THE Pulpit-Guard Routed, IN ITS Twenty Strongholds.

OR, A brief ANSWER, To a large and lawless Discourse, Written by one Tho. Hall
of Kings-Norton, Entitled, The Pulpit-Guarded, with Twenty Arguments,
Pretending to prove the unlawfulness, and sinfulness of Private men's Preaching.

Wherein the Arguments being weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, are found
too light; and the lawfulness of Private men's Preaching (as Tho. Hall calls
them) viz. Gifted Brethren; is cleared, and confirmed, in opposition to all
Gainsayers.

My work in this Treatise has been, and is, 1. To Rout him in all his Guards;
2. To discover the weakness and invalidity of all his Answers to those
Objections and Allegations by him there produced for the Preaching of the
Gifted Brethren.

His six Arguments to prove their Ministry free from Antichristianism, rased;
and six more asserted, proving them to be Antichristian.

Written by Tho. Collier.

Isai. 28. 20. For the Bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on
it, and the Covering narrower then that he can wrap himself in it. Verse 21.
For the Lord shall rise up as in Mount Perasim, and be wroth, as in the valley
of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his
act, his strange act; strange, because so to the dark minds of men. Chap 29.
14. Therefore behold, I proceed to do a mavelous work, and a wonder; for the
wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent men
shall be hid. Chap. 28. 22. Now therefore, be ye not mo^kers, lest your bands
be made strong. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Giles
Calvert, at the Black-Spred Eagle at the West end of Paul's, near Ludgate, 1651.

The Epistle to the Readers.
DEar Countrymen, and Friends, its not my desire as I am a man, to be meddling
with things of this nature, but as I am a Christian, and made partaker in a
measure of the Heavenly Gift, taking notice of this Pulpit-Guard, it being so
directly against the will of the Lord in the Gospel dispensation, and the free
operation of his Spirit in the hearts of his people, for the good and comfort
of the Church, his Body, 1 Cor. 14. 31. For Sions sake I could not hold my
peace, and for Jerusalems sake I could not rest, without giving a check in the
plain evidence and demonstration of the spirit and power unto this unrighteous
Guard: it is a very sad and dangerous thing, when men, under the pretense of
Religion, for self ends, and interests, shall make use of their Wisdom, Arts,
Parts against the Lord, and his Truth. What opinion or practice is there this
day in the world that pretends for Christ, but that men may, and do put fair
glosses and pretenses of Scripture for the upholding of it, though never so
contrary unto it? I have in that light God has given me, examined the
particulars of that discourse, and the Scripture grounds, and found them too
light, not holding weight in the Balance of the Scripture; and have commended
to thy view, who art the Reader, The substance of my apprehensions concerning
them; possibly thou may imagine that I have been too rugged in my
expressions, or sometimes too light, or vain in my Answers.

I answer; 1. Meeting with such a Spirit in that Book, of Pride, Reproach, and
Self conceitedness, I was at some stand as to the manner of my Answer: But when
I considered the words of Solomon, Prove. 26. 5. Answer a fool according to his
folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. And Chap. 15. 28. The heart of the
righteous studyeth to answer; but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil
things; I was satisfied in giving an Answer suitable to the Spirit I found
working in it.

2. Being deeply sensible of the dangerousness of the way that thousands of
souls are lead in by these kind of men: and finding, by experience, their
height and perverseness in their way, that they are without a miracle of mercy,
without the reach, or bands of love: I have therefore dealt the more plain, and
downright, yet still in truth and love; and its no other then Christ, and his
Servants have done in the like case before me, Mat. 23. throughout; John 8 44.
Act. 13. 10 1 King. 18. 27.

But you may say, you look upon many of them to be honest and precious men,
etc.

Answ. The more need have they to be sharply reproved for their sins and
miscarriages; men may be honest, the people of God, and yet in Babylon. I am
not despairing in the truth of what you say; yet their Office and Babylonish
actions are never the honester for that, Rev. 18. 4. And this I must mind you,
that God has not left himself without witness of the truth by me declared; and
that by men of the same calling with them; but when once enlightened, they
reject their callings, administrations, and all as Antichristian with shame to
themselves for their ignorance. I could instance in diverse, if it might add to
the truth; but I judge it needless at present. What thou find written
contrary to thy mind, try it by the Scripture, wait upon the Lord to teach
thee: what weakness in expressions, as to thy judgment thou meetest with, let
not the truth suffer; rather impute it to him whose it is: If thou find any
light shining forth in it, through it, to thy dark understanding, give him the
glory who is the Author of it; so have I my desire: Finally, read and judge,
and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

T. C.

THE Pulpit-Guard Routed, In his twenty strong Holds.
SIR,
I Meeting with your Book, subscribed with this Title, The Pulpit Guarded, etc.
and perceiving the drift and end of the matter, with the manner of it, could
not but judge my self bound, as I tendered the honor of the Lord Jesus, his
Truth and Gospel, his Saints and Servants (especially seeing none else
undertaking the work) to rebuke this unclean spirit, and to cast out this
devil, to enter the lists with, and to rout this unrighteous Guard. It possibly
may seem strange that I should undertake this task, especially because this
Guard was occasioned, as you say, by a dispute at Henly in Warwickshire: But
Sir, finding your Discourse tending not only to reproach the Creature, but the
Creator likewise, his Truth and powerful free operation in his Saints, all
which I find my self bound in conscience for to vindicate, as far as light and
truth in its power appears in me.

As for the manner of my proceeding, 1. I shall not turn aside after every vain
and unworthy passage and miscarriage in your Guard, neither shall I meddle with
your particular Epistles, but I shall first give you some hints concerning the
Title of your Book.

Secondly, I shall discover your ignorance, falsehood, and folly, in your
Looking-glass for Anabaptists, as you call them.

Thirdly, I shall encounter with you in all your twenty Guards, and in the
strength of the grace of Christ, doubt not but that I shall rout you in them
all.

Fourthly, I shall discover the weakness of your answers unto those objections
you produce for Laymens preaching.

Fifthly and lastly, Your six Arguments to prove your Ministers free from
Antichristianism, examined, and found too light; and six more asserted, proving
them to be Antichristian.

And now Sir, to the business in hand; and first to the Title of your Book, The
Pulpit Guarded. I have two words to mind you here.

1. I perceive you are turned Soldier; Sir, are you not besides your Calling?
but whom do you guard? the Pulpit forsooth: what, does the Pulpit want
guarding? your high and holy place? are you yet such Pharisees (notwithstanding
the light shines, and the Sun of righteousness is arising with healing in his
wings) that you must have the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in
the Synagogues, and be called of men Rabbi? But Sir, in good earnest, is it
truth that the Pulpit needs your guard? are gifted brethren, as you call them,
grown so high, as that they dare adventure into your Pulpit? and will you guard
the Pulpit from them? and not only the Pulpit, but you would guard all
preaching from them too: as there ever such a thing as this heard of? what, to
guard the Pulpit from preaching brethren? Did ever Christ and his Apostles do
the like? did you ever find any one in Scripture guarding the Pulpit and
preaching from the Saints? I challenge you in the name of the Lord to come
forth and produce any one in the Scripture; I say again any one, unless the
Pope, or the Devil that has done the like work as you have done. Was this the
practice of Christ? Mar. 9. 38, 39. The Disciples seeing one cast out Devils in
the name of Christ, they forbade him, because he followed not Christ; but Jesus
said, Forbid him not; for there is no man which shall do a Miracle in my name,
which can likely speak evil of me; the reason is, for he that is not against
me, is on our part.

But 2. The persons you mention with whom you disputed, and as you say,
occasioned this Pulpit discourse, was, a Nailer, a Baker, a Plough-right, a
Weaver, and a Bakers-boy; and it appears clearly in this, and all your
discourse, in which you often mention them, that you mention them in way of
reproach, as if it were a reproach and scandal for a Nailer, a Baker, a
Plough-right, and a Weaver to preach the Gospel. I cannot but take notice of
two things in this particular; First ignorance: Secondly envy. 1. Your
ignorance, and that under two considerations.

First, Ignorance, in not knowing; else wilfulness, in not acknowledging that
God has always, and in all Ages of the world hitherto made, and will make use
of men of Callings to be the Ministers of his will unto the people, as Moses,
David, Elisha, Peter, Paul, etc. And I challenge you again to produce any
example in the Scripture, that ever God made choice of any to be Ministers of
his mind unto the people, who were bred up idly all the days of their life,
without a Calling, as the Priests of our times have been: that whereas idleness
is forbidden in all Ages, and God has called men of particular Callings to
minister in the Gospel, forsooth we must have idlers, and them only, Drones
that never knew what it was to live lawfully in the world, by a particular
Calling, that must be put into the Priests office, that they may eat a piece of
bread, cloth themselves with the wool, and feed themselves with the fat; and
none must preach but themselves, lest their idleness and baseness should be
discovered.

Object. There are many Prophets and Ministers in the Scripture, their Callings
are not mentioned.

Answ. True; but its enough, first, that many, nay most are mentioned. 2.
Idleness was forbidden, and was altogether unlawful; therefore we may not
judge that God made choice of idlers, because they were so, nay that it is the
devils choice, and Sodoms sin, pride and idleness.

Object. The Ministers are not bred up idly, as you say, but have particular
Callings, being bred up to learning, which is a calling.

Answ. That is no calling; for a calling is that, in and by which men may in
the sweat of their face get their living, Genesis 3. 19. Ephesians. 4. 28. breeding to
school is proper to children, when they cannot labor, to fit them for some
calling, Prove. 22. 6.

Secondly ignorance, in not knowing that its that which tends most to the glory
of God, and that wherein his power, wisdom, etc. is the more made manifest and
magnified, in gifting weak ones; and this he does that no man might glory in
his presence, nor in his own wisdom, parts, arts, sciences, etc. that men might
not give the glory to those outward base things of the world, which belongs to
God; and of this it seems you and the men of your generation are ignorant,
worse and more blind, if not wilful then those Act. 4. 13. When they saw the
boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant
they marvelled, and took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus: But
you are so blind that you cannot take knowledge of your gifted brethren, that
they have been with Jesus, you are ignorant of that truth, Psalm. 8. 2. Out of
the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine
enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger: God ordains
strength out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, that way making his power
and wisdom to appear, that so he might still the enemy and the avenger; but you
are such an enemy, that you will not take notice of Gods working in this way,
but you will be an enemy the more, and avenge the more, and blaspheme the free
operation of the Spirit in the Saints, Pharisee like, Mat. 12. a dangerous sin.

Secondly Envy against the Lord, and against his people; envyest thou for my
sake? says Moses, Numb. 11. 29. Would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets: Oh says the Priest, but we will have no Prophets nor Preachers but
our selves; its a profitable trade, by this we have our gain, our profit, our
honor upheld, our back and belly clad and fed, our pride and ambitious lusts
maintained; but if you suffer Mecanick fellows, men of Trades and particular
Callings to preach, we lose all, they will tell truth to the people; and for
this it is you envy them.

Now to your Looking-glass for Anabaptists, as you call them; Their first
Tenent (and Error) you say is, That Infant Baptism is a childish needless
thing, and that none must be baptized before they come to perfect age, and can
make confession of his faith, that Infant Baptism came from the Pope and the
Devil.

Ans. This I own for truth, although in many places you abuse them, writing
lying vanities, the visions of your own head. I shall therefore briefly run
through it. 1. Owning and confirming their own principles, wherein your
ignorance and woe will appear, in calling light darkness, and darkness light: 2.
In discovering your folly and falsehood, in charging them with things they never
owned, wherein your envy and malice will appear.

The first Tenent I must speak to in its parts. 1. That Infant Baptism is
childish, and needless.

Answ. It Is truth, and that upon a double account. 1. As relating to the
subject, the Child, who is to be baptized, not understanding what is to be
done, neither the use and end of it; and I suppose you cannot but grant, that
on the Infants part there is nothing but childishness from first to last.

Object. The Infants of the Children of Israel were as incapable in the
understanding of the mystery of Circumcision as Infants are now of Baptism,
yet they were by the command of God to be circumcised.

Answ. To this I shall return a threefold answer.

1. Its truth, that one part of Circumcisions mystery, viz. the Circumcision
of the heart was as far from the capacity of Infants, as the mystery of
Baptism is now.

Yet 2. As Circumcision was a type and sign in the flesh, of Christ who was to
come of Abraham's seed, and was to continue till Christ and Grace was come,
there was not such a capacity required; for this was a Jewish and legal type,
as all the rest of their external Worships and Sacrifices were, leading to, or
representing of the coming of Christ in the flesh; but this of Baptism a lively
representation and manifestation of the souls faith and knowledge of Christ's
being already come both in the flesh and in the Spirit, without him and within
him; as likewise a visible demonstration to the world of the souls owning this
Christ thus come, for him, in him, by his Spirit, etc. this is not to be found
within the capacity of Children, Infants.

But 3. There was a command for that of Circumcision, but none for that of
Baptism; and the command is it that gives the party a capacity of submission to
the thing commanded: Infants of Abraham's natural seed were commanded to be
circumcised; Infants of the spiritual seed, children of the faith of Abraham
are commanded to be baptized, Mar. 16. 16. Act. 8. 37. with Gal. 3. from the
26. to the end.

Secondly, Its childish as relating to the Administrators; and truly I think
this is the most moderate term that you or I can give it; for Childish relates
to ignorance, or want of knowledge; but I am afraid that in many of you its
wilfulness: Childishness relates to ignorance; Paul says, When he was a child,
he understood as a child, etc. And in malice be ye children, but in
understanding be ye men: Your childish ignorance consists in not understanding
the command of your Lord, and the mystery of his Covenant, only to and with
the spiritual seed, those in whose hearts his Law is written; not
distinguishing between Law and Gospel, Covenant of Moses, and Covenant of
Christ, Jer. 31. 32, 33. The Ordinances, Subjects, and Commands of the one and
of the other, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Act. 3. 22.

2. Childish ignorance, wilfulness and untowardness, falling out with your
brethren to whom God has given more understanding in the mystery of his will,
reproaching, scandalizing Truth it self, like children rejoicing in the
counter, the bauble something like the Truth, suffering your selves to be
cheated by the Devil, and deluded out of the Truth it self.

And it being such a childish thing, hence it follows, its a needless thing; no
need of that which flows from ignorance, no need of that which is not required,
its will worship; and formerly you had so much reason and Religion in you, as
to say that any thing done in the worship of God which had no command, was
will worship; but now when it concerns your selves, it seems the case is
altered.

3. And that none must be Baptized till they come to perfect age and can wake
confession of their Faith: And is this such a strange thing with you, who
profess your self a Minister of the Gospel, as that you make it such a
dangerous Tenent as to scorn it, and to account those who hold and practice it,
such dangerous Sectaries as you do? was not Christ himself baptized at thirty
years of age, the Eunuch by Philip, Act. 8. and those of John who came and
confessed their sins, and those converted at Peter's Sermon? and yet dare you to
reproach this practice? would you not account Christ and his Apostles
Anabaptists, if they were now living?

Object. That was the first plantation of the Churches, but now the Churches
are planted, therefore Infants are to be baptized.

Answ. Was there one Rule for them in the infancy, and another for you now? If
any such thing, pray produce it, let us see the Scripture; but if no other Rule
or Command to you, then was to them, be ashamed and tremble for ever, to
reproach this Principle and Practice, unless you be resolved to deny Christ,
and to be the great Antichrist sitting in the seat of God, exalting your self
above all that is called God.

4. That Infant Baptism came from the Pope and the Devil: And I pray from
whence came it else? First, it came not from Christ, it is nowhere reckoned
amongst his sayings, or the Apostles Writings: Therefore first it came from the
Pope as your Calling did, and you brought it from Rome with you; therefore it
was well confessed by a man of your Coat, once discoursing about Infants Baptism,
that it came from Rome; its true said he, it came from Rome; so did we, for all
was involved up in the Romish Religion; but we are come forth and bring out our
Ordinances with us, and so refine them, that they are now no longer the
Ordinances of Rome but of Christ; were they once the Ordinances of Rome, and
now of Christ! a strange change, when the truth is that they are but
Anabatized, or nick named with the name of the Ordinances of Christ; they are
as much and as truly the Ordinances of Rome as ever; this is such an evident
truth, as that he that runs may read it. Secondly, it came from the Devil, I
say, not because it came from Rome, for the Pope possibly may hold some Truth;
but if it came not from Christ, then it came from the Devil, and out of that
bottomless Pit mentioned in Revelations, of man's inventions; The Devil and man's
deceitful heart joining and juggling together, forms up something in the
likeness of truth; this is that mystery of Iniquity mentioned in Scripture,
something like truth, but is not truth; therefore wisdom is required for the
understanding of it, not your University Wisdom, Arts and Sciences, but that
Wisdom which is from above, which is pure, peaceable, etc.

The second Tenent you lay to their charge, is, That all gifted persons may
preach without Ordination. This likewise is such an evident and undoubted Truth
to all men living in the Light, that they are or may be so far from being
ashamed to own this Truth, as that it is or shall be your sin and shame too,
first or last, to reckon this among the Errors of the Saints; but this is that
which has been the substance of your Discourse, and shall be of mine in Answer
to you: Therefore I shall pass it in this place; only one word take notice of;
There is mention in Scripture of preaching by persons in Office by Ordination
and Gift; but I say not that you are the men; and there is preaching by way of
Gift only; and although all gifted brethren preach not as men in Office and
Ordained, yet all gifted brethren may preach for the edifying of the body of
Christ according to the measure of the gift given them, Rom 12. 4, 9. with 1
Cor. 14. 31. and 1 Pet. 4. 10. 11.

3. That God reveals his will not only by the written Word, but by Dreams and
Visions, which they believe more then the word, etc.

Answ. First, if this be truth, that some do hold this Principle, is it strange
and ridiculous unto you? has not God revealed truth to his people formerly by
Dreams and Revelations? and dare you deny it, and reprove it now? is God
limited, or his hand shortened? although its true I say, that I believe God does
not often reveal himself thus unto his people now: yet I dare not limit the
holy One of Israel to this or that particular way; and put case some may
transgress in this particular, yet I dare say you as deeply trangress one the
other hand: 1. To judge the thing it self for the miscarriage of some in it. And
2. In laying it as an odium upon all, when it is perhaps the judgment but of a
few, if of any at all; for mine own particular, although I dare not be so
audacious as to judge the thing it self, God having formerly revealed himself
to his servants in this way; yet I know none who profess themselves to have
experience of this, viz. the knowledge of truth by Dreams and Visions; whether
you know any such, or no, or whether it be one of the whimsies of your head, I
leave.

2. They (you say) deny all consequences from Scripture, though never so clear,
and require express Scripture.

Answ. You are mistaken, man, in this too; they deny unnecessary and untrue
consequences, such as you will often draw for your own ends; and if some tender
souls will not permit you to draw any consequences from Scripture, thank your
selves for it, who have, by your many lying and false consequences, given them
just cause to suspect you, and to believe none of your consequences at all:
your consequences are such as these.

1. Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision; infants were circumcised,
therefore infants must be Baptized.

A goodly consequence, as true as Scripture; if the people would but believe
it, they should never know that the Law and Circumcision came by Moses; and
that Grace and Truth, and Gospel Ordinances came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17.

2. The Apostles baptized households; there might be Children; therefore
children may be baptized.

Another goodly consequence, as true as Scripture; if the people will but
believe it, it is enough; and why may not the simple Anabaptists, as you
account them, draw another consequence that will devour, and swallow up yours
at once? that is, There are no children mentioned in those families; and if
any, it was contrary to the command of Christ, and known practice of the
Apostles to Baptize them; and families take their denomination from the major
part, or the ruling part; therefore there might be no children; and if any, yet
they might not be Baptized; therefore this is no good foundation for such a
practice. I could instance diverse such like consequences of yours, as, Children
were brought to Christ, therefore they may be Baptized etc. but I can give you
but a hint and away; but if some tender ones dare not believe your
consequences, thank your selves for it, in abusing them so grossly in this
nature.

4. Tenet, That the Saints in this life are pure, without spot, etc.

What Sir, will you still persist in your wickedness and ignorance? has not
this been the language of the worst of men in all Ages of the world against
honesty, and honest men? they are too pure, too holy; are you like them,
ignorant of the Scripture? Cant. 4 7. chap 6. 9, 10. 1 John 4. 17. its true, in
their own sight they see their spots and sins; but as related to the Lord in
the covenant of Grace, they see themselves, in him, justified, clothed, and
covered with his own righteousness, there is no spot at all in them; and
whereas you say they need not make use of that Petition, Forgive us our sins,
you manifest your ignorance of the truth; for that which they say, is, that
while a soul lives in the enjoyment of mercy and love, its then form or custom
that carries him to that Petition; but when a soul apprehends the want of
pardon, let him ask it.

5. Tenet, No man can with a good conscience, exercise the office of a
Magistrate under the New Testament.

Ans. This, with diverse others, being altogether false, I shall join them up
together, as being not worth the speaking to in particular; the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. I join up these
together, because they are all of them forged lies, inventions come from hell
of purpose to scandal Truth, and Saints; and therefore in this I shall be bold
to say to you, as Christ to the Pharisees, You are of your father the Devil,
because his works you will do, for he was a liar from the beginning: and its
obvious to all men's knowledge, who are not willingly blinded, that they are
honest in their Conversations, and prefer honesty in their Congregations more
then your selves; if they meet with any such principles, or practices, they
expel them, have no society with them, nor their owners; they look diligently
lest any profane person arise, and defile others; but its your selves are the
men that are guilty of these crimes you lay to others charge: I wonder how you
durst be so impudent as to charge that upon others, of which you are guilty
your selves; your selves it is that entertain in your Congregations notorious
offenders, adulterers, drunkards, swearers, etc. and none comes amiss with you;
but if God begin to enlighten any soul to see into the evil and ignorance of
his former ways, he shall be the butt you shoot your arrows at, and you judge
him to hell presently for a Sectary: Thus you feed not the sheep, but wolves
and goats with lies and vanity, but you kill them that are fed.

Your selves it is that are seditious and tumultuous. Who preached Parliament
and King into a War at first in England, but the Episcopal and Presbyterian
Factions, and left the Parliament again in their greatest streights, when you
had but thoughts that your own interest would not stand? who are turned
Traitors to their native Country, ready to join with Scots or Devil in the
ruin of it? Your selves or those you call Anabaptists? who are they, at
present, that endeavor to kindle a fire in the neighbor Nations, to burn up
their own? your selves, or the Anabaptists?

In a word, who are they that refuse, or at least murmur against promising
fidelity to the Magistrate in the common good? your selves, or the Anabaptists?
Let truth be judge, and acknowledge your mistake, and be ashamed for ever, thus
grossly to belie the truth, and its servants, laying your own blame and shame
upon other men's shoulders.

And put case there be any that pretend themselves to be Christians in that
profession you so much contemn, that dishonor truth in any of these
particulars mentioned by you: Yet how dare you say they are such all of them,
laying the scandal upon the whole, as if because there was one Judas, all the
Disciples must be Hypocrites? But Sir, if we should judge of you after this
manner, we could say more of you, then you shall ever be able to say of us, I
trust: I could tell you of Priests Free-willers, Drunkards, Swearers,
Whore-masters; what not? should I therefore say you are all such men? but I
forbear at present; only this, take heed how you take the Devils work upon you
next, to accuse the brethren; if not, I must speak more at large unto you; as
to the rest of the particulars you mention, as the Twelfth, that Christ died
intentionally for all; I say he dyed for all, although not intentionally to
save all; for if he had intended to save all, he had not failed of his
intention.

17. That its unlawful to go Law.

Is this such a grievous error with you? I answer, 1. That its chargeable to
go to Law: and 2. That the Apostle reproves it as a sin, and fault in the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, to
go to Law before the unjust, and not before the Saints?

And yet you dare to upbrade the Saints who dare not go to Law, and yet you
belie them too in respect either of persons or opion: 1. Of opinion, they deny
not going to Law absolutely, but in case of necessity, when no other way or
means will serve; and that too secondly, when it tends to the prejudice of
their livelihood and being. 2. Of Persons, Its not all, but possibly some few
tender souls dare not own going to Law in any case; and I wish all were more
tender in this respect, although they become your reproach and scandal more
then yet they are.

18. That Wars are unuseful, etc.

Answ. First, its the judgment but of some, and I believe of very few, that
Wars are altogether useless.

Secondly, Their judgment is that Wars are useless in the Kingdom of Christ,
and that its useful only in the Kingdoms of the world amongst men for the
preservation of civil Rights; and upon this account, are they active in the
present War, so public as that I wonder how you could without shame and
blushing mention this particular, but that you shoot your arrows so at random,
^s that you neither fear or shame before God or man; for those you brand with
the name of Anabaptists and Independents, have been and are the Instruments by
whom God has given a being to your selves and Nation; though men are blind,
and do not or will not see it.

Thirdly, Are you an Enemy to the Saints, because they are men of peace, and
not of War and blood like your selves?

Fourthly, You discover much ignorance or wilfulness in your accusations of
them, or else you could not so contradict your self in it. In the seventh
Tenent, you say, They are tumultuous, and raised Tumults in Germany, and filled
it with the fire of Sedition, to the loss of six hundred thousand men. And in
the eighteenth, Wars are useless. Was there ever such contradictions heard? And
truly I must tell you, I credit not the Relation of the German Wars; I see how
bold you are in lying, while we are yet alive to give you Answer, that I cannot
credit that Relation, the people being gone, and their Adversaries too relate
it; I rather think the Priests were the cause of it, as they were in this
Nation; and am confident, if they durst give a Relation of things to another
Age, They would say as much of the Anabaptists, or rather of the baptized
Christians of this Nation, as they of old did of those in Germany.

19. That all Ordinances are legal, that the spirit is all.

Here you contradict your self again; if another should have done so much, you
would have thought him not in his right wits.

In the first you say, Their Tenent is that none must be baptized until they
come to perfect age, and can make confession of their Faith. Here they own
baptism you confess your self; And in the 26. you say, Their Tenent is, that
after rebaptization they cannot sin; in which you belie them as much as ever
the Devil belyed Truth; but I pass: In the 19 you say, They deny all
Ordinances: Is not this contradiction? Truly, you teach people not to believe
you, and then you are angry with the people for it.

20. The Magistrate must compel none in matters of Religion, but must tolerate
all.

Ans. Can Magistrates make men Religious? Is it not the work of Christ to make
men Christians and Religious, and to compel them by the power of love? Or is it
the work of the Magistrate? I thought where to have you at last; within the
Borders of Rome; and indeed Sir, are you come no farther yet? What, a Minister
of Christ? and want the help of the Magistrate to make Christians, to compel
them to come in unto you? And Sir, Why may not a Jesuit have as good a Church
as you, if the Magistrate must convert them, compel them to come in? and so you
will have in all. Do you believe that its the work of God to convert? and that
he will take one of a City, and two of a Tribe, and bring them to Jerusalem?
How durst you then to bring in all by a Magisterial Power into the Church?
unless you resolve to make them Hypocrites, and to damn them to the purpose; or
unless you see it stand for your profit and advantage, the clothing and
feeding of your back and belly by the vulgar sort of people, who are thus
deluded by you. And as for toleration, we desire not the Magistrate to tolerate
any in their wickedness; and if any under the pretense of conscientious
principles live and allow themselves in looseness, baseness and profaneness, let
the Sword of Justice be drawn for the execution of Justice, upon all such
without respect of person or opinion, and in it shall we rejoice.

21. That the Father, Son and holy Ghost, are not three distinct persons, one
in Essence. etc.

But Sir, Who told you they were three persons? have you it in Scripture or by
tradition from Rome? if in Scripture, produce it when you come forth in public
next; for mine own part, I know no such Scripture. And this I shall with
confidence affirm, that neither Father, Son or Spirit, are at all called Person
or Persons as God, but its a Title proper only to man, and in Scripture given
to none else; and therefore come from Rome. Be instructed now therefore ye wise
men of the Earth, and do not judge so harshly of honest men, because they
cannot believe that which is not written in Scripture, and be content to be
fools, that you may be wise, and let these Traditions return to their first
center.

23. That Christ has removed the Law, and now the pure Gospel is the only Rule.

What yet more ignorance and malice? Is this one of the wrinkles and
deformities, one of the delusions of that deluded Sect? I wonder you have left
out one; this comes very near it, that they expect salvation by the Free grace
of God in Jesus Christ; Is this such a strange wrinkle and delusion with you,
that Christ has removed the Law? I pray what was the end of his coming, if not
to remove the Law as a dispensation held forth in the hands of Moses? The Law
came by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Joh 1. 17. First, he
came to fulfill the Law every jot and title of it; Mat. 5. 17, 18. He fulfilled
all the righteousness of it; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat 3. 15. and so is the end of the Law for righteousness to all
those who believe, Romans 10. 4. Secondly, He has removed the Curse and
condemnation of it, Gal. 3. 13. Romans 8. 1. Thirdly, He has removed the Rule of
it as in the hands of Moses; for there it was the Rule that produced the Curse,
it was a ministration of death; and now the pure Gospel is the only Rule of
Saints; And is this such a mystery and deformity to you? a Minister of the
Gospel and ignorant of this Truth? Sir, I must tell you, that if you were a
Christian in good earnest, you should not, you could not be ignorant that the
Gospel, the Law of Christ, is the Rule of the Saints, Mat. 28. 20. Act. 3. 22.
They are married to him, and subject to him, Romans 74. Christ takes all that old
dispensation, both Moral and Ceremonial, into his own hands, and is the
substance of the Ceremonies and righteousness of the Moral Law, and now gives
forth the substance of the Moral again, to them, in them, not as a Rule of
righteousness, but as a law of love, a law of Grace, and pure Gospel if you
will have it; though you think the word pure Gospel is reproach enough;
although you cannot be literally ignorant that the Gospel signifies glad
tidings; and is not this glad tidings think you and pure Gospel when a soul
comes to see all the wrath and enmity that was against him contained in
Ordinances taken away? Ephesians. 2. 13, 14. and fulfilled; and now there is no
ministration of death against him; the Law of God is in his heart, within him,
without him, a law of love and grace; no death, no wrath, nothing but love and
grace, and the love of Christ constrains such souls to yield obedience to him,
and to follow him where ever he goes.

But to conclude; the Thirtieth Tenent, They give a Supreme and Independent
power in all Ecclesiastical causes and censures to their single Congregations.

And can you produce any other rule in the Gospel then this? must you needs
have one Church to rule over another? or rather your selves to rule over the
whole? will nothing content you unless you may be Lords over Gods heritage?
Sir, we allow no Synodian, nor Classical power, but advice and counsel we own,
etc. its not an Independent power neither, only independent as to man and
creatures, but depending upon Jesus Christ; and if you can produce any other
rule in the Gospel, let us know it, that we may be informed: If you mention
Acts 15. I say first, they sent to Jerusalem for advice and counsel; and
secondly, those to whom they sent, were able infallibly to determine the case,
ver. 28. They could say, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay
upon you no greater burdens then these necessary things, etc. And truly were
there such Apostles and Elders amongst us, we should gladly acknowledge them,
and receive from them; but as for your Classical power, we own it not, we
submit not to it, etc. Thus have I briefly run through your Looking-glass; and
truly it may be a Looking glass for your self, if the Lord open your eyes to
see into it; wherein you may first see your ignorance and blindness, in calling
so many precious truths of Christ wrinkles and deformities, and delusions of
the deluded Sect. And secondly you may see your malice and envy, in charging so
many falsehoods upon them, when its your selves that are guilty of those crimes
you endeavor to fasten upon them.

Thus you say You have given a taste out of a full sea, whereby it appears that
the Anabaptists are no such harmless creatures as some imagine. A full sea it
is indeed of lies and scandals on the one part; and truth ignorantly or
wilfully abused by you on the other part: No such harmless creatures, etc. if
you could by your lies and scandals persuade people to it; thus dealt the
Scribes, Pharisees, and the hypocrites, your brethren in iniquity, with Christ
and the Saints of old, Mat. 12 24. Joh. 8. 48. and 10. 36. Act. 14. 2. You
commend those who desire to see more of their Errors, to Mr. Edwards Gangraena,
and the rest of your brethren in the same iniquity with you; but you do well to
commend them to the Gangraena, the vilest viper that ever appeared in the world
against Christ and his truth, and Saints; herein justifying your brethren in
their iniquity, and so drawing upon your self all the righteous blood shed from
Abel until now; you build the Tombs of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
pretend high estimation of them Pharisee like, Mat. 23. from the 29. to the end.

Well, you draw your conclusion, How needful is it both for Church and
Commonwealth to join the labor of the Universities for confutation of the
Anabaptists?

Indeed Sir, you had need join all your forces, Church, Commonwealth (that is,
the Magistrate) Universities, and all for the suppression of truth: I wonder
you had not conjured the Prince of darkness to your assistance in this great
work and undertaking; it seems their errors are so great, so dangerous in your
eye, as that you fear miserably some great disaster or change: you cry out
lamentably upon their doctrine, as that it will bring destruction to Church,
State, Souls, all.

But what are their principles that are so full of danger?

Answ. I shall give some brief hints, 1. That Justification and Salvation is by
grace alone through Christ, without any relation to any thing done by the
creature.

2. That this Justification and Salvation is enjoyed by faith.

3. That this faith is the gift of God.

4. That where this faith is truly wrought, it produces an universal
obedience to the whole Law of Christ, and that its the Believers privilege
only to be baptized.

5. That obedience to Magistrates is the will of God, and they submit for
conscience sake.

6. That believers are to press forwards after perfection, in the use of
lawful means, as Prayer, Preaching, Conference, Fellowship, etc.

7. That none are the Ministers of the Gospel but such as have received the
Spirit, and power from on high.

8. That the Spirit of Christ and the Scripture is sufficient for the Ministers
calling, and both Minister and peoples salvation.

9. That its the work of the Lord, and of him alone in the ministry of the
Gospel, to convert and build up souls.

10. That all the Saints may and ought to exercise their gifts for the good of
others, according to the measure they have received.

11. That it is their duty to be men of peace, and as much as in them lies, to
live peaceably with all.

12. That a vizard and show of holiness and innocence to deceive others,
without the power and life of godliness, is the deepest hypocrisy, and shall
be punished with the deepest damnation.

13. Their expectation is of a change in the day of the Lord, wherein they
shall be made conformable to him in glory.

14. And in the mean time they are saved by hope, that as the Anchor of the
soul is cast into that which is within the vail, where they are held both sure
and steadfast.

Where they are cheared and comforted against all the black mouths, and false
scandals, and lying tongues of Devil, Priests, or men that shall be opened
against them, notwithstanding you fear not, neither tremble to do the work of
the devil, in laying false scandals and accusations to the charge of Gods Elect
without just cause: the Lord will in his time reprove you, and rebuke you.
Well, but I pass by, because I must hasten to your Arguments. I shall only take
notice of a word or two more, because its bootless to trace you in your folly.

You say, You have forborne all gall and bitterness, and tempered your reproof
with love and meekness; that you have dipped your nails in oil; that your witness
is on high, that you have done nothing out of envy, spleen, or passion to the
persons of the men, etc.

Truly Sir, you have buttered words, were your deeds answerable; when the truth
is, that there is nothing else but gall and bitterness, lying and false
accusations; are these words rouled in Sugar? you would fain be shut of them,
have them banished the Nation: I thought to what your sugered words would
amount at last; and indeed no wonder; for it is the best portion that ever the
world could afford the Saints.

As for your ensuing preface unto your first Argument, I pass it over, because
in answering your Arguments, I shall answer those things which seem to have
weight in them, because reiterations are both needless and useless.

The Arguments against the Preaching of gifted Brethren, Examined and Answered.
Argument I. If God were angry with those in the time of the Law that did usurp
the Priests office, then he (being Jehovah, the same for ever) will be angry
with those in the time of the Gospel that do usurp the Ministers office; But
God was angry with those in the time of the Law that did usurp the Priests
office. Ergo, He will be angry with those in the Gospel that do usurp the
Ministers office.

Your Major you say is clear from the immutability of Gods nature; he is the
same, that is truth; But for to give you a discovery of the Fallacy, and
weakness of your Argument; I shall give you a twofold Answer.

First, Your Major joins the Priesthood of the Law and the Ministry of the
Gospel together; when the truth is, there is no comparison between them; The
Priests were to offer Sacrifice, and they only to teach the people, and to
minister about the things of the Altar, as they were Types of Christ the great
high Priest, who offered himself once for all, a Sacrifice for the sins of his
people. But the Ministers of the Gospel, they are no Types of Christ, they do
not offer Sacrifice for sin, etc. Therefore there is no comparison between
them; none might meddle with the office or work of a Priest because it was
appointed of God, and did so clearly represent that great high Priest Christ
Jesus: but the work of a Minister of Christ, is to declare forth what they have
heard and seen from the Lord Jesus who is already come, 1 John 1. 1. 2. and
this is the work of every Saint according to the measure of the gift received.

But secondly, I answer, I grant the truth of your Major in the terms; but I
deny that gifted brethren usurp the ministerial office in their preaching;
usurpation is a sin; but for men to speak of the things of God according to the
measure they have received, is no usurpation, Romans 12. 6. 1 Pet. 10. 4. 11. nor
sin, but every Christians duty; although you by your Logic and Retorick, and
forged innovations, and abusive Interpretations would amaze and amuze the
world, and affright the Saints with Vzzah and Korah, Dathan and Abiram, etc.
But know that they are such as never came from Christ, but the smoke ascending
out of the bottomless Pit, endeavoring to darken the bright shining of the Sun
of righteousness in and by Saints; Korah Dathan and Abiram were smiten for
doing that they were forbidden; you smite the Saints for doing that they are
commanded, and for which they are commended, 1 Cor. 14. from the first to the
fifth.

You apply that unto the gifted brethren, which retorts it self justly upon
your self; For first you say, usurpation to the Office of the Ministry is a
great sin; gifted brethren only exercise their gifts, not usurp the Office; but
your selves it is that usurp the Office without the gift; many, yea, most of
the Ministers of the Nation usurp the Office; but for the gift, they are not
only ignorant of, but enemies to it.

And secondly, not only usurp the Office without the gift, but usurp the Office
likewise without any colorable ground for it; They cry up Office, Office of the
Ministry, when they know not what it is, and have no more authentic Authority
for their Ordination to their Office, then the Pope and the Devil can give them.

You instance Korah etc. and apply it to the preaching brethen; but truly, if
the Lord give you eyes but to see it, you might more truly apply it to your
selves; you thrust your selves into the Priests Office, as if you were holy and
none but you, and you must do all and monopolize all to your selves, when you
have no more to do with the Office of a Minister, nor have no more Calling to
it then Korah and his Company, or the Devil himself.

I prove it thus: First, Those who usurp the Office of the Ministry to
themselves, and have no more Call unto it, either according the letter or the
Spirit, then Korah and his Company, are guilty of Korah's sin; but the
Ministry of the Nation have no more Call unto it, then Korah had. Ergo, They
are guilty of Korah's sin: 1. They have no Call according to the letter by a
right Ordination; for that they have lost in Rome long since, and now have
brought forth the carcass, the form only, and like children bless themselves
with that, as if they had found some great pearl.

Secondly, There is no Call from the Spirit; they then should live in the
Spirits light, and not in the darkness of the Devil; and do the Spirits work,
build up the Saints, encourage them, in exercising their gifts for their mutual
good and building up, not hinder them and reproach them for so doing, bear
their weakness, cover their infirmities, reprove with meekness and love, not
belie them, scandal them, falsely accuse them, like the Devil. And whereas you
say, It Is dangerous for men to preach without a Call, and it is dangerous for
people to bear such: I say its truth, but gifted brethren do not preach without
a Call, their gift and opportunity is their Call; But you it is that preach
without a Call; for the gift in most of you, it is a stranger, and you are
strangers unto it; and believe it, the punishment will be great, the earth will
cleave and swallow you up in conclusion.

To what you have added in your third Edition: I add this Answer.

You say, Remember Hind, etc.

Sir, Are you so impudent as to reproach Saints and Truth with particular men's
sins and faults? Might you not upon the same account reproach Christ himself?
behold one of his own Disciples betray him, and Peter denying him; an old trick
of the Devil to reproach truth withal. If I should deal thus with you, as
justly I might, I could tell you of a zealous Preacher of your tribe, one
Williams of Munton in Somersetshire got his servant with Child, and was outed
by the Committee of that County; and another of Chard in the same County, very
zealous and like your self, preached bitterly against Sectaries; yet got one of
his nearest friends daughter with Child, and was outed likewise by the
Committee; another very near the same place did the like. And upon this
account, it may easily be made manifest, that there are not a filthyer
Generation of Adulterers and Devils in the Nation then your own Coat.

You say, That for it he has been cast out of his gathered Church.

A discovery of their integrity; they cannot bear them that do evil, that say
they are Jews and are not; but you entertain drunkards, whore-mongers,
profane, all sorts in you Congregation, both of Priests and people, and never
cast them out; a demonstration that you are no Church of Christ, but the
Synagogue of Satan, a Cage of unclean and hateful birds.

Argument II. If none may Preach but such as are sent, then every gifted
brother may not preach; but none may preach but such as are sent. Ergo. Every
gifted brother may not preach.

Your Argument in the Minor I grant, but the Major I deny, that although its
true, none can preach according to the intention of that Scripture, Romans 10. 15
viz. for the working of faith and converting of souls, yet it does not follow
that every gifted brother may not preach; for every gifted brother is sent to
preach according to the measure of the gift received. And your grand mistake in
this Argument, is in the word sent, whereas that word sent, relates to the
internal power of the Spirit in the Saints, by which they are enabled to speak
a word in season to the very soul; you understand it to be an outward mission
or sending, a poor and low interpretation.

The mission, you say implies three things: Election by the Churches, Probation
and Examination by the Presbytery, separation by Ordination of the Presbytery.

First, Election by the Church; But by what Church? not your Parochial
Provincial or National Church; The New Testament never knew such a Church, nor
Christ in the New Testament never did, never will own such a Church; a company
of ignorant profane carnal creatures, both Priest and people; yet have gotten
the name of a Church and Ministry, blessing themselves in that name, and yet
are ignorant what it is; for a Church of Christ to whom Election belongs, are a
company of Believers, Saints gathered out of the world by the power of the Lord
in the Ministry of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Act. 2. 47. chap. 4. 32. But you
are Enemies to this Church, rail, reproach, persecute; they are the object of
your scorn and malice. I grant that where such a Church is, Election belongs to
them; yet I say, a man may be sent to preach, though not elected by the Church,
Act. 8. 1. 4. The whole Church being scattered preached; and I suppose none
dare say, that all of them were Elected and Ordained: for I said before, there
is a preaching by way of gift and office, and preaching by gift only; and its
the Churches joy to see her Members gifted and exercised in this way: But as
for your selves, as your Church is no true Church, nor your Ministry no true
Ministry: so you fail likewise in your Election by that Church; for you are in
your way first ordained, and then you are sent to your Churches, Parishes,
whether they will or no, and you take them by violence, if you have a mind to
their Tithes, you will be their Minister, though never elected by them, and
afterward, if you have a Call to another place for your advantage, you will
leave them again, and embrace the second, and the third too it may be; yet you
dare be so bold as to tell of your electing by the Church; where as first, it
is no Church, but a Parish consisting for the most part of ignorant carnal
souls; and secondly, you press your selves upon them whether they will or no
for the most part; where then is your Election by the Church of Christ? thus
you fail in the first part of your mission, non-Election by a Church of Christ,
and then I pray who sent you?

Your second is, Probation and Examination by the Presbytery; the Scripture you
produce, is, 1 Cor. 14 32. For the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets; etc.

A learned interpretation of this Scripture! the spirits of those who are to be
ordained to preach, must be subject to the examination and probation of the
Presbytery, when there is not the least hint or intention of such a thing in
the words; for the Apostle says, Ye may all prophecy one by one: what, all
the Presbyters? Nay all the Prophets; but who are they? All the gifted
brethren: See ver, 34. none are prohibited but women: Let your women keep
silence, for they are not permitted to speak, but men are permitted.

Obj. The Lord intends Prophets only; and its said in another place, 1 Cor. 12
29. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets, etc? The interrogation implies a
negation; all are not Prophets.

Answ. 1. All are not Prophets.

Secondly, All that have the gift of Prophecy, are Prophets, and may speak,
and ought to speak, for the edifying of the Church, as in its place I shall let
you see more at large.

Now, if all that have the gift of Prophecy, that is, to speak to the edifying
of the Church, may Prophecy, ver. 3. then this may occasion confusion, some may
say, and you say so too: Nay, says the Apostle, the spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets; For God is not the author of confusion, but of
peace, etc. That is, when one Prophet, or gifted Brother has spoken, and
another has any thing revealed, let the first hold his peace: but how can he
hold his peace? the spirit of Prophecy is strong and violent, and men cannot
contain themselves, its like fire within them? Numb. 11. 25. 1 Samuel 19, 20. to
the end. But says the Apostle, there is no such thing in this prophesying, For
the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; that is, they are able
to contain themselves, and be silent, while another speaks, etc. else it would
occasion confusion; But God is not the author of confusion, but of peace.

So that the sum of all is, That he that is a Gospel-Prophet, can contain
himself, and be content to hear another speak as well as himself, etc.

By all which, it appears, that a man may be sent, and may Preach, or
Prophecy, without such an approbation or examination as you speak of; else
those, Acts 8. acted unlawfully in preaching without any such Probation.

But to return to your selves, you come short of any such probation by the
Presbytery; its true, there was a Presbytery in the primitive times; but what
is that to you, who know no true Church, nor Ministry, but are enemies unto it?
you have only Popish forms amongst you without the power; the name of Church,
Ordinances, Ministers; but are indeed, and in truth, enemies to Church,
Ordinances, Ministers; reproach them, persecute them, and are for the most part
a pack of cheaters and deluders of the people for your own advantages.

I own probation by such a Presbytery the Scripture speaks of, before admission
to office, (although still, I say, men may Preach as gifted Brethren without
any relation to office) but as for your Presbytery, it was conceived in Hell,
brought forth in Rome, and yet lives, and pants for breath in England, but its
end is to be burned: See Esai 65. from 11. to 16.

Your Third, in your mission, is, Separation by ordination of the Presbytery:
which thing I own, as relating to persons in Office, by a lawful Presbytery;
yet still I have two exceptions.

1. Not that Ordination to office ever did, or shall, where its right, prevent
the gifts of the Brethren. No Sir, it was not the end for which it was
appointed.

2. You have no such Presbytery; therefore no such ordination; you have yours
by succession from the Pope; only you have of late altered the name from
Bishop, Priest and Jesuit, to Presbyter; but the nature is not changed, as
deeply engaged, and enraged against the truth as any Jesuit in Rome: and I
assure you, I should as freely accept of the Prayers and the hands of a pack of
Jesuits, as of yours, as relating to this of Ordination.

But to return to the word Sent, where, it seems the force of your Argument
lies, wherein you are so much mistaken; you judge it to be the outward
mission, consisting of Election, Probation, Ordination; whereas indeed, and
truth it has the least relation to it, if any at all; my grounds are these:

1. From the nature of the word and work: the word Sent in those high things of
God, relates to God, and his sending immediate. So Christ was the Sent of the
Father, to do the Fathers work: thus was Paul an Apostle, one sent not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 1. and he was sent not to Baptize,
but to Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. so the word and work joined together,
it being a heavenly work, preaching of the Gospel, its a heavenly sending that
is here intended.

2. The manner of expression, the interrogation, which, as you say, and its
granted, implies a strong negation; how can he preach except he be sent? He
cannot preach, etc. that is, he cannot preach in the Spirit and power of the
Lord, to the conversion and building up of souls, except sent by Jesus Christ
in the power of the spirit: and if so sent, he can preach, and does preach,
though all the world say him nay; and you being so much mistaken in the truth,
no wonder you have such a company of Divines, as you are pleased to call them;
all the Ministry of the Nation are sent, by your account; for you have all one
manner of call, and sending, according to the outward form; if one be sent,
then all are sent: and think you, did the Lord ever send forth such a company
to preach his Gospel, of idle, drunken, whoring, proud, covetous, envious,
ignorant, profane persons, as the most part of them are? nay, and some too such
dunces, sots, that all their wit cannot make a Sermon in your way of Sermon
making; yet these have the same sending with you.

And this I must tell you, that if God inlighten any of your profession in the
Truth, they renounce this kind of sending, trample it under feet, return it
from whence it came: But to return, men can preach by your mission; but they
cannot preach unless sent of God to convert Souls, in the power of the internal
sending.

But to proceed to the third Argument: If this be such an outward mission, or
sending, as you imagine, then it makes all other preaching unlawful; for its
such a sending, as that there is no preaching without it; how can he preach
then? What the Apostle writ to the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. You may all
prophecy one by one, was unlawful; and the preaching of scattered brethren,
Acts 8. was unlawful; the preaching of Paul, Acts 9. 20. immediately after his
conversion, before he was separated, to the work of Ministry, Chap. 13. 2. was
unlawful, and he had cause to repent it, if what you affirm were truth; but he
rejoices in it, Gal. 1. 15, 16, 17. No sooner was Christ revealed in him, but
he preaches him; he went not up to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before
him, etc.

But to the great objection that lies in the way against you, That gifting is
sending, and all gifted persons are sent, etc. And know this will yet lie in
your way, and is not so easily removed as you imagine: you pretend a
distinction between gifting and sending.

Many thousands in the Nation are gifted (you say) but may not dare not preach,
etc.

Your gifted brethren (it seems) may not, dare not preach; you keep them in
subjection; but your sent ones, though no gift at all, they may and dare to do
it, or abuse it; and what account will you give to the Lord for this at last
think you?

You say, None may preach in a constituted Church without sending, in your way:
And yet in the constituted Church of Corinth they might all, (viz.) who had the
gift, prophesy one by one; you instance Barnabas and Saul, Act. 13. 1. 2. who
though they had gifts must be ordained: Yet Saul preached, Act. 9. 20, 21, 22.
before he was ordained, or had seen the Apostles; see verse. 27. And when Paul
and Barnabas were Ordained, it was not to preach in a constituted Church, but
to the world as you may see, Act. 13.

You say, If bare gifts be a sufficient Call, etc. Then gifted boys may preach
as the little gifted Boy at Stafford.

And why not Sir? will you limit the holy One of Israel, and dare you reproach
the Scripture, as you do? out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, he ordained
strength, and will confound his foes.

Then gifted women may preach, you say: This is your own conclusion; because we
say, as the Scripture says, that gifted brethen may preach or prophecy;
therefore you in reproach will conclude that gifted women may preach; but its
your conclusion, and to your self I leave it; and according to the Mystery of
the truth, I think there are but few, if any, besides women preachers among
your selves.

You produce, Mat. 10. 1. 5. Which you say, fully clears the scruple, where
Christ distinguishes gifting men from Authoritative sending, v. 1. he gifts
them; verse. 5. he sends them.

I answer: First, Is this such a sending as you have talked of in your mission,
Election, Probation, Ordination? or an immediate sending, as he sent Paul
before he was Ordained? Here is not a word of Ordination, but sending; no
laying on of the hands of Christ, but gifting, sending; and so the gifting and
sending of the gifted brethren, is when the Lord enables them in a measure unto
it, and says in them, to them, go, as in Paul, Gal. 1. 16. As for those gifts
you mention, Mat. 10. 1. I query, if you or any of your sent Brethren have
those gifts, or if you are so sent as those, verse. 5.

You conclude two things, that must concur in making a Minister, gifts,
abilities, qualifications both of life and learning; This if rightly
understood, is a truth, and I freely own it.

But you seem, page 12. to bring in a mixture, a hodge podge, Arts, Sciences,
Latin, Greek, Hebrew, etc. And is it true indeed, that these gifts are
required in a Minister? then no Minister without them. I wonder then the
Apostles could be Ministers, who are said to be illiterate or unlearned men,
Act. 4. 13. Or were they made partakers of the Spirit of Christ? and are not
the Saints now? yea; or else they are none of his, Romans 8 9. and is not the
same Spirit sufficient now as then? yea certainly, to those who trust in him;
but its the spirit of Antichrist that seeks out after humane helps to supply
the room or want of this Spirit of Christ; and having gotten it, they grow
proud of it, are self-conceited in it, make it their great idol, and dare
reproach the Spirit and power of the Lord appearing in his Saints.

Secondly, He must have power and Authority from the Presbytery to exercise his
Gifts: he must not run before he be sent.

I have Answered this already: what Presbytery sent Paul when he preached? Act.
9. or the scattered brethren? Act. 8. etc. And where is that Presbytery among
you, that have power thus to send? It seems you have high esteem of your
Presbytery: else you would not mention it so often, when its but a new trick of
the Devil to give another name when the Prelate was out of date; Alas you were
ignorant of Presbytery your selves not long since: but now the name lifts you
up to Heaven, although the nature of the Prelate still remains. I suppose you
harp so much upon this string, that so they might preach nothing but what you
approve, and then your dark kingdom might it may be stand the longer; but the
Lord Jesus will consume and destroy Antichrist, with the spirit of his mouth,
and the brightness of his coming.

You say, All Preachers are sent either by God, or by the Devil etc.

To this we fully assent without Tertullian your witness; and I pray you look
you unto it; Are those who minister according to the measure of the gift given
them, in your account, intruders, usurpers, sent of the Devil, or of God? Look
to your self man (you are upon a very sharp point and keen rock) lest you fall,
or be split before you are aware; Therefore I beseech you take a little view,
who are likeliest to be sent from God or the Devil, your selves or your gifted
Brethren: The gifted brethren exercise the gift they have received, either
first, when occasion and opportunity is offered to inform the judgment in the
Gospel of Grace and Truth, that so, if the Lord work, souls may be enlightened
and converted: or secondly, to build up the Church in its most holy Faith; he
does his Office as a member in the body, that it may grow up in him who is the
Head.

Your selves, First, make up a Church, a body, as you call it, of Christ, a
monstrous body of profane ones, and give them Ordinances, tell them they are
Christians, and so delude them, and without infinite mercy damn them for ever.

Secondly, Are ignorant of, and envious to the truth, the Saints and Servants
of God.

Thirdly, Do not the work of Christ, preach, baptize Believers converted,
gather Churches, build up Saints, but the contrary by way of opposition to all.

Fourthly, For the most part are carnal, loose, base in conversation; not so
much as common civility or civil honesty; yet all one sending.

Now be your selves judges who are sent from God, and who from the Devil; who
does the work of Christ, and who the work of the Devil. Oh consider this you
who forget God, lest he come and tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver.

Page 13. You say, It Is for Wolves and false Prophets to be self called, and to
come of their own accord etc.

Answ. You say truth. They are wolves who are Self-called, Thieves and Robbers
Joh. 10. you mention it; but the Query lies here still, Who are the
Self-called ones, you or the preaching brethren? And so, who are the wolves,
you or them? Gifted brethren they preach only by Gift as they have received, as
I said, either for conversion or building, that they might inform others in the
same truth they themselves are informed, or comfort others with the same
comfort they themselves are comforted.

But you, who boast so much of your sending, you come indeed and are not sent;
for first, you come not in at the door, but in at the window; the door is
Christ and his Spirit, and there is no other door that admits to preaching; see
1 Cor. 12. there are many Gifts and Works and operations; but still the same
spirit who works all in all. But you have found out another way, your Popish
Ordination; and none must preach but such, just as the Pope and the Prelates;
so your selves walk in the same steps; you are the Theives and Robbers that
climb in at the window or some other way; a hole you have made for your selves
to creep in at: and secondly, the end of your coming in, is to steal, rob and
to carry away to enrich your selves with the worldly gain, the fat Tithes of
the peoples labors and increase: but those who come in by the door Christ, they
dare not do it, nay they dare not but like honest and true men, disery and
discover the thief and the robber, that so he may be known and avoided.

And as for Wolves, who are they but such a devour the sheep? I send you forth
(says Christ) as Lambs among Wolves; its the property of Wolves to devour the
Lambs; how have the Popish Wolves devoured? let Queen Mary's days witness;
Episcopal Wolves? let the Prelates days witness; Presbyterian Wolves? let
latter times; if they could have prevailed, they would have sucked the blood of
almost all the Lambs of Jesus Christ in this Nation ere this. Possibly you may
account us Wolves, because in word and writing we discover your baseness and
unrighteous ways: be not mistaken Sir, Light cannot but discover Darkness: but
there is no spirit or principle of persecution in us, we desire not the
Magistrate to meddle with you, or to hinder you from preaching, if you turn not
Traitors to the State; the Wolves it is that bite and devour, that make the
Lambs their prey; but the Lambs are meek, patient, suffering, not biting and
devouring, etc. But stay awhile, go not off triumphing; If what you say be
truth, That the gifted brother was silent at this Argument; yet believe it, it
was not the light that shined in it that overcame him, but your cunning
sophistry in reasoning: but believe it, your own Argument will burn up all your
sending in conclusion, and then you shall consess that gifted brethren may
preach the Gospel. You say Goliath fled; but you are mistaken; I suppose rather
it was little David; and at present great Goliath gets the victory, Goliath with
his Armor of proof, University stuff, etc. but Goliath must be routed in the end.

Now to your third Argument.
If all that have gifts may preach, then all that have gifts may baptize; but
all that have gifts (say you) may preach; ergo, all that have gifts may baptize.

In my answer to this Argument, I shall pass by what the gifted brethren
answered, as you make mention with so much reproach and scorn, as if you had
sat a long time in Scorners chair: for mine own particular, I grant the truth
of your Argument; That gifted brethren may preach, and may baptize, and give
the Supper too; and that I have to do, is to make good this principle, which I
doubt not but I shall with much light and evidence of Truth; and then this
Argument is routed, and blown away with the wind of truth, as the morning dew
before the Sun.

My Arguments are these: First John, the first preacher of Repentance, and
baptizer in the water, to the washing away of sin by the blood of Christ, yet
had no special mission nor did any miracle, John 10. 41. but by divine
inspiration, according to the measure he had received, so he preached, and so
he baptized; its true he was prophesied of before, and sent in a special
manner to prepare the way of the Lord, etc. yet he did his work in an ordinary
way, as a gifted brother, if you will have it so, not extraordinarily gifted
and sent. See John 1. 31. he preached Christ, and baptized into his name, and
knew him not; like many an honest soul, that are speaking of Christ, and preach
of him too, when they have but shattered and shallow apprehensions of him,
there being such a worth in him, that a soul that has had but a sight of him,
and an interest in him, cannot but declare him, as the woman of Samaria. John 4.

The second ground is from John 4. 1, 2. The Disciples of Christ then were the
ordinary Christians, the alone Church of the Gospel, Christ the Head, Pastor,
and Shepherd; yet it is said that Christ baptized not, but his Disciples;
compare this Scripture with Act. 10. to the latter end, Peter commanded them to
be baptized; not that he did it himself, but commanded them; and its very
probable that there were some gifted preaching brethren with him who did the
work; and the like assistance might he expect when the 3000 were converted and
added to the Church, Acts 2. and Acts 8. The scattered brethren went preaching
the Gospel; and Chap. 11. The hand of the Lord was with them and a great number
believed and turned to the Lord; and the same who converted them, baptized
them, if they were at all baptized, for they gathered them into
Church Fellowship. But the Apostles hearing of it, sent Barnabas to confirm and
strengthen them, which he did, ver. 23. not baptize them: Thus it appears that
preaching Disciples may baptize, not that they must: Paul was sent, not to
baptize, but to preach; yet seeing he was sent to do the greater, he might do
the lesser, and did it too.

Object. This is that will breed confusion in the Church; no need of Officers,
if any gifted brother may administer Ordinances.

Answ. Which shall be my third Argument too; That Officers, Pastors and
Teachers are not for the being of the Church and Ordinances; they are both
before them, and without them; but they are rather for the wel-being of the
Church; there is nothing to be done in the Church, no Ordinance to be
administered, but a gifted brother may do it, with the approbation of the
Church; but because of convenience and order, therefore some men are chosen
forth to act in behalf of the whole, for the good of the whole; not that such
men thus chosen should usurp such power and authority to themselves, as to set
up themselves above all, and stifle the grace and workings of the Spirit in
others; its time then to dethrone them again; and the work of a Pastor or
Teacher does not consist all in preaching and baptizing, as Priests now adays
think, but in knowing the state of the flock, in watching, in reproving, in
admonishing, in rebuking with authority, in the Spirit and power of the Lord:
There is no one thing that I know belongs to a Pastor, but a gifted brother may
do it; it is his duty when time, opportunity and liberty calls for it; only the
brother does it according to his gift, as a member; the other waiting on his
office, as one entrusted by the Church more then ordinary for that end.

It is with the Church in this case, as with a body Politic that needs
Magistrates and Officers: not for its being, but for its wel-being; its not
Magistracy that gives a being to a People, but a People gives a being to the
Magistracy: and the Magistracy is or should be for the Peoples good. So it is
in this case with the Church; its not the Pastor that gives being to the
Church, but the Church gives being to the Pastor; the Church and Ordinances are
before Pastors.

Object. But there must be some one or other to preach for the gathering of the
Church, and such a one is before the Church, and may be said to give being to
the Church.

Answ. True, but we are not now speaking about preaching out of, but in a
constituted Church. And secondly, out of a constituted Church gifted brethren
may preach for the gathering of a Church or Churches; and if God give a
blessing to them, and manifest his presence with them, as those Acts 8. with
Acts 11. they may baptize them, and gather them into fellowship, as they did.

You pretend absurdities that will follow: If men may preach without a call,
they may baptize, deliver the Supper, exercise Church censures without a Call.

I say it is not without a call: the Churches freedom or desire is call enough
for either, if the party be gifted to it; all lawful Calls to preach, either
wthin or without, are suitable to the gift. If no gift, the call is unlawful;
and that Church which has power to call an Officer, has power to call forth
any gifted brother to do service for the Church, if he have a freedom within
himself to do it.

But you say, then gifted boys, and gifted women, and gifted Midwives may
preach, if all gifted persons may preach: But by the way, pray Sir, what is the
difference between women and midwives? you might have done well to distinguish;
for I thought midwives had been women all this while; but I have told you
already that there is difference between gifted brethren, and gifted women;
that is your own nonsensicall conclusion, because gifted men may preach,
therefore gifted women.

Secondly, Should I give by way of concession, though not grant, That its not
lawful for men out of office to baptize: yet they may preach; and that 1. From
the command; for its not the reasoning from the greater to the less will serve
you, but its the command that makes things lawful, or unlawful; there is a
command of preaching, if not of baptizing, Romans 12. 3, 6. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11.
Examples, Acts 8. 4. and 9. 20. and 18. 26.

2. Preaching and Baptism were not so united together, as never to be separated
(as you pretend) See 1 Cor. 1. 17.

But to your fourth Argument.
If no Priest or Prophet might offer Sacrifice under the Law without a Call,
then none may preach the Word, or deliver the Sacraments under the Gospel
without a Call; but no man might offer Sacrifice under the Law without a Call.
Ergo, etc.

This Argument is one in substance with your first: I thought your University
Divinity had delivered you from such Tautologies; and although I suppose there
is enough said in mine Answer to the first for satisfaction to both, yet I
shall follow you in this likewise, that so I may not leave one stone unturned,
nor any part of your warlike frame uncharged, that so your Pulpit-Guard may be
wholly and totally routed. And to your Argument I give you a treble Answer;

First, that there is no comparison to be made between the Jewish Priests, and
the Ministers of the Gospel, although indeed your selves in many things run
parallel with them; but this I have answered to your first.

Therefore Secondly, I answer, that its not the parity of Jewish Priests and
Ministers of the Gospel that will hold in your Argument; that is nonsensicall
like most of the rest; because the Jewish Priest or Prophet in time of the Law
only might offer Sacrifice, therefore none may preach or minister Ordinances
under the Gospel without a Call; you may as well make this Argument, Because
none were circumcised under the Law but men children, therefore none under the
Gospel but men children must be baptized; But Sir, the limiting of the Legal
Sacrifice to the Legal Priesthood, is no ground why none but Ministers in
office should preach; it was sufficient to them, that none but them should
offer Sacrifice. So under the Gospel, the command of Christ is the rule of
Saints, and that is it that makes things lawful or unlawful: the Lord will
have his servants not to hide their talents, but that which they hear in
secret, they shall proclaim upon the house top, that is publicly, and not to
hide as by stealth his goodness within them; and this which you for base and
self ends so much cry out against, was never forbidden, but ever approved both
in the old and new Testament; any servant of the Lord might and did prophecy
and preach forth the goodness of the Lord to others; Moses wishes that all the
Lords people were Prophets: And the Propet David Psalm. 145. 10, 11, 12. speaks
once for all both for Law and Gospel, All thy works shall praise thee O Lord,
and thy Saints shall bless thee; they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom,
and talk of thy power; to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and
the glorious majesty of his Kingdom: Note man, its the Saints work and
privilege to declare the glorious majesty of the Kingdom of Christ: And why?
Because they have been in the Kingdom, and have seen it, and can speak of it by
experience, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. You are mistaken man, its not your University,
nor your Call, that teaches you knowledge in the Kingdom of the Lord; and that
is the reason of your so deep ignorance of, and hatred against the Truth; but
its the Saints work to preach the glad tidings of the Kingdom: The Gospel is
called The word of the Kingdom, Mat. 13. 19. And who shall preach the word of
the Kingdom? Why, the Saints shall declare the glorious word of thy Kingdom,
and talk of thy power; and hence it is that the same Prophet David, Psalm. 68.
11. says, The Lord gave the word, and great was the company of those that
published it, or the army, as the Margin notes it; In the Hebrew A great Army
of Saints, publishing the Truth; believe it Sir, you are mistaken, to imagine
that God has given a Patent to any Society or Generation of men under the Sun,
of what name or title soever they dignifie, or distinguish themselves, whether
Pope, Cardinal, Jesuit, Bishop, Priest, or Presbyter, that so they might
monopolize Preaching to themselves; so making that a trade cum Privilegio,
which is proper, and in common to the Saints, according as God shall reveal
unto them: where the Lord speaks the word, there will be Preachers: And truly
Sir, you endeavor what you can to make the Saints to come short of other
Creatures; the whole Creation in their spheres, and places, all set forth the
praise of their Maker; and shall not the Saints, sutably to their spears,
capacities, and understandings, do the like? Thy works shall praise thee, O
God, and thy Saints shall not be behind the whole Creation, they shall bless
thee, they shall talk of thee, they shall declare thee to the sons of men, etc.
But

3. I answer, that all the Saints are a spiritual, and a holy Priesthood, 1
Pet. 2. 5. and their Priestly Office under the Law had no relation at all to
yours under the Gospel, or any other officiating ministry; for that Priesthood
was 1. A Type of Christ; and 2. Of the Church of Christ etc.

4. I answer, and conclude, That Gifted Brethren do not preach without a Call,
as none might sacrifice without a Call, etc.

And whereas you say, and give it as your reason, That Preaching is a greater
work then offering sacrifice; I say its not the greatness of the work, but the
will of the Lord commanding the work, that makes the thing either lawful, or
unlawful: whereas you make so many reiterations of a Call; and that many creep
in at the window, etc. I have said enough to this already, and proved it so,
that your selves are the men, though you see it not, and not the Gifted
Brethren.

You say, That a true Minister preaches in Gods Name by virtue of a Call, etc.
And to this purpose you mention Paul who often speaks of his Call.

I say, first, That he never mentions his Call to such a base, and ungodly end,
as you so often mention yours, viz. that you might stop, and silence the
workings, and the gifts of the Spirit in all, except in you selves, where it is
not neither, but University Gifts instead of the Spirit; a Mystery of Iniquity.

2. If his Call had been no better then yours, he might, and would have been
ashamed of it, rather then to have boasted as you do: but believe me, your
glorying is not good; your glory will be your shame in the end.

But to your Reasons, to convince men of the necessity of a Call to this Sacred
Function; yours is a sacred one in deed, as sacred as the holy Chair of Rome.

1. Reason, Without it all Ordinances are null, etc.

Answ. I grant it for truth; that is the reason that all your Ordinances are
null; your Preaching null; for you preach people into an outward formality
without power: Hence it is, that the work of the Sent-preaching Brethren is to
undo what you have done: And this I can assure you, that it would be much
easier, in an ordinary way, to convert Souls to Christ amongst Indians and
Heathens, then in England: you, their teachers, have so rivited them in the
ways of ignorance and formality; the leaders of the people have caused them to
Err.

Your Baptism null, because ye were not called, nor sent of God, but run before
you were sent; you have sprinkled Babes instead of baptizing Believers.

Your Supper and Communion null, because you have prepared a Table for the
Troop, and furnished a drink offering for that number, Isai. 65. 11, 12.
Therefore shall you be numbered to the sword, and shall all bow down to the
slaughter.

2, Reas. He can expect no success, etc.

Answ. That is the reason you do not profit the People at all.

3. Reas. People cannot hear such with comfort, etc.

Answ. That is the reason so many honest Souls depart from you; they are driven
forth, they cannot hear, because they know the voice of Christ, and must follow
it.

4. Reas. God will have all things done according to that order and rule he
himself has prescribed.

Answ. True (that is) that his Saints should Preach the Word of his Kingdom;
that office should not put out Gifts, etc. but all things should be done in
order; that is the reason the knowing and godly part leave you, because Gods
Order is not amongst you. You prescribe two notes of those who have not the
Spirit.

1. Separatists dividing and separating from the true Church of Christ, etc.

Answ. I grant it; but we separate not from the true, but from the false Church
of Babel, and confusion; both in Ministry, and in Members; in Doctrine, and in
Manners; in Government, and in Ordinances; and from such we are commanded to
separate, and have no fellowship with them: Your Church and Ministry are such
as have a form of godliness, but without; denying the power; therefore from
such we are to turn away, to separate, as the Geneva reads it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. And
that is the reason why Souls, when they are once informed in it, they run from
you, as from an unclean and monstrous Babel and Antichrist, obeying the Call of
the Lord, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my People, partake not of her sins, lest
ye partake of her plagues: And your selves it is who have separated from the
true Church, Ordinances, Order, and all; that have forgotten Sion, and forsaken
the Lord, in preparing a Table for the Troop, etc.

2. Sensualists, following the Dictates of corrupt reason, forsaking their
Callings, etc.

You are mistaken, and that upon a double account.

1. They do not follow the dictates of nature, but of the Spirit of Truth in
the written Word of God; they do not leave their Callings, and live idle, they
can work, and preach too.

But 2. Your are the men who lie under this gilt: you it is who are Sensualists
following the dictates of corrupt reason. Hence it is, that you must live by
sense and reason, fetch in your maintenance by the force of civil power from
the People, whether they will or no, cannot trust God with your maintenance;
no; this is enough for the poor believing Anabaptists, as you call them: who
are the Sensualists now? your selves it is; who, I do not say forsake your
Callings, but live altogether idle without a Calling, scorning to live in that
lawful way God has appointed men to live in. Idlers you are, and yet cry out
against idleness; out of your own mouths shall you be condemned.

Thus you make it appear that you have indeed the spirit of delusion.

The fifth Argument.
From the Absurdities that would follow, etc.

Before I come to your first Absurdity, I cannot but note your Story in your
large Swallows, of the man (you say) your read of, that swallowed an Ox, all
except the Tail.

But Sir, I pray you, does your Story lie, or do your self lie? If it be your
Story, it argues Idleness, Ignorance, Vanity, and Malice in you to read, and
repeat such a lie.

1. Idleness in that you could spare so much time and leisure to read such a
lie; Saints work is to redeem the time.

2. Ignorance in relating, as well as reading, not knowing that the relating of
lies, and falsehoods, is no work for Saints, but dishonorable to Truth.

3. Vanity, vain minds to delight in reading, and relating such abominations.

4. Malice, in making use of a lying Story to dishonor Saints, and Truth.

But if it be a son of your own begetting, as me thinks it looks exceeding like
your self: remember that all liars must have their portion in the Lake that
burns, in the fire that is not to be quenched: and this lie do you apply in
scorn to the Baptists.

But give me leave to tell you, that its your selves that are indeed the great
swallowers; you tell of an Ox; but you can swallow the tenth of the whole
Nation, if you had it; not only Corn and Hay, but the Lambs, Calves, Pigs, and
Geese, Eggs, and legs, if not tails, and all, and yet not content: was there
ever such swallowers in the world beside, think you? be judge your self in time.

1. Absurdity, This is that will confound all Callings and Societies, etc. then
every Soldier that has a Commanders gift may be a Commander, and a General
without a Call, etc. then farewell all.

Answ. You make use of Comparisons not consistent with the thing in hand; those
varieties of stations amongst men, must have variety of distinct Callings to
it; but this of Preaching and Prophesying is that which all the brethren that
have gifts are called to, as I have often proved; that in the Church all may
Prophesy, that have the gift, and yet no confusion, but peace and order: and
indeed its nothing else but your ignorance, and your pride, in being afraid of
such an equality with your Brethren, as the Scripture presents you with.

2. Then every gifted boy and woman should preach, etc.

To this I have answered you already.

3. Then all may preach, and deliver the Supper, etc.

To this I have likewise answered already.

4. This would open a flood gate to all Errors, Heresies, etc.

I wonder what people in the world more full of Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies, then the Pope, and your selves, who have confined all preaching to
your selves; no way like this to nourish ignorance, and nuzzle up people in
blindness and abominable Worships.

5. Then all vain glorious Hypocrites, etc. would turn Preachers, etc. the
emptiest barrels make the loudest sound, etc.

And is it otherwise now amongst your selves? Who hold their heads highest, who
makes the greatest sound, who thinks they have Gifts beyond all others? Is is
not your selves? and would you not exclude all beside your selves, had you so
much power? empty barrels, making great sounds, but being tried, there is
nothing but vanity and pride. And whereas you say, All vain glorious Hypocrites
would turn Preachers; I would have you to know, that the Saints have a Spirit
of discerning, and if they find such persons, they exclude them; therefore
this is no way to set up vainglorious Hypocrites; it is that Spirit of
discerning God has given to them, that makes them discover so much Hypocrisy
amongst you.

6. Then the Church of Christ, which is his Body, would be monstrous, all eye,
all ear, all head, etc. contrary to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12, 14, 15, and
28, 29.

Answ. No truth in your conclusion: For

1. I say not that all have Gifts, but all that have Gifts may Preach; there
are some in the Body that have not those Gifts, or do not exercise them.

2. I say, that to those who do exercise them, the Gift is different.
Diversities of Gifts, yet the same Spirit; and diversities of operations, yet
the same Lord, etc.

As there are diversities of Members, yet the same Body.

And so 3. Diversities of Callings; some Apostles, that is sent for the
gathering of Churches; some Prophets, gifted brethren in the Church, exercising
for the edifying of the Body of Christ; Pastors and Teachers for to feed and
watch; yet not to hinder, but rather to further, and encourage the Prophets;
Deacons to see to the necessities of the poor, etc.

Thus you see, or may see, that this order is so far from making a Monster,
that it sets every member to do his office in his place, every one to exercise
his Gift in the Body, according to the measure he has received.

But you it is who make a monster in all its parts; a filthy corrupt leprous
body, without, or at best, with rotten, false, painted, artificial members,
legs, arms, etc. without a head. Jesus Christ never was, never will be Head to
such a Body; and your are the men, the Ministers that form up, and present him
with such a body, and then cry it up, boasting of this Body, dance about this
ill-favored Calf, and cry out against the true Churches to be monstrous
Bodies, when your selves are the Monsters all the while.

7. If this be tolerated, it will make both Ministry and Ministers
contemptible, etc.

Answ. I thought where I should take you at last: Oh, you love Honor as well
as your Profit, to have the cap and knee, and to be called of men Rabbi; then
it goes gallant; and pleases the heart of a proud Pharisee: but you are
mistaken; this is not the way to make Ministers vile, but the alone way for
them to be esteemed of as the Ministers of Christ, when they walk according to
the Truth, and endeavor not the dethroning of any to exalt themselves: and
this is that has made you dishonorable in the eyes of Christians, your pride
and vileness in this particular.

You say The toleration of such irregularities is not so small an error as some
imagine, etc.

Alas Sir, do you want the power of the Civil Magistrate, to exalt you into the
throne? it seems it matters not what becomes of Souls; let them be ignorant,
let them sink, let them perish, so your Honor may be upheld, you care not,
etc. You Will make it a matter of consideration and concernment to the Civil
Magistrate, to oppose the way and Truth of Christ for your own self ends and
interests.

The sixth Argument.
Every Preacher must be able in some good measure above ordinary Christians,
not only to divide the Word aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Soundly to interpret, and
give the true sense and meaning, applying the same to edification; but he must
be able also to convince gainsayers, Tit. 1 9.

But every Gifted Tradesman, Nailer, Tailor, etc. is not able to divide the
Word aright, nor to convince a learned adversary, and gainsayer. Ergo.

The Major, you say, is clear of it self; the Minor you pretend to prove, which
I deny: your proof is this,

Those who want learning, both Humane and Divine, cannot be sound Interpreters,
nor solid Disputants, but most of our Gifted artificers want learning, both
Humane and Divine. Ergo.

Sir, I question what you intend by Learning, Humane and Divine, whether you
mind a perfection of Learning; for you set no bounds upon your terms; if so,
its to be doubted that your selves are but Ignoramus's in both, in your best
and most experienced Art of humanity; you come short of many Heathens and
Philosophers; and I am very confident that many in this Nation who never knew
what an Art or Science meant in its form or method in way of School Study, have
more natural Philosophy, Logic, Retorick in their heads then your selves, who
so much pride your selves in your shame.

But whether am I wandering into the bottomless Pit of man's wisdom? take your
honor in this blackness and darkness, and go on spoiling souls by your
Philosophy, Col. 2. 8. till the Lord prevent you.

You say in the Minor of your first Argument, That every gifted Tradesman,
nailer, tailor, etc. is not able to divide the word aright, etc.

And is every Priest of your Calling in the Nation able to divide the Word
aright in your own judgment? or is one in ten, nay in twenty? be the judge
your self; if not, be ashamed to bring such Arguments any more, because every
gifted Tradesman is not able, therefore none are able, etc. because every
Priest is not able, therefore none are able Artificers in their art of
preaching.

And in your second Argument, you say, most of them want learning, etc.

And may not your selves say most of your own Calling want learning humane and
divine? I am sure you want divine learning; else you would not make such humane
Arguments against the divine truth; but we confess your Argument, we want
learning, not humane but divine, and we wait on the Lord for his teachings,
acknowledging with the Apostle, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.
16.

You say, Nor to convince a learned Adversary.

Truly, now adays your selves are the learned Adversaries the Church of Christ
has to deal withal: And this I must tell you, and you will find it by
experience, that the gifted brethren will in the light and strength of truth,
overturn all the wisdom of the flesh, as its exercised against the truth, in
you or any others; God will make all fleshes wisdom and pride and glory vale it
self, and fall down at the presence of his truth in his Saints, as Dagon before
the Ark; you are mistaken Sir, to think its your humanity that makes you able
to divide the Word aright, and that makes you an able Disputant; its the power
of the Spirit of Christ in his people that makes them able to divide the Word,
and to convince gainsayers; Therefore your Argument is weak, and has nothing
in it: if any thing, it reaches your selves as well as others, nay more then
others; because you live in that sphere, and yet want; but the gifted brethren
see their wants, and acknowledge it, not boast of their fullness like your
selves; and they see they may want learning both humane and divine, and yet
divide the Word aright, be solid Disputants for the truth, so far as they have
received, not walking without or beyond their line; knowing the Lord is their
light and strength, who never fails those that trust in him; and only one thing
I desire to Query of you, If ever the like was read or heard of in Scripture,
so much ado about humane Learning, to beat down truth, and prevent the free
operations of the Spirit in Saints; Did any seek to hinder Gods workings in
this way? Oh Sir, you want learning, humane Arts and parts, Therefore prophesy
not, preach not unto us: If Old or New Testament, Law or Gospel, Moses or
Christ has done the like, pray produce it; If not, be ashamed for ever to
account your self a Minister of the Gospel, and to make use of such an engine
against truth and its Owners, as never any in the world made use of but Babylon
and Egypt.

You grant, That Translations are excellent helps; yet there is such an
emphasis and fullness in the Original, that the Translation is nothing to the
glory of it.

Answ. Its like that is the reason you are so filled and puffed up with this
outward fullness, as that the Original of all fullness, the fullness of the Spirit
is scarce ever spoken of by you, as if the Spirit of the Lord was not
sufficient for these things.

You complain, What miserable wrakings and rentings of Texts have come into the
world for want of this Learning!

Come Sir, Let us now a little consider, who are the greatest wrackers,
renters, and tearers of Scriptures; The learned Humanists, or the preaching
Brethren.

The preaching brethren, they hold and say, that salvation is through Grace,
and that without any relation to any qualification or good in the creature
according to Isay 55. 1. Romans 4. 5.

The Humanists say, no; but there must be some creature qualification, some
good in the creature before the soul must presume to come to Christ.

The preaching brethren hold and say, that none but believers are to be
baptized, because there is neither precept nor president for it.

The Humanists say, Infants must, though no Scripture for it, and this is their
practice.

The preaching brethren say, That the Saints are the Church of Christ, and that
they dare not own any else to be members, if they manifest the contrary, 1 Cor.
1. 12. because they are the body of Christ, chap. 12. 27. and compact together,
Ephesians. 4. 16. with carnal ones they can have no spiritual fellowship, 2 Cor. 6.
15. 16.

But the Humanists say nay to this; They will turn the world into Church, and
make all Christians, thus deluding them, thus forming up a monstrous body for
Christ, if he would accept of it: But you might with better acceptance present
your Church at the feet of the Pope then at the feet of Christ: Thus owning a
communion with them rather in their Estates, tithe Pigs, Geese and Eggs, then
with their souls; for some of you will confess, they are no Christians but
deluded ones, for self ends, and would not own them, nor have any fellowship
with them, were it not for their bellies; their God is their belly, and their
glory will be their shame.

The preaching brethren, they own none for Christians but those who are
convinced and converted by the preaching of the Gospel.

The Humanists want the power of the Civil Magistrate to convert souls for them.

The preaching brethren, they say, That Christ is King of Saints, and that its
his work alone, to accept or reject in matters of conscience, relating to the
knowledge or worship of him; and that who so gets into his room is the
Antichrist.

But the Humanists, Pope-like, and Queen Mary-like, cry out, imprison, hang,
burn, banish the Sectaries that will not do as we say etc.

The preaching brethren say, That preaching is a Gift, and that its the work of
the Saints according to their measure to communicate, having received freely,
freely to give.

But the Humanists say nay to this; It is an Art and a Trade, and by this we
have our gain, it cost us much the attaining; therefore we must sell, etc.

The preaching brethren say, That where the love of Christ is enjoyed, its a
law sufficient to keep from sin and to conform to Christ.

But the Humanists say, nay, its a Doctrine of liberty; and that its the Law of
Moses, fear and wrath that must keep from sin, etc.

Thus have I given some few brief hints amongst many that so it may appear who
are the renters of Scripture, the gifted brethren or the Linguists.

You Query, How a man should expound and reconcile Scripture without learning:
To that end, you produce many Scriptures, you say, hard to be interpreted.

I answer: That the Spirit of Christ, which is the original of all truth, and
dwells in the Saints, is sufficient, and does teach them those things of
which the Humanists are ignorant, Joh. 15. 13. 1 Cor. 2. from the 12th to the
end. You conclude, there is need of Retorick and Arts to understand the
Scripture. 1 These. 5. 19. quench not the Spirit; that is, the Gifts; and yet
notwithstanding all your Retorick, Arts, Learning, etc. you are the men that
understand not the Scripture; you are the men who quench the Spirit in your
brethren; and despise Prophesying, if it comes not out of your forge; for that
is it which is there intended; quench not the Spirit; that is, the Spirits
workings in the Saints, which many will do out of a low and base esteem of
their brethren, in despising of Prophesy, which is but an interpretation of the
former. How do men quench the Spirit?

Answ. In despising of Prophesy, etc.

Hence the holy Ghost, you say, commends learning.

By the way; holy Ghost, and for all your learning is there any such word in
all the Scripture as Ghost?

But you instance in Moses, Act. 7. 22. Who was learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians.

And no wonder, being naturalized unto it, bred up in it. Daniel and his
companions had skill in all learning and wisdom, Dan. 1. 4. 17. For what was it
these children were to be looked forth? that in it they might preach, or to
teach the tongues and learning of the Caldeans, to those amongst whom they were
Captives? verse. 17. God gave them understanding in all learning and wisdom, and
to Daniel the knowledge of visions. This was the gift of God immediate, not
acquired by Arts, that they might set forth the glory of their Creator, not
themselves and their own pride. Apollo was eloquent and mighty in Scripture; So
are your gifted brethren, able in the might and strength of the grace of
Christ, to hold forth truth, and to convince gainsayers, though not mighty in
humane Arts, etc. Paul could speak languages more then they all; but what
languages? acquired, gotten by industry, or of the Spirit? its the gifts of the
Spirit the Apostle speaks of, not humane; this is but a trick and shift of the
Devil and Antichrist, now they have lost those gifts of the Spirit, to set up
humane in the room; a mystery of iniquity.

You say, The Apostle cites Heathen Poets to convince the Grecians, etc.

So may the gifted brethren produce Turks and Heathens to reprove you and your
Christians.

He uses Syriack and Hebrew phrases.

No wonder, when it was his own native Language.

Hence we read, say you, of Schools of the Prophets and Colleges erected etc.

Answ. This is but your own Learned Retorical Exposition; there is never a word
of School or College in the Text, but the sons of the Prophets, that is, every
one who had received the same spirit of the Prophets; if there were Schools and
Colleges as you imagine, its like the Lord dealt with them as he does with you
now adays; he never that we read of took a Prophet from that School, but from
their Callings, that the work might appear to be of himself, and and not man;
but the truth is, there were no such Schools of Idleness and wantonness as you
have erected for your selves.

Well say you, But how shall a man be able to preserve the truth? how shall a
man be able to Analyze, and open Scripture without Logic, Retorick, Tongues,
etc.

And do you not know in good earnest how to do it? Is your Philosophy the
mother of your Theology? Your gifted brethren can tell you how to do it; its
the light of the Spirit of truth in which they preserve truth; and its in the
light of the same Spirit in which they understand and open obscure and dark
phrases. And indeed, as you say, Great is the pride and wantonness of the
Priests, to tread all that learning of the Spirit under foot, without which the
knowledge of Scriptures is not to be had, laying all upon humane endeavors,
undervaluing the Gifts of the Spirit, etc.

But you conclude your self, That Arts and Sciences are necessary, not of
absolute necessity.

Well, Sir, To say no more about this Argument, your gifted brethren, they
stick to that which is of absolute necessity, the Spirit of Christ. You bless
your selves with that you confess is not of absolute necessity; a man may be a
Minister without it; make you much of it, little good will it do you, and little
will it avail you in the evil day.

The seventh Argument from the sinfulness of it.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Heb. 11. 6. But whatsoever we do if we do
it not by virtue of some Command or Call, is not of Faith. Ergo, It Is sin.

But the gifted brethren have a word of Faith and a Call, as I have already
proved; therefore its no sin. You refer the proof of this Argument to the
Examination of their Objections; I shall do the like in my Answer, purposing
there to meet you, etc.

The eighth Argument.
If none may preach but such as be Ordained, then every gifted person may not
preach; but none may preach but such as be Ordained. Tit. 1. 5. I will that
thou Ordain Elders, etc.

Answ. This is but the substance of what you have said already, and I have
given a full Answer unto it; therefore shall say but a word or two, to the
nonsense of your Argument; Because Titus was left in Crete to Ordain, and
because they ordained Elders in every Church, etc. therefore none else must
preach, but such as be Ordained.

Whereas first, As I have already said and proved, Paul and diverse others did
preach before they were Ordained.

And secondly, That unless men did preach before Ordination, there was no
ground for which they should be Ordained, if their Gifts be not manifest.

Thirdly, Ordination was not upon any such account, as that by it they might
preach the more lawfully; but that the Gift might first be increased upon them,
1 Timothy 4. 14. Secondly, that they might attend upon the work of watching,
feeding, reproving, ruling, etc.

The ninth Argument.
If no man might be an inferior Church Officer or Deacon without a Call and
Ordination from the Church, then no man may be a Preacher, a superior
Church Officer, without a Call or Ordination.

The truth is granted, though not by you understood; there is a difference, as
I have already shown and proved, between the preaching of gifted brethren and
Church Officers, in relation to the manner of administering, but not the matter;
the one waits upon it as his office, the other as his gift.

You instance, That if in the Common wealth none may intrude into another
calling, but must first serve an Apprentiship, then much less may any intrude
into the Ministry, etc. who do not first serve an Apprentiship. That is the
substance and the thing you drive at, and indeed I knew before that you would
turn Preaching into an Art and Trade, that so you might be the true Merchants
of Babylon. And would Christ have the Scriptures to dwell in the Saints richly
and abundantly, and should they hide it there, and not bring it forth for the
good of others?

The tenth Argument.
If every man must study to be quiet, do his own Work, and keep the bounds of
his proper calling, then private men may not be Pulpit-men, but the Apostle
commands 1 These 4. 11. That every man study to be quiet, etc. Who are the
unquiet men? the gifted brethren or your selves? who is it that casts out
floods of contention and unquietness but your selves? but you would have your
brethren to be quiet, and let you alone in your sin, that so the blind leading
the blind, both might fall into the ditch; this would be a sinful quietness
and silence. But Sir, may not a man follow his Calling, preach, and yet be
quiet too? May not the Nailer keep his Hammer, the Husbandman his Plough, etc.
and come into the Pulpit, and yet be quiet too? Is not preaching and
prophesying one part of a Christians general Calling, if gifted unto it? or
may not a Christian come from his Hides, his Shop, his Arms, his Blew Apron, to
the Pulpit, without a Black Gown? Is there so much virtue in that, or does all
your office and divinity consist in it? or rather, does not your color
manifest your nature? Let every one abide in his calling, 1 Cor. 7. 20. This I
have answered already: it relates to Servants, not to leave their Masters,
after conversion, etc. and not to that end for which you learned Rhetoritians
ignorantly apply it, against the Lord and his Truth.

Your first and Second Query and Answer I wave, as not material to my work in
hand. But the Objection you seem to Answer in it, I shall a little touch.

If Paul had a double Calling, why not We?

Your Answer is,

First, There is a great difference between Paul and You; He had much learning,
You no learning.

Stay Sir; where is it said, Paul had so much learning? he had the gifts of the
Spirit: but what else? This is Learning enough for Paul: and mean Abilities:
yet according to the Ability let them minister.

Secondly, He had an extraordinary measure of the Spirit, had his Learning
given him by Revelation, Inspiration, etc. We by industry, study, etc.

Had Paul his by the Spirit? and have You yours by another way? No wonder if
you make use of it to another End. But have you indeed gotten another way to
get the gifts of preaching? have you Simon-like, bought them for money? or have
you Pharisee-like, wrought hard for them? oh, the Lord will curse and blast all
such gettings: the Princes of Zoan and spiritual Egypt shall appear to be fools
in the end. I deny not reading of, and meditation on the Scriptures: But unless
the Lord freely inspire and teach by his Spirit, all your study and reading is
nothing. But your Art of studying and making Sermons I utterly protest against.

Thirdly you say, The work of the Ministry is a distinct Calling, etc.

Not so distinct but that they may make use of another, as Paul. Distinct
Duties.

Not so distinct, but that another may perform them: but he is in a distinct
manner to attend upon them, and officiate in them.

The power of the Keys is not given to the Church, but to Peter and his
Successors, etc.

(To the Pope and his Ministers.) But the Keys of the Kingdom were not given to
Peter more then to Paul, but to Peter's faith, and to all that have obtained or
shall obtain like precious faith.

Fourthly, The Apostle labors, 1. That he might not be burdensome to the Church
which was poor. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.

But you will not labor, but live upon the People, though poor: you will Lord
it over them, and have it from them if they have it, without them.

2. That he might stop the mouths of false Prophets Who would accuse him for
making advantage of the Gospel.

But you will not labor, let false and true Prophets say what they will of you,
but will make advantage of the Gospel: you are so far from the Apostles temper,
that let what mouths will be open against you, yet your mouths are still open
for the gain.

3. That he might be an Example of Industry.

But you are resolved notwithstanding to be Examples of Pride and Idleness; you
bind heavy burdens for others, and cry out against their Idleness, but will be
sure not to touch them your selves with the least of your fingers.

But Fifthly, you confess at last, That a man may keep two Callings (though
your selves intend not to live lawfully in one) but a Minister may teach
School, as Samuel had a School of young Prophets.

Had a Lay Prophet (as you call them) said so much, you would have been ready
to cry out ignorance, in tearing, wresting and abusing Scripture to self Ends;
There is never a word of School or College in the Text. But may a man, a
Minister have two Callings, the one subordinate to the other? and then why may
he not bake and preach, nayl and preach, patch and preach, and plow and preach
too, as well as fish and preach, make tents and preach? etc.

The eleventh Argument.
If the Calling of the Ministry be a distinct Calling, have distinct offices,
and duties belonging to it, etc. then every private man (though gifted) may not
intrude himself into it: but so it is Mat. 16. 19. and 18. 18. John 20. 21, 23.
The power of the keys is not given to the whole body of the Church, but to the
Apostles and their Successors, the Ministers of the Gospel; to them belongs the
power of remitting and retaining sins authoritatively, in Christ's name, etc.

I answer, 1. That I have already told you that there is difference between men
ministering by office, and by gift. The Calling of the Minister is distinct, yet
not so distinct as to prevent the gifted brethren, as you imagine; and they may
administer according to the measure they have received, yet not intrude
themselves into the office of the Ministry: and the truth is, that its your
selves who are the intruders, pretending your selves Ministers of the Gospel,
when you know not what it is, but are in deed and truth the Peoples Lords and
Masters.

You say the power of the keys is given to you, and the power of remitting and
retaining sins, and not to the body of the Church.

I answer, The power of the keys is given neither to Church nor Minister: to
retain and remit, that is proper only to God, to Christ, who have the keys of
Hell and Death, and open and no man shuts, and shut and no man opens: You would
fain dethrone the Pope, and take the power of pardoning out of his hand if you
could. But it is the power of the Gospel that remits sins; where it comes in
power, it brings pardon and peace; where the Gospel comes in power, and is
believed and received, it remits sins; but where it is not received, there sin
is retained: So that its not the word or authority of a Priest, but the power
and grace of Christ that remits sins.

The twelfth Argument.
If the work of the Ministry be an exceeding weighty and laborious work, then
every private man (though he have some gifts) is not fit for it; but the work
of the Ministry is an exceeding weighty and laborious work, etc. Hence the
Apostle puts (...) on it, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Who is sufficient, etc. and every man
is not fit to be a Carver to a King.

I answer, You are still harping upon one string, you love reiterations and
tautologies; many of your Arguments being one and the same in substance, you
only alter the terms, that so you may make up the number. I have often
answered, that though every gifted brother is not fit to be a Minister in
office, yet every gifted brother is fit to communicate according to the gift he
has received; and notwithstanding it is both a laborious and weighty Calling
yet neither of them in those who are Ministers indeed shall prevent, but rather
encourage that which you so much oppose, So in Paul, and in Peter, who
excelling in the work of the Ministry, excelled likewise in this* the
encouraging of the Saints in the performance of their duty in this particular,
1 Cor. 14. 1 Pet. 4. And were you what you profess your self to be, you durst
not to have done what you have in opposing this truth of Christ.

The thirteenth Argument.
That way which was first invented by Socinians, Anabaptists Arminians (the
enemies of Gods grace) to destroy the truth, may not be practiced by
Christians, etc. but this toleration of all gifted brethren to preach, was
first invented by Socinians, Anabaptists, Arminians, to destory the truth, etc.

Answ. Dare you be so impudent and bold, as to belie the Saints with so much
venom? as 1. To give them such reproachful terms for their owning and
professing truth. 2. To call them enemies to Gods grace, when they hold it
forth in its purity. 3. That they were the first Inventers of this practice,
and that to destroy the truth; when it was the Lord Jesus, in, and by his
servants, the Apostles did command it; therefore in your next, lay your blame
where it is. Call Christ, and his Apostles, Socinians, Anabaptists, etc.
because they both practiced, and commanded that, for which you would hang, if
you could, your Brethren that practice the like.

Believe it Sir, you had need be disburden'd of this Book, and your pretended
Ministry too before you meet the Lord Jesus, when he comes to Judge the Earth:
He will say then, As for mine enemies, that would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19. For Sir, I would
have you know, that in substance, you call Christ and his Apostles Socinians,
Anabaptists, Arminians, etc. and enemies to Truth; for they were the first
Inventers of this practice you so much oppose, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Pet. 4.

The fourteenth Argument.
They which have no promise from God of Divine assistance, cannot comfortably,
or succesfully undertake a work; but private persons turning Preachers (without
a Call) have no promise of Divine assistance. Ergo, They cannot comfortably,
and succesfully, undertake the work.

The Major granted: the Minor grounded on Mat. 28. 20. Lo I am with you to the
end, etc.

The Promise is made to the Apostles, and their Successors. And who are they?
your selves, think you?

Say you not there are no Apostles now? how are you their Successors then? or
do you their work, which was to Disciple first, then Baptize? Nay; how then?
why Baptize or sprinkle first, and hate, reproach, persecute the true Disciples
everafter; and yet are you the Apostles successors? or rather, are you not of
the Bastard brood of Rome, whose name is changed, but not the nature? But to
your Minor:

1. Where are the Saints called private persons in Scripture, or Laymen? This
is but a trick of your own to make your selves the more public; but if the
Saints, viz. Gifted brethren are commanded to, and commended for exercising
according to their gift, then they have a promise, and may expect a blessing
and success in that work; but they have a command, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. and
commendation, 1 Cor. 14. 6. for exercising in that gift. Ergo, they may with
comfort expect success, and a blessing in it.

The promise, Mat. 28. 20. is for them, I will be with you, etc. so long as you
are doing what I command you, and what I commend unto you: And I will never
fail you, nor forsake you, Heb. 13. 5. while you do that I command you, and
commend unto you, etc.

The fifteenth Argument.
That way which breeds Disorder, Error, and Confusion, is not the way of God;
but toleration of private persons out of Office, to Expound and Interpret
Scripture in public, is away that breeds Error and Confusion. Ergo, It Is not
of God.

Answ. 1. The Major, you say, is clear; therefore to your Minor: The toleration
of such uncalled Preachers breeds Error. Its granted; but this does not hinder
the preaching of Gifted Brethren, who are called to exercise their Gifts; but
indeed its the uncalled Preachers, viz. your selves that have bred the Error
and Confusion in this Nation, it is proved by woeful experience.

You it is that have stirred up the Nation to the zeal of Persecution: and you
it is in all Ages that have been the cause of War and Blood; and you it is that
at present, if mercy prevent not, endeavor to kindle a fire in it that will
devour it; and you it is that bring in such ignorance, darkness, and errors,
as that there is not any one truth that can appear in its purity, but you cry
out against it, giving it some contemptible Nick name or other, that so it may
not take with the people; but you will have but little thank of Christ one day
for it.

And 2. If some do Preach, and practice things tending to looseness, and
profaneness, lay not the blame upon the practice of the Truth, but let it light
where it is.

So that its not the preaching of Gifted Brethren that brings in Error, but
the preaching of uncalled and ungifted ones, such as your selves are, that
brings in Error; and its the preaching of Gifted ones that will be a means of
its discovery and bringing out.

The sixteenth Argument.
If the Church be Gods House and Family, then no man may presume to exercise
any Function there without a Call from God, but the Church is Gods House; and
that God should appoint Officers and Order in his own House, is but reason.

Granted; but this is the order of Gods House, That all his Children should
communicate each to other, according to the Gift, as I have already proved; and
its the order of the Devils house to destroy this order of the Lords* Jer. 11.
21.

The seventeeneth Argument, from the Rise of it.
That which springs from pride, and self conceitedness cannot be good; but this
kind of Preaching springs from pride, and self conceitedness, Ergo, It cannot
be good

The Major is granted; that the Minor is true, You say you judge by their
actions; you judge of springs by their streams, and trees by their fruit. But
are you so ignorant, bold, and impudent, as to judge of Saints for doing their
Duty? its their duty to Preach, and Prophecy, and in Humility and Obedience
they act in it; not taking the Office, but exercising the Gift as they have
received; having freely received, they freely give.

But its your own preaching that flows from pride, and self conceitedness; you
that would preach, and none else: we hinder none from preaching that has the
Gift; your selves it is who usurp the Office, by reason of your imaginary
gifts, being never called to it by God or man, according to the Truth.

You it is who thrust your selves in by violence, whether the people will or
no; the dry keck and bramble it is indeed who desire to rule; that is the
reason so many of the honest Party have left you, because of your dryness and
emptiness; and that is the reason you are so much troubled for want of the
ruling, scratching, persecuting power; but your preaching Brethren desire not
to rule, unless over their corruptions; nor to scratch, unless they could, by
the power of Truth scratch away your Ignorance, Envy and Pride against the
Lord, and his Truth, etc. its the irregular using of Gifts, which is when men
would by that means stifle all, except their own; this flows from Pride.

The eighteenth Argument.
If Christ at his Ascension, gave only some to be Pastors and Teachers, then
all Gifted men may not Teach; but Christ at his Ascension gave only some to be
Pastors and Teachers. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29.

Ans. If a gifted Brother should have brought forth such a gross and palpable
untruth, you would have thought it had been for want of learning; the very
Scriptures you produce to prove it being so evident against you^ your falsehood
lies in the words only Pastors and Teachers; see the Scriptures, God has set
some in his Church, 1. Apostles, 2. Prophets, 3. Teachers, etc. how dare you be
so bold as to say only Pastors, etc?

1. Apostles* That is, men sent for the gathering of the Saints.

2. Prophets, That is, Gifted brethren, Prophesying according to the measure of
Faith.

And 3. Out of these Prophets, are taken Pastors and Teachers; no Prophet, no
Pastor nor Teacher, etc.

Thus briefly the falacy of your Argument is made manifest; the gift is for
all, I will pour out my spirit upon all, etc.

The nineteenth Argument.
That which has neither precept, nor president, is neither commanded, nor
commended in the Word of God, may not be tolerated in the Church of God.

But this kind of Preaching by Gifted Brethren, has neither precept nor
president in all the Word of God, Ergo, it may not be tolerated in the Church
of God.

You conclude, This new found Officer, a gifted Preacher out of office, is not
to be found in the Bible. I have already proved this truth, that it is
commanded and commended; there is both Precept and President.

1. Precept, They shall declare the glorious majesty of thy Kingdom to the sons
of men, Psalm. 145. 11, 12. As every one has received, so let them administer.
Commended, 1 Cor. 14. 5, 6.

2. President, All the Prophets in the Old Testament acted suitable to the gift;
it was no Office, viz. Prophecy; but a gift, 1. In the New Testament, the
scattered brethren, Act 8. and Paul, Acts 9. 20. straight way he Preached; he
never looked for an office, as you dream; and the truth is, I can scarce
imagine that you are so ignorant of this truth as you seem to be; but that
others might rest themselves quiet and satisfied in what you say, Let your
ignorance in presenting such gross untrue conclusions, that this Preacher is
not to be found in the Bible, be recanted, and repented of for shame.

The twentieth Argument, From the practice of all Reformed Churches.
That which is condemned in all the Churches of God and is contrary to their
practice, ought not to be tolerated in our Church: but this practice of private
men's Preaching without a Call, is condemned by all the Churches of God, and is
contrary to their practice. Ergo.

As for the Major, and the Minor, your Churches and your old Divines are no
rule for me to walk by; nor to any others who have their eyes in their heads,
no further then they follow Christ, the Spirit, and the Scripture.

The Spirit in the Scripture is the rule of Saints; and this I am sure, the
custom of the Churches in the Scripture is contrary to your customs: their
custom was, That Preaching brethren should both Preach, and Prophecy, 1 Cor.
14. 31. And for those who will be contentious against this truth, there was,
nor is no such custom in the Churches of the Lord: therefore keep the example
of your Churches and Divines to your self, who walk not according to the rule;
if any man walk not according to this rule, it is because there is no light in
him, Isai 8. 20.

Thus have I briefly run through your Pulpit-Guard, and doubt not but that I
have Routed you in all your Twenty Strong Holds; that now the way being opened
again, the Gifted brethren may come in to your Pulpit without sin or shame.

As for your Indictment against the Lay-Prophet, as you call him, it is so
ridiculous, so poor and low, not being accompanied with common reason: the Jury
you pretend to call, are your Witnesses, the evidence you call it.

You have lost your self in the very form; no wonder if you are lost in the
matter: you forsake the Scripture, and fly to Apostatized Churches; or rather
to those who call themselves Churches, Jews, and are not; but we have examined
them, and found them liars; you calling old Divines men of the same Principle
with your Church; I wonder you left out your Mother Church of Rome, she could
have spoken as much in the case as both you and they all have done. You produce
Ordinances, Scots Covenant, etc. and why not the Spanish Inquisition too?
Seeing you are upon this account, you might have raked to the bottom, and have
brought in all the forces of the King of Darkness to this great day of Trial:
But Sir, your Judge, Jurates, Evidence, and all are too low and weak to amaze
or amuse your preaching Brethren: It seems you have considered, and wisely
brought in the Council of Trent, for one in your third Edition; and that,
though last in name, yet I suppose first in being, and father to all the rest
of your Jurates witnesses.

And here, before I pass, because you begin to Judge, I shall let you see, not
mine, but the Scriptures judgment upon the false Prophets of the Nations, who
prophecy lies in the name of the Lord, smiting others in the face, saying,
Which way went the Spirit of God from me to thee?

The Judge is Christ himself, who is not only both Lord, Judge, and King of
Saints, Isai. 33. 22. but of the world too, Isa. 99. 1.

The false Prophets of the Nation that set themselves against the Lord, and his
Anointed, is the Prisoner to be tried.

The Witnesses are, 1. The Scriptures, the Old and New Testament; 2. Reformed
Churches, who walk suitable unto the Scripture: 3. Deluded Souls: 4. Public
peace, and weal of Nations.

Judge Crier, Call the Prisoner to the Bar.


Crier. False Prophet, come forth, hold up thy hand, heart thy Indictment: Thou
art here Indicted by the name of False Prophet or Ministry, that have a long
time stood up, and prophesied lies unto the Nations in my name, under what
title, or term soever thou have been distinguished, whether Cardinal, Prelate,
Jesuit, Presbyter, or Priest, thy name is False Prophet in deed and truth; thou
art here accused for high Crimes against the Lord, and his People; against the
peace of Nations etc.


Judge. Art thou guilty, or not?


Answ. Not guilty.


Judge. Call the Evidence: 1. Scriptures, come in; what say you against the
Prisoner at the Bar? He is here Indicted by the name of False Prophet, and thou
art called to speak thy knowledge of him; Do know him by that name?


Scripture. Yea, my Lord, I know him by that name long since Rev. 16. 13. and
19. 20. who has deceived them who dwell on earth, and my Lord, I have many
things to say against this Prophet, although he has sat a long time as queen,
thinking that he shall see no sorrow, and has made use of me to confirm him in
his ways, and to establish the men of the Earth so much the more firm in these
delusions; therefore I can speak the more experimentally of him: First,
although its written in me, that thy people are a selected, severed people from
the World, to worship thee in Spirit and Truth; and that the wicked have
nothing to do to take thy name in their mouth, while they hate to be reformed;
yet this false and lying Prophet has deluded souls all along, many hundred of
years; forming them up with the outside of a profession, without the truth and
power; made them Christians, though deluded ones, before they knew thee, or
ever heard of thee; I ruth and plain-dealing in this kind, he has ever been
inveterate against: And I have done my part, my Lord, to inform him of his
error, but he would not believe me, but give me the lie, wrest my words at his
pleasure for his own ends he has likewise been an enemy to the peace of thy
people, of thy family, because they could not join with him in his Babylonish
Worships, and say Amen to his deceits; He has always ill requited thy
Servants, and has abused my Sayings for that end; and notwithstanding I have
informed him, that its only by thy Spirit men come to the knowledge of the
mystery of thy will; yet he has always opposed this truth, looking after it in
the bottomless Pit of his own inventions. In a word, my Lord, he has been a
Traitor to thy Crown and Dignity, pretending a desire that thou should
Reign; but that which he looked after, was, to reign himself, abusing me and my
Sayings Isa. 9. 6 7. to exalt himself: So, sitting in thy seat, exalting
himself above thee, over the conscience of thy people. And so in deed and
truth, what ever his pretense is, He is the false Prophet, the Antichrist, that
was to come into the world: This shall suffice at present, my Lord, though I
could say much more, if time would permit; but I shall give way to the other
Witnesses.


Judge. Call in another Witness.


Christian Churches and Saints, come in, give your Evidence against the
Prisoner at the Bar; who is arraigned by the name of False Prophet.

Churches. My Lord, We have much to say against him; for we know him by woeful
experience. Its true, my Lord, he has past under the name of thy Ministry in
Office, but he has been far from the nature of thy Ministry, which is meek,
peaceable, and loving, longing to convert souls unto thee; and whatever his
pretense has been, or is, he has been and is a deadly Enemy to us, thy
Disciples and Followers; and has been swollen with the enmity against the Seed
of the Woman; no sooner could we receive any of thy truth, but he fell a
quarrelling with us, and inventing reproachful nick names for us, that so he
might make us appear odious before the world, his deluded Church; if we come to
see into the freeness and fullness of thy grace, in justifying sinners, and
saving of souls, without any relation to any thing done by us; he immediately
endeavors, to reproach us with the odious name of Libertine; if we come to see
into the Law of the Gospel, which is a Law of love, and that Christ is the
Judge, King, and Lawgiver to the Saints, and that we have all the Law in him,
from him, for righteousness and for Rule, he then called us Antimonians; if we
separated from the world in their Babylonish ways, and worships, according to
thy-will and command, he then branded us for Separatists; if we practiced
Baptism according to thy written Word, he then called us Anabaptists; if we
held forth, that the power of thy law of love shed abroad in the hearts of thy
people, and written in thy Scripture, was sufficient to keep them from sin, and
to carry them on in a way of holy walking with thee, and that thou acceptest of
no obedience but that which flows from this principle of love, then he called
us the Family of Love; as if that had been reproach enough to be of that
Family; And diverse other false Titles and Terms has he reproached us withal.
He has been a man of as beastly language against thy Truth and Saints as ever
breathed on the Earth. Besides, we could no sooner come out from the worlds
ways and Worships, congregating our selves together according to thy will,
edifying each other in love, desiring to rely on none but thy self, but he
casts out floods of reproach and persecution after us, calling us Independents,
etc. And further, he has been an Enemy to the free operation of thy Spirit in
thy Saints, thinking to limit thee to himself, whereas in truth, he knew thee
not; and such has been his boldness, that he has adventured to arraign all my
gifted Members, that so he might silence them for ever; and so continue me the
reproach and scorn of himself and the World. In a word, my Lord, to conclude,
he it is, that has been the cause of persecution unto us in all Ages, stirring
up the Civil Magistrate to imprison, burn, banish hang us, etc. all for thy
truth and sake. In him and amongst them, thou shall find the blood of Saints
and Martyrs be headed for thy Testimony; and to thee it is they address
themselves, crying, How long Lord, how long will it be ere thou avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth.


Judge. Call in another Witness. Deluded Souls, come in, give your Evidence
against the Prisoner at the Bar; what say you? do you know the man? his name
is False Prophet.


Del. Souls. Yea my Lord, We know him by woeful experience, but his name then
was True Ministry, sometime Papal, sometime Prelatical, sometime Presbyterian:
but We have found by woeful experience that he nicknamed himself, and was not
the man he professed himself to be; for my Lord, he it is that instrumentally
has deluded us with forms, and customs, and traditions, bearing us in hand,
that we were Christians, when there was no such thing. Sometimes he would tell
us that those who were Christians, must do thus and thus; yet would still make
us a Church, give us Ordinances, when alas for the most part we knew not what
a Church was; nor the use and end of Ordinances. And my Lord, such was our
ignorance, that this pleased us. The Prophets prophesied lies, and we delighted
in it. But miserable is the end; And my Lord, such was the falsness and deceit
of this Prophet, that if any of the servants of truth came amongst us, and
indeavored to fright us by the power of truth, out of our delusions and
formalities; this lying Prophet would presently cry out against them, bid us
beware of them, They were Wolves in sheeps clothing etc. and have prevented us
often from harkening after and embracing truth; when our consciences oft-times
has convinced us, they by their lying against the truth have prevented us; and
we have now found it by sad experience, that he is indeed the false Prophet,
the Woolf that comes in sheeps clothing: And therefore, my Lord, that which we
desire, is, Justice against him, as the grand ringleader of souls, in a way of
falsehood, delusion, and confusion, etc.


Judge. Is there yet another Witness? if so, call him in.


Public Peace and weal of Nations, come in, give Evidence against the
Prisoner at the Bar; he is here arraigned by the name of False Prophet. Do
thou know him? have thou any thing to say against him?

Peace. Yea, my Lord, I know him very well likewise by sad experience; he has
pretended himself to be the Minister of the Gospel, and upon that account has
prevailed the more in doing mischif: He has prevailed not only upon the
consciences of the vulgar sort of people, but of the Civil Magistrate; getting
in his power for to accomplish his own ends and designs. Under Papacy, sending
forth his Emissaries, Jesuits, etc. to work upon the consciences of his
deluded Followers, persuading that it was a meritorious work to murder
Magistrates, or any that differed from him, and that they might lawfully
understake any practice, blow up Parliaments, ruin Nations, foment Wars, etc.
and all for furthering of his own wicked design; and since his name has been
changed to Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Reformed Church and Clergy; yet my
Lord, he is still the same man as formerly, as proud, covetous, and contentious
as ever, stirring up and fomenting divisions, War and blood, not willingly
permitting thy peaceable people to have a being, their Pulpits being their
Cock-pits for that end, sowing strife and divisions amongst the people,
stirring up and enraging the vulgar sort to the breach of peace, and trouble of
thy Saints. They it were who preached the Nation into a War at first for their
own ends and interests; and when but an appearance that they might fail of
their expectation, they turn round again to another Interest, and foment
another War, kindling a fire in Scotland and other parts, that so they might
burn up England, and all under the pretense of holiness, fastings, prayings,
contributions pretended for the poor, that so they might have supply of money
to usher in an Enemy in my bowels to destroy me, denying obedience to the Civil
Magistrate, and faithfulness to the Commonweath: and the truth is, my Lord, I
am at a stand, and know not what to do, I am never like to give that to the
people that they so earnestly long for (viz.) peace and quiet, so long as this
Generation of men reign thus in the world, and in the consciences of men; and
therefore my Lord, that which I desire, is Justice, Justice, against this
perfidious, traiterous, and troublesome creature.


Judge. Here has been enough said; Prisoner, what say thou for thy self?
thou have been here arraigned by the name of False Prophet, and thou have heard
thy witness; what plea have thou for thy self that sentence should not be given
against thee?


Prisoner. My Lord, they have much wronged me, and mistaken my name, my name is
not False Prophet, as they pretend; but reformed Ministry, teaching the way of
God, etc. And as for their accusations, they are mistaken Sir; its the
Anabaptists, Independents, Sectaries, etc. that are the disturbers of the
peace, and enemies to thy truth, etc.


Judge. If this be all thou have to say for thy self, I must proceed to
Judgment; therefore prepare to hear thy Sentence; for the truth is, that
although I have with patience heard these Witnesses, and thy plea likewise, yet
I am a Witness my self as well as thy Judge; and I know their witness is truth:
for I judge not after the hearing of the ear, nor the seeing of the eye, but
with righteousness will I judge, that I may save the meek of the Earth, I say
11. 3 4 I will come near in judgment, and will be a swift witness against the
Sorcerers, and against the adulterers, etc. Mal. 3. 5. And although I have a
long time been silent and refrained my self, and let thee alone in thine evil
and pernicious ways, yet now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will
destroy and devour at once, I say 42. 14. I will make wast mountains and
Hills, and dry up all their herbs, and bring the blind by a way they know not;
but who are blind as my Messenger?

Thou False Prophet that pretendest thy self to be my Messenger and Minister,
yet most blind of all. Who blind as thee? pretending to open the eye, and see
not thy self; opening the ear, but hear not thy self, verse. 19. 20.
Therefore first, that thou may yet know there is mercy with me for the worst
of sinners, that I may be feared, I advertise thee to kiss the Son least he
angry; if his wrath be kindled but a little, Oh blessed are they then that
trust in him, Psalm. 2. Be not obstinate against my truth and servants any
longer, resolve not to break my bonds and cords of love and grace any longer:
If thou hear and obey, there is yet the kiss of love for thee; but if thou be
still rebellious, and persist in thine obstinacy, my Sentence is, that thou
with that Beast before whom thou have wrought miracles, and deceived them that
dwell on the Earth, shall be taken both alive, and cast into the Lake of fire
burning with brimstone, Rev. 19. 20.

Now you say You proceed to Answer all the Cavils, Scruples, and Arguments,
which are brought in defense of Lay Preachers, in which I shall trace you, and
find you too light.


The first Objection.
Genesis 18. 19. The Lord commends Abraham for teaching his Family. Ergo, private
persons may be preachers.

You say, This was a long Cutlers Argument, and that its like their Logic,
etc. But believe it, its an Argument that has more weight and perpetuity in it
then your long Gowns, although this is not an Argument much made use on for
this purpose; therefore I shall say the less to it in this place, only give a
hint or two, that the weakness of your conclusions may appear.

1. You say, That was his Family; and its one thing for a man to instruct and
teach his Family, and another thing to preach.

But stay a little Sir: is it lawful for a man to teach his Family, and is it
unlawful for him to teach others? May he not teach the same to others as he
teaches his Family? Is it unlawful for him to teach the way of God to others?
Was there ever the like heard of in this world, Its lawful for a preaching
brother to preach and teach the way of God to his Family, but not to others?
for preaching is but a speech, or speaking of words; and this I must do to my
Family, or nothing at all; and this I may do it seems, but not to others; the
reason rendered is, because God commanded it; but it seems if God had not
commanded it, then it had been unlawful for a man to teach his Family too: as
if the law of Grace did not teach to do good to all, Soul as well as Body,
others as well as Family: but its evident there is a time when every man shall
teach not only his Family, but his brother, and his neighbor too, saying, Know
the Lord, that is, teach the knowledge of the Lord, Jer. 31. 34 which was, or
is a condition preceding a glory that was to be revealed. Now Sir, if you and
your Churches do all know the Lord from the least to the greatest, and have no
need of teaching, let us know it when you come forth next in public; but if
not, be ashamed and silent for ever, thus to mince and wrest Scripture to your
own ends. For till then they shall teach every man his brother in the
constituted Churches, for believers are all brethren; and every man his
neighbor; so much is clearly employed in the Scripture, And thou shall not
suffer thy brother to sin, but shall reprove him, and tell him his fault etc.
And comfort one another with the same comforts with which you your selves have
been comforted, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

2. You say, If it be granted, that Abraham did preach publicly, yet it will
not be any advantage, because he was a Patriarch, and a Prophet, Genesis 2. 7.
which Title is never given to any one in all the Scripture, but only to one in
office.

You are mistaken much in this likewise: For first, I say, Prophecy is not an
office, but a gift; so it was in the old, so in the new Testament, They
prophesied according to the measure of the gift received, and no further: and I
say, that the Name or Title of office or officer is not given to a Prophet in
all the Scripture, because it is a gift, and not an office.

Hence I conclude (contrary to yours) that as prophecy is a gift, and Abraham
and the rest of the Prophets did prophecy according to the measure of the gift
received, both in the old and new Testament; So may every Nayler, Tailor,
Artificer, having received the same Spirit, according to their measure,
prophecy and preach forth the truths of God for the good of others.

If it be objected, That prophesying was an extraordinary gift, and that spirit
given but to few.

I answer, In the time of the Law it was so, but in the Gospel days it is not
so; prophesying in the Gospel, it is to speak to edification, exhortation, and
comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3. which is proper to all the brethren, as in the same
Chapter, none exempted but women, ver. 34. and they may prophecy too, though
not in the Church, or at least by permission of the Church, 1 Cor. 11. 5. all
men that have the gift, may teach in the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 12. its employed by
the woman's prohibition; the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, and
this is given to the brethren, Rev. 19. 10. and he that can speak
experimentally of the work of Christ for him, in him, and testify his worth
and work to others, is a Prophet, and may, nay ought to declare this Jesus to
others; every spiritual man is a Prophet, but the Saints are all spiritual,
therefore all Prophets. 1 Cor. 14. 37. If any be ignorant of this, let him be
ignorant. Wherefore my brethren covet to prophecy* etc. ver. 38 39.

The second Objection.
From Numb 11. 25. to 30. Eldad and Medad prophesied, and Moses wishes that
all the Lords people were Prophets. Ergo, All that have gifts, may prophecy
and preach.

In answer to this, first you say, That this was an extraordinary spirit of
prophecy. Grant it to be so, yet the spirit of prophecy in the Gospel is
ordinary and proper to all the Saints; its poured out upon them all, and
accordingly they may prophecy.

2. The spirit of prophecy here spoken of, was a spirit of Government, as
appears by the Context, ver. 16, 17. you had done very well to have produced
one Scripture in the Bible if you could, that says the spirit of government is
a spirit of prophecy; Blindness with a witness! Do you not know that Moses was
a prophet as well as a prince and Leader of the People? and that spirit of
prophecy that was upon Moses, was given likewise to the Seventy. I make no
question but that they might be, and were the better enabled to govern by this
spirit; but the spirit of government is nowhere called the spirit of prophecy;
then all good and wise Governors are Prophets, and when they consult and talk
about Government, they do prophecy by this account. These are a sort of
Prophets I never heard or read of in Scripture; its true, many Governors were
Prophets, but not as Governors, neither were they Governors as they were
Prophets.

3. Moses his wish was not that all might preach, but that they might be able
to rule, oh that the Lords people had a spirit of government, etc. It seems by
your words that Moses would have all the people to be governors; who then
should be governed? for if all had the spirit of prophecy, they must make use
of it accordingly, they must govern, etc. but I have told you already that
there is a difference between prophesying and governing: So that Moses desire
is, That all the Lords people were Prophets, and then they might prophecy, if
Prophets. He does not desire to have Prophets, and intend to forbid them to
prophecy, like the Priests of the Nation, that pray that God would send
Laborers into the Harvest, and when they come, are mad at them, and would hang
them if they could. You say that his wish implies, that none might prophecy
till they were Prophets, and men in office. I say the contrary, it implies that
none could prophecy until they had the gift, and then they might, and may
prophecy; but your selves it is who prophecy or preach, if I may
discoursingly give it that term, without gift or office either; as for gift,
you are enemies to it, unless University gifts, the smoke of the pit, and so
what you do is by art; make it, and then sell it, this is your gift; and as for
office, I have told you the rise of that already, and from whence it came. You
conclude, That to your apprehension it cannot hang together, because Prophets
in office might prophecy, that therefore Laymen might prophecy. But I say,
all the Lords people are Kings, Priests and Prophets, and may Prophecy, etc.
You say It will come no nearer together then St Jermans Lips, which were nine
mile asunder: Its like this was the Saint that swallowed the Ox you mentioned;
but its strange he could not swallaw his tail too, his lips being at such a
distance: Its like this Jerman was the great grandfather to the Saint Persons
of England; for they could never swallow so much as they do, if their lips were
not at a great distance each from other; but its like Sir, you do but tell a
lie in jest; his lips were not altogether at such a distance as you mention; if
they were, he had a very great mouth its like, and a body suitable to it; he
could digest Oxen, Pigs, and Geese; nothing comes amiss, it seems.

The third Objection.
From 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 19, to 11, and 29, 25. Here says Master
Robinson, are most pithy and exellent Sermons of Jehosophat, and Hezekiah, etc.
besides, he sent his Princes to teach in the cities of Judah, etc. hence gifted
persons may preach, though not in office.

Your answer: 1. Teaching is taken two ways;

1. Largely for Fathers, etc. Masters, etc.

2. For a Pastoral act; so none but Priests, etc. might preach.

Answ. Though not by way of Office, yet by way of Gift, they might, etc. Oh
that Magistrates would promote the Ministry, etc. It seems you want promoting;
for so long you will promote the Magistrate, but be sure no longer; would bless
our temporals; exaltation and promotion is that you long for, and the blessing
of the Tithes. But Sir, its that we desire, the encouraging of a faithful
Ministry, which is the ministry of the spirit in the Saints, not a faithless
self-seeking one.

3. Princes (say you) teach Efficienter, by causing the Levits to do their
duty; he sent Princes to see the people taught, etc. but that is but your word;
the Text says* He sent Princes to teach the People; you say, to see them: who
shall be believed, the Scripture, or your self? should your Preaching brethren
give such an Interpretation, you would say, that through ignorance they wrest
the Scripture.

You say, It is a rule, that what I command my servant to do, I am said to do
it my self.

And is this a perfect rule? may not you do that your self which you command
your servant to do? he that has power to command, may lawfully do that himself
which he commands a another, if he has ability to it. If the Princes might
command to Preach, they might then as well, and as lawfully preach themselves.
For any man to command that which is not lawful for him to do himself, is
sinful, either in Civil, or Divine affairs.

Your reason stands good, What I command my servant to do, I am said to do it
my self: and if you do it your self by your servant, you may do it your self by
your self; if the first, then second is lawful.

4. You answer, That suppose you grant that Princes did Preach, yet there is a
vast difference between them, and our Gifted Brethren.

1. These were sent to teach by the Magistrates command but our Jehosaphats
have prohibited our gifted brethrens Preaching.

Answ. 1. Those prohibitions were but the fruits of your own hands gaining upon
the Parliament, in the time of their too high esteem of you, and believe it,
for all that I know, it may one day be laid to your account too, and then I
believe you will not boast of it.

2. Our Jehosophats have of late rather encouraged the gifted Brethren for to
teach to the people then prohibited them.

3. If the Magistrate should in good earnest prohibit, Whom should we obey?
God, or Man? judge you.

2. These men were Princes; and so men of choice Breeding, rare Abilities, etc.

As if the Lord could not furnish Tailors, etc. to that work, but must of
necessity be beholding to choice Breeding, rare Abilities, etc. as if he could
not as well furnish a Fisherman, a Publican, as a Prince, or a Priest.

3. These had Levits to join with them, who were men in Office; but you scorn
at Ministers, etc.

No Sir, we scorn not at Ministers, neither own we Baals Priests, whose work is
to delude Souls; there is never a tittle you mention that is given you, but is
truth.

Let such know (say you) that Christ takes indignities done to his Ambassadors,
as done to himself.

We own the Truth, but we own you not to be his Ambassadors, but such as usurp
it to your selves: hence it is that you know not your Message, do not his work;
and you are like to have a bad reward in the end; you would fain be Levits, but
you are but bastard ones; Ambassadors, but you are but ignorant ones, you know
not the Message: Shepherds, but you feed not the flock, but kill them that are
fed.

4. Admit they did Preach; 'twas but once, and that in a time of Reformation,
etc.

Was it lawful for them to Preach once, and not a second time? if once, then
always lawful; was it lawful in a time of Reformation, and not in a time of
Deformation? but it seems you would have no time lawful for your gifted
Brethren etc.

The fourth Objection.
From 1 Samuel 10, 5, 6. Saul and his servants did Prophecy.

This (you say) was extraordinary, not of Office.

True, it was of gift; and all that have the ordinary gift, may Prophecy in an
ordinary way, as is proved already, etc.

The fifth Objection.
The example of Elisha called from the Plough, 1 King. 19. 19. and Amos from
the Stalls, Amos 7. 14, 15.

These (you say) were called extraordinarily, and showed it by their Gifts, etc.

Answ. Prophets now are called ordinarily, and show it by their Gifts too; and
comparatively to your selves extraordinarily too; for these preaching Prophets,
though Nailers, Tailors, etc. yet in Gifts, not Humane, but Divine, they excel,
and shame you Rabbis; they can Nail and Preach; Plough and Preach; make Tents
and Preach, if that be their Calling; but its your Trade, you can do naught
else that good is, nor that neither as it should be; and yet cry out against
your gifted Brethren for want of Gifts; when the truth is, they have too much
Gift for you, and are as lawfully called to exercise it, as Amos and Elisha.

The sixth Objection.
Joel 2. 28. Where the Lord promises in the Gospel times to pour out his
spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and daughters shall Prophecy, etc.

The sum of all you say to this, is just naught at all:

It was (say you) performed in the first times extraordinarily; but its now
fulfilled in the Elect, to whom God gives his Spirit abundantly; yet with this
difference; formerly, they had extraordinary gifts of the spirit, but now
ordinary.

I answer, then they could prophecy in an extraordinary manner; and prophets
now ordinary, still suitable to the gift; for you consess its the same spirit,
only the gift differs; be contended then, although the Prophecy differs.

1. You say These words are a promise, not a procept for Laymen.

And is not promise enough, and as much, nay more then precept? promise of
assistance is more then precept without it.

2. You say, Because the Lord promises to bless his people, not only with
Temporal, but Spiritual blessings. Ergo, They must preach, and use their gifts
in public.

And why in public Sir? I thought it was public that troubled you so much;
when in private, then that troubled you; but now in public, that troubles you;
but what is the reason of it? I shall tell you Sir.

1. Because God has given them more knowledge of the Truth, and greater
Abilities then your selves; for this you envy them; and your pride it is which
makes you cry out no Gift; your own must be gift though no gift, but an Art;
theirs no gift, though no Art, but a gift.

2. Because they in the light of Truth discover your folly and falsehood in
deceiving the people, therefore they may not come in public: I shall tell you
a Story, and a true one too; One of the gifted Brethren preaching, and it was
in public too, near about the midst of the Ciy of Land. and preaching such
things as he knew were contrary to your Principles and Practice; when he had
done, he asked the Parson of the place if he had preached any untruth; if he
judged that he had, he had his liberty to reprove it: The Parson answered, That
he confesfed it was truth, but it had been more meet to have been preached in
private, and not in public, especially seeing there was so much liberty, etc.
So that the public preaching of Truth, I perceive, is your grief, and burden,
etc.

3. You say, Because the Lord promised to pour his spirit on his handmaids; and
they did prophecy, etc. therefore women (who are forbidden) now may preach,
etc.

And where are women forbidden? women may Prophecy now as well as then; they
are forbidden to Prophecy in the Church, which is not an absolute forbidding;
but women may prophecy with their heads covered, 1 Cor. 11.

You conclude, That as for those promises, Jer. 31. 34. that the sum of all is
but this, That Gods People shall, by the Spirit, have a more full and clear
understanding of Divine Mysteries.

And shall they know Divine Mysteries, and not declare them? will you teach
them to hide their Talent in the Earth, viz. within themselves?

That there shall not need so much labor in teaching, etc. with so little
fruit, for they shall all be taught of God.

And what is the reason then that you must have so much teaching in your
Congregations, and so little profit? that there are so few that know the Lord,
from their being taught of him, as your selves confess? an evident
demonstration, that neither you, nor they, are the Ministers of the Church of
Christ; for he owns none to be his Church, but such as are taught of him, etc.

Allegations out of the New Testament, for Lay-preaching, Answered.
The first Allegation.
FRom the Example of Christ; If he Disputed in the Temple, and Preached in the
Synagogues without a Call, then Laymen that have Gifts may preach without a
Call, etc. Luke 2. 42. 46. Mat. 9. 35. Luke 4. 16, 17.

Your answer is: 1. That all Christ's Actions are not for our imitation; he did
many things which we may not, cannot do; we must walk by Rule, etc. for that
which was lawful in Christ to do, may be unlawful in us, etc.

I answer, That those things in Christ, which were imitable, its lawful for us
to do, if made partakers of the same Spirit; and those who are not, are none of
his, Romans 8. And where this Spirit is in power, there are gifts according to
the measure of its working; and the Apostle says to the Saints in general,
desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may Prophesy, 1 Cor. 14. And Christ
himself says, that his Disciples should not only do such works as himself, but
greater then those, Joh. 14. 12. If it be objected, that Christ gave to his
Apostles his Spirit and Power more then ordinary.

I answer: They still acted according to the measure of the gift received, and
accordingly they exhort others to do the like; and if there be not the same
measure manifest in the Saints, yet still according to the measure of the
working of Christ in them, they are to imitate and follow him; and he that
says the Saints are not to imitate Jesus Christ in preaching and declaring his
Truth and Gospel, so far as they have received from him, does both deny and
belie him.

Secondly, You say, It Is true, Christ disputed, etc. but did not preach unto
them; disputing is one thing, and preaching is another.

I answer: That disputing and preaching though differing in the manner and
form, yet are one in the substance; and do the manner and form so much change
the business, when the same in substance? See Act. 9. 29. chap. 17. 17. Where
Paul disputed among the Grecians, and that in their Synagogues and in the
market daily with them that met him. See verse. 18. what it was he disputed
about, he preached to them Jesus and the Resurrection, etc. Paul disputed with
the devout persons about their Idolatry, and preached the true God and Christ
Jesus unto them; and thus did Christ dispute in the Temple, and preach to the
Doctors, and that to their amazement to; I query the difference in substance,
between spending an hours time in speaking to a Congregation, or in spending
so much time in asking questions and answering doubts; and thus presenting the
same truth, though in another form, I suppose this would be the most profitable
way of preaching, sometimes, if it were used.

Thirdly, Christ, you say, was called extraordinarily, and sent by the Father
to preach glad tidings to the meek, Joh. 20. 21.

Answ. He that sent Christ Jesus extraordinarily, sends the Lay-Prophets (as
you deridingly call them) ordinarily; and according to their measure, it is
work their work to preach the glad tidings of Jesus Christ.

2. You say, The people took him for a Teacher sent from God; for it was a
fashion amongst the Jews, that if any one did come to their Ecclesidstical
(viz. Church) meetings, who was known to have some gift of understanding in the
holy Scripture, etc. They would entreat him to make them partakers of it, for
their common edification.

I answer: It seems by your own confession, that the Jews and Jewish Doctors,
Scribes and Pharisees and Hypocrites, (for all give consent, none opposes) had
more honesty, and love to the truth and humility in them, then you Parsons of
the Nation, who will admit of no such fashion; no gift nor light shall shine
forth amongst you, but that which shines forth in and by you; and if that be
darkness, how great is you darkness, who will admit of no light but darkness?
therefore woe to you, worse then Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

3 You say, The fame of Christ went out through all Regions, etc. Luke 4 14, 15.

And does not the fame of many of your preaching brethren both for life and
doctrine go forth? etc. And is it not your work Priest-like, to defame and
reproach them with lies and scandals? witness your Looking-Glass for
Anabaptists.

You say, Let Artificers and Lay-Prophets show such a life, such doctrine, such
Miracles as Christ; you know no man that will envy them.

I answer: You are mistaken, you would envy them the more; for it is their
life and doctrine conformable to Christ, which is the cause why you envy them;
because they are more free from covetousness then your selves, will not take
Tithes, or a stinted allowance, more free from pride, will not exalt themselves
above the people, and set themselves in the room of Christ; more free from
idleness, will not be ashamed to follow their Callings, and preach and dispute
forth truth too, more free from Antichristiansm; they will not, dare not, make
the world the Church, and ignorant carnal souls Christians; take the charge or
cure of souls as you call it, (viz) of Parishes, so deluding them; but choose
rather with Christ to go from place to place, preaching the Doctrine of the
Gospel, for conversion of ignorant souls, not for to establish them in their
ignorance; they preach Justification by Christ without any preceding creature
qualification, and holiness following as a fruit of this faith. Now who comes
nearest in life and doctrine unto Christ? your selves or the preaching
brethren? and yet you envy them, for want of that which in your selves is very
rarely to be found; out of thine own mouth shall thou be condemned, etc. Do
thou envy the Lay-Prophets for want of that which thou have not thy self? nay,
for want of that which shines forth more eminently in them, then in your
selves? (viz.) life and doctrine conformable to Christ, etc.

4. Your Question still is, Whether Christ taught publicly before he was
thirty years of age, and before he was baptized? etc.

Answer. You have heard that he disputed before; and that for substance is one
with preaching; and that he did it publicly in the Temple, etc.

5. You say, If you grant that it was the practice of the Jewish Church to
admit of all, etc. yet this corrupt and irregular practice, can be no president
for us.

I answer: You call that corrupt and irregular, which the Scriptures do not;
nay, that which the Scripture justifies both by president and precept, as you
have heard already, not only of Christ, but of Saul immediately upon his
conversion, Act. 9. 20. the scattered brethren, Act. 8. etc.

But Sir, Its no wonder to hear you crying out so much upon irregularity and
disorder of the orderly Christians, and that for their order, when your selves
walk at such a vaste distance from all Scripture or spiritual order.

The second Allegation.
Secondly, They allege the Example of the Apostle, Mat. 10. 1, 5 6.

This with your third and fourth Allegation, I shall pass over in silence;
judging them to be inventions of your own brain, rather then Allegations of
your preaching brethren. Its true, something might be said, as to the second
and fourth. But Sir, we are not driven to such necessity, as to press those
Arguments for confirmation of the Truth in hand.

I shall therefore rather proceed to maintain those which are more clear and
full to the purpose. And as for the third, the examples of the Scribes and
Pharisees your brethren in iniquity, we need not them to maintain the cause;
but rather leave them to your selves, their Scholars and Imitators in their
evil ways.

The fifth Allegation.
Act. 8. 4. They that were scattered abroad, went everywhere preaching the
Word, etc. Hence they gather, that all that can may preach, etc.

You seem to scorn at this strong hold, as if you could pull it down with ease;
but soft you Sir, not so easily done as said.

You say, First it cannot be proved that all these dispersed, were private men
out of Office. Philip was one of these dispersed ones, who was an Evangelist,
verse. 5. Hence you conclude that they were not all private men, there were
Apostles, Prophets, the seventy Disciples, etc. they might be some of these,
etc.

I answer: First, That Philip is not called an Evangelist before this time of
persecution; for he was one of the Deacons for the poor newly elected, chap. 6.
5. and Deacons you say may not preach, their Office is not to that end: yet
Philip preaches not as a man in Office, as an Evangelist, for that he was not,
unless his preaching did Evangelize him, for he preached Christ unto them,
verse. 5. That was the glad tidings of remission of sins by Jesus Christ; which
is the intention of the word Evangelist from Evangelion; a Crier or Publisher
of good news; So that if he was now an Evangelist, it was his preaching and
publishing of the Gospel made him so.

And whereas you say, there were Apostles, Prophets, etc. I say, and the
Scripture says, that the Apostles were at Jerusalem not scattered; And as for
Prophets and Evangelists, you read of none before this scattering time; As for
the seventy Disciples, they were not men in office, their time was limited
them, and their mission ended at least at the death of Christ; for the twelve
might not preach after that, by virtue of any former mission, but were to stay
at Jerusalem (in the last mission) until they had received power from on high;
therefore if the Seventy were amongst them, or any of the Seventy, that is
nothing for your purpose, who endeavor to darken truth with words, that so you
may delude the simple.

Yet thirdly, Its said, That all the Church were scattered, etc. And if you
will have Evangelists and Prophets which the Scripture mentions not, and the
Seventy, or part of them, which is nothing to your purpose; yet were these all
the Church? was there not 3000 converted at one Sermon? Act. 3. and many more
after, who walked in sweet fellowship; and yet must all these needs be
Apostles, Prophets, etc. in your sense? if some of them were such, dare you
affirm that they were all such, the Scripture being so apparently clear to the
contrary, every circumstance weighed? Is not your own Argument a non sequitur,
because there were 12 Apostles, and Philip was afterward an Evangelist? and
there were seventy Disciples once Comissioned, which mission was ended at the
death of Christ; the whole Church was scattered except those Apostles, and none
else you own; therefore it might be Apostles, Prophets, etc. The Apostles not
scattered, but still at Jerusalem; no Prophets nor Evangelists we read of
before this, the Seventy non-Commissioned; a goodly Argument or Answer for
those who have no eyes to see, nor hearts to understand.

Secondly, The Apostles, you say, might give them Commissions.

Answ. And they might not give them Commissions. You mention Act. 15. 22, 23.
because the Apostles sent two chosen men of the Church to the Gentiles upon
special occasion, therefore they might mission all these.

This is one of your own Conclusions, and it looks like your self; there is but
little Logic or Retorick in it: you raise an Objection, The Text not does say
so, and seem to Answer it. Arguments drawn from silent Authority conclude
nothing.

And Sir. Your own Argument it is, that is drawn from silent Authority; they
might mission them, the Scripture is silent, your Argument concludes nothing;
but indeed its like all the rest; you instance amongst other Examples,
Melchisedech; we read of no Parents that he had; it does not follow, say you,
therefore that he had none, etc.

A learned and deep conclusion! Does not the Scripture say, he was without
Father, without Mother? etc. Heb. 7. 3.

Thirdly, You say, Did not the Lord give them commission by immediate
Revelation? etc.

To prove this, you produce the extraordinary (as you call them) Effects 1. The
hand of the Lord was with them, Act. 11. 21. And dare you say, that the hand of
the Lord is not with the preaching brethren? etc. 2. The extraordinary number
of converts, their great and quick harvist shows it. I say, In this likewise
has the Lord manifested his approving and calling of the preaching brethren,
the great number of Converts from Antichristian and Babylonish ignorance and
confusion; the the hand of the Lord has been with them, and a quick harvest
there has been through grace: your selves it is that most evidently and
eminently prove your selves Non-called of the Lord, upon this account; no hand
of the Lord has been with you, no Converts drawn to Christ by you; but take
your Parishes, and your Tithes, souls perish for want of knowledge: and if you
make two or three in your Parish a little zealous and formal in Antichristian
ways, you bless your selves, make them the seal of your Apostleship immediately.

Lastly, you say by way of Concession, giving, though not granting, etc. you
will clear all by asking two questions.

1. When did these dispersed Disciples preach? etc. you answer, in times of
persecution; therefore those which were scattered, etc. implying, that if they
had not been scattered, they had not preached.

Now you think you have hit the nayl upon the head; but Sir, a word by the way;
1. Did, or could persecution make that to be lawful, which you say in it self
is sinful and unlawful? is it first sinful and unlawful in your deep
judgment, and yet lawful in persecution? This is Logic contrary to your own
practice; you do that in fear of persecution, which you would never do in love
without: and leave undone that you would have done; you could cease preaching
of Lectures, afternoon-Sermons, etc. in the Episcopal time for fear of
persecution before it came; not preach the more, as you confess the preaching
brethren did; but I suppose it would have been sinful for you to have
preached, if persecution had come.

2. I answer, Have not your preaching brethren preached in times of persecution
too? have not there been many Saul's that have breathed out threatenings against
them? and would not these priestly Pharisees as gladly as ever Saul to Stevens,
have consented unto their death? nay, have they not sought after it, as Esau
the blessing, with tears? But yet blessed be him who is in the bush, they
cannot obtain their desires. Yet of late days have not many been imprisoned,
the Churches scattered, etc. and then upon your own account, is it not a time
for the brethren to preach, etc?

Your second Quaere is, Where did they preach? You answer, Not at Jerusalem, a
planted, settled, constituted Church, but amongst the Heathens, etc. You say,
That may be lawful in an unplanted Church, etc. which is utterly unlawful in a
planted, constituted Church, etc.

I answer, 1. That its undoubtedly lawful in a constituted Church; for the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. Ye may all prophosie one by one, that is, in a
constituted Church; and God gives gifts to men to profit withal, others as
well as themselves. And they are undoubtedly none of the Churches of Christ,
who deny the free operation of the Spirit of Christ in the brethren; they are
such as quench the Spirit, and despise prophesying.

2. I answer, That the public preaching of the brethren in this Nation is not
in constituted Churches of Christ, neither in Ministers, Members, nor in
Manners, in Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline, but of Antichrist and the Devil;
for his servants you are to whom you obey, etc. therefore its lawful, and a fit
time for them to preach for the gathering of the Saints out of Babylon and
Confusion; and that upon your own account, its a greater work to gather souls
out of your delusions, then out of Heathenisme and downright Idolatry.

In conclusion, you gather up all in a parallel, in which I shall a little
trace you too, that so you may in your colors appear to the world.

The Parallel.
1. Those dispersed had extraordinary gifts. 1. Your gifted brethren have
ordinary by the same Spirit. 1. But your selves have neither, but what you gain
from Universities and men. 2. Those had an immediate Call. 2. The brethren
immediate by the Spirit, mediate by the Church and Saints. 2. But you have
neither, for you are enemies to them both. 3. These converted many souls. 3. So
the brethren convert many. 3. But its you who pervert and delude with
Antichrists forms, customs, etc. 4. The hand of the Lord was with them. 4. So
the hand of the Lord is with the brethren. 4. But the hand of the Lord is
against you, and that makes you gnaw your tongus for pain, and not repent of
your deeds. 5. Those preached the word of God. 5. So do the brethren the Gospel
of Salvation, and in it the Law of righteousness, and of love. 5. But you
preach the Law, and your selves through ignorance, not knowing what you affirm
or say, 1 Timothy 1. are enemies to the Gospel in its righteousness, in its rule.
6. These preached in time of persecution. 6. So do the brethren; and of peace
too. 6. You persecute and permit no time of peace for the Saints in your wills
and desires. 7. Those preached in unplanted Churches, amongst Heathens. 7. So
do the brethren, or at least in constituted Antichristian Churches, which is
the greater task, to undo that which you have done. 7. You are enemies to
Churches planted according to Gospel rule, and preach to build up Antichristian
constituted Churches, in Antichristian invented forms, ordinances, etc.

I suppose you may now, notwithstanding your vain confidence, if mercy
enlighten you, see the weakness and invalidity of your Answers and Parallels,
how far short you come of levelling the strong hold; its yet as strong as ever;
I now pursue you in the Rear, upon your march unto the rest.

The sixth a Fort, and so you will find it; boast not, scorn not.
Acts 13. 14, 15. Paul and Barnabas coming into the Synagogue, the Rulers sent
to them, not as Apostles, but as men having gifts, that if they had any word of
exhortation, they should say on.

You answer 1. That Paul and Barnabas were men in office, etc. and had
commission to teach the Nations, etc.

I answer 1. That Prophets, as I have already proved, were not men in office,
but in gift; and as for the Apostleship of Paul, he owned it not in way of
office, as from men, Gal. 1. and he preached before this in Chap. 13. by way of
gift; you dare not deny it; and the separating and sending of them, was not
that they were ever the more empowered to any office, for they had been at the
work before; but the Lord said, Separate me Saul and Barnabas to the wark
whereunto I have appointed them, that is, let them not abide in the Church, but
go forth to the work appointed for them, preach to the world where was most
need; so that it was no new work or office, but a going on in the work of the
Lord, in the gift of the Spirit, which was not of man, or by man, but by Jesus
Christ.

2. You say, They were known to be teachers in office; and all to the end of
this second, is but probability: known to be preachers in office; when the
Scripture mentions no such thing, when they had never seen them before its
likely, and for ought you know had not heard of their fame; but undoubtedly
they did not know them to be men in office, for they were unbelieving Jews and
Gentiles, zealous it seems of the Law, and knew not what Gospel-office meant,
but rather in all places almost persecuted the servants of the Lord, accounting
them Sectaries like your selves; therefore they could not know them to be
officers: It Is a non sequitur, that unbelievers, men ignorant of the Gospel,
should know Gospel-officers, that unbelievers should take those they never saw
before for Gospel-officers: and the Text it self is clear; for they speak unto
them to exercise their gifts, not as men in office, upon your own account; but
they sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, etc. that is, any of you men
and brethren that have any word of exhortation to the people, say on, etc.

3. You say, This was practiced in corrupt times, etc. that in corrupt times it
was permitted for some out of order to preach, etc. as you say Apollonius
confesses, etc. you conclude, that we are not to follow Jewish corrupt
customs, but to walk by rule, etc.

I answer, first, I cannot but take notice of your ignorance, in calling such
an approved practice both in Law and Gospel, a corrupt Jewish custom; if it
had been so indeed, then no Prophet might have spoken unto them, who prophesied
by gift only; and for the most of them, they did no miracle to convince the
people that they were extraordinarily sent.

If it had been a corrupt practice, they should in your order have persecuted
John for want of mission; he did no miracle, yet preached a new doctrine of
Repentance: and the scattered brethren should have had no admittance; the
custom should have prevented them: as for the new Testament, it was the
custom, as has been proved already, for gifted brethren to preach; and for
those that were contentious, and denied it, There was no such custom in the
Church of God.

2. I answer, that you are worse then those Jews, who though in many things
they erred from the truth, yet in this they retained some principles of
honesty, willing to have the people instructed; but you are the men who do what
in you lies to shut up the Kingdom of heaven from the people, etc.

3. I answer, you cry out against those approved practices of the Jews, and
continued custom in the Churches of the Gospel, for corruption and confusion;
but you take up corrupt confused practices your selves, never mentioned either
in Law or Gospel, and these pass for current with you; but the uncorrupted
ways of God, they are corrupted ways with you: are you not of the number of
those who call evil good, and good evil? etc. how do you think to escape the
woe, etc?

The seventh a Tower, and it will not easily fall.
The example of Apollos, Act. 18. 24. an eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scriptures, taught diligently, etc. because he preached without a Call,
therefore gifted brethren may preach without a Call; this you say is a Tower, a
strong Tower, etc. But stay Sir, reproach not, scorn not, that is no answer to
the Truth. You answer first, That this is an example, but no precept, etc. And
is not example enough to warrant the lawfulnes of the thing, that the like may
be done? But Sir, I cannot but take notice of your simplicity and contradictory
spirit, you contradict your own self: For first, You say there is neither
precept nor president in the Scripture, yet here you have produced a president
and example your self; gross mistake! But its just like all the rest of your
preaching, do and undo, contradict upon every occasion. To clear your business,
you quaere first, Who it was that preached? Apollos. 2. What was he? A
Minister. How is that proved? 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who is Paul, who Apollos, but
Ministers, etc?

I answer first, its true, he was a Minister by way of gift, and so are all the
gifted brethren, nay all believers are Ministers; for a Minister is the servant
of the Lord, and so are all the Saints; As every one has received the gift, so
let him minister; and upon this account was Apollo a Minister, and no other at
that time, neither can you prove that he was any other after: you produce 1
Cor. 3. 5. which was a long time after this preaching, and that Scripture does
not prove him a Minister in office, as you pretend neither: but a little to
discover your juggling with the Truth, as if you were blind, or did think others
to be as blind as your self, you pretend to make much for your self in the
first and second, That he was a coadjutor with Paul, etc. But Sir, do you
believe that he was so when he first preached? Nay Sir, its evident the
contrary; for he was a stranger, not only to Paul, but to the rest of the
brethren, ver. 27.

2. He was instructed but only in the baptism of John, and needed an Aquila and
Priscilla to teach him the way of the Lord more plainly. And was he an ordained
Minister think you, and yet ignorant of the way of the Lord, and the doctrine
of Christ, knowing but the baptism of John? who ordained him think you? Away
therefore with your blind Sophistry; you may as well reason, that because you
are a man now, you were one an hundred years ago; because Apollos was a
Minister, and might be so in office, 1 Cor. 3. 5. therefore he was so before he
was known of the brethren, or knew the way of the Lord, or the baptism of
Christ, only the baptism of John; a likely conclusion! etc.

3. You ask, What were the gifts of this Minister? etc. 1. An eloquent man. 2.
Mighty in the Scriptures. 3. Instructed in the way of the Lord; 4. Fervent in
spirit; 5. Taught diligently; 6. The things of the Lord; 7. Bold in the
Synagogues. All these I doubt not, if you were not blind, but you might in a
measure see in your preaching Brethren. etc. 8. Rare humility; he does not
disdain to be taught what he knew not, of mean persons, far differing from the
pride of you parsons, who scorn to hear or learn from your Brethren; puffed up
with pride, and self conceitedness of your own worth, knowledge, excellency,
etc. 9. His teaching was operative, fruitful, etc. he did not labor in vain,
etc. So is your preaching Brethrens work; they labor not in vain, though to
your grief and pain, that makes you fret again, etc.

Your second query is, When he preached?

You answer, 1. 'Twas in a time when Churches were planting, etc.

So are the Churches now planting, and God gives gifts extraordinary,
comparitively with your selves, for the gathering and building of the Saints.

2. 'Twas in a time when the corrupt custom was in practice among the Jews.

I Answer; 1. You have often called it a corrupt custom, when the Scripture
calls it not so: you have a very foul mouth, to cry out so much corruption,
where the Scripture is silent, and the custom was in it self commendable, both
in the Old and New Testament.

2. By way of concession, to give what is not granted. Put case that it was a
corrupt custom, was Apollos corrupt in his practice? for he was no Minister in
office, as is clear; was he corrupt for his preaching out of Office, in making
use of his opportunity? If you durst be so bold, for shame, I make no question
but you would account him a corrupt Sectarian-fellow for his labor.

3. You answer by way of concession, that Apollos was not a man in Office, it
twill not help; for this was but an instance of the liberty given by the Jews,
or taken when given: And were they not both corrupt? one for giving, the other
for taking?

You conclude, Take in all, etc. and in like juncture of time, others of like
abilities may do the like.

Now is the like juncture of time, gathering of Saints out of Babel from
Antichristianism; now is the like liberty, now may gifted Brethren take that
liberty, etc. Now given Parallel.

The Parallel.
1. Apollos was a man of extraordinary Abilities. 1. These, most of them, have
ordinary from the Spirit of Christ. 1. You selves have not ordinary from the
Spirit, but are enemies unto it. 2. He is called a Minister, and was a
Preacher. 2. These are Ministers and Preachers according to the measure of
their gift. 2. Your selves are neither Ministers, nor Preachers in the Spirit,
but enemies to both. 3. He was a helper to the Apostles. 3. These are helpers
on of the same work, both in conversion and building. 3. Your selves are
Enemies to both; strive to keep Souls in blindness for base and self ends. 4.
He was Eloquent. 4. So are the Brethren, they have the tongue of the Learned,
and know how to speak a word in season. 4. Your selves are loquent ignorant in
this Mystery, want this tongue, are enemies unto it. 5. He was mighty in the
Scripture. 5. So are the Preaching Brethren able to confound you in all your
Philosophy, etc. 5. Your selves in Scripture ignorant, to its ways and rules
are enemies, in Arts and Sciences mighty, so spoiling Souls. Col. 2. 8. 6. He
taught the things of God. 6. So do your Brethren according to the Scripture. 6.
You teach your own fancies, the imaginations of your deceitful hearts. 7. He
taught frequently. 7. So do your Brethren, as opportunity is offered. 7. You
firely, to confound them in their practice if you could. 8. He taught boldly,
and openly in the Synagogues. 8 So do the Brethren in the most public places
in the face of all men. 8. You envy, and publicly cry out against this their
just, and honest Practice. 9. He was very humble and lowly. 9. So are the
Brethren (not exalting themselves above the people) willing to learn. 9. Your
selves are proud, exalting your selves above the people, scorning to learn. 10.
He had the approbation of the Church. 10. So have the Preaching Brethren. 10.
Your selves want that; for you are enemies, and persecuters of the true Church.
11. He convinced, and converted many. 11. So have, and do the Brethren daily.
11. You pervert, seduce, and lead blindfold to perdition many, most of the
people of the Nation, etc.

The eighth a bulwark, all your wisdom is not able to undermine it.
1 Cor. 14. 1. 31. Where the Apostle exhorts them to desire spiritual gifts,
but rather that they might prophesy; and tells them, verse. 31. They may all
Prophesy one by one; hence our brethren conclude, that all that have gifts, may
Prophesy, etc.

In your answer to this, you pretend a great deal of confidence and assurance,
that your gifted brethren are deluded with the word All, when the truth is,
that your self it is who is under the delusion.

The Question you say, will be, who are meant by this word All verse. 31. ye may
all Prophesy, etc.

You answer first Negatively: It cannot be meant of all the Saints, for then
women should preach, who are forbidden.

I answer: 1. The Scripture it self is clear, women are excepted, ver. 34. All
may, etc. There is no limitation, no prohibition of any; except women; and
women are not altogether forbidden neither; compare this with cha. 11. 5. Joel
2. 28. women may Prophesy by permission, and in subjection to the man, etc.

2. You say, Private Professors are nowhere commanded to leave their Callings,
and go study Arts, Sciences, etc.

Oh blindness with a witness! Is not the Spirit of Christ sufficient to help
men to preach and prophesy, unless they study Arts, and Sciences? the Scripture
says, ye may All Prophesy; Private men, is a title you have learnt from Rome;
its true, it does not say you must all leave your Callings, and study Arts, and
Sciences; this is not commanded to any, nor practiced by any; and truly Sir, I
think there are none but Asses in the things of God, who study Arts and
Sciences, to help them to preach and prophecy: your Scriptures produced, 1
Cor. 7. 20. chapter 12. 29. I have answered already, therefore I pass it in this
place.

2. You answer positively, by All is meant all such as are Prophets, the Text
is clear, ver. 29. Let the Prophets speak, etc. Thus far you say truth, by All
is meant the Prophets, that is, those who have the spirit of Prophecy; you
proceed, and say, They were extraordinary; your reason is, because they spoke
by Revelation, without study. ver. 31. I say they were not extraordinary, but
ordinary, such as could speak to edification, exhortation, and comfort, ver. 3.
and this many of the brethren could do then, and can do now; its your selves
that are no Prophets; for you cannot speak by revelation, without study; but in
the strength of the Lord, the preaching brethren can: And here it is you are
lost, you measure other men's condition by your own; because you cannot preach
without study, therefore you think none else can, etc.

I conclude with you, That the word All, is to be confined to the Prophets, All
ye that are Prophets may preach; All ye that have the Spirit, and so the Gift
of prophesy may preach and prophesy: for prophesy was no Office, but a Gift, as
I have already showed: So then, notwithstanding all your sophistications and
wrenchings, All that have the Gift, may prophecy: the preaching brethren that
have the Gift, may prophesy.

You say, Its worth the observing, that the word Prophet is never given to any
but Ministers, men in Office.

I have already answered, that Prophet or Prophesy, is never called an Office
in the Scripture, but a Gift; and the distinguishment of Christ between a
Prophet and a righteous man, Mat. 10. 41. its not the Office but the Gift;
every righteous man has not a Prophets gift; there are various operations,
still the same spirit.

You say, That all that are Prophets, and can open hard Prophesies without
study, interpret Scripture to edification, etc. Who so has these Gifts, may
use them.

But Sir, where and when do you mean? 1000 years ago, but not now. Why this is
all we plead for man; you have granted our desire; let the Hearers be judges,
let the Saints be judges, let the Prophets be judges; God has given that
Spirit of Prophesy, to interpret Scripture, speak to edification and comfort of
the Saints, etc.

You say, They are Prophets, because the duties of Prophets are ascribed to
them.

No need of so much of one thing, being so clear and granted of all. But you
must needs have them extraordinary Prophets; and here you harp, or else you
were gone.

But you say, You will easily prove them to be extraordinary Prophets; (but
stay Sir, not so easily done as said.)

But you say, You prove it, verse. 30. If any thing be revealed to another that
sits by, etc. They preached extemporary Revelations, they were by the
singular Revelation of the Spirit to give the sense of Scripture.

Answ. 1. I wonder from whence you had this distinction of ordinary, and
extraordinary Prophets; Does the Scripture teach you any such thing? I suppose
you mind by extraordinary, such as foretold things to come; as in the Old
Testament, etc. But why you call them extraordinary I know not; and for
ordinary, such as by the same spirit can speak for the edifying of the Saints,
the difference is only in the operation of the same spirit; in some one way,
in some another, in some more, in some less; but its given to every one to
profit withal.

2. That upon your own account, and in your language, these Prophets were
ordinary; extraordinary were such as could foretell things to come, as Elijah,
Elisha, Esaias, etc. In the New Testament Agabus, Act. 11. 27. chap. 21. 10. 11.
such these Prophets were not; For the work of the one was to foretell, of the
other to build up and edify the Church.

You say, These Prophets are set amongst extraordinary Gifts, or Officers,
Ephesians 4. 11.

I wonder how you dare thus to abuse the Scripture and truth? who or where are
those Gifts? or as you call them Officers called extraordinary; but its your
own ignorance, if not baseness, to delude the people under these terms you call
Apostles, and Prophets, Evangelists extraordinary, and pick out from amongst
the same, Pastors, Teachers for ordinary: What Scripture teaches you this, to
call one ordinary, the other extraordinary? If I can show you no Prophets, etc.
you shall show me no Pastors, nor Teachers in the World.

Well you say, There were three things objected. 1. They could not be
extraordinary because their doctrine was to be tried, etc.

You answer first, That this trying and judging, did not consist in calling
them to an account, etc.

But I say, It consisted in judging the truth of what was spoken, to try the
spirits whether they were of God; for there were and are false Prophets: for
this was the Church of Ephesus commended, Rev. 2. 2. For trying those who said
they were Apostles, and were not, and found them liars.

2. You say, An extraordinary Prophet though in penning Scripture infallible,
yet in other things he might err; you instance in Aaron, Exodus 32. 4. Peter
Act. 10. 15. about the calling of the Gentiles, etc.

You will make the Scripture it self to be of small Authority, if what you say
were truth; for all extraordinary Prophesies are written, and if they might and
did miscarry in Prophesying, as you say, then you derogate from the truth of
Scripture; for all extraordinary Prophesies are written.

And you say, Extraordinary Prophets may err.

But Sir, You have produced no Example of such erring in matter of Prophesy.
Paul and Peter and Aaron, etc. did not err in matter of Prophecy; if they had,
they had been false Prophets like your self; the point in hand at present, is
about Prophets in time of their Prophesy, ye may all Prophesy, etc.

And you say, They were extraordinary, and yet might err: (oh full of all
subtilty!

What? Are all the Prophesies in the Old Testament then, if extraordinary
Prophets might err in their Prophesyings?

Yet at last, you come to say, That all things are not revealed to one; and
that which is not revealed to one, may be to another.

That is truth, and that is the reason why all may Prophesy.

You say, There might be something mingled with that which the Prophets
received, and they might add something of their own, etc. therefore it was to
be judged and tried.

And is this truth which you lay down, and yet are they extraordinary? Note 1.
Were there any in the Old Testament to judge of the Prophesies, whether they
were truth when spoken? 2. Might the Prophets extraordinary, as you call them,
in their Prophesies, add of self unto it, and err in it? let all men judge of
the truth of this Doctrine, but its like your self, etc. 3. Did those
extraordinary Prophets prophecy according to the Rule of Scripture? and look
what others had said before them, or by an immediate Inspiration? As you
confess, these Prophets were to prophecy according to the rule of faith, Isa.
8. 20. to the Law and to the Testimony; Was their prophecy subject to error?
had need to be judged? might be something of self in it? tried if according to
Scripture, etc.

Yet extraordinary; strange and unheard of confusion! out of your own mouth
shall you be judged, etc.

2. You say, It Is objected, That those could not be extraordinary, because its
said, verse. 3. They spoke to edification, exhortation and comfort, as ordinary
Prophets did.

You answer it easily: The extraordinary Prophets as Amos, Esaias, Ezekiel, etc.
did preach to edification, exhortation and consolation, etc.

Answ. 1. That its more then the Scripture affirms, if they did teach in this
way of prophesying.

2. If they did, yet they took not their denomination of prophets from this
kind of prophesying; but those 1 Cor. 14. are called Prophets upon this
account, their speaking to edification, etc. And this was the end and work of
Prophets, to edify the Church, Ephesians. 4 12. not to foretell of things to come:
therefore the Apostle renders the reason of their prophesy, that All may be
instructed, and All may be comforted, verse. 31. And again, these Prophets were
such as needed directions from the Apostle, as to the manner and order in
prophesying, which if extraordinary, they could rather have directed the
Apostle, as Agabus, Act. 21. 10, 11.

3. You say, 'Twas objected, that the Apostle forbidding women, did give
liberty to men to preach: you grant by way of concession, The Apostle forbids
women, and enjoins men to preach: But what men? not all Gifted, but all gifted
and Called.

I say, All that are gifted are Called to exercise Gift, and may prophesy.

2. You draw the Argument thus, The Apostle forbids women gifted or ungifted to
preach; therefore all men gifted or ungifted may preach, etc.

This is the good your University does you; make you wise to do evil and
pervert truth, to draw scurrilous conclusions to dishonor truth and its
servants; All women gifted or ungifted are in this Scripture prohibited; but
all men that have gifts are authorized. And truly, I shall say thus much too,
that I should look upon that member to be very weak and useless, that has not
some gift or other for good in the Church, in the body: But Sir, your
ridiculous conclusions will not establish you.

You conclude, That all Orders, Officers, Members in the Church above
Ministers, may preach, etc.

I thought you had owned none above you, but that you had sat in Peter's chair,
been supreme Lords, to bind and loose at your pleasure, children to the holy
Father at Rome; but you will be sure to own such to be above you, which are not in
your account, and then as good as none at all; absolute Lords for all that. You
mention Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists: but you think there is neither of
these in being; therefore you are the chief Lords over all: but you are
mistaken; for Apostles Prophets, Evangelists, are no more extraordinary in the
Church, then Pastors, Teachers, etc. for they are all reckoned together, Ephesians
11. And if you will say, there are no Apostles Prophets, etc. I will say and
make it good, there are no Pastors, Teachers, Presbyters, or others, nay no
Church of Christ, without Apostles, Prophets; there may be a Church without
Pastors, etc. but none without Apostles, Prophets, etc. He has set in his
Church first Apostles, then Prophets, etc. and after this Pastors and Teachers.

1. Apostles, men sent for the gathering of the Saints.

2. Prophets next, because when gathered, the Prophets, (viz) gifted brethren,
they exercise their gifts for the edifying of the body, until there be Pastors
and Teachers; and then the gifts of the Prophets are not to be quenched, or
slighted; for they are Prophets still; and out of the Prophets in process of
time, may be chosen men for Office, Teachers; by Office as well as Gift; and
these are elected by the Prophets, viz. the Church; for they are all Prophets,
though they have not Gifts alike.

So that first then in the Churches of Christ, there are Apostles, men sent to
gather, Apostles signifying as much: and Prophets when gathered, before the
Ministry you so much cry up.

2. Your selves are neither Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, nor
Teachers, according to the-Scripture account; for first you gather no Churches;
but rather endeavor to scatter those that are gathered.

2. You build up no Churches, but ignorant, carnal, profane creatures in a way
of formality, to their eternal ruin; you administer no Ordinances according to
the Rule of Christ, but of Antichrist, and your own inventions; I shall
conclude this with your Parallel.

The Parallel.
1. These were Prophets. 1. So are the gifted brethren. 1. Your selves none,
nor know not what they are. 2. Those no extraordinary, but ordinary Prophets.
2. So are the gifted brethren. 2. Your selves not ordinary, but Enemies to it.
3. Those had a spirit of Revelation. 3. So have the brethren, else none of his.
3. You are ignorant of it, have a philosophical spirit of delusion. 4. These
could expound Prophetic Scripture. 4. So can the Preaching brethren to your
terror and amazement. 4. You wrest them and darken them for your own ends. 5.
These subjected their prophesy to the judgment of the rest. 5. So do the
preaching brethren. 5. You are puffed with pride, none may question what you say,
be it never so false. 6. The Spirit of those was subject to them. 6. So it is
in the preaching brethren. 6. But you are subject to your spirit of pride, none
may speak but your selves, yet know not what prophesy is. 7. These spoke by two
or three, and the others judged. 7. So do the preaching brethren. 7. But you
speak all your selves, but permit none to judge.

The ninth Objection.
Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is
given to us; whether prophesy, let us prophesy, etc. Hence they gather that all
that have gifts of prophesy may prophesy, etc.

Your answer: It Is granted, that they who have the gifts of prophesy may
prophesy, etc. But who are they that have this gift? they that are Prophets by
Office, and not those who who have abilities only, etc.

I have answered this already, That there is no Office of Prophesy, but Gift
only; and they that have abilities may prophesy; the Gift is given them for
that end.

You say It will appear more fully in the context, and scope of the Chapter;
having exhorted to duties of Piety in general, ver. 1, 2. he comes, ver. 3. to
9. to particular duties of Ecclesiastical persons and Officers, viz. that they
should not be proud of their Gifts, etc.

Sir, it were well if you who so account your selves, etc. could learn that
lesson: but Sir, you very much fail in your interpretation, for the Apostle
speaks to the whole Church throughout the whole Chap. and in these verses
mentioned, ver. 3. he speaks to the whole Church, Let no man think of himself,
etc. He does not say, let no Ministers in office think, etc. but no man. Let no
man be proud, or lifted up with his gift, to think more highly then he ought of
himself; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith. Mark, as God has dealt to every man; you say, every Minister
in Office, the Scripture says every man, etc. ver. 4, 5. the Apostle relates
to the whole Church, We being many, are one body, etc. What Sir, do you suppose
that none are the body of Christ, the Church, but the Priests? or do you not
see your ignorance, that its the whole body the Apostle here speaks of?

2. You say He sets down a distinct and perfect enumeration of all the standing
officers in the Church, etc.

To which I answer:

1. That all your wisdom and Logic have not, cannot distinguish these Officers.

2. He enumerates the various gifts in the whole Church; though officers are
not excluded, yet there is no office but depends upon gift, else no Office.

And 1. He mentions Prophets, Whether prophecy, let us Prophecy, etc. that
is, let those who have that Gift, make use of it for the good of the Church.
That this is the intention of the Scripture, note first, that the Apostle is
speaking to the whole, as you have heard, Verse 5.

2. The terms under which its expressed; that is, 1. Prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: answering ver. 3. according as God has dealt to every man
the measure of faith. Hence note, that its every man's liberty, nay duty, to
prophecy according to the proportion of Faith, etc.

3. See Verse 7. There, if anywhere, you have the Office, or Ministry, Let us
wait on our Ministering, etc. The first is a Gift without Office, according to
the proportion of Faith: the other is an office to be waited on, though office
depends upon Gift likewise.

You confess, That this is not the extraordinary, but ordinary Prophesying. And
why this ordinary more then that? 1 Cor. 14. 31. But Sir, it is not your
understanding of the Scripture that makes you give the right Interpretation of
it, but because it suits best with what you drive at; for that I perceive is
your great work, to make the Scripture speak to your own purpose, be it what it
will.

You conclude, Now let us see what they can gather hence; because Pastors and
Teachers, who were Prophets, etc. men in Office are commanded to Prophecy, and
Expound the Word; therefore private persons may, etc. this is kneading trough
Logic.

I answer: Where did you read your Logic in Scripture, that Prophets were
called Pastors; or Pastors and Teachers called Prophets? but that you can say
any thing, make the Scripture to say any thing for your own ends: And this is
Logic learnt from your father the devil; Read and apply Joh. 8. 44.

The tenth Objection.
1 Cor. 11. 5. Every woman that prays or prophesies with her head covered,
etc. Hence say they, were women that did prophesy; If gifted women did
prophesy, much more may gifted men: thus Miriam, Anna and Hilda prophesied, 2
King. 22. 14 etc.

This I suppose is a Scripture of your own invention in this place; there are
enough more to the purpose then this; for I should be unwilling to do as your
self, turn the Scripture every way for your own ends: yet Sir, I shall a little
trace you in this, that so your pride and folly may appear.

You say, Here is chalk for cheese; we speak of ordinary gifted men, and they
flee to women that were called extraordinarily, etc.

And how prove you that Sir? Is there ever such a word in the Text? 1 Cor. 11.
5. he says, pray or prophesy; was it extraordinary praying too? I wonder you
left out that.

As for Phebe, Romans 16. 13. You say, She was a Diaconess to minister to the
sick, and not to preach, or have Peter's Keys jingling at her girdle.

I thought Sir, you were very loath to lose the Keys, having been Peter's
successors so long; but I wonder how you got them from your father the Pope,
who says he keeps the chair still.

Aquila and Priscilla were helpers to Paul, Romans 16. 3. that is, say you, by
their private instructions.

But who told you so, that it was by their private instructions? and why not
public as well as private?

So you say, Not only men, but women should teach their children, servants,
neighbors the way of the Lord. Prove. 1. 8. and 6. 20. Act. 18. 26. Tit. 2. 3.

Confess the truth sometimes, that out of your own mouth you may be condemned;
this is all we plead for, that its the duty of the Saints, according to the
measure of their gift, and proportion of faith, to teach the way of the Lord to
children, neighbors, any, as opportunity is offered: but I suppose you have a
secret reservation, or relation to that word private, etc. and why private Sir?
Is it lawful in private, and unlawful in public? where does the Scripture
make this distinction? But Sir, I suppose I have found you; you will keep it in
private, that so your Diana may stand, your honor and esteem among the vulgar;
and that your god, your bellies may be fed to the full, etc. Phil. 3. 18, 19.

As for that place, 1 Cor. 11. 5. you say, The words are not taken actively for
women's preaching, but passively, for their attending on prayer and prophesying,
etc.

And who told you so Sir? you are very quick of apprehension, ready to give
interpretations: I suppose you may thank your Logic, Rhetoric, and Philosophy
for it. Is there ever such a word in the Text? nay, is it not evident that
there is no such thing intended? Examine the Scripture.

1. He speaks of men in particular, and women in particular; every man that
prays and prophesies; every woman that prays and prophesies; he does not
say every one that does attend upon praying, etc.

2. If he intends the woman, that she does attend upon the praying of another,
then he intends the same to the men likewise; for its one and the same; only
the manner differs: So then there is no rule given to him that speaks in
prophecy, either man or woman.

3. The Text says, Every woman that prophesies, etc. Pray tell me Sir,
whether when a man prophesies and preaches the things of God, whether the
women that are present hearing, do prophecy then, because the man does? if the
women, then the men: where now Sir, you will make all Prophets anon, both men
and women.

2. You say, You must distinguish of prophesying; there is prophesying which is
preaching; thus say some, these women did not prophecy.

I thought you were gotten into a Wood, almost lost, you hear what some say.
But how can they tell? who told either you or them so?

2. You say, Prophesying is taken for publishing, and singing praise, etc.
Psalm. 68. 11. there were she preachers.

If so Sir, why not men and women to teach and preach according to the gift?
See to this purpose Col. 3. 16.

3. You say, Suppose you grant, as your Divines confess, that its the sense of
the place, that women in those times were inspired with the Spirit of prayer,
prophecy, etc. according to Joel 2. 28. yet they failing and abusing their
liberty, the Apostle enjoins them silence for ever in public, 1 Cor. 14. 34,
35.

There is no such thing: Compare that with this, and it forbids but the
disorder, not the thing; by permission, in submission, the women that have a
gift may prophecy, which is the sense of the Scripture.

The eleventh Objection.
1 Cor. 16. 15, 16. The house of Stephanas addicted themselves to the Ministry
of the Saints, etc. Hence you say the Anabaptists ignorantly gather, that a man
may call himself to preaching, etc.

Sir, you are maliciously mistaken, and the ignorance is in your self. 1. In
calling them Anabaptists, for practicing Baptism according to the Scripture,
that grieves you it seems; but you have learnt a new way, both for matter and
manner: for matter, Babies instead of believers: for manner, sprinkling at the
holy Font, instead of baptising in a River: You are loath to go in there with
your long Gowns, you have found a better way then ever was prescribed or
practiced; who now Sir are the Ignoramusses?

2. You belie them (but that is no wonder) you say, they gather that a man may
call himself to preaching.

Its your own forgery; they never said so; but 1. If God gives gifts, then he
calls them to it. 2. The Church finding such gifts, approves of them, ownes
them, rejoices in them, etc.

And as for the Scripture you mention, you say first, It does not appear that
they were Ministers, and Preachers, but rather Deacons and Church Officers, who
did serve and minister to the necessities of the Saints, etc.

This is but your word, and there is no probability for it, but that you have
learned to evade truth; but all will not serve you; I say therefore first, they
were Ministers, and that preaching ones too.

1. Ministers, the word is clear for that; They gave themselves to the ministry
of the Saints.

2. Preaching ones too, ver. 16. That ye submit your selves to such, and to
every one that helps with us, and labors; they were such as did help with
the Apostles, and labor; In what? In giving Alms, or distributing? No. Labor
in the Gospel; its usually applied that way, I labored more abundantly then
they all, says Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 10. and the Elders that labor in the word,
are worthy of honor, etc. this word Labor is nowhere given to Deacons.

3. Yet out of office, only by gift; I prove it thus. 1. Its the household of
Stephanas that Paul baptized, and was his first fruits at Achaia; tell me when
they did, or any else choose a household or family to be all Ministers in office?

2. They addicted themselves to the Ministry, were not called by office, etc.

3. That ye submit to such, and every one that helps; he does not say to
every one in office, but to every one that helps, that is, every one that
has the gift, and helps to the building up of the rest; let others submit
their judgments unto such in points of difference and controversies. If Paul
intended it to every Pastor in the Church of Corinth, there were very many then
it seems; for there was the household of Stephanas, and so every one else that
does labor with us; how many officers will you make in the Church, if what you
say were truth?

You say, They gave themselves to the service, were not compelled or hired, etc.

It seems at least then they were not such officers as the Parsons of the
Nation are; for they must be hired, and well paid too, or else they will not
serve; they are far from the temper of Stephanas and his family.

2. You say, Take it which way you please, either for the service of the
Presbytery, or Deaconship, yet this is the same; they being lawfully called,
did freely give themselves to the service, etc.

Their calling I have already proved unto you, not by office, but gift, and
they readily did the service; you call the Anabaptists the Firebrands of
Societies. Sir, 1. They have been, and will be a firebrand to Antichristian
Societies, and the Lord will by them dash such to pieces by their doctrine,
life and practice. 2. They are the only upholders of lawful Societies, both
Civil and Divine. 3. Your selves are in deed and truth the firebrands of
Societies, both Civil and Divine; For Civil, you could be content to burn up
Nations, Parliament, People, and all, for the establishment of your own
interests, burn up Churches, the Societies of Saints, rail, and call them all
that naught is, when your selves are the men upon whom the guilt lies; you
abuse and wrest the Scripture to your own ends and interest, viz. No man takes
this honor to himself without a Call, etc. Its spoken of the Priests under the
Law, who were a type of Christ, and not of your bastard Tribe of Levites, etc.
Your answer to the objection I have already sufficiently cleared, that they
were gifted persons, not officers, etc.

The twelfth Objection.
Heb. 5. 11, 12. When for the time ye ought to have been teachers, etc. here
say they, the Apostle blames them because they were not all Teachers.

The substance of your answer is, that there are two sorts of teachers; public
teachers, and private teachers; the one by men in office, the other by men out
of office.

But who gave this distinction of public and private Christians? of public
and private teachers? I know not; they are terms the Scripture is not
acquainted withal, therefore away with them to Rome, from whence they came;
and call not that or them private, whom God has made public; say no more for
shame, that its lawful for them to teach in private, and unlawful in public;
does the place and manner make so much difference? If it be lawful to teach
the way of God to one or two in private, is it not lawful to teach the same to
them in public? and if to one or two, why not to ten? if to ten, why not to an
hundred, to a thousand? if in private, why not in public? does the Scripture
know any such distinction, or approve one more then another? If not, be silent
for ever, and ashamed of your folly, and make no more such distinctions where
the Lord has made none.

The thirteenth Objection.
1 Pet. 2. 9 Ye are a royal Priesthood, etc. Rev. 3. 10. and 1. 6. and have
made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, etc. Exodus 19. 6. All Priests must
teach, but all Believers are Priests. Ergo, all Believers may teach.

You answer: The fallacy lies in the word Priest; you read of two sorts of
Priests: 1. Some by Office, etc. 2. Others a royal Priesthood proper to all
Believers, etc. who as the former, come near to God. 1. Have boldness and
access, etc. 2. Offer sacrifice of prayer and praise. 3. Slay their sins and
mortify the old man, etc. 4. In respect of common annoynting, so all Believers
have an unction of the Spirit of God, which leads them into all truth, 1 John
2. 20. and being thus taught, they may and must teach others.

These are your own words: And now Sir, where is the Fallacy? in your self, or
in the preaching brethren? your own confession shall be your judge one day. But
you pretend to mend all again, with the word privately, the way of the Lord;
how often have you confessed the truth, and then think to lick your self whole
again, with that one word, that the Scripture ownes not, upon your account; but
breathes forth light and truth to the contrary, as clear as the Sun when it
shines at the noonday; yet when you have confessed the truth, you pretend to
over-turn it again, with that word private; with shame acknowledge your
ignorance, if not your malice.

2. You answer: You Will show the weakness of this Argument, you say, per idem
thus; The office of a King is to rule; but every Believer is a King. Ergo. And
if so, why do ye not get into the Throne? etc.

I answer: Your Argument looks like your self. Because Believers are Kings;
Ergo, they do and shall reign with Christ over Sin, Satan, Flesh, and World,
with him in glory; this is the truth in the mystery: but you draw scurrilous
and reproachful conclusions to make the Saints and truth contemptible; be
advised of your folly in time and repent, least you walking in John a Leydens
ways, cry up Office, Office, thinking to carry away all the crown and glory
from the Saints, when indeed and truth you have no more part nor portion in the
business then Simon the Sorcerer, etc. I say, be warned of crying up your
selves above the Magistrate, Parliament, and Council of State, etc. resolving
to ruin all, if you may not reign, least you come to John a Leydens end, etc.

The fourteenth Objection.
1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every one has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, etc. every man must use the talent God has given him,
etc. Mat. 25. Hence (you say) they argue, All that have gifts, must use them;
but many private men have gifts; Ergo, they must use them.

Your answer's true: But where? not publicly; for then many women who have
excellent Gifts should be Preachers, but privately, etc.

You have no other shift to put off truth, but this silly distinction of
public, private, etc. you have worn it threadbare, being so often put to it in
the very plain express terms of Scripture; that you know not where to shift
your self, but put off your load upon this word private: to which I have said
so much in answer unto it, that I suppose the most weak and simple may see into
your Fallacy: but Sir, you leave your case desperate at last; but no wonder,
when it is so bad, that it seems you are glad to steal away from it; for you
confess that which you have so long opposed.

You say He comes ver. 11, to the gift of Prophecy, and ministering according
to our Abilities.

Is it the Gift of Prophecy? indeed its well you confess it: It seems you had
not audaciousness enough in you to contradict this truth shining so clear in
your conscience.

You say Its the gift of Prophecy.

Surely these are not Prophets in Office; you dare not say so it seems; but as
every man has received this Gift, so let him minister, if any man speak, etc.
Here you are blank, and glad to be gone with speed to the next: you saying so
little, and to so little purpose, the Scripture it self being so undeniably
clear, that daunts all gain sayers, as appears in your answer. I shall say no
more unto it, but pursue you to that which follows.

The fifteenth Objection.
Rev. 11. 3. The two Witnesses Prophecy; not only the Clergy, but all the
Faithful.

You answer; 1. That borrowed Speeches make no grounded Arguments.

I answer, That the truth of those speeches shall stand, and hold firm, when
your Logic, and Rhetoric, shall have an end.

2. You say, The Witnesses consisted of Pastors, and People; the one Preaching,
the other Professing against Antichrist, etc.

Be sure then its not you, nor your People, who walk in Antichristian ways;
but you it is must be witnessed against; and if you have not already, will kill
the witnesses. And why not the people witness by Preaching, as well as
Prophesying, if every one may administer according to the gift received, as in
the former Argument? etc.

The last Objection is a Sceleton.
A penny worth of their small Reasons, a parcel of bare bones; the very naming
of them is confutation sufficient, as 1 Cor. 1. 27, 29. God has chosen the
foolish things of the world, etc. Ergo, Laymen may Preach.

Sir, Your Answer to this Objection and Scripture, seems to carry the langage
of the old Proverb in it, more knave then fool: was there ever the like heard
of, either from Pope, or Devil? what, not a word of answer, but scurrility, and
reproach? what, reproach the Scripture it self? calling it a Sceleton, a
parcel of bare bones etc? Is this enough to give satisfaction? does the light
shine so clear out of that Scripture, that it compels you to fly from it, as
not being able to look it in the face, or give answer to it, but cry out
against it? has not this been your practice in all Ages? when you meet with
truth, that you cannot gain-say-it, then to reproach it, and render it
contemptible to the people; but be ye sure you will have but little thank for
it at the last day: but seeing you leave this Scripture as being worthy of no
answer, but base and scurrilous names, etc. I shall say something to it, that
its light may appear, and your darkness the more unto the world.

The truth there asserted, is this, That God in all Ages has made choice of
foolish, weak, and unlikely things; by it to confound and bring to nothing,
things that are.

And this he does, either 1. In the work of Conversion; the poor receive the
Gospel; Publican, and Harlots go into Heaven before the self righteous zealous
harisees; for Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners, etc.

2. Or in the work of the Ministry; Fishermen, Publicans, Tent-makers,
Shepherds, Plough-men, etc. And why so, that by weak means he might bring to
nothing things that are in creatures apprehension.

You cry up your humanity, fleshly wisdom, Arts, Sciences, etc. But believe it,
the Lord has began it already, and he will go on with it by weak nothing
creatures, fools in the world eyes, and in yours too, to dash to pieces all
your wisdom; and by this means he will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
bring to nothing the understanding of the Prudent: Then where is the scribe,
where is the disputer of this world, etc? has not God made foolish the wisdom
of the world? Take notice,

1. That you fleshly wisdom in which you so much boast, and glory, cannot help
you to the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. chap. 2. 14.

2. It is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3. 19.

3. It is that which must be destroyed, when the wisdom of the Spirit comes, 1
Cor. 1. 19.

4. Its enmity against God; it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be, Romans 8. 7.

5. If mercy prevent not, its death, Romans 8. 6. So the Greek word signifies;
(...), the wisdom of the flesh, etc. and ver. 7. (...), The wisdom of the flesh
is enmity, etc. nay, and fleshes best wisdom; prudence, so the word signifies,
its all but enmity, death, and that not only to your selves, but others, Col.
2. 8. And this God has done, is doing, and will discover and bring it to
nothing, by weak, and unlikely men, and means, manger all the wisdom and power
of men and flesh that shall oppose; be advised therefore, ye wise men of the
earth; Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, etc.

You mention other Scriptures that are not to the purpose, nor made use of,
that I know of by any; but I suppose you juggled them in here, that so you
might shift off the truth in this Scripture, by running to others not so much
to the purpose; therefore I pass them in this place, and conclude: The sum of
all, is this;

1. That all the Brethren in the Church, that have Gifts, may Prophecy, 1 Cor.
14. 31.

2. That every man according to his proportion of faith may prophecy, Romans 12.
3. 6.

3. That gifted men out of Office, have Preached, therefore may Preach, Act. 9.
20. and 8. 4. and 18. 26.

4. That every man according to the Gift received, may, and ought to
administer, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11.

5. That its the Saints work to declare the glory of Christ's Kingdom to the
world, Psalm. 145. 10, 11, 12.

6. That this, is the end wherefore God gives gifts to men, Ephesians. 4. 8. 1 Cor.
12. 7.

7. That the Saints should desire to Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 1. ver. 5. and 39.

8. That the Jews themselves denied not this in their assemblies, Acts 13. 14,
15. and 18. 26.

9. None but Devil, Pope, Priests and Persecutors ever denied this truth.

1 Cor. 14. 37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things I write, are the Commandments of the Lord. But 1
Cor. 11. 16. If any be contentious, we have no such customs, nor the Churches
of God, chap. 14. 13. But if any man will be ignorant, let him be ignorant
still, etc.

You say, There was one thing more objected. viz. That your Ministry was
Antichristian, of which one word, and then you have done.

I shall as briefly trace you in it, and so have done too.

This you say is objected, Your ministry is Antichristan, you are Babylonish
Diviners, Egyptians juglers, limbs of the Devil, proud, covetous, etc. A whole
load of such ignomious titles you may find in a little Pamphlet of one
Collier, a very dangerous Sectary.

Sir, Collier would have you to know that he has written nothing in that
little Pamphlet, but what he is both ready and able in the strength of the Lord
to make it good in opposition to all gainsayers; notwithstanding your
reproachful term of dangerous Sectary, both in this, and your beastial Epistle
to your Reverend Senior; he is a Collier, and although you are black already,
yet he will make your blackness more to appear, for he is accomplishing your
desire working about coal, digging up the blackness, etc.

Well, but you comfort your self yet, That it is your honor, and therefore you
should not fret, but rejoice and give God thanks, etc.

A very fine way to shift of truth from your selves, and so go on in your
wickedness; saying, you shall have peace, although you add sin to sin, and walk
after the imaginations and stubbornness of your own hearts: As well might the
false Prophets and false Apostles rejoice, because the true ones reprove them;
and tell them that they transform themselves into Angels of light; so because
the servants of light reprove you, and discover your false and erroneous ways,
you rejoice as if persecuted for the truth of Christ; Believe it, your glorying
is not good; but I suppose your joy is but from the teeth outward, as we use to
say; there is grief within and sorrow of heart, etc. Isay 65. 11. 12. 13, 14.

You say, God is beholding to us, for the kindness we show to his Ambassadors.

Answ. 1. Then he is but little beholding to the men of your coat; for you are
the greatest enemies to them in the world.

2. But is God beholding unto men for the kindness showed to his Ambassadors in
good earnest? I must confess I am now informed by you, in that I knew not
before; for I was so ignorant in this mystery, that I thought God had not been
beholding to any man, no not to Ambassadors themselves; because the Scripture
says, when we have done all that we can, yet we are unprofitable servants;
that we are in Christ Jesus created unto good works, that we should walk in
them.

But Sir, I suppose you do in this as in diverse other things, but tell a lie in
jest; for you suppose your selves to be Ambassadors; and you would feign
persuade the people to love you, and honor you, though with a lie: but that
Ministry which cannot uphold it self without a lie, is not of Christ, but of
him who is the father of lies.

You proceed, And whereas they say our Ministry is Antichristian, because we
were ordained by Antichristian Bishops, etc. You answer, It Is easily said, but
not so easily proved; for first you have your Ordination form Christ by Bishops
and Presbyters.

Your selves have concluded the Bishops Antichristian in their Calling; and is
yours Christian? a Riddle!

But you say immediately, You have it not so much from them as Christ, etc.

The outward, you have from them; and can they give you that they had not
themselves? a paradox!

You say, That you adminster in Christ's name, and not in the Bishops, etc.

And why not your preaching brethren minister in Christ's name, not having to do
with the Bishops? but if, you did in good earnest minister in Christ's name, you
would do his work, etc.

The Presbytery you say, is only ministerial, whereby it testifies, declares
and approves of those whom God approves and calls.

Sir, That is the reason I suppose, there are so many approved called ones of
that Generation in the Nation at present as there are; if in some, pride,
covetousness, ignorance, malice, treachery, bloodthirstiness, etc. In others,
looseness of life, profaneness, drunkenness, whoring, etc. may declare men to be
the called of God, you have as much to say for your selves as any people in the
world etc.

But secondly, You say, The Bishops were not Antichristian, because by their
life and Doctrine they have witnessed against Antichrist.

Answ. That was not as Bishops; I do not say because Bishops and Priests too
are Antichristian, that therefore there are no honest men amongst them; for the
Lords people are and have been in Babylon, and the Lord calls them to come
forth, Rev. 18 4.

I deny not, but that Ridley, Cranmer, Latimer, etc. might be honest men; yet
not as Bishops; their witnessing against particular errors, of which they were
informed, adds no whit to their Office, it makes them Bishops never the more;
no more then the witness of all the rest against the same errors, made them
Bishops.

3. You say, They were Ministers, and Ordained you, not as Lord Bishops, but as
Presbyters.

Answ. 1. You juggle with the business, you anabaptise or rather rebaptise
them; it may be contrary to their minds; who knows not, that not long since,
the name of Presbyter was a stranger amongst us, and to your selves too:
Therefore to say, that they did it not as Bishops, but as Presbyters, is a
juggling shift, and savors of ignorance too, else why in the second place, is
not Episcopos an Over-feer? as good Scripture, as ancient, as honorable, and
as useful as Presbyteros an Elder? but only change of names to delude people,
as if there must of necessity be some great reformation, when the name is
changed, though the nature be the same, if not worse; this has been always,
and is the trick of the Devil at a dead lift, when one Form can no longer
please, then to get into another; and be sure he will not mend it.

3. If they were Ministers and so ordained you, you have done very ill to
preach them down as Antichristian; and so not only to unlord them, but to
unbishop and lay them aside as no Ministers, as no Bishops: where is your Call
from them now? etc.

4. You say, Many of them were able Ministers, and painful Preachers (your
selves being Judges) no man can affirm that they were wicked men.

I do not affirm that all the Presbyter persons are wicked men, yet their
Office is never the honester; if any of you do know the Lord, and be in good
earnest, founded upon the Rock Christ; and yet build, as you do, wood, hay,
stuble, that shall suffer loss, though your selves be saved, yet so as by fire:
Therefore do not deceive your selves, because you meet now and then with a man
of some honest principles, therefore the Calling is good; no more then because
the Lord has some people in Babylon under Antichrist, therefore Babylon and
Antichrist is good. Remember it was your own saying, Its not one Swallow that
makes a Summer.

5. You say, Admit some of them have been Popish, etc. yet we must not condemn
all the Apostles for one Judas, etc.

Answ. We condemn not all, although we justify the Office of neither them nor
you there is but little 'twixt you; and I believe as few honest men of your
Calling as any Trade in the Nation.

You conclude, Suppose they be wicked, Heretical, Antichristian that ordain,
yet our Ministry is firm, etc.

Well said for your self at last; you have pleaded for outward Order,
Ordination, etc. all this while, and now so it be done, it matters not who does
it, wicked, Heretics, Antichrist; and why not the Devil to? I am very
confident that the Devils Ordination is as good as Antichrists? Well, but
something you must have, it seems; and why may not the Preaching Brethren now
upon your own account preach as lawfully without any Ordination, as your selves
with Antichrists Ordination? the one acting in the power of the Spirit of
Christ, the other of Antichrist, etc. But to your Arguments to prove your Call.

1. Argument; Those whose Ordination was right for substance. though it fail in
some circumstance, yet is valid; but our Ordination was right for substance,
etc. we had the inward Call.

1. Say little of that.

2. That upon your own account is no part of Ordination, and the outward Call
by succession from Rome; your Saint Austin the Monk being sent from Rome to
establish the Romish Faith in this Nation; he accordingly accomplishing the
work, you have your Ordination by succession from thence.

And for all the imposition of hands, examination of life and learning, prayer,
etc. you so much seem to boast in, its nothing but an Antichristian form
without power, a dead carcass without a soul; for neither they nor you know
what the Gift, Calling, or Work of the Ministry of Christ is, but glory in the
fleshly form without, being ignorant of, and for the most part enemies to the
Power, etc.

2. Argument. If Baptism of Ministers in times of Popery was true Baptism,
though corrupted, etc. the Ministers, though corrupted, were true Ministers;
therefore you must be true Ministers, though corrupted; I suppose this to be
the intention of your Argument.

Answ. You have now hit the nail upon the head, and fastened it like a Master
builder.

1. Then I deny either their or your Baptism to be any Baptism at all; for
believe it, theirs is as good as yours, never a best, but aninvented
Antichristian Custom and Form, for which there is no warrant, either in Law or
Gospel, or President of any true Church of Christ.

2. You do well to rank your selves with the Ministry of Rome; for they are by
Office your brethren; from thence you come, and thither you must return, etc. a
grounded Argument to prove your Call: If the Ministry of Rome be true, then you
are true; but they are; Ergo. this is the sum of your Argument.

3. Argument. If the Papists disclaim us as having no Call from them, then our
Calling cannot be Antichristian; but they disclaim us, etc.

Answ. 1. Your jangling and differing each with other, and reproaching one
another, argues not the truth of what you say; for its known, and your selves
know, that by Succession, your Ordination came from thence, etc.

2. They do not say, That your Ordination in its rise came not from them, but
in the present its not approved of, or executed by them, by reason of some small
differences between you.

3. Grant by way of concession, that if what you say were truth; is there but
one Antichrist in the world? you say it cannot be Antichristian; Does not the
Apostle say there are many Antichrists in the world.

4. Argument. If your Ordination be Antichristian, then cannot you with modesty
accuse us: But your Ordination is Antichristian, Ergo.

A goodly Argument Sir I for if it were truth that you say, because ours is
Antichristian, therefore yours may be so by a Law; learned Logic! As to the
Ordination you mention by the people, I know none such in the formal way you
pretend, Election being the sum of all, and that lies in the people: the
power, or gift of Ordination in the form being wanting, its but a form without
a power; yet I believe that the power both of Election and Ordination lies in
the Church; and if Ordination be so administered as you say, the Church
appointing some of her Members unto it, they are a lawful Presbytery to do it,
so far as the power accompanies it, etc.

You conclude, If this be lawful, then a fortiori from the greater, yours must
needs be lawful, learned, Orthodox Divines. Their learning and greatness mends
the business well you think, though ignorant of, or enemies unto the Way,
Truth, Churches and Ministers of Christ; (the case is altered now sir.)

5. Argument. Those Ministers that are elected, proved, ordained, etc.
according to the mind of Christ, cannot be Antichristian; but our Ministers are
so. Ergo.

Answ. Your Minor I deny; you have no such Election; I have told you already,
you have no Church of Christ, but for the most part are ignorant, rude,
deboist, profane, yet professing Hypocrites: yet secondly, such as they are,
yet they never elected you before Ordination; but you for love of the tithe
pigs, etc. come and take them by violence, and get their goods from them by a
Law.

2. You were never proved, viz. of your knowledge of the Lord and his ways,
but of your learning; if you had the language of the Beast, and the smoke of
the pit, it was enough; and as for your Ordination, I have told you already
from whence it is, I need say no more.

6. Argument. Those Ministers which are directly opposite to the Priests and
Shavelings of Antichrist, cannot be Antichristian; but ours are so. Ergo.

Answ. You are so in some Circumstantials, not in the substance; for you own
their Ministry true, their Ordinances true: and indeed you are the Sectaries
and Schismatics in renting from them, they being in your account a true Church
and Ministry, though corrupted. This your self acknowledged in your second
Argument; and this Parson Tilly of Compton in Somersetshire, no little one in
the peoples account, acknowledged in express terms, that Rome is a true Church,
and her Ministry a true Ministry, etc.

2. There may be an opposition in some Circumstantials, and yet a joining in
others; Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and both
against Judah; you are both against Christ and his Interst, which is his
people. etc.

You say this will appear by the ensuing Parallel.
1. They were ordained to sacrifice. 2. You were ordained to do the same; its
only the change of that word; the second clears it. 2. They teach the
traditions of men. 2. You do the same and your own inventions; are ashamed of,
and enemies to the truth of the Scriptures. 3. They mix the Sacraments and
Altar. 3. You destroy and annihilate them by your impure administration. 4.
They are for the Mass. 4. You kept the body and substance of it, (viz.) the
Liturgy, until the Parliament took it from you. 5. They are the Popes sworn
Vassals. 5. You are as deeply engaged to your self-interest, as they are to the
Pope. 6. These pervert souls and draw them from Christ. 6. You delude souls
with your Forms, Customs, Ordinances, so keep them from Christ.

But you say; That you convert souls, and bring them to Christ; that we
received our conversion from sin to God, in the public Assemblies, etc.

Answ. 1. If conversion be a proof of a Minister in office, then women may be
Ministers in office, or any man by whom God converts; for I believe your selves
dare not deny, but that God is free in this thing, and works by whom and how
he pleases, 1 Cor. 7. 16. Joh. 4. 28.

You instance in Paul proving his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9. 2. that is but in
particular to them, not that conversion of souls proves the Office, but the
work; I deny not but there might be some men of honesty, and godly men, though
in darkness in part, by whom God might work for conversion; yet this justifies
not the Office.

2. If God did own his hidden ones, and afford his presence in times of
Ignorance; yet now are times of Light, and he admonishes you to repent.

3. Most of the conversion you so much boast of, was but a conversion from sin
to Duty, not from sin to God, as many can, and have witnessed, being with Paul
made partakers of another Conversion both from sin, and resting upon duty to
God.

You seem to make much of our separating from you in time of Reformation; that
its a greater sin then many are aware of, to separate from a Church that
professes so much readiness to conform to the Rule, and that never was
separation from the Chuch so unwarrantable as now it is, etc.

Answ. 1. You never were, nor are a true Church of Christ; upon your own
account and confession, you are but Schismatics, rent from your Mother Church
of Rome, who is, as you confess, true, therefore not to be departed from: but
neither you nor they are the Church of Christ; if one, then both.

2. Your work, if you would do the Lords work, is, not to reform the old, but
to begin anew upon the right foundation, by a right rule, to a right end: then
should we rejoice in you, and join with you etc.

3. We see it clearly, that for want of this, all your Reformation is but
Deformation, and you are but like a man in a dream, that dreams in his sleep of
a goodly Palace, but when he is awake, he is in a stinking Prison. So if ever
the Lord awake you, you shall then see the folly of your dream: you may change
the name as often as you please; but its the change of the nature that does the
deed, etc.

I have done; only my six Arguments, and I take my leave.

Argument 1. Those Ministers whose Ordination by succession came from the
authority of the Pope, are Antichristian; but your Ordination by succession
came from the authority of the Pope. Ergo.

That this is truth, is visible to all understanding men, and not denied by you.

Argument 2. Those Ministers who do not the work of Christ according to the
Scripture, but the contrary, are Antichristian; but the Ministry of the Nation
do not the work of Christ according to the Scripture, but the contrary. Ergo.
First, they do not his work according to the Scripture, which is to preach for
conversion, baptize, bring into fellowship, etc. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Act. 2.
40. etc. you do the contrary, oppose, reproach, persecute the Lords rule in his
people; then see Rom 6. 16.

Argument 3. Those Ministers who do, or do desire to sit in the seat of Christ,
ruling in and over the Consciences of his people, are Antichristian; but the
Ministry of the Nation has done, and does desire to sit in the seat of Christ,
and there to rule over the Consciences of his people. Ergo. That this is truth,
is undeniably clear: that such are Antichristian, see 2 These. 2. 4.

Argument 4. Those Ministers whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things, whose call from one place to another, is
earthly augmentations, are Antichristian; but the Ministers of England are
such. Ergo. The truth of this I leave to him that reads to judge, etc. whether
gain be not their godliness.

Argument 5. Those Ministers who are opposers of, and enemies unto the
fellowship of the Saints, and the free operations of the Spirit of Christ in
and amongst them for their mutual good, are Antichristian; but the Ministry of
the Nation is such, witness the Pulpit-Guard. Ergo. That such are
Antichristian, see Numb 11. 28. Luke 9. 50. 1 Cor. 14. 31. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11.
Act. 5. 40.

Argument. 6. Those Ministers who set up a Mystery of Iniquity, viz Something
like truth in the room of truth, in opposition to truth, are Antichristian,
Rev. 17. 10, and 13. 18. but the Ministry of the Nation are such* Ergo.
Something like truth in the room of truth, yet opposite to truth, viz. Acquired
Arts, Sciences, Tongues, in the room of the Spirit since the Apostasy, yet
opposite to the Spirit, Romans 8. 7. turn the world into Church, make Churches by
a humane power, something like a Church, yet no Church of Christ, but enemies
to it; Ordinations like Christ's, yet not; Presbytery, Ministry, etc. all like
Christ's, yet none of his, but enemies to him; though professing they know God,
yet deny him, etc. a Mystery of Iniquity; Here needs wisdom to discern; let him
that reads consider. These things I leave to your consideration, wishing you
no more hurt from my heart then that through the blessing of the Lord, it might
prove an effectual Call unto you, to bring you out of Babylon to Sion, etc.
Rev. 18. 4.

FINIS.
The Postscript.
Reader,
THou may be pleased to take notice, that I had written this Answer before
the third Edition of the Pulpit-Guard; wherein are many Additions which were
not formerly, to which I have but briefly hinted some Answers to some of them:
yet I question not, but that there is enough said for satisfaction in Answer to
that Lawless Guard, if the Lord give thee a heart to understand. 2. In what I
have here written, I intend, that only Brethren who have gifts may Preach, or
exercise them in an orderly way; it is one end why God gives gifts unto men,
and so it is their duty; not that those who have no gifts but their own
imaginations, should be encouraged hereby. 3. That its proper for the Saints to
judge of those Gifts; yet not to despise Prophesying; and upon this account, I
am very sure that few, if any of those who cry up themselves as the only
Authoritative Potents, would be found to have Gifts fit for so great a work,
etc.

There is another Book written by one Collins, something suitable to the
Pulpit-Guard, tending to the same end. I believe you shall find most of those
particulars he urges in it for his own ends, to be answered in this Book: Read
with patience, and the Lord guide thy heart, and give thee understanding, etc.

Farewell.
Reader, Some small Escapes thou may meet withal, mend them with thy Pen; for
I find that an Errata in the end of the Book is but of little use.

FINIS.

