THE HAPPINESS OF BRETHRENS Dwelling together in UNITY.

DISCOURSED Upon PSALM 133. Verse. 1. On Occasion of the late Thanksgiving, Feb.
14. 1688/9.

By JOHN COLLINGES, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich, near the
Marketplace. 1689.

TO THE READER.
FOr the Divisions of Reuben are great thoughts [great searchings] of heart
(says the victorious Prophetess, Jud. 5. 15, 16.) Reuben was one of the most
Potent Tribes of Israel, you will find, Numb. 1. that upon their first
Numbering, there belonged to it Forty six thousand five hundred fighting Men:
Upon the second Numbering, Number. 26. Forty three thousand seven hundred, and
thirty. They had their Portion on the other side of Jordan, and were by that
River divided locally from their Brethren; but that is not the Division here
lamented. In a cause where the whole was concerned against a Potent Enemy, they
could not unite, but abode amongst the Sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the
Flocks. The cause of this Neutrality is not told us, but what ever it was, it
could not be justified, and caused amongst the more considerate amongst their
Brethren, great thoughts, great searchings of heart, and not without reason: It
is a just amazement to any, that any Men for a little Secular Profit and
Advantage to themselves, should disunite from their Brethren in Councels, and
Actions tending to the common preservation of the whole Body of which they are
Members. This has been our case in England for more than an Hundred years, Men
to keep up their particular Dominations, grandeur, and Secular Gain and
Interest have kept up Division to the apparent hazard of the whole, at least
twice, or thrice, and this deserves great thoughts, great searchings of heart.
Being called to perform my part in the late Public Thanksgiving, I knew not
what better Subject to pitch upon, than the Commendation of Unity, with a
Persuasive to it; because I thought this alone was a Real Thanksgiving, as well
as most of any thing subservient to the good of the Nation. Every one calls for
Unity, and reflects upon those who are (in their fancies) the hinderers of it,
but they seem not to understand the way of Peace. Would they have an Unity in
the Doctrines of Religion? Nothing less, they grant this unpracticable; nor
will they themselves own the Articles of our Religion, further than as an
Instrument of Peace, and with a Latitude for their own sense of them. Would
they have an Union in Designs and Councils for the Public Good, and in the
performance of mutual Offices of love one toward another? To this all good Men
will say Amen. Only, say we, this is inconsistent with any Persecution; for how
do they show their readiness to do all Offices of love one to another, who make
it their business to ruin others, by Fines, Imprisonments, etc. Or how can
they join in Actions for Public Good, of whom you require (as the terms of
such Conjunction) things that their Consciences tell them they cannot do
without Sin? and others Consciences tell them are no way necessary for that
end; but wholly foreign as to the thing for which they would have them unite?
Would you have an Union to uphold the Protestant Religion? All honest Men are
agreed for this. But, say they, (and truly too) you pluck up Protestant
Religion by the root that day, that you deny to every Protestant, the Judgment
of Discretion, which allows to every Man a liberty to Judge of his own Acts,
whether they be such as he may lawfully do, or may not do. For if a Man may act
contrary to the practical Judgment of his own Conscience; in compliance with
the Commands, or Opinions of others, calling themselves The Church: The Papists
have got a great Point of us, and seeing they have greater Numbers, and that of
Learned men, than are of and amongst Protestants, they grant it safer to be
Papists than Protestants. Well, but say some, We would have such an Union that
all may join together in Hearing, Receiving the Sacrament, etc. All good Men
will say, Amen to this too; Provided, that they will allow all those who are
true Ministers of Jesus Christ (if there be any in the World except amongst
those of their Persuasions) to Preach and Administer the Sacraments: And
Provided, There be nothing added to Preachings beyond what God has revealed in
his Word, nor to Prayers and Administrations of Sacraments beyond what God has
directed in his Word, which is a sufficient Rule for Worship as well as
Doctrine, except as to the common Circumstances of all humane acts. We hear Men
say, Will you allow nothing then to Humane Laws and Legislators? Yes, very
much; 1. A Power to judge what is necessary and expedient in all Civil things
for the upholding and managing the Civil Government. 2. A Power to enforce the
Laws of God in Religious things. 3. A Power there also to determine the
necessary Circumstances of those actions, so far as they are Humane Acts. But
by the granting of these things, so much of some men's craft is in danger to be
set at naught; So much Magnificence (as some count it) in danger to be
destroyed, that I despair ever to see such an Unity. Nor do I understand how it
is necessary in order to Brethrens dwelling together in Unity, more than it is
necessary to the Civil Union of a Corporation, that all Men in it should manage
the same Trade by the same Method, and in the same Circumstances. If Men be
united in their common Counsels, Designs, and Readiness to serve the public,
for their common Good and Advantage, and a readiness to serve one another in
love, it is enough for our Civil, and Secular Happiness: and if they be united
in a common belief of all things necessary to be believed, and all things
necessary to be done, in order to Salvation, it is Union enough in order to our
Spiritual, and Eternal Happiness. The necessity of any other Union is a
Chimaera fit only for such who cry out for Unity upon terms, upon which it is
almost impossible it should be had, that is, they cry out for continued
Discord, under the Notion of Unity, This, Reader, is that Union which the
following Discourse pleads for, and directs what seems to me the best
means to attain. Now the God of Peace, which brought again from the dead, our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every good work to do his Will,
working in us, that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ.
To whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Psalm 133. verse. 1. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to
Dwell together in Unity.
WE have not in the Title of the Psalm so certain a conduct to determine the
occasion of the Penning of it, as we have in many other Psalms. It tells us
indeed it was a Psalm of David, but upon what occasion Composed, it says not.
It is not improbably guessed that the occasion of the Penning, was the Union of
all the Tribes in David their King, of which you read, 2 Samuel 5. 3. After 2 Samuel 5. 3.
the Death of Saul, David reigned some years over Judah alone; but you read
there, that after he had reigned seven Years and three Months in Hebron over
Judah alone, all the Elders of Israel came to him in Hebron, -- and made a
league with him, and anointed him King over Israel; and thus now the twelve
Tribes were become Gens una, one Nation. David might (very probably) upon this
occasion Pen this Psalm, commending to them the keeping of this Knot, which
God's Providence had made. Thus it excellently suteth our present occasion, we
being at this Day, in such an opportunity of uniting all that profess the
Reformed Religion, as possibly our Forefathers for more than an Hundred years
(till within our memory) have wanted, whether God will yet please to hide from
us the things which concern our Peace, time must show. However I could not but
take the advantage of it, to commend to you the Union of Brethren. The words I
have read to you is the Proposition of the whole Psalm, the Proof of it lies in
the last words, the other Verses are made up of two Similitudes, illustrating
the general Proposition. The Proposition of the Psalm, is that which my design
is to make the Subject of my Discourse, which I shall prove only, by opening
the last Clause -- There God commands the Blessings. The other Passages of the
Psalm I shall no further concern my self in, than they will naturally fall
under the proof of the Proposition.

Prop. It is a very good, and pleasant thing for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity.

The Notion of Brethren in Scripture is of as great a Latitude as that of
Neighbor. It signifies those that agree in uno aliquo tertio, in any third
thing, whether it be Blood in a more general Notion, and thus all Men are
Brethren each to other: or in a more restrained Notion, thus all of the same
Family are Brethren; or in the same more immediate Parents, thus Esau is called
Jacob's Brother; or in the same Nation, thus Paul calls the Jews his Brethren;
or in the same Religion; or finally in the same Faith, or hope of calling (as
the Apostle phraseth it,) thus we are called to Love the Brethren. As to the
particular sense of it in this Text, it doubtless signifies those that were
Members of the same Nation, and United in the main things with respect to
Religion.

It may be a more valuable Question, what Union this is predicated of? The Heb.
says no more than in One. I find some would have it only to respect Place. But
besides that, this was sufficiently expressed before, by the words dwell
together. Nor does this always appear Productive of any Happiness, or
Pleasantness. And if it did it would speak the Psalmist only here commending
the Happiness of those who live in Towns, and Cities, contiguous one to
another, above theirs, who live in the Country, or places where Men's
Habitations are at greater distances; which is too mean a Notion to suit
David's design in this Text. We must therefore find out some other Unity here
intended.

Unity refers certainly to the Mind, and so there is a double Unity: The one
referring to the Understanding, the other to the Will and Affections.

Unity so far as respects the understanding, is a Oneness in Apprehension and
Judgment, which is consequent to it, for every Man must judge of the truth or
falsehood, the goodness or badness of a Notion as he apprehends it. Now this is
an Unity which is not to be expected, we may as soon look to see an Oneness, in
the likeness of all men's faces, their features and complexions, as in their
apprehensions, there must, and will be while the World lasts, different
abilities in Men to discourse Conclusions from Principles, as differences also
in their Educations, and improvements of their Reasons; from whence Men and
Women's apprehensions and judgments are formed. I doubt whether any such thing
may be prayed for: for what were it but to pray God to unmake the World, and to
Cast all men's Souls in the same Mould? or to work some such miraculous change
upon all; for neither of which I know of any Warrant. Besides, supposing that
the will must follow the dictate of the understanding, it would (with a witness
too) destroy all liberty of the will, which some so contend for. Nor do I know
whether this would produce any such Happiness. Indeed there is an Unity of
Faith that is desirable; But that is secured by Men's rightly apprehending and
Judging, in all things necessary to be believed and done in order to Salvation.
But when shall we be agreed what those are? I do not think that Unity is at all
concerned in my Text. It must therefore be the Unity of the Will and
Affections. And this either respects, 1. Designs and Councels. Or, 2. Offices
of Love and Charity. 1. Though Men as to particular Notions may have different
apprehensions, and Judgments, yet they may have a oneness of Will and Design
for the promotion of some general good, let it be, the Glory of God, or the
common good of the City or Community, in which we are involved. Now there are
two things which give a liberty for this, under different Apprehensions.

1. That a Man may practice, according to, or contrary to many particular
Notions, and yet glorify God, if he lives up to the Dictate of his own
Conscience. This the Apostle abundantly determines, Romans 14. in the case of the
Jewish Holy days and Meats. v. 6. He that regards a day regards it to the
Lord; [that is to the Glory of God] and be that regards it not, to the Lord
he does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the Lord, and gives God
thanks: and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives God
thanks. Thus it is in all things which God's Word has left indifferent. God's
Glory is neither concerned, in the doing, or not doing of them. Those who think
a Superiour's command afters the case, should do well to consider whether Saint
Paul might at that time, have by his command made it necessary for any Jew
turned to the Christian Faith, to have kept the Jewish days, or to have for
born the Meats there spoken of. What shall he say (says Solomon) that comes
after the King, even the same thing that has been said before? What shall
God's Vicegerent say, or do, who in any thing comes after the King of Kings;
surely nothing but what has been said before him (in the things of God)
commanding things necessary, and leaving things indifferent, as God has left
them. I never read but that the good Kings of God's ancient People, and Paul
and the rest of the Apostles did so, not pretending to a Wisdom paramount to
that of God.

2. A second thing is, That in all Civil things, a man in Obedience to the
higher Powers, may, and ought to act contrary to his own Opinion and Judgment.
The Reasons for this are obvious.

1. He transgresses no Law of God in doing it. 2. Nay, he obeys the Law of
God in it. Though the Law of God in Religious Matters obliges every Man to
follow the dictate of his own Conscience, judging a thing lawful or unlawful;
(and in things indifferent judging a thing more, or less expedient; because in
all such things next after God, a Man's practical Conscience is the Supreme
Judge as to his actions* Yet in Civil Matters, the Higher Powers of States and
Kingdoms are plainly Judges betwixt God and our practical Judgments; God has
clothed them with Power to make Laws, and determine of things necessary, or not
necessary, expedient, or not expedient for the better managery of their
particular Governments. That text, Deuteronomy. 17. is to be restrained to such
things, it is restrained, v. 8. to matters betwixt blood and blood, plea and
plea, stroke and stroke, matters of Judgment, etc. and most impertinently urged
further. Now suppose a Thousand Men, half of which judge such a Law for a Tax
or a Custom, necessary or expedient; the other half judge it unnecessary and
inexpedient, they are none of them Judges of the public Good of a Nation or
City; but the chief Magistrate, is by God left Judge in the case. What should
hinder but that all these Men should Unite in their Designs, Councels, and
Practice for the Public Good. And this is the unquestionable Duty of them all.

2. A second Union referring to the Will, I called the Union of Love and
Charity. That is, when all persons in any community are agreed in what they may
to do all Offices of Love each to other. I see nothing can hinder this, but
Men's passions, and lusts, Pride, Envy, Malice, Hatred of one another, etc. I
hear some pleading for another Union, which they call an Unity of Communion,
and expound by a resorting to the same Church to offer up united Prayers and
Praises, and together to receive the Sacrament, and telling us, That an Union
in Love, Charity, and mutual forbearance, is very difficult, when Men divide
Communion, and why I pray? because Men's not joining in Communion one with
other, is in effect a declaring them with whom we do not join, Heathens and
Publicans. Now I must confess this is a Doctrine I cannot understand.

1. Is there then any Church to be found so large as to hold all Christians who
are obliged to live together in Unity? But it will be said, though they meet in
several places, yet they are one in their worship?

2. Very well; but what is meant by Worship? only the specifical, though not
their individual acts of Worship: Or one in all the Rites and Modes of their
Worship? If the first only be intended, all good Christians are in Unity: I
know of none but worship God by Prayer, Praises, receiving the Sacraments, etc.
Must it needs be an Union in all the Rites, and Modes of Worship?

3. In the first place, There was never such an Unity, either in the Primitive
Churches, or betwixt the Reformed Churches; Could they not therefore love
another?

2. If there must be such an Unity for which I see no reason, What Church shall
be the Standard to which all others shall Unite? Why should the Church of God
in Scotland more Unite to that in England, than that in England to that in
Scotland? Shall the Word of God overruled? Then all are bound to Unite to that
Church which performs all its Acts of Worship most conformably to the Divine
Rule. To this I know no Dissenter but will willingly say, Amen.

4. But it is yet much more un-intelligible, how Christians (not joining with
others in the same Modes, and Rites of Worship) should be in effect a declaring
them to be as Heathens and Publicans, and Persons out of a state of Salvation.
This,

1. In the first place proclaims to the World, that those that are of this Mind
not joining with Nonconformists in public Prayers and Praises, and in the
Sacraments, is in effect a declaring them Heathens and Publicans, and not in a
state of Salvation.

2. I cannot understand the Divinity of this Assertion. May not Christians
choose to join in Communion with one Congregation, and adhere to that alone, and
yet think others Christians, and in a state of Salvation? this is certainly
both a new, and false Notion. It is not enough for to justify me to join with
other Christians, that Salvation may be had amongst them. I am further obliged
to join my self with such where the Ordinances are so administered as my
Conscience tells me will be most to my comfort, and Edification, and as I
judge, is nearest to the Divine Rule. I know that in all cases a Christian is
not always obliged to do what is best, but that in the Worship of God he is not
so obliged, is more than I, or I suppose any thinking Divine will assert. But I
have dwelt upon this too long. He who does not think himself and his Church
Infallible, may easily allow others to be Christians, and in a state of
Salvation, that do not in some Rites and Modes (of which the Word of God says
nothing) follow him, and those with whom he chooses to walk. If any do think
themselves infallible, and fit to make a Standard to the World, they certainly
think of themselves, above what they ought to think, or can think with any
degree of Humility. I conclude, That it is the Duty of all Christians (agreed
in things necessary to Salvation) to be at Unity one with another so far, as
mutually to Unite all their Councels and Studies, and Practices in things which
concern the Glory of God, and the common good of the place wherein they dwell
together, though they may differ in some private Opinions, and such differences
may oblige them not to walk together, in those things wherein they are not
agreed, and to be ready to do all good offices one to another, both (...),
maintaining what they apprehend (though differently) to be Truth in Love, and
serving one another in love. Nor is there a greater difficulty in this, than
what attends all Self Denial, without which we cannot be the Disciples of
Christ, who so can deny himself in malice, and hatred against such as he
judges stricter than himself, and in Pride, thinking that it is possible he
may be mistaken, may easily overcome this difficulty; which is no more than
every one must meet with, that will come in Heaven. Though Calvin would not
join in Communion with Luther, yet he not only loved him, but owned him as an
eminent Servant of God, and professed he would so acknowledge him, though he
should call him a Devil, (such was the Sweetness and Evangelicalness of that
excellent Man's temper) This I say, is our Duty to be as the Apostle phraseth
it, Romans 12. 10. Kindly affectioned one to another in love; But it is not my
Business to demonstrate this (though it were very easy) but my work is to show
you the Happiness of such a dwelling together. The Text says it is happy and
pleasant; About the latter I shall not labor: The pleasantness of such a
dwelling together, is obvious to sense; to see any Society of Men and Women,
ready to spend, and be spent for one another, to serve one another in love in
all mutual Offices, is pleasant to every Eye, but that which is envious, which
nothing pleases that is another's good. I shall make it my only business to
demonstrate the Happiness of such a Life, which I shall do in several
Particulars.

1. It is the only Humane Life. A Life of discord, and division, biting and
devouring one another, continual Feuds and Quarrels, is a Brutal Life. Amongst
living Creatures, some are under the mere conduct of Sense and Appetite, such
are the Beasts of the Field; Others (such is Man) are under the conduct of
reason and government of that, which God has planted in Man to rule and govern
his sensitive appetite, and restrain it in those Exorbitancies to which since
the Fall it is very prone, and to reduce the Soul to its Primitive order; hence
you see that diverse Beasts can hardly be one with another, or meet one with
another, but they are grinning each at other, biting, or devouring, or pushing
one another; but with Men it is otherwise, and amongst Men railing, and
reviling, fighting, and quarrelling are generally found in the meaner sort of
Men not cultivated by Education, or ill-bred. The only Humane Life is a Life of
Amity and Unity. It speaks such Men to have most recovered the Image of God
in Man (so far as it concerns Reason.) And if it be any Happiness to Men, to
have recovered this, and to have attained to an ability to live like Persons
possessed of reasonable Souls: This Happiness those Brethren have who have
learned so far to deny their Lusts and Passions, as to live together in Unity.

2. Secondly, It is the only good that extends it self to many. We say in
Philosophy, that all Good is diffusive, and by how much any thing is more
common, or more communicative, the better it is. There is no such thing in
nature as a clung, hide-bound Good, that only feeds upon it self; or, if you
will, It is the only good that is productive of Goodness: For if Dives fares
deliciously every day, if he has not a bit of Meat, or a piece of Money to
give a Lazarus, his Riches are no good (truly so called) at least they are
productive of no goodness at all. Now take all other things we call Good, they
only serve single Persons, without this dwelling together in Unity, being
kindly affectionated to, and freely serving one another in love. This is such a
Good, as is a fruitful Mother, which many call Blessed, because it gives a
Portion to six and also to seven. This is one thing by which the Psalmist
demonstrates the excellency of Unity, when he compares it to the precious
Ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, and did not wet Aaron's
head alone, but ran down to the skirts of his Garment. Take all other things
which we call good, Riches, Honor, Learning, they only give single Persons an
Happiness, and that very imperfect; this living together in an Union of
Councels and Designs for one another welfare, and a being kindly affectionated
one to another, and ready to serve one another in love, is a common Good to all
that live in such an Union.

3. The Third and greatest demonstration is in the last words of the Psalm,
There God commands the blessing. That is an happy Society upon which God
commands the Blessing; but on these Societies it is that God commands his
Blessings.

The next Question is, what Blessings they are which God commands upon
Societies of Persons dwelling together in such an Unity, as I have been
describing to you; and here, -- Inopem me copia fecit, I shall more easily know
where to begin, than where to end. All Blessings that Mankind is capable of,
refer either to the outward or to the inward Man; I shall discourse both apart,
beginning with those that refer to the outward Man.

1. And the first in Riches, and all outward Prosperity. This I take to be
hinted by our Psalmist in that Similitude, It is like the dew of Hermon, and as
the dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion; the Dew made the Mountains
full of Grass, Corn, Wine, and Oil. We may apply to this dwelling together in
Unity, what Solomon Prove. 3. 16.
says of Wisdom; Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand
Riches and Honor. The Health of the Body Natural depends upon the Unity of the
Humors: and the Health of the Body Politic equally depends upon the Union of
the Members of it. It has been observed, that where the Popish Inquisition
has come, it has spoiled all the Wealth and Trade of the place, the reason
is, because it has spoiled the Unity of the whole, for the Unity of a part. On
the contrary, where a Liberty has been granted for Men's various Opinions in
Religion and Practice suitably, those places have abounded in Riches, (of which
our Brethren in the Low Countries is a demonstration very near us). And for
this, a great deal of reason is to be given,

1. From the Will of God. Places where People live together in Unity, are
places where God has declared he will command the Blessing; now those whom he
blesses shall be blessed. Solomon says in one place, The diligent hand makes
rich; in another, Prove. 10. 22. The blessing of God makes rich, and he adds
no sorrow therewith. The curse of God, may make Rich, but Sorrow will be added
to those Riches: God in the ordinary course of his Providence, does not bless a
People with Riches that live in Discord, and perpetually biting and devouring
of one another.

2. A second Reason may be, The Contribution which Unity makes to Riches.
Riches ordinarily are gotten by some Trade and Dealing with others; now no Man
tradeth alone, there is (as I think Cicero calls it) quaedam connexio rationum,
a connection of several Men's ways of living, which must make up a Trade; and
this (to become profitable) requires so much Boldness, and mutual Confidence,
as can be in no place where Men do not dwell together in Unity: and this must
be true, as to all that part of Trade which is at home. Besides, where Men live
together in Discord, and Enmity, all their Studies are to ruin and devour one
another without Pity, (we have had too late an Experience of it for some years)
and it is the keener, and more edged, where one Party can be persuaded, that in
what they do, they do God Service, and the mad cry can be raised for the Holy
house (as it is in some Popish Countries) it presently puts the People in
uproar, and no man is secure, because, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. On the
other side, where Men live together in Unity, every one trades freely according
to his Talent, and is not afraid of a Gaol, whiles he lives justly and
honestly, every Man wishes well to his Neighbor, helps, advises, assisteth
him, reposeth mutual Confidence in him, etc. There is a Precept of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 10. 24. than which there is none more useful to Mankind, Let every man
not seek his own, but another wealth; that is, not his own only: and where it
is not put in practice, a short time makes a City a Corporation of Beggars; for
there must be more than one, to make one thrive, where there is Discord,
Hatred, Envy, Malice, seeking advantages against, biting, devouring of one
another; few or none grow rich, but such as live by ill Arts, upon the Spoils
of others, and those are such ill Plants in a Community, as the justice of God
seldom will allow to grow to any height, where Men dwell together in this
Unity, every Man is as a Journyman to his Neighbor, and lending him his hands
to be rich. You see it in a small Society of Friends, there always attends
it, a being kindly affectionated one to another, a forbearing one another in
love, a serving one another. So many true Friends as a Man has, so many
Servants he has. Concordia parvae res crescunt, little Estates grow great by
it. Discords nourish none but Birds of Prey, that can digest the Blood and
Flesh of others.

2. A second Blessing consequent to this Brethrens dwelling together in Unity,
is comfortable Society and fellowship. This is the life of Men's lives, for Man
is a sociable Creature, and as it is not good for him to be alone, so naturally
he loves it not. How miserable does that Man judge himself, who is shut up in a
Prison where none must come at him? Experience tells us how miserable the life
of Persons in a Family is, for want of Conjugal, Parental, and Filial love; and
if you go out of those Doors, you will find it the same, for want of
Neighbourly love. Two may walk together though they be not agreed; but it will be
no pleasant walk. There is no Pleasure in a litigious snarling Society; but how
sweet is the Society of Persons kindly affectionated one toward another, and
ready upon all occasions to serve one another?

3. A third more external Blessing is mutual and cordial assistance. God has
created us in a Connection with, and a dependancy upon one another: In my course
of life in the World, I have made this observation; I never yet knew a Prince
so great, but at one time or other he has found that he has had need of his
Peoples Hands, and Purses; nor private Person so sufficient to himself, but he
has had need of his poorest Neighbors: This requires Unity amongst Brethren.
Solomon tells us, Eccles. 4. 10. Two are better than one; for if one falls,
the other will lift him up: but woe to him that is alone, for if he falls, he
has none to lift him up. If two lie together, they shall have heat, but how
can one be warm that is alone? and if one prevail against him two shall
withstand him, and a threefold Cord is not quickly broken. The many Companies
and Partnerships, with which the World, abounds in carrying on Business of
Trades, are a sufficient proof of this.

4. A fourth more outward Blessing, is Stability and Consistency. The abiding
of all compounded Bodies does very much depend upon the union of their several
parts one with another. Thus it is in the Body Natural, thus it is in
Buildings, thus it must be in all Compositions. Thus it is in Bodies Politic,
Math. 12. 25. The house divided against it self cannot stand. Let the condition
of a State, a Kingdom, any Society, be never so flourishing, it cannot abide
longer than the Union of the principal Parts of it do abide: Vis unita fortior,
A firm Union of several things of the same kind, makes all their Strength and
Virtues one; and many Eyes see more than one, and many Hands can do more than
one; hence is the stability of the Prosperity of all such Societies, which is a
great Blessing. I will add but one more.

5. That shall be Success in Business. Discord clogs the wheels of all public
Councels and Actions: Let it be Business of War, or Peace, of what nature
soever it be for a public good, it must move slowly and with small success,
whiles those concerned in it, have divided Ends and Counsels, and draw diverse
ways. I observe, that when God promised Prosperity and Success to his ancient
People, in order to it, he promised that the stick for the house of Judah, and
the stick for the house of Joseph should be made one stick, Ezekiel. 37. 16, 17,
18. This is enough to show you what external Blessings God commands, where
Brethren dwell together in the Unity I have described.

But yet the flood of Spiritual Blessings commanded, and brought by this
dwelling together in Unity, is much greater, and much more valuable. Let me
open this in a few particulars.

1. It is the only Christian life. A life of Unity, is not only the life of a
Man who is endued with a reasonable Soul, and should walk under the conduct,
and government of it, but it is the life of a Christian, who by his Name is
obliged to fulfill the Law of Christ, and not to walk after the flesh, but after
the spirit. No Man or Woman can live up to the Law of Christ, but he, or she,
that dwells with their Brethren in Unity. The Apostle speaking of himself and
others, whiles they were in a state of unregeneracy, describes their life
thus, Tit. 3. 3. We our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts, and pleasures, living in malice, and envy, hateful and
hating one another. The Law of God is a Law of Love and Unity, and further
extensive than to those that follow us. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self (said the old Law, Levit. 19.) and the Law of Christ is the Royal Law of
Love. This is my Commandment (says our Savior, Joh. 15.) that you love one
another. The Apostle, Gal. 5. reckons up the fruits of the flesh, and the
fruits of the Spirit, he tells you the works of the flesh are -- v. 20. Hatred,
Variance, Wrath, Strife, v. 22. the fruit of the Spirit, is Love, Peace. If it
be the Happiness of any People, to have recovered the Image of God, and to be
arrived at the life of Christians, this Happiness they are arrived at, that
dwell together in Unity.

2. It is a life in which a world of Sins, (and those the blackest of Sins) are
avoided. No People live with less guilt of Sin upon their Souls, than those
that are so far reconciled to the whole Creation, as to be kindly affectionated
one to another in love, and ready in love to serve one another in love. By this
Pride is avoided, by which alone comes contention (says Solomon) Love argues
that a Man thinks of himself as he ought to think, as a poor fallible Person,
that may be mistaken as well as his Neighbor, and therefore can love his
Neighbor though he be not in all things of his Mind, and does not in all things
follow him. Envy, malice, hatred, thinking evil of, and wishing evil to his
Neighbor are all avoided by this dwelling together in Unity. Since we in
England have broke loose from this Rule, observe into what Exorbitances we have
fallen, and debauched our selves to a degree, hardly to be believed of
Christians; from hence have come our new phrased Healths to the Damnation,
Confusion of others. (Blessed God! were ever such things heard of before
amongst a People that ever owned Christ, or his Gospel?) But it is no wonder
that Men who have not so far learned Christ as to love one another, but think
every little difference in an Opinion, or Practice a sufficient ground to hate
another, should be so far taught by the Devil, as to hate one another, and wish
the worst of Evils to them, contrary to all Rules of Humanity as well as
Christianity. Let me further add, these are not only Sins, but of all Sins the
blackest, next to Blasphemy against God, and his Holy Spirit. Our Savior,
Math. 5. has taught us, that they fall under the Prohibition of that Precept.
Thou shall do no Murder, and his beloved Disciple tells us after him, That he
who hates his Brother, is a Murderer, and no Murderer has Eternal life.

3. By this life much advantage is taken away from our grand Adversary. The
Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Our Adversary the Devil, goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. He is a cruel Adversary, therefore
compared to a Lion, a roaring Lion, one seeking whom he may devour; He is a
diligent Adversary, not like a Lion in his Den, that needs one to rouse him up,
he is up going about and seeking for his Prey; yea, he is also a subtle
Adversary, that has Wiles, Methods, Devices: nor does he take a greater
advantage of any thing, than the coilings of our Passions. The Apostle was
jealous of his taking advantage of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2. 11. upon this
account he there advises the 2 Cor. 2. 11.
restoring the incestuous Person upon his Repentance. If you ask me what
Advantages the Devil is spoiled of, by this life of Unity? I answer, all the
Advantages that he has from hatred, to move us to do unto others what we would
not be willing they should do us, whether by Word or Deed. It is the Precept of
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 14. Give no occasion to the Adversary. The 1 Timothy 5. 14.
Evil Spirits discerning the want of love in us gives him a fair advantage to
tempt us to revile, nickname him, wound his Reputation, to rejoice in Evil
betiding him, to spoil him of his Goods, his Life, etc. Fourthly,

4. This living together in Unity, opens a door for great spiritual advantage
one to another. I will open this but in Four things.

1. It is the nearest way, to bring us to Union in Judgment and Opinion, and so
to a perfect communion each with other. We have been these many years,
complaining of Separation, calling for Peace and Union. But what courses have
we taken to bring it about? Each Party has been disputing for his differing
Notion: and where this has been done nervously and calmly, the most rational
means has been used, but we have seen little good effect of it, by reason of
Men's Pride and Prejudice, we have rather contended for Mastery than for Truth.
Another parcel of Men have fell to railing and reviling, calling Men
Schismatics, Heretics, Papists, Formalists; now this has been just as proper
a means to bring Men to dwell together in Unity, as it would be to persuade
others to live in the same House with us to call them Knaves, and give them all
the brutish Language we could, Of late we have thought nothing would do it but
Violence, and accordingly we have been filling Gaols, rifling Houses, etc. Thus
the Spaniard has got an Unity where he has to do, by depopulating his
Country. Had we in stead of these fiery counsels, but agreed in this, That
whether we agreed in every Notion or no, or met at the same place to worship
God by the same Rites, yea, or no, we would unite in Counsels for the Glory of
God, and the good of the Community in which we are involved, and be ready to do
all offices of love one to another, we might by this time have better
understood one another, and all that truly agreed in the same end of glorifying
God, would (probably long ere this time) have agreed in the directest means in
order thereunto. I am sure we have hitherto took the wrong way to peace.

2. It would open a great Door for the conversion of others. I do not mean
Conversion to an Opinion (that is a lamentable thing) but conversion from Sin
unto God. Upon this Argument, the great Apostle of the Gentiles persuades the
believing Wife to abide with the unbelieving 1 Cor. 3. 16.
Husband, and the believing Husband to abide with the unbelieving Wife. What
know thou, O Wife, but that thou may save thy Husband? etc. God is love,
and so much the God of love, and the worst Men have so right a Notion of God in
this case, That they cannot believe God is amongst a Society of Men, where is
nothing but fighting and scratching, railing at, and reviling of one another,
who yet are in Religion Brethren.

It makes some so Mad, that they will rather choose to go to Hell than to
Heaven with such Company (as they say the Indian did, rather than to keep the
Spaniard company to Heaven). Offices of Love are a great part of those good
Works to which the Apostle Peter 1 Pet. 2. 12.
exhorts, that others may see them, and glorify God in the day of their
Visitation. The Papists (who have as little reason as any to boast of it) make
Unity the note of a true Church. The truth is, they have no Unity but what is
the product of Tyranny. I doubt not but there is many a Soul in Heaven, to whom
the ancient brotherly love amongst Christians, was a great means to bring them
thither: and many a Soul in Hell, to whom the discords and violences of
Christians one against another, has been a great occasion of their keeping in
that broad Way that leads to that bottomless pit.

3. It opens a Door for all those mutual spiritual assistances by which one
Christian may be advantaged by another; whether they be Instructions, Counsels,
Admonitions, Reproofs, etc. That they are our Duty, appears from Colos. 3. 16.
Gal. 6. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Now where Men dwell not together in that Unity I
have described, little or nothing of this is done, at least with any good
success, and effect; he that apprehends himself hated by his Brother, will not
be very patiently reproved, or admonished, or instructed by him: but he who
finds his Brother loves him, yields an obedient Ear to a wise reproof, and
says with David, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
Kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not
break my Head.

4. Lastly, It gives the great advantage of mutual Prayers one for another.
Those Profane Persons, that drink to the Damnation, Confusion, Destruction of
others, let you know how they pray for one another, that do not dwell together
in Unity. Now as little as the irreligious part of the World judge to be of
advantage from the Prayers of others, it appears Paul was not of their Mind,
by his so often begging the Christians Prayers who were many degrees his
Inferiors. The Apostle presses the Duty of Husbands to their Wives upon this
1 Pet. 3. 7.
Argument, That your Prayers be not hindered. It is a great Evil to any Society
of Christians, that hinders their Prayers one for another: and by a Parity of
Reason, whatever promoveth, and advantageth such Prayers, must be a great good,
and of a great advantage. But I shall dwell no longer upon the Doctrinal part
of my Discourse.

Use 1. This Notion in the first place may serve to convince you, how great a
cause you have this day to meet, and give Thanks to the God of Heaven. It is
true, there are two ways, either of which if you look, you will see reason to
Rejoice with trembling.

1. If you look upon the Enemies which we have abroad. There is no doubt but
that Nimrod, that mighty hunter before the Lord, who has driven all
Protestants out of his Dominions, has as good a mind to drive them all out of
the World; and there is as little doubt but that there are abundance of Priests
and Jesuits who make it their design in all places where they lurk.

2. And it is as melancholic a Prospect if we look upon the Sins of the
Nation, and the Numbers of such, all whose Protestant Religion lies in their
Protesting against any Reformation. I say, if we look at this, we may see some
cause to say, Can a pure and Holy God spare so profane, so vile, and sinful a
People as this? Shall not our Earth disclose her Blood? Shall it cover her
slain Innocents? Our Fears are not over, nor is our state secure. There is yet
room for Fasting and Prayer, and bitter mourning before the Lord, if the bitter
Cup may possibly pass over.

But we have this Day at least three eminent, and undeniable Causes of
Thanksgiving.

1. That so great a Revolution of Divine Providence is thus far passed over,
with so small a shower of Blood. Very few Weeks have passed, since every of our
Hands were upon our Loins, and we stood in a trembling Expectation of what
would be the issue of that great Commotion which we saw. The Effusion of much
Protestants Blood was the least of our Expectations, the dreadful consequent of
a Victory by Blood with reference to the Protestant Interest over all the
World, was a much more terrifying Speculation. Now that God should do what is
done with the shedding of so little Blood, certainly deserves their
Thanksgivings, who have any Kindness for the Protestant Interest.

2. The Deliverance of the Nation from so great degree of fear, as the most
were under as to their best, and highest Concern is another thing. I know
Popery had not overran us, nor was it the topping Religion of the Nation, nor
like to have been in a short tract of Time. But we know that there is in us all
a desire to Propagate our own Sentiments in Religion, and we cannot but judge
that Princes who have more Power, have greater Temptations, tho not advised by
such as are restless in such a design. God indeed has so far blessed the
Preaching of the Gospel, that the most Peoples Palats are spoiled for such Lamp
Oil, as their Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and many other absurd
tenets of that Religion: nor was England to be hewed into a Conformity to them,
by such wooden Tools, as came to do it, they must have been Persons of more
Learning and Piety too that could have promised themselves any sudden Success.
Nor were their Numbers any way proportionable for any such work as their
Conversion of three Nations in their usual Methods of Conversion by Fire and
Sword; But we must have lived in fear of such a dismal change, and died in a
greater for our Posterity. From these (blessed be God) we are in a great
measure delivered, and the Bondage of Fear is no inconsiderable Bondage. This
also gives us an apparent Cause of Thanksgiving, That we may now serve the
Lord without fear.

3. But there is yet a third, and possibly that not the least cause of
rejoicing before the Lord this day, viz. That we have now the fairest
opportunity offered us for the Union of Protestants in these Nations, amongst
themselves, and with our Brethren of other reformed Churches that ever our Eyes
saw, and beyond whatever our Forefathers could could tell us of. I mean by the
Exclusion of the Romish Party, from any influence upon our Courts and Councels,
whosoever reads the History of our Ecclesiastical Affairs for 130 years last
past, may see just reason to admire, that instead of making further steps
forward we have rather seemed to have gone backward. In Doctrine indeed we had
a very considerable Reformation, and so in Worship, in Discipline very little,
and that directed by some particular Statutes, though that was by our first
Reformers as truly intended as the other, and at least 4 Acts of Parliament
made to Authorize the Kings of England to appoint Commissioners for it, and
something was done of that Nature, but that blessed Prince Edw. 6. died before
he had given it his Royal Sanction; since whose time, nothing has been done in
it; this we are told has been by the mighty influence upon our Court, which
the Romish Party had, who possibly might labor to keep up their old Forms of
Discipline, so far as our Statute Laws, and King's Prerogative would allow
them, if peradventure they might ever gain an opportunity to use them to serve
their ^urns: This has been one great Cause of our Divisions of Protestants
amongst themselves. Another bitter root has been in Matters of Worship. In the
beginning of our Reformation so much of the ancient Forms, Rites and Ceremonies
were retained, (as was pretended to gain the Papists into our Communion. This
did something, for the (...) first years of Queen Elizabeth: but when their
Holy Father commanded the contrary, it would do no longer. Then Laws must be
made to force them into it, and these so penned, that they might equally serve
to force in all Protestants, and as more Laws were made (occasioned by the
Treasons of the Romish Party) still, such Words and Phrases were got in, as
made them (at least in the Judgment of some Judges) applicable to Protestants.
At last it came to it, that they were executed with much more severity against
Protestants than against Papists. This also was charged upon the Influence of a
Popish Party, had upon our Court, and Councels. Well, God has by a stupendous
Providence delivered us from any such Influence; so that I say, here is a
larger Door for this Unity offered, than ever we or our Fathers saw, and this
is a great Blessing worthy to be accepted with all thankfulness, if this
dwelling together in Unity be so great an Happiness as I have showed you it is.

Use 2. What therefore remains, but that I should persuade all you that hear me
this day to dispose your selves to so great a piece of Happiness.

In order to this, I shall offer you 3 or 4 Arguments, and then conclude with a
few words of advice, and counsel.

1. I beseech you to reflect upon the Opportunities we have already lost: There
are two more eminent within the Memory of many that hear me. That in the year
1660. when all the Nation was united in their Supreme Governor restored in a
most stupendous manner. One would have thought, that the Experience of 20
years Calamities much occasioned from our Religious Divisions, might then have
prompted all, to utmost endeavors to Unite all Protestants; but instead of it,
we made so ill an use of that Opportunity, that our Divisions were vastly
increased by it. It Is too sad a Story to be too particular in. A second was Ten
years since, upon the Discovery of the Pupish Plot: we heard then, that all
Protestants were equally called Heretics. That our Bishoprics, Deanries, were
disposed of to Men of the Romish persuasion: Was it not then time to unite all
Protestants we lost that opportunity likewise, and after that, the Designs were
more, and the Zeal hotter than ever, to root out all Protestants who could not
unite in the established Forms of Worship and Discipline. The loss of both
these Opportunities, has also been charged upon the potent Influence Men of
the Romish Religion had upon our Court and Councels, and it is certain their
Influence was great, how far they used it to this end, I cannot tell. For my
own part, I had given over England for lost, at least the Uniting of
Protestants for lost. I despaired of seeing any thing would save those whom so
miraculous a Re^auration and a Deliverance from so pernicious and general a
Plot would not save. God has outdone my hopes and expectation, and given us a
third Opportunity. If we lose this too, The Interpretation be to them that hate
us, and to the Enemies of our God, and Nation.

2. Secondly Let me desire you to reflect upon the sad Consequents of the loss
of those two first mentioned opportunities. A first and second War with our
Brethren of Holland (next us, the only Bulwark of our Religion) such a Plague
as we nor our Fathers ever knew. The burning of the City of London, and many
other Towns and Cities. The ruining of many thousands for Nonconformity.

What were the Consequents of our letting slip the second opportunity* the
cruel, and harbarous usages of those that dared to tell our King and his
Parliament, that there were those had conspired their ruin, the death of diverse
worthy Persons, the Finings and Imprisonments of others, the Subverting the
Governments of Corporations, the Interpreting Laws to a sense never before
heard of, on purpose to ruin a great Party of Protestants, etc. If we should
lose a third opportunity, we may easily Prophecy the Consequents are like to
be much more fatal.

3. Thirdly, Let the Union of your Enemies move you. The Papists are hardly
United so much in any one thing, as their good will, and zeal to destroy us,
whom they call Heretics, and indeed we worship the God of our Fathers after
the way they call Heresy. Shall not we Unite to preserve our selves?

4. Lastly, Let me tell you, this will be a real Thanksgiving; other praising
God is but in word, and in Tongue only, but loving one another is the command
of our Lord, productive of a great deal of good, and glory to God, and
impeditive of a World of sin.

You will all grant me this, but you will say, How may this thing be? or what
may we do in order to the arriving at such an happiness? In the general: As
there is nothing but our receding from the divine Rule, which has caused our
Divisions, so there is nothing but a return to that Rule which will ever bring
us to an Union. Our Divisions have been partly in matters of Religion and
Conscience toward God, partly in our Civil and Political Conversation toward
men; and the former, have not a little inflamed and advantaged the latter: I
will therefore most in large with reference to the former; and show you, how
the Deviation from the divine Rule has been the cause of those Discords. I
will instance in five or six particulars.

1. The first shall be Superiors making those things necessary by their
Commands, which they themselves own to be in their own Nature indifferent, and
this in matters of Worship and Religion. That in case the Superior judges a
thing necessary, he ought to command it, those that are under his Jurisdiction
is on all hands granted. What he apprehends by God commanded to be done or for
born in matters of his Worship, he must command or forbid, for he is Gods
Vicegerent, and ought to enforce his Laws, though the Subject has other
apprehensions of it, and though it may be the Superior be mistaken in his Notion,
for he must Act according to the dictates of his own Conscience, and in this
case the Inferior who judges otherwise, has nothing to do but patiently to
suffer. In Civil things, though the thing be in it self indifferent, yet the
Magistrate may command it, because he judges it necessary or expedient for his
Civil Government. And he is Judge of such necessity or expedience, not the
Inferior, but it is otherwise in matters of Religion, there is no Judge
Superior to a Man's Conscience but God alone. God in his word has not left
sufficient particular directions for the upholding and well beings of States
and Kingdoms, but he has left us only general Rules for Justice and Equity,
and made the Magistrate judge of things necessary or not necessary, expedient
or inexpedient as to that, and clothed him with a Power to make and execute
Laws in order to that end. In Matters of Religion, and Worship, God has left
sufficient Rules in his Worship for the Preservation, and Government of his
Church, and for all Christians to pay homage to him, which he will accept,
performed according to them, nor is there any thing further necessary, but the
common Circumstances of all Humane Actions to be applied to those Religious
Acts; neither is there any thing so indifferent, but may by some Circumstances
become unlawful, either to greater numbers, or to particular persons in regard
of their different apprehensions of it. The Superior is as much obliged by the
Law of charity, as the Inferior, and cannot set a step in that way wherein he
cannot walk charitably. Besides, Christians observation, that there is no
president either in the Old Testament or New, of Superiors either in Church or
State, taking away that liberty of people which God had left them in matters
relating to their homage to God, is no small Topic to persuade them that as
the Superior has no right to do it, so if they should submit to it they
should too easily part with that Liberty, which God has left them, and with
which Christ has made them free. This makes this thing necessary to a Churches
unity and peace, and the not leaving things of this nature in that state
wherein it has seemed good to the wisdom of God to leave them in, this seems a
deviation from the Divine Rule. Because it is a deviation from the practice of
all the good Kings of Gods ancient people, and the practice of Paul and the
Apostles, who instead of determining the liberty God gave the Jews for a time,
as to the practice or not practice of the ceremonial usages strongly asserted
it, and reflected upon those converted Jews that condemned some of their
brethren, or the Christians of the Gentiles, for their using such a liberty.
This very thing has been a bone of contention amongst us for more than an
hundred years, nor do I see any way to our unity, but our return to the Divine
Rule in this thing; Superiors have a full work, and more than we could ever
see universally well done, to enforce the commands of God upon people that will
not take upon them those easy yokes, and need not incumber themselves or their
Subjects consciences, where it has pleased the all-wise God to leave them at
liberty. A man may keep a day holy to the Lord, and give God thanks, another
may not keep it to the Lord, and yet give God thanks. (The Apostle determines
so) when God has left men two ways by either of which they may equally honor
God, why should men leave them but one? Just Liberty and Unity are inseparable
things, as well in matters of Religion as in civil matters; Oh! that this thing
so much concerning our peace, might not upon this opportunity be hid from our
Eyes.

2. A Second thing whereby we have fomented divisions by a deviation from the
Divine Rule, is by judging and censuring another Servants. Who art thou (says
the Apostle, Romans 14. 4.) that judge another man's Servant? Romans 14. 4.
To his own Master he stands or falls. In civil, and secular things, men
may be the Servants of men, but in matters of Conscience men are only the
Servants of God; the fear of God must not be learned by the mere precepts of
men, what a common thing has it been with us, to judge and censure our
brethren in these cases, as Schismatics, ungovernable, rebellious, etc? Those
that use these methods have not known the way of peace. And till we return to
the Apostles rule, Romans 14. 13. Let us not therefore judge one Romans 14. 13.
another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling Block or
an occasion to fall in his Brothers way; I can look for no Unity; When we can
leave judging and censuring, reviling, and speaking evil of our Brethren, of
the same Religion, and Nation, as going in the broad way to Hell, because they
go in a narrower way toward Heaven than we judge necessary, or because they
just tread not in the prints of our Feet, (observing still their faces Sion
ward) we may hope for something of Unity. But while such uncharitable thoughts,
and speeches continue amongst us, as if we had a monopoly of the Holy Spirit of
God, I cannot but expect they should naturally produce all kind of uncharitable
actions. Oh! that we could remember what the Apostle has taught us, Jam 4.
Jam. 4. 12.
12. that in matters of Conscience. There is but one Lawgiver who is able to
save, and to destroy; and who art thou that judge another? If we would but
see it, we have most of us something of the worst of Popery within us, viz.
arrogating to our selves an infallibility with this difference to our
disadvantage. The Papists claim it only for the Pope. We would every one have
it for our selves, or at least for all Superiors, for if thou be not
infallible, how come thou to judge thy Brother, who has as much right to
judge thee, as thou have to judge, and censure him. The Judgment of
Profaneness, Debauchery, Blasphemy, Idolatry, and Heresy too (in matters
necessary to be believed in order to Salvation) is easy; but the Judgment of
Schism, Hypocrisy, overmuch preciseness is not so easy. The guilt of those
things, depends much upon the Complexion of the particular Conscience, and
should be left unto him who searches the Heart, and tries the Reins of Men.

3. A third thing, whereby we have fomented Divisions by a Deviation from the
Divine Rule, Is a not walking together in things wherein we are agreed, because
of some things in which we are not agreed. That we may walk together in
nothing, because we are not agreed in all things, is one of the wildest and
most dividing Notions a Christian can entertain, directly contrary to the
Apostolical Rule, Phil. 3. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we Phil. 3. 16.
have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same
thing. He walks with his Brother far enough, who walks with him as far as the
shoes of the Gospel will carry him; and he is very uncharitable, who because
his Brother is willing to walk this one Mile with him, will force him to walk
two. I mean as far as every ((...)) Ordinance of Man would carry him.

4. A fourth thing is an over-eagerness to propagate our own particular
Opinions. There are very few Christians but have their (...), their particular
Opinions and Judgments in some things, not necessary to be believed or done in
order to Salvation, but every Christian is not bound to propagate such Notions,
especially if the Unity and Peace of a Church will be broken and endangered by
it. This is plainly the Apostles Rule. Host thou Romans 14. 22.
Faith? that is, have thou a Persuasion of the truth of a Notion, wherein the
generality of the Church wherewith thou walk differs from thee? Have it to
thy self before God, Keep thy particular Notion to thy self, and live up to it
in the presence of God, but do not for it disturb the Peace and Unity of
others. Every Proposition of Truth is not of that moment, as to balance the
breach of a Churches Peace and Unity. It is a strange eagerness we shall
observe in some to propagate an Opinion wherein they differ from others, and
what a stress they lay upon it, as if no Salvation were to be had without their
Faith, no Communion to be kept with any otherwise minded to them, this will
perpetuate division to the Worlds end.

5. A 5th Error of Men has been caused by a deviation of men from that Rule
which Solomon gives us, Prove. 3. 5. Prove. 3. 5.
Lean not too much to thine own understanding. Humility will teach us to think
that others may have the Spirit of God as well as we, and nothing but Pride can
prompt us to think that we are the only Persons that cannot be deceived. It is
true every one must so far lean upon his own understanding, as to live and walk
according to the dictate of his own Conscience and speak, and act, as he
believes, but he is not so far to lean upon it, as to censure, and condemn all
those that are not of his mind.

6. A sixth Error, which has broken our Unity, has been our contending for
truth, but not in love. This is Ephesians. 4. 15.
also contrary to the Apostles. Precept (...). Truthing in love, that is,
maintaining the Truth, or practicing what you judge Truth in Love. Some Men
indeed are so fond of their Notion, that they will not endure a word to be said
against them, this is an overfondness; but there are many that cannot bear a
deriding them, or reviling them for maintaining such a Notion, or being of such
a Party. If a man strive (says the Apostle) he is not Crowned, except he
strive lawfully. To gain a truth with the loss of love, is a very ill Victory,
if the Notion of Truth be not such as Salvation and Damnation depends upon an
assent to, or a dissent from it. Nor is there more need of quarrels in these
strivings, than there is of Men's Enmity one to another, because they are
enforced to try a title at Law one with another, whiles one Man thinks an
Estate is his right, which the other judges his, which would make all going to
Law a very sinful thing. But there is no need of any such Enmity, while both
are or should consent to this, That they desire the Estate may be his whose the
Legal right is; whiles in this case all Christians desire that the Truth of God
might prevail: What is their arguing and disputing, but a Trial at the Bar of
Scripture and Reason, what is Truth in the case? what needs any breach of
Charity for this? If (which all will pretend to) Men did sincerely desire that
what is truth might obtain; but the mischief is bottomed in Men's insincerity in
those pretenses, and unwillingness to be convinced.

7. A seventh deviation from the Divine Rule, which has caused our breaches,
Is a not bearing one another Infirmities, directly contrary to the Apostles
determination, Romans 15. 1. We then that are strong ought to bear Romans 15. 1.
the Infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. All Men have their
infirmities, some in their understanding, some in their Passions, every one
cannot apprehend things that are true, with that clearness as others can,
contrary to the judgment of their own Consciences, in the things of God they
cannot act; What then? must we therefore hate them and malign them, and seek
their ruin? is this a bearing with their Infirmities. Besides, there are many
Propositions of Truth, the Truth of which will not be evident till the Day of
Judgment, and that day will determine in such cases who are the strong and who
the weak. But Men are so for pleasing themselves, that they can bear no
Contradictions, no Disputings of their Sentiments. Hence are the breaches of
this Unity which produce so much unhappiness to a People, as the maintaining of
it would produce happiness.

8. I shall add but one thing more; That is, A not marking those who
unnecessarily make divisions, and avoiding them. This is also contrary to the
Apostles rule, Romans 16. 17. -- Mark them which make divisions amongst Romans 16.
17.
you, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. Those
make unnecessary divisions, that divide where no Law of God obliges them to
divide, to secure the peace of their own Consciences. A Man is obliged to
follow the dictate of his own Conscience, and to do what that tells him God's
Word obliges him to do, and to avoid what that tells him would be Sin unto
him. All other Divisions are unnecessary. Now all these ought to be marked and
avoided, as the common Enemies of Humane Society, a returning to those Rules
which God's Word has left us, is the only way I know to bring us to that
Happiness, which the Union of Brethren will bring us to. I will add but 4
things more, which shall be more extensive, for the avoiding of breaches upon
civil accounts, and so conclude my Discourse.

1. Those that would dispose themselves to live in Unity one with another, must
prepossess themselves with this. That there is none but must have their
allowances. -- Nemo sine crimine vivit. (says the Poet Optimus ille qui
minimis urgetur. He is not the best Man, who has no Faults, but he that has
fewest. He will hardly be able to keep a Friend in the World, who has not
learned this, but resolves to quarrel with him upon every offense. Hence it is
that the forbearance of one another is in Scripture pressed so often upon
Christians as their duty, Ephesians. 4. 2. Colos. 3. 13. where forgiving one another
is also added. He that cannot both forbear and forgive, will not long keep in
Unity with any.

2. Study Humility, and a mean opinion of your selves. The humble Man is
commonly reconciled to the world. Solomon tells us, That only by pride comes
contention. He that must exalt himself, and his own Sentiments, above all other
Men's, will hardly find any but Flatterers long agreeing with him.

3. Avoid Self seeking. It is an admirable direction of the Apostle, Let no man
seek his own, but another wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24. He that only seeks himself,
loves himself alone, and must be contented to be loved by himself alone.

4. Above all, Hatred, Malice, Envy, and all peevish Passions must be
mortified. The Apostle speaks of these as things which he supposes all good
Christians to have put off and mortified. Indeed they are all works of the
Flesh, directly opposite to this work and fruit of the Spirit. I shall now
conclude, Begging of God to bring us to such a temper, that we may arrive at
such an Happiness.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edw. Giles, Bookseller
in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence.

A Word in Season.

Defenswe Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts.

Sermons upon the whole first and second Chapter of the Canticles.

Thirteen Sermons upon several useful Subjects; all Published by John Collins,
D. D. of Norwich.

The way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ.

The Glory of Christ set forth, with the necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons: both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late Pastor of a Church at Norwich.

Enoch's Walk with God and Christ, a Christian's Gain: by Mr. Timothy Armitage,
late Minister at Norwich.

A Discourse of the preciousness of Christ, and of the preciousness of Faith.

Precious Promises the Portion of Overcomers.

Sermons on five several useful Subjects; all by Mr. John L^^gher, Minister in
Norfolk.

The Saints Ehenezer, by Mr. Francis English, late Minister in Norwich.

Directions to spell English right.

The History of the Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther.

The Dead Saint speaking; being a Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr. Ne^comb
of Dedham in Essex.

The English Presbyterian.

The Miracles of Christ.

The ordinary matter of Prayer, drawn into Questions and Answers.

Two Treatises, the first, Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in all Cases and
Conditions: The second, Of a Christian's Hope in Heaven, and Freedom from
Condemnation by Christ: both by Mr. Robert Asty, late Minister of Jesus Christ
in Norwich.

Obedience to Magistrates, recommended in a Sermon preached September the 9th,
1683. being the Thanksgiving Day for His Majesty's Deliverance: by Jonathan
Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk.

A Present for Youth, and an Example for the Aged; Two Discourses, one of
Spiritual Blessings; the other, That God has an high account of the least
Grace in the Saints: by Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in
Norwich.

Infant Baptism of Christ's Appointment: by Mr. Samuel Petto, Minister of the
Gospel in Sudbury in Suffolk.

Of the Conversion of Sinners to God in Christ, the necessity, nature, means,
and signs of it, with a concluding Speech to the Unconverted: by Martin Finch,
a Servant of Christ in the Work of the Gospel, in the City of Norwich.

Sincerity, or the upright Man's Walk to Heaven, delivered, in several Sermons
in the Parish Church of St. Michael, in Long-stratton, in Norfolk: by
James-Oldfield, late Minister there.

Alexipharmacon Spirituale. Being a Defensative against the Poison and Sting of
Death. Or, The great Expedient how to make the Bed of the Grave so easy, that
we may lie down in Peace, and take our Rest. By S. Snowden.


