A Word in Season: BEING A Parallel between the intended Bloody Massacre of the
People of the Jews, in the Reign of King Ahasuerus; and the Hellish Powder Plot
against the Protestants, in the Reign of King James.

TOGETHER With an Account of some of the Wicked Principles and Practices of the
Church of Rome, Demonstrated in their Barbarous and Cruel Murders and Massacres
of the Protestants in the Netherlands, France, Ireland, Piedmont, the
Albigenses, etc.

ALSO SHOWING That the present Church of Rome is an Apostate Church, and so
discovered to be that Mystery Babylon, Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of
the Earth, mentioned in the Revelations.

By H. C. a Lover of true Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill near
the Royal Exchange, 1679.

The Author to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
NOt because I envy the Person of any Man of any Persuasion, so consequently
not those of the Papal Church, who at present I am concerned with; but it is
their Capital Errors, and Damnable Principles I aim at in this my Discourse,
knowing they are contrary and repugnant to the Word of Truth, which is the Rule
of Faith and Manners, and having compassion on Souls, which may be Ignorant,
lest they should fall into the Errors of the Wicked (and especially young ones)
which are not aware of their Principles, I have taken a little pains to gather
up some of their Horrid Practices, and Soul-destroying Principles, into a
narrow Compass, that so in a little time any may perceive what kind of
condition they shall be in that do taste, touch, or handle any of them;
therefore I beg of you all to whom this shall come, to read it considerately,
and compare their Principles and Practices with the Word of God, and you will
see that there is as much difference between them, as between Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil, Heaven and Hell, God and the Devil. And this is not my
Opinion alone, but the Opinion of almost all the Reformed Churches: For that
the Pope is Antichrist, has been put into most of the Confessions of Faith. I
shall only recite the Testimony of one, whose incomparable Learning and Piety
may make his Words received, or mine at least not over-hastily condemned; it is
the Reverend Doctor Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, who in his Catechize writ
thus.

As Christ is the Head of the True Church, so Antichrist is the Head of the
Romish Church, which is his Body.

Quest. Who is that Antichrist?

Answ. He is one who under a color of being for Christ, nd under Title of
being his Vicegerent, exalts himself above and against Christ, opposing
himself against all his Offices and Ordinances both in Church and Commonwealth,
bearing Authority over the Church of God, ruling over that City with seven
Hills, which did bear Rule over the Nations, and put our Lord to Death; a Man
of Sin, a Child of Perdition, a Destroyer; establishing himself by Lying
Miracles and False Wonders. All which Marks do agree together to be none but
the Pope of Rome.

Quest. What is the use of all his Doctrine?

Answ. That whosoever are partakers of the Sins of Rome, are also under the
same Curse.

Quest. What further?

Answ. That there can be no sound agreement between Popery and the Gospel, no
more than between Light and Darkness, Falsehood and Truth, God and Belial; and
therefore no Reconciliation can be devised betwixt them. For if the Antichrist
shall be destroyed, we cannot in any sort communicate with them in their
Errors, unless we will bear them company in their destruction also.

An Account of which Errors, Heresies, and wicked Practices, this Book may give
you light in, which I had not concerned my self withal at this time, but that I
was stirred up from the consideration of their Damnable and Hellish Designs of
late against England; so that they may thank themselves for what I have done,
and a great many more, who are no friends to Popery.

If these few Sheets shall do any good to the Establishing of those that have
received the Truth as it is in Jesus, or informing the Ignorant, animating the
Spirits of any against those Principles and Practices, or bring any out of that
gross Egyptian Darkness and leading them into the path of Light and Life, I
shall have my desire; and I desire you may give God the Glory: Which that it
may be so, shall be the hearty prayers of him that is a lover of the true
Protestant Religion.

H. C.
A Parallel betwixt the Jews Deliverance from the intended Bloody Massacre in
the Reign of Ahasuerus, and our Deliverance from the Hellish Powder Plot in the
Reign of King James.
BEloved Friends and Countrymen, I am this Day, as God's Messenger, to remind
you of a very Signal, but almostforgotten Deliverance, which England received
in the Year 1605, from that hellish Powder Plot of the blood-thirsty Papists:
Which was not only a general Mercy then received; but as it was a kindness to
our Grandfathers and Fathers, so also to us: For had Popery then entered
England (which has been, yet is, and I hope will be Emmanuel's Land) what in
all probability had we been at this time! (Now for as much as God delights to
have his wonderful Works remembered, (Psalm. 111. 4.) by those that are in the
fruition and enjoyment of them; and more especially, considering the need we
may have of as great a kindness as then received, already through Grace begun
to be showed, the Lord of his rich Mercy bring Ahitophel's Counsel to naught
totally) what cause have we to be praising God this day! that so your Hearts
may be animated and stirred up to the Work. I shall in this my Discourse at
this time, run a Parallel between the wicked Conspiracy made against the Jews
and People of God in the days of King Ahasuerus, and the hellith Powder Plot in
the days of King James of happy Memory, for defending the Protestant Religion,
and discountenancing the contrary; and I hope by that time I have done, you
will see what great cause there is to bless God for his unspeakable Goodness,
and also see what Enemies Papists are to all true Protestants, and so I shall
now begin what I have to say.

1. As in the days of Ahasuerus (who Reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over
one hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, Esther 1. 1.) there was a Massacre
designed upon all the Men, Women, and Children, which were of the Nation of the
Jews (the Church of God) Esther 3. 13.

So in the days of King James 1605. (about seventy three Years since) there was
a Powder Plot against this Nation, and all the People of God; for there was
thirty six Barrels of Gun powder in a Seller under the Parliament House: And in
stead of Shot, they had laid upon the Powder, Bars of Iron, Logs of Timber,
massy Stones, Iron Crows, Pickaxes, and all their working Tools; and to cover
all (that the Plot might not be discovered) they had laid great store of
Billets and Faggots; so that nothing was wanting to carry on their wicked
Design: Neither were the Jesuits and Priests slack on their parts, who usually
concluded their Masses with Prayers for the success of that Good day, as they
called it.

2. The chief Conspirator in King Ahasuerus's days was wicked Haman, a Person
of no small note.

So in like manner, those that had a hand in this Gunpowder Plot, were great
Men, men of Note, some that could give many Hundreds to carry it on. Mr. Percy,
and Mr. Catesby, finding the Charge lay heavy, call in Sir Everard Digby of
Rutlandshire, and Francis Tresham, Esquire. Catesby also took in Ambrose
Rockwood, and John Grant, two Recusant Gentlemen, besides Winter, Fanks, John
Writh. And Sir Edmund Baynam, an attainted Person (who styled himself Prince of
the damned Crew) was sent to the Pope to acquaint him of the Gunpowder Plot.
These were some of the Instruments employed in this Design.

3. And as Haman was willing to be at vast Expenses to have the Jews
Massacre'd; for he offers ten thousand Talents of Silver for the accomplishing
the thing, Esther 3. 9.

So those men, and many more, did not care what Expenses they were at. Sir
Everard Digby offers one thousand five hundred Pounds, and Tresham two
thousand, and Percy, four thousand, to forward the Action. And they were in
great hopes of having in a few Months ten times as much. The Pope himself was
willing to give one Million of Money to complete the Spanish Armada, which he
called the Invincible Armada, but God made it vincible; for of one hundred and
thirty four sail of Ships that came for England, Sir Francis Drake with eight
Fireships, by God's blessing, destroyed so many of them, that but fifty four
returned to Spain. But will the Pope give this Million of Money gratis, and
expect nothing for it? No I Will warrant you, for he lays but one half down, and
the other half when they had won any notable Haven in our Dominions; and with
this proviso that the Crown of England should be held Tributary to the Sea of
Rome; in token whereof he bestows on the King of Spain, his Apostolical
Benediction, and the Title of Defender of the Faith. Not at so little Charge
was the King of Spain, whom the Pope animated to the Work, by persuading him
that the Church of God could not be more gloriously nor meritoriously
propagated, than by the Conquest of England, extirpating Heresy, and planting
the Catholic Roman Religion; and that the subduing England was but a just
thing, considering that the Queen of England, Queen Elizabeth, was
Excommunicated, and persisted contumaciously against the Church of Rome. By
this means the King of Spain, like Haman, was willing to be at vast Expense to
please the Pope, whom indeed he dared not to displease, for it was as much as
his Crown was worth: And so that word is verified, that she Reigns over the
Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17. 18.

His Charges must needs be great, for they were five Years a preparing their
Fleet, which consisted of an hundred thirty and four Sail, containing fifty
seven thousand eight hundred and eight Tun, wherein were eight thousand and
forty five Mariners, nineteen thousand two hundred and ninety five Soldiers,
to cut the poor Protestants Throats, had they been landed: Two thousand eighty
eight Gally-Slaves; and so sure were they that England should pay the Shot,
they spared no cost for Furnishing; they were provided for Sea and Land; they
had Bullets of great shot two hundred and twenty thousand, of Powder four
thousand, and two hundred Kintals, every Kintal containing one hundred pound
weight; Muskets seven thousand; of Partisans and Halberts ten thousand, with
store of other murdering Pieces, as double Cannon; they had also store of
Torches, Lamps, Lanthorns, Whips, Butcherly Knives, to murder and torment the
poor English. This Army cost the King of Spain thirty two thousand Ducats every
day. Oh who would be at such charges to do God service, as the Pope and King of
Spain, Catesby, Tresham, Percy, Haman, etc. were to do the Devil service!

Don Pedro being asked the question of the intent of their coming to England by
some of the Privy Council, stoutly answered, To subdue your Nation: But what
would you have done with the Papists? We would have sent them (good men) in the
Nation to Heaven, and you Heretics to Hell. But what meant you to do with your
Whips of Cord and Wire? We meant to whip Heretics to death. But what would you
have done with the young Children? Answer, Them that were above seven years
old, should have gone the same way their Fathers did, them under should have
lived; only we would have branded them in the Forehead with the letter L. for
Lutherans, and reserved them for perpetual Bondage. This Rome's cruelty is one
infallible mark of her being the Whore of Babylon, which is a better sign of
her being a false Church, than her pretense of Unity, Antiquity, Universality,
Infallibility and Miracles will render her to be a true one. For these
Denominations do as rightly belong to the Devil himself, as to her; I conceive
to both alike.

4. The chief cause and reason why Haman sought the lives of the Jews, was,
because Mordecai the Jew would not bow and stoop to him: He was so full of
Ambition, that all the Honor the King conferred on him signified nothing, so
long as Mordecai would not bow, Esther 5. 13.

So in like manner, because we will not bow to the Pope, and acknowledge him to
be Head of the Church, who is a great Enemy to God, by worshipping Idols; to
Christ, by its newfound Mediators; to the Holy Ghost, by putting a Pope in his
room; to the Scripture by its Legends and corrupt Traditions; to Reason, by its
imposed Absurdities; to Common Sense, by its most foolish and Idolized
Transubstantiations; to all tender dissenting Consciences, by Fire and Faggot;
an Enemy also to all Civil Government that refuses to be subject to it, by
Plots, Assassinations, and horrid Massacres. Shall we stoop to her that will
not stoop to God? Let Rome know, that as Mordecai which was a Jew would not
stoop to Haman, Son of Hamadatha the Agagite, Esther 3. 1. The Heathen King,
the Person and People whom God sent Saul to destroy, 1 Samuel 15. 2, 3. which
People were called Amalekites, Agag being King of them; they were a People
hated by the Lord, and of whom God said, Numb. 24. 20. That Amalek was the
first of the Nations, but his latter end should be that he perish for ever. Now
Mordecai knowing that they were a People of God's hatred, and knowing Haman to
be one of them, Mordecai out of Conscience (I conceive) would not bow to him;
and also considering that they had been Enemies to the People of God.

So in like manner, we knowing Rome to be an Enemy to the People of God, and
that God has purposed to destroy her, and give her Blood to drink, being
worthy, Rev. 18. 6. because she has drunk deep of the Blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, and also because she sets at naught God's holy Word; therefore we
cannot, we will not bow to her Golden Image that she has set up,
notwithstanding all her Threats. As Nebuchadnezzar threatened the three Worthies
with a burning fiery Furnace, if they would not bow down to the Image of Gold
which he had set up. So this Mother of Harlots, if you will not put your Necks
under her Yoke, then comes an Armada, an Inquisition, a Massacre, a
Powder Plot, Fire, Faggot, Racks, Assassinations, Stranglings, witness Justice
Godfry, Who for taking but an Examination which was his Place, and Work, and
Sworn to it, those Men of Blood could not sleep quietly, till their malice was
vented on his Body, by strangling and other Tortures they put him to, as is
more than probable, to protract his misery; and after a considerable time
thrust a Sword into his Body, to make the World believe it was his own Act.
Surely had he done it himself, some Blood would have appeared on the Ground
where he lay! but the Sword being run into his Body some considerable time
after Strangling, the Blood being coagulated, nothing appears but a black
Water, which usually follows after the Bloods coagulating: And that Act,
inhumane and horrid Act, was done by the Papists, is clear, from their taking
his Pocket Book, where the Depositions and Examinations were; which was that
they wanted, though not his Gold nor Silver. It Is true, his great Lace Band he
went out withal in the Morning, was taken away, the Gentleman being strangled,
doubtless the Band was torn in the Fray; and to have let that gone, would have
told the Story too plainly. But this Blood, as well as the Blood of many
millions more, cries for Vengeance. That one instance in Ireland, in that most
inhumane Massacre in 1642, wherein were more than three hundred thousand in a
few days put to Death; some burnt, some slain with the Sword, some shot to
Death, some smothered, some starved and pined to Death, some killed with
Staves, some cut in pieces, some hanged twice or thriee, many thousands drowned
at Portendown-Bridg: And when the poor Souls came swimming by the River side to
save their Lives, the Papists knocked them on the head with the But-end of their
Muskets. But the Instance I mind is that at Portendown-Bridg, a Woman was seen
to rise Brest-high out of the River, her Hair hanging down, with Skin as white
as Snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which made the Persons
much amazed that saw, and heard it. This was attested by one Elizabeth Price
(whose Husband was thrown into that River) before the Commissioners appointed
for that purpose; with many more that might be named.

4. Sudden Death was designed by wicked Haman, after one Years provision and
preparation for the Work; as the Spanish Invasion was five Years before
completed, so there was to be one Year. For on the 13th day of the first
Month, the King's Scribes were called to make the Writings, and on the 11th day
of the twelfth Month, the month Adar, the Massacre was appointed, and then
nothing but sudden Death in one day: Says the Word, They were to Destroy,
Kill, and to cause to Perish, all Jews both young and old, little Children and
Women, in one day, Esther 3. 12, 13.

So in like manner, Sudden Death was like to be the portion of the Protestants
in England. Time for Repentance would have been reckoned too good for an
Heretic. To kill them, and send them to Hell speedily, is an act meritorious,
and cause of Triumph: when there was near one hundred thousand lives in three
days time taken away in France, (which it seems no less could quench the thirst
of that unsatiable Whore and Harlot) his Holiness at Rome, at the same time
made Bonfires, rings his Bells, shoots off his Guns, and sang (O horrid
Blasphemy!) Te deum Laudamus, We praise thee, O God: As if he would draw in the
most Gracious God to be accessory to his Murders, and an accomplisher of his
Bloody and Abominable Impieties. Sudden death is that they delight in, when so
many Barrels of Gunpowder were under the Parliament House, and Chair of State.
Thirty six Barrels would soon have dispatched the King, Princes, Clergy,
Nobles, Knights and Burgesses, the very confluence of the Flower of Glory,
Learning, Prudence, and Authority in the Land; Fathers, Sons and Brothers,
Foes, Papists, Protestants, all at one blast; and after that had been done,
then a sudden Massacre throughout the Nation, and so would have altered
Religion and Government, and brought in a Foraign Power. But our good God has
prevented them hitherto, praised be his holy Name. O what a settled
Detestation, and fixed Opposition, should we have against that Religion! whose
Faith is Faction, whose Promises are Equivocations, whose Worship is Idolatry,
whose Principles are high Treason, whose Mercies are Cruelties, whose practices
are Stabbing, Strangling, and poisoning of Kings, whose frame of Government is
a politic design to enslave the World, and to bring the Necks of Princes under
their Iron Yoke, and whose God is a pretty little tiny thing, which the Priests
first create with a Charm of four Words long, and then worship the Works of
their own Hands; and when they have done, chop him up at a bit, and make no
Bones of him.

5. Much Deceit and Hypocrisy was acted by wicked Haman, when he intended to
have the Jews Massacred: For he pretended to the King Ahasuerus, that this
People had Laws diverse from the King's Laws, and that they kept not the Laws
of the King; and besides, that it was not for the Kings profit to suffer such
People, Est. 3. 8. This he pretends to the King, as the great reason why he
would have them destroyed, when indeed it was not out of love he had to the
King's Honor, but his own, through the pride of his own Heart: All the reason
was, because Mordecai would not bow to him, Esther 3. 5.

As hypocritical and deceitful has Rome been, in bringing about her wicked
Designs at all times: for concerning this Powder Plot, the better to bring
about her design, Mr. Percy takes some Rooms of one Mr. Winyard, which Rooms
served for withdrawing Rooms in Parliament-time for the Lords, for these Rooms
adjoined to the Wall of the Parliament House, and Percy took Fauks under
pretense to be his Man, who changed his name into Johnson, he had the Keys and
keeping of the Rooms; and these Rooms were taken for Lodging Rooms. They took
also another House and a Seller, just under the Parliament House, under
pretense to keep Coals and Wood, which was to make the Serpents Nest in; thus
their deceit appears. Yea further, When they wanted to bring the Plot upon the
Protestants, (for that they would have done) one of the Conspirators, Mr. Keys,
a Relation of Mr. Pickring of Tichmarsh Grove, in Northamptonshire (which
Pickring was a Protestant, and a great Favorite of King James's) who had a
very choice Horse: This Mr. Key, (one of the Conspirntors) borrowed Mr.
Pickring's Horse, under pretense no Horse could serve his turn so well as that,
(which indeed would not, considering he was a Protestant); this Horse was to
stand in St. Georges Field, ready for Fauks after the Blow was given, as the
Papists pretended to him. Mr. Pickring was to be killed, and conveyed away so
as not to be found; and when Fauks came into St. Georges Fields, the Papists
did intend to kill him, and so to have mangled him, that he should not have
been known from Mr. Pickring the Protestant, and so it should have been bruited
abroad presently, that the Protestants had done the work of the Plot; and to
make the World believe it, Here, say they (or would have said) is Mr. Pickring
with his choice Horse, who did the thing, and was about to make his escape, but
he was prevented; and so they did intend to have Massacred the Protestants,
under that pretense of their blowing up the Parliament House.

Fauks after he was taken and put into the Tower, would not confess any thing,
notwithstanding they put him upon the Rack, till he came to understand the
design of his Brethren in Iniquity against him, who promised him a great sum of
Money to set the House on Fire; yet when he came to make his escape in St.
Georges Fields, there they intended to take away his Life, the better to bring
about their design, and then he confessed all when he came to hear this. Thus
we see there is no manner of safety in being a Papist, for they value not the
lives of their own party to bring about their designs; for if we will not be
subject to them in every thing, they matter not the lives of their own
Proselytes. Witness King Henry the 3d, and 4th of France, the first, because he
would not destroy all the Hugonots and Protestants in France, they Assassinated
him, and took away his Life. So Henry the 4th was their Convert, whom they
twice Assissinated, and the third time took away his Life; so that a Man cannot
promise himself any security under the Romish Religion, but upon every humor
and suspicion, the Blood of the most Noble must go.

6. As God wrought marvellously in the delivering the Seed of Abraham from the
cruelty of wicked Haman, so he did deliver England from the fate of Rome:
Consider with me a little, how the providence of God did work in the saving the
former.

King Ahasuerus makes a Feast, invites his Nobles, when his heart was merry
with Wine, he sends for Queen Vashti to come before him, she refuses to come;
the King and Nobles were greatly troubled for her not coming. Queen Vashti is
no more to come into the King's presence, she is shut out for ever from being
Queen more; this makes way for Esther who was a Jew, to be an Instument to save
her People.

A great many fair Virgins, were to be sought for (by the King's Command) out
of all Provinces, and brought to Shushan the King's Palace. Now Mordecai the
Jew, brings in Esther, his Uncles Daughter, who had neither Father nor Mother;
and among all the Virgins that were brought, none pleased the King so well as
Esther, whom he made Queen.

Again it came to pass on a certain Night, that the King could not sleep, (a
Hand of God there was in that also) he calls for the Records, in which he finds
that two of the King's Chamberlains, Bigthana and Teresh, intended to lay Hands
on the King, which was discovered by Mordecai the Jew. Then says the King,
What has been done to him for that good deed? Has he not been promoted for
the same? No, say the King's Servants. Who is in the Court, says the King?
Haman, say the Servants. Now Haman at this time stood in the outer Court to
speak with the King, to have Mordecai hanged on the Gallows he had prepared.
The King commanded Haman to be called in: What (says the King to Haman) shall
be done to the man whom the King delights to honor? Haman thinking he should
be the man, said thus, Esther 6. 7, 8, 9. Let the Royal Apparel be brought
which the King uses to wear, and the Horse that the King rides upon, and the
Crown Royal, which he uses to wear: And let this Apparel and Horse be
delivered into the hands of one of the King's most noble Princes, that they may
array him withal, whom the King delights to honor: And bring him on
Horseback through the Street of the City, and proclaim before him; Thus shall
be done to the man whom the King delights to honor. Then said the King to
Haman, Take the Apparel and Horse, and do so to Mordecai the Jew that sits
in the King's Gate, and let nothing fail of all that thou have spoken. Then
Haman did as the King commanded, but Haman hasted to his own House mourning,
and having his Head covered. Mark how God's Providence did work further. When
Mordecai had by Proxy informed Queen Esther of wicked Haman's design, and sent
her a Copy of the Writings among the Jews, by the hand of Hatateh the King's
Chamberlain, poor Mordecai weeps bitterly, puts on Sackcloth, and went into the
midst of the City, and cried with a loud and bitter Cry. But when Queen Esther
came to hear of the Design, she is in a very great strait, she had not been
called before the King for thirty days space: And there was a Law, that whoever
comes before the King into the inner Court, except the King holds out his
Scepter to them, they are to be put to death. What shall Queen Esther do now?
Well, out of love to her own Country, and considering what Mordecai said; Think
not that thou shall save thy own Life. Upon these considerations, she resolves
to go to the King with her Life in her Hand, and if I perish, I perish, says
the Queen. When she comes before the King, God puts it in his heart to hold out
his Scepter to her: so Esther drew near and touched the top of his Golden
Scepter. Then says the King to her, What is thy Request, and it shall be
granted, to the half of my Kingdom? And Queen Esther answered, Let the King and
Haman come this day to a Dinner I shall prepare: The King and Haman did so. Now
Haman's heart was lifted up, when he heard that none but he was to go with the
King to the Dinner the Queen had prepared, yet says he, All this avails me
nothing, so long as Mordecai stands in the Kings Gate. When the King, Queen,
and Haman was at the Banquet of Wine, What is thy Request Queen Esther, says
the King, and it shall be performed to thee, even to the half of my Kingdom?

Then Esther the Queen answered, If I have found favor in thine Eyes, O King,
if it please the King, let my Life be given at my Petition, and my People at my
Request; for we are sold, I and my People to be destroyed, to be slain, and to
perish: But if we had been sold for Bondmen, and Bond-women, I had held my
Tongue. Then said the King Ahasuerus, Who is he? And where is he that durst
presume in his heart so to do? And Esther said, The Enemy is this wicked Haman.
Then the King rose up in Wrath, and went into the Palace Garden, and Haman
being afraid, stands up and makes request for his Life to the King, and to
Esther the Queen, in the Kings absence. When the King returned out of the
Palace-Garden, Haman was lying on the Bed where Esther was. What, says the
King, will he force the Queen before me in the House? Thus the King was more
and more enraged against Haman. Haman's face was covered of a sudden. The says
one of the King's Chamberlains, there stands a Gallows in Haman's House,
which he built for Mordecai, who has spoken good for the King; then the King
said, Hang him thereon. So Haman was hanged, and the former Writing reversed by
sending Letters through all the Provinces, and Orders was given the Jews should
be ready to destroy all that day, that came to destroy them; and on that day
they destroyed seventy five thousand, but laid not their hands on the Prey.
Thus you see, how wonderfully God did work for their Deliverance.

So in like manner did he for England, for the Lord was pleased to prevent
their design by two Prorogations before this Fifth of November, and but ten
days before the Parliament sat, there was a Letter sent from some (whose heart
God had stirred up) to the Lord Mount-Eagle, to have him exempt himself from
the Parliament House that day: The said Lord Mount-Eagle takes the Letter, and
late at Night goes to White Hall, and shows it to the Earl of Salisbury, then
Principal Secretary; the Earl of Salisbury acquaints the Chamberlain therewith;
these two Counselors show the Letter to the Earls of Worcester and
Northampton, and all concluded how slightly the Contents seemed to be to show
the King, for it was without Date and Subscription, and not very legible:
However the Earl of Salisbury presents the Letter to the King, which is as
follows.

MY Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation: Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise
some Excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament, for God and Man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this Time; and think not slightly of
this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any stir, yet
I say they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they shall
not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do
you good and can do you no harm, for the danger is past so soon as you have
burnt the Letter, and I hope God will give you the grace to make a good use of
it; to whose holy protection I recommend you. --


God's goodness did greatly appear in giving the King that Wisdom to interpret
some dark phrases in the Letter by receiving a terrible Blow, this Parliament;
the King did presently apprehend that a sudden blow of Gunpowder was intended,
by some base Villain in a Corner: And that the danger was past, so soon as the
Letter was burnt. The King putting the former words, a terrible Blow, and these
together, gathered that for so soon, was as quickly as the Letter was burnt,
the danger would be past. Order was given that the Rooms under the Parliament
House should be searched thoroughly: Accordingly the Earl of Suffolk, then Lord
Chamberlain, upon Monday in the Afternoon, with the Lord Mount-Eagle, repaired
into those under Rooms; and finding the Sellar well stored with Wood and Coals,
asked Fauks, the counterfeit Johnson, Whose they were? Who answered, The
Lodgings belonged to Mr. Thomas Percy, and the Sellar was to lay in his Winter
Provision. When they were come forth, the Lord Mount-Eagle told the Chamberlain
when he heard Percy's name named, he did much suspect Percy to be the Inditer
of that Letter. The Lord Chamberlain returned and told the King and Council
what he had seen, and the suspicion the Lord Mount-Eagle had of Percy, and of
Johnson his Man; all which increased his Majesty's jealousy, and a Charge was
given that a narrower search should be made, the Billets and Coals turned up to
the bottom. Sir Thomas Knevet, a Gentleman, one of his Majesty's Privy-Chamber,
and a Justice of Peace in Westminster, was employed herein; who about Midnight
before the Parliament was to begin, went with a small, but trusty number of
Persons, and at the sellar door they found Fauks at so unseasonable an hour,
Cloaked and Booted, with a Dark-Lanthorn; they found about him three Matches,
and other Instruments for blowing up the Powder: He was no whit daunted, and
instantly confessed his Guiltiness, and was so far from Repentance, that he
vowed had he been within the House (as he came but just forth) he would have
blown up the House, with himself and them all in it; and further said, That the
Devil and not God, had discovered that Design. And when they came to ransack
the Billets, they found the Serpents Nest, thirty six Barrels of Powder, with
Bars of Iron, and massy Stones. This Wretch would not discover the Plot, till
he knew the design of his Brethren in Iniquity, which was to murder him in St.
Georges Fields, when he came to take Mr. Pickrings Horse, and would have so
mangled him, that the World should have thought that it had been Mr. Pickring
the Protestant; and so, as I said before, would have fathered the Plot upon
them. This Villain remembered the Oath of Secrefie that he took with the rest,
from Gerard and Tresmond, Jesuitical Priests, who by their Apostolical Power,
did commend the Fact and absolve the Actors; the Oath was in these words:

You shall swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive, never to disclose directly, or indirectly, by word or circumstance,
the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the
Execution thereof, until the rest give you leave. 6. As the Wicked was snared
in the work of his own hands, in the days of Ahasuerus; wicked Haman was hanged
on the Gallows he made for Mordecai, Est. 7. 10. Yea, his ten Sons were hanged
also, and seventy five thousand were slain, who thought to have slain the Jews,
Est. 9. 16.

So in like manner, about the Gunpowder Plot, the judgment returns on their
own Pate, many of their lives being taken away that were Actors of it. Fauks
was Hanged and Quartered, as some say; others say, that he had a pair of Iron
Boots, made red-hot, which he was put to stand in. Sixteen were taken in the
Country and sent to London. Catesby, Rockwood, and Grant, had their Faces
scorched with some Powder which they had put in a Chimny-corner; a Billet
thrown into the Fire, raised a spark that fell on the Powder. Two whose names
were Wright, were shot down dead in a Fray, that was in Holback-House in
Staffordshire, which belonged to Stephen Littleton; these and many others were
pursued there by the high Sheriff of Worcestershire; those that were in this
House being desperate, set open the Gates, and suffered the Sheriffs Men to
rush upon them: Rockwood, and Thomas Winter were sorely wounded, Gatesby and
Percy desperately fighting back to back, were both shot through and slain with
one Musquet-Bullet; the rest being taken were carried to London, where they
received the just demerit of their Wickedness.

But most remarkable is that Judgment of God, that befell the Papists in
Black-friars, on a Lord's Day, Anno Christi, 1623. about seventeen Years after
this Plot was levelled against the Protestants, which was the Fifth of
November, by the Roman Account: One Drury, a Romish Priest, a Man of parts, was
to preach in a fair House in Black-friars. Upon this Report, many Protestants
as well as Papists, Scholars as well as others, assembled to hear him; he had
not discoursed half an Hour, but the Floor whereon he was and his Company, fell
down with such Violence, as therewith the Floor of the Chamber underneath where
Redgate was and his Company (another Jesuit Priest) was broken down with it,
so that both the Floors, with the Beams, Girders, Joyces, Boards and Seilings
fell down together upon the third Floor; some there were that were pulled out
alive, but so bruised or spent for want of Breath, that some lived not many
hours, some died not many days after. On the Lord's Day at Night, were numbered
ninety one dead Bodies. Both the Jesuits were killed.

One thing is very remarkable further, There was at this time one Parker, who
was a Factor for the English Seminaries and Nuns beyond Sea; he had so dealt
with two of his Brethren, that he had got from one a Son, and from the other a
Daughter, to send them to Religious Houses, as they falsely call them beyond Sea.

This Parker, at this time, took his Nephew with him, a Lad about sixteen Years
old; the Youth lost his Life, but Parker escaped with a bruised Body. But
though he had his Life given him, he did not prize his Mercy, but would often
wish that he had died among so many Martyrs. (Many such Martyrs have been made
at Tybourn for Treason) But, Beloved, the preservation of the Wicked, is but a
reservation to future Judgment: For about ten days after, this Parker was
shooting London-Bridg with his aforesaid Niece, whom he was conveying beyond
Sea, they were both cast away, and drowned in the Thames.

Judge by this, O Parents, whether God is well pleased with disposing your
Children to Popish Education.

Again, Should we go back to the Spanish Invasion, and see how God turned their
own Cruelties on their own Heads. For on the 29th of May, 1588. the Fleet set
sail out of the River Tago: but God, who is an Enemy to all such Hostile
Actions, caused a Storm to raise, a very dreadful one, their Ships were
dispersed, some their Masts broken and blown overboard; and abundance of their
Men died with the Pestilence, and their Fleet was so torn that they could not
possibly come out that Year. The next Year coming out again with a Fleet of
about one hundred and thirty sail, they seemed as if they made for Plymouth,
they came with lofty Towers like Castles (their Ships being so built) in front
like a Half Moon: On July the twenty third they had a great Fight, and the
greatest they ever had; the English Commanders found very hard work to Fight
them, and were out of all hopes of doing much good, because they did not dare
to board them, they having so many thousand Soldiers; but God was pleased to
put a Project into the Heart of Queen Elizabeth, (Or Sir Francis Drake) So that
the next day after they had cast Anchor, the Lord Admiral made ready eight
Ships, filled with Wildfire, Pitch, Rosin, Brimstone, and other combustible
matter, their Ordnance being charged with Bullets, Stones, Chains, all the Men
being taken out; about two a Clock after Midnight, the Ships were let drive
with Wind and Tide (under the guidance of Young and Prowse) among the Spanish
Fleet, their Train taking fire, such a Thunderclap was given by them in the
dead of the Night, the Spaniards were amazed, and knowing not better how to
avoid these Fireships than by cutting their Cables asunder, which they did,
and so some run upon the Sands, others were taken, that in all they lost eighty
one Vessels, thirteen thousand five hundred and odd Soldiers, Prisoners taken
in England, Ireland, and the Low Countries about two thousand, and there
returned to Spain but a small number of Ships and Men, to what they had when
they came out; thus their Invincible Armada by God's blessing proved Vincible.

Now, Beloved, I think none will be so unbelieving as to think that all these
Judgments came by chance; no, God forbid ye should; we would not be rash in
censuring, yet when we see Judgments executed on Sinners in the act of their
Sins, when they are impudent and presumptuous therein, not to acknowledge such
to be judged by the Lord, is to wink at their Light, Psalm. 9. 16. God is known
by the Judgments he executes. Shall Nebuchadnezzar while he is vaunting of his
great Babylon, be bereft of his Wits? Shall Herod, while he is priding himself
in the flattering applause of the People, be eaten with Worms? Shall Haman,
while he is practizing to destroy all the People of God, be hanged on the
Gallows fifty Cubits high, which he prepared for Mordecai? Shall the House
where the Philistines met together to sport with Sampson, fall upon their
Heads? Shall these and such like Judgments overtake Men in acts of Sin, and yet
be accounted no Judgment, no evidences of God's Revenging Judgments? Truly then
we may deny all Providence.

God will certainly take Vengeance on all his Implacable Enemies, God will not
forget the Blood of so many Millions of Americans, which now cries for
Vengeance, whose greatest guilt was their Gold; nor the cry of the Blood of so
many hundred thousands of Men, Women, and Children, Infants, Virgins, Wives,
Widows, and the variety of the most unheard of Cruelties which Malice could
invent, whose Blood will be a lasting Monument of Romes Barbarity: The Blood of
those ten thousand Souls that were taken away in three days time in Paris,
while his Unholiness, the Pope, makes Bonfires, rings his Bells for joy, shoots
off his Guns, and sings Te Deum laudamus, we praise thee, O God, for it. The
Massacre of Ireland, where was (as I said) three hundred thousand Starved and
Murdered, whose Blood calls aloud to be reckoned for. O the Bloodshed in
Piedmont, wherein a vast number of quiet peaceable Souls were by the insatiable
malice of Cutthroat Papists, at the instigation and importunity of the Pope
and his cruel Clergy, murdered! The Blood of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry, will not
leave crying till God avenge it: We see by that what they would do with us all,
did it lie in their power; the Powder Plot, the Burning of London again and
again attempted; the Spanish Invasion; the many that have been privately
Murdered, must all be reckoned for: God has every one of them, and a thousand
more, in his Book of Remembrance, which he will exactly remember when Babylon's
Sins are grown to the height.

Let me give you a short Scheme of the variety of Popish Tortures, practiced by
the Bloody Idolaters, upon the poor Christians in Ireland, Paris, and Piedmont.

Some had their Bellies ripped up when they were with Child, and the living Child
laid on the dead Mother; some driven into a River, and there Drowned in great
numbers; if any could Swim, they either shot at them, or knocked them on the
Head with the But-ends of their Muskets, as they came near the Land.

One Mrs. Manuel they threw into the Water then in Labor, the Child being half
born when the Mother was drowned.

The merciless Papists having set fire on a Castle where many Protestants were,
and hearing them screek, O how sweetly do they cry! said they, rejoicing.

In one place they burnt two Protestants Bibles, and said, It was Hell fire
they burnt; other Bibles they took and cut in pieces; and they took the Bible
of one Mr. Edward Slack, a Minister, opening of it, they laid it in a puddle of
Water, and then stamped upon it, saying, A Plague on it! this Bible has bred all
the Quarrel. Women great with Child, had Swords run in them in such an inhuman
manner that the Children in the Womb thrust their Arms and Feet out of the
Wounds: Others have been tortured alive, others deadly wounded and laid on
Tenter-hooks; others their Flesh sliced off their Bodies; some with Ropes and
Withs about their Necks, have been drawn through Water, Bogs, Woods, Streets,
to enforce them to confess their Treasure, and when they had so done, and
gotten their Treasure, were basely Murdered; some were hanged up by their Arms,
and Soldiers did try the strength of their Swords upon them.

A Schoolmaster of Rovas being stripped Naked, had his Nails tore off with
Pincers, his Hands stabbed with a Dagger-point, drawn through the Borroughs of
Lucerna in Piedmont, and had his Flesh cut off with a Faulchion, crying out to
him, What say thou now? Will you go to Mass? To which with admirable
constancy, he said, Much rather Death than Mass, crying, O dispatch me quickly
for the love of God! Some they ripped up, and their Guts left to trial about
their Heels; Women great with Child were hung up by the Heels, and Bellies ripped
open till the Children dropped out, and then cast into a Ditch. Some Children
have had their Brains dashed out against the Wall, and their Bodies thrown to
Dogs and Swine; some Children thrown to Dogs to be devoured by them; some
trampled upon to death; other Infants have been found sucking the breasts of
their dead Mothers: Some were driven to the Woods and Mountains in the
extremity of Frost and Snow, having first been stripped stark naked, and so were
starved; others have been driven to take shelter in Caves, and there by Fire
and Smoke made at the Caves mouth, were smothered and choked to Death. Some of
the Murderers in Piedmont finding eleven Men, made a Furnace red-hot, and made
one cast in another, and the last they cast in themselves.

In Piedmont two Children, both Dumb, murdered. The Marquess of Pionessa
commanded the Hangman to take the Body of Giovani Pullions, after many Scorns
laid upon him by the Friars, to be dragged to a Tree and there Hanged, who
before they hanged, used many Arguments to him to leave his Religion, but could
not prevail. Some time after an Elder of the Church at Rosanna, was brought to
the same place to die, the Marquess of Pionessa three or four days after going
that way, and one of the Soldiers discharging a Musket on the dead Bodies,
there came a stream of fresh Blood from one of them, which the Marquess seeing,
said, This Blood cries for Vengeance.

Some have been compelled to carry their own Parents to the place of Execution,
others to set fire to the Pile that burnt them; some Mothers compelled to cast
their own Children into the Water to drown them; some Wives to hang up their
own Husbands, and Children to hang up their own Parents, and when this was done
inhopes of Life, because Life was promised for so doing, were Massacred
themselves; some have been boiled to death in Cauldrons; some have had their
Eyes twisted out with Cords.

When the Massacre was in Ireland, the Popish Priests gave the Sacrament to
many Irish, upon condition that they should not spare Men, Women, nor Children
that were Protestants.

One Hulligan a Priest, when this Massacre began, read an Excommunication
against all those that from henceforth should harbor any English, Scottish, or
Welsh, or give them Alms, whereby many were famished to death.

At this time, when the Irish Massacre was acting, they boasted, That when they
had destroyed the Irish, they would go over to England, and not leave the
memorial of an Englishman under Heaven.

The Popish Priests after they had given their Crew a dismiss at Mass, the day
before the Massacre, told them they should go and take possession of all the
Protestants Lands, also to Strip, Rob, and Dispoil them: for the Protestants
were worse than Dogs, they were Devils, and therefore their killing them was a
meritorious Act. Some had their Brains taken out and fried in a Pan; many
stoned to Death; some have been put into a Hole, and nothing but their Head
appearing, covered to the Neck with Stones and Earth, that they might feel
Death, and taste death more deliberately.

Some have been stripped stark-naked and driven by the Inhumane Persecutors
through the Streets; and if their weakness was such that they could not go so
fast as they would have them, they would prick them forward with Swords and
Spears. Some have been so wracked, that in their Festering Wounds, Worms and
other Vermin have bred.

Some of the Papists openly professed in Irelands Massacre, that they held it as
lawful to kill a Protestant, as a Dog: And one of their Priests said, It was as
lawful to take away their Lives, as a Bone out of a Dogs mouth.

One Ann Hill, going with a young Child on her back to save her Life, and four
more by her side, they met her and pulled the Child from off her Back and trod
on it till it died, stripped her and the four Children naked, so that they died
with cold.

One Joan Addis they stabbed, and then put the Child to her Breast, and bid it
Suck, English Bastard.

One Good-wife Lea they carried and her Daughter into the Woods, and first hung
the Mother, and then the Daughter by the hair of her Mother's Head.

Poor Children that went out into the Fields to eat Weeds and Grass, they
murdered without all pity.

Some of those Bloody Murderers have boasted, that their Arms have been so
weary with killing, that they could not lift them up to their Heads. Some
Infants have been closed up in their Mothers Belly and been strangled. Many
thousands have died in the Inquisition. Some have been drawn with promises of
Life, and threats of death to renounce their Religion and turn Papists, and
when they have so done, have been murdered; the scoffing Papists telling them
it was good to kill them while they were in a good humor, lest they should
recant if they lived longer.

Others have yielded up their Forts and Castles upon Articles and Conditions to
have their lives spared, and then being disarmed, were kept in the Fort or
Castle, till starved, with this Jesuitical Evasion, We promised you your Lives,
but not Food to preserve them. Like that Treachery the Marquess of Pionessa was
guilty of in the late Massacre in Piedmont, April, Anno 1655. The Deputies of
the Protestants, by the Subtilties of this Marquis of Pionessa, were detained
at Turin, in which time a great Army arrived at St. Giovani, and some other
Towns, to the number of fifteen thousand, which set upon the poor Protestants
in an inhumane manner; the Marquess also made a great Dinner for many of the
Protestants, and made the Deputies many fair promises, that there should be no
hurt to any of them, if they would but quarter a few Troops, as a token of
their Obedience; they did assent to what the Marquess designed. But no sooner
were those Troops entered, but they put all to Fire and Sword, slaying all they
met with in the most barbarous manner that could be invented.

Much like this was that of Admiral Coligny with abundance of Protestants, who
were enticed to Paris with Promises and Oaths of Security, under pretense of a
Marriage between two Houses, where were barbarously slain ten thousand
Protestants, whose Blood ran down the Chanel like Water.

Not much different from this, was the practice of the Duke of Savoy, Sovereign
Prince of the Valleys of Piedmont, after a tedious and chargeable Application
of the Protestants to him, for a confirmation of their Liberty of Conscience,
did at last by an Edict promise expressly that he would confirm unto them the
enjoyment of the Liberty of Religion, and of these Privileges granted to them
by his Predecessors, Dukes of Savoy. Yet by the powerful persuasion of the
Congregation, as they call it; or of the Jesuits, Friars, and others, one
Gastalt was at last sent from the Prince with a Commission, who calls himself
Conservator General of the Catholic Faith against the Reformed Professors,
affirming that he had received Instructions from the Prince, That in case they
will not within three Days receive the Romish Religion, they must for ever bid
farewell to their Native Country, Houses, Lands, and Possessions; adding
moreover, It should be death without mercy, if after that space of time any
were taken in those Places.

So that you see those Men make little conscience of Promises, or Covenants.
But what need we question that? It Is a Maxim owned by the Priests, That Faith
ought not to be kept with Heretics; and that all Oaths, Covenants, Promises,
made to and with the silly Protestants, are of no force longer than it pleases
the Pope; and so it seems indeed by their practices.

It was the Pope (to the scandal of all the World) persuaded the King
Vladislaus, to break his League with the Turk upon some seeming Advantage: the
Pope absolved him from his Oath: But God revenged the Perjury, with the death
of many thousand poor Christians.

7. As the People of God of old (the Jews) did keep the fourteenth and
fifteenth days of the Month Adar, Annually, in remembrance of that great
Deliverance from Haman's designed Massacre, as you have in Est. 9. 18, 29.

So in King James's days, from a sense of the Mercy then received, it was
Enacted, that November the Fifth should be kept throughout the Nation, with
praising God for so great Deliverance. Let this (Beloved) be your work this day
to praise God from your Hearts, and let the thankfulness of your Hearts be seen
in the holiness of your Lives, Psalm. 50. ult. He that praises me, glorifieth
me; and to him that orders his Conversation aright, to him will I show my
Salvation. Do also as the Jews did, send Portions one to another, and to the
Poor, Est. 9. 22. To praise God heartily for former Deliverances, will engage
God to give us more Salvation, which he has begun to give England already in
his discovering this horrid Plot against it: His Name be praised for that
Mercy; and O Good Lord, as Thou have still delivered us from Invasions, Horrid
Massacres, Powder-Plots, Assassinations, Stranglings, and all sinful
Conspiracies of thine implacable Enemies; let us now praise that God with
joyful Lips, that has hitherto kept us (and we hope still will) from those
whose faith is Faction, whose Promises are Equivocations, whose Worship is
Idolatry, whose Principles are High Treason, and whose Mercies are Cruelties.

Amen.
A Hymn sung after the Discourse, by way of Praising God, for so great
Deliverance as England enjoyed in 1605.
HAman of old, the Seed of God,
He thought for to destroy:
So wicked Men in this our Age,
God's Church seek to annoy.
Though they have dug wide and deep,
Their secret Plots to hide;
Yet when they dig as deep as Hell
Our God will them deride.
For he the first Man's thought did know,
Of this Plot of November;
And it in His due time did show,
And's People did remember.
O Lord, as Thou remembred'st us,
To save us from that Blow;
So on November we'll remember,
Thy Praises forth to show.
Let Men and Devils do their worst,
A True Church Thou will have;
Though she that is false will do her best,
To throw it in the Grave.
When Cain his Brother Abel slew,
His Seed God did revive:
When Pharaoh pursued the Israelites,
The Seas against him did strive.
When Jezebel God's Prophets sought,
Them every one to kill,
God turned her Witchcraft unto naught,
By his Almighty Skill.
When Haman thought the Jews to kill,
And utterly destroy;
The Lord on him destruction brought,
And his whole Family.
From Rome and Hell deliver us,
For Blood they thirst for still;
Defend us, Lord, our Cause is just,
Of Blood give her her fill.
A Golden Cup there is in one Hand,
A Sword there is in the other;
If we the Poison will not drink,
We shall not be called a Brother.
Our Names will then be Heretics,
Yea, Fire and Sword's too good
For those that do decline her ways,
And love God's holy Word.
From an Invasion, Lord deliver;
From Massacre also;
From Powder Plot preserve us still,
That we may know no Woe.
Then shall Thy Name extolled be,
By Praises in a Song,
Who has his Church and People saved,
From Men and Devils strong.
REVEL. xvii. 5. And upon her Forehead was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE
GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
THese words, Beloved, contain the Inscription that is written upon the
Forehead of Antichrist; and they may be written in Capital Letters in our
Bibles, to show unto us that this Inscription is as plain, obvious, and legible
upon the Forehead of Antichrist, as in our Books.

By the Forehead we may safely understand the Principles and Practices of the
false Church: For as what is written on the Forehead is plain, apparent, and
obvious to all Spectators: So all that will but take a prospect of Romes
Practices and Principles, through the Glass of God's sacred Word, must needs
read this Inscription, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth.

1. She is called Babylon, because she resembles Babylon, where the the Jews
and the People of God were seventy Years in Captivity: For as Literal Babylon
held the Bodies of Men in Captivity, so Rome, which is Mystery Spiritual
Babylon, keeps their Souls. Therefore some of the Learned have said, Babylon
was the first Rome, and Rome is the second Babylon.

2. She is called Mystery Babylon, because she pretends to be Sion, but is
truly Babylon. That that is a Mystery, is something hidden: So Rome is Babylon,
but hidden under the name of the Mother Church, God's Temple, the Mistress of
Faith. Rome hides her Fornication under the name of the pure Spouse, her
Impiety and Blasphemy under the name of Piety and Infallibility, she dares not
appear to be what she is.

3. She is called the Mother of Harlots, because she is the Head of the great
Apostasy from Christ; and is not only a Harlot her self, but has many
Daughters of the same Nature, whom she has taught to commit Spiritual
Whoredom. How many Kings, Kingdoms, Nations, and Languages, has she infected
by the Golden-Cup of her Fornication? This poor Nation of England was once
greatly infected and poisoned by that Harlot, that indeed to this day some
Relics of her Poison, which was then drunk, remain. The good Physician of
Value cleanse this Nation wholly of all such Poisonous and Infectious
Doctrines. Hence it is the Spirit has this Emphatical phrase in the Text,
GREAT, because there never was, nor will be a greater Harlot than she is, and
has been; there is not a worse to be found, she is the Mother, the first, the
greatest that can be named.

4. She is called the Abomination of the Earth, because she is the Mother of
all false and Adulterous Churches; so the Abomination of the Earth, the Mother
of Impious and Idolatrous Practices. The Doctrine from these words is this:
Doct. That the Church of Rome is Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth.



This Doctrine appears to be true, if we consider the description the Sripture
gives of Rome.

She stands, or is built upon Seven Mountains, or Hills. This is her
Situation, as you may see, Rev. 17. 9. The seven Heads are seven Hills, on
which the Woman sits; that Woman in my Text, the Mother of Harlots. And this
stands strongly against them, unless they can find out another City which is so
Situated, which is impossible, and this they cannot deny but the City is so
Situated, many of the Fathers acknowledge it. Beside, Rome being built on seven
Hills, her own Poets sing loudly of it; as Virgil, Ovid, Propertius. See the
Book entitled, The Man of Sin. Also the Reverend Bishop Usher is of the same
mind. But that which they Object, is this:

Object. 1. Say they, This is meant of Rome in her Heathen State, and not in
her State of Christianity.

Answ. 1. That cannot be meant of Rome in its Heathen State, because the
Apostle spoke Prophetically, of a Time to come. Rome consisted of seven forms
of Government, called Seven Kings, (Rev. 17. 10.) to govern the Common wealth.
1. Kings, properly so called: 2. Consuls. 3. Decemviri. 4. Tribunes of
Soldiers. 5. Dicrators. 6. Emperors, properly so called. 7. Antichrist, the
state of the Beast, which is a note of difference from all the others which
were yet to come. Now five of those in the Apostles days were fallen; one then
was in being, namely the Roman Emperor; and the other (that was the Beast
Antichrist) was yet to come. Therefore if the Antichrist, the Beast, the Mother
of Harlots, was not then in being, in the Apostles sense, it could not be Rome
under the Reign of the Emperors in her Heathen State. But Rev. 17. 10. clears
this fully.

2. It cannot be Heathen Rome, because she never made a Covenant with God, and
broke it. The Antichrist is a Whore, a Harlot, one that has left her first
Husband. Heathen Rome never professed Christ, therefore it cannot be her. It
must needs be Rome Apostate: For the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, is some
Apostate, as you may see in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. The Apostle there exhorting the
Saints to constancy in the Faith, and that they should not expect Christ's
coming (which they so much looked for) till there was some great Apostasy from
the Faith, ver. 3. Let no Man deceive you with vain words by any means, for
that Day shall not come except there be a falling away first, and that Man of
Sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition. So that this Beast is one that falls
from the Truth, which Heathen Rome never did. But Rome in its professed Christian
State has so done: For she was once a famous Church, when the Apostle Paul
writ the Epistle to them, Romans 1. 8. St. Paul thanks God that their Faith was
spoken of throughout the whole World; and many Elders and Christians did suffer
under the sixth form of Government. But now she is Rome Apostate, the fallen
Star, mentioned in Rev. 9. 1. I saw a Star fall from Heaven to the Earth, to
earthly Concupisence, an earthly Mind, which had the Key of the bottomless Pit.
The Pope, etc. pretend to have the Key of Hell: By that means they delivered
Trajan the Emperor's Soul out of Hell; a great Persecuter of the Christians.
But I shall not impose the belief of this on you in the least. Rome did once
shine as a glorious Star, but now a place of Darkness, by reason of the Smoke
that comes out of the Pit. The Sun and Moon are darkened. True Principles of
Christ are hid from a great part of the World, by the black and smoaky
principles of the fallen Star.

So in my Text, she is called, a Whore, a Harlot. Which she would not have been
called, had she not defiled her Lord's Bed. We have her portraied to the life,
in 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
Times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences
seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from
Meats, which God has ordained to be received with thanksgiving. Who is this
but Rome Christian? St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, think it Antichrist. Know we not
that she forbids her Priests to Marry, and to abstain from Meats, under
pretense of doing Penance for Sin, and imitation of Christ, who fasted forty
days.

3. Had it been Heathen Rome the Apostle spoke of, he would not have spoken of
her as a Mystery: He calls her Mystery Babylon, and mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Now it was not a Mystery for Heathen Rome to persecute Christians;
but for Christians to persecute Christians, that was a Mystery indeed. The Pope
pretends he loves Christ, but hates his People. He is Christ's Vicar by Name,
but Enemy in Deed; he is not Iniquity public, openly, and professedly, but
Iniquity in a Mystery, in a dark and hidden way.

4. Nor could the Apostle John have made Heathen Rome the Merchants of Souls,
which only subdued Nations by Force, and not infected them by Poison; it kept a
Shambles for Bodies, but not a Market for Souls, as Mystery Babylon does; Rev.
18. 13. And in her was found Slaves, and Souls of men. Among all the Traffic
of Rome, none is so gainful as Souls. Her Merchants are the Monks and Jesuits,
called the false Prophets, who are to be cast into the bottomless Pit, Rev. 19.
20. That the Apostasy is not a Civil Apostasy, but Religious, is the opinion of
some of their own, as Nical Delyra, Theodoret, St. Augustine, Oecumenicus, and
others.

5. It cannot be Heathen Rome, because she never did sit in the Temple of God,
as Antichrist is described, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Heathen Rome never pretended to be
God's Temple, but the Church of Rome does: She says she is God's House, and
does not Apostate Rome answer to all those Phrases? 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.

First, She opposes and exalts her self above all that is called God: Does
she not oppose Kings, and exalt her self above all Magistrates, called Gods in
Scripture, in respect of their Authority?

Secondly, Does she not oppose and exalt her self above what is worshipped? God
says in his Word, You shall worship Me only, not Images. Says the Pope (quite
contrary) you shall worship Images. In the Nicene Synod, 567, the Pope with
three hundred and eighteen Fathers, (as they call them) ordained the making and
worshipping of Images.

Thirdly, Does not he pretend to sit in God's Temple, and make himself as if he
were a God? In many things he makes himself equal with Christ; in forgiving
Sins, in redeeming Souls by their Satisfactory, Propitiatory, and Explatory
Sacrifices, which they blasphemously say they make in their unbloody Sacrifice
at Mass. Besides, The Pope and his Council can make new Articles of Faith, as
if he were the thirteenth Apostle, and he is much troubled that he cannot find
the name of Pope mentioned in the four Evangelists; therefore he has made
other Articles of Faith, which Christ never made.

Take an account of some of them.

1. That St. Peter, and so consequently say they the Pope, is the Rock on which
the Church is founded. 2. That the Virgin Mary is our Mediatrix. 3. That all
other Saints sustain that Office. 4. Religious Worship is to be paid to Stocks
and Stones, yea, old Clouts, called Relics of Saints. 5. That Images do as
great Miracles as Christ himself, if not greater. 6. Christ's Sufferings will
not make satisfaction for our Sins; but we must also make satisfaction our
selves. 7. Such as died before St. French's time were saved by Christ, since by
St. Francis. 8. All buried in the habit of St. Francis, whether Jew or Turk,
shall be saved. 9. That Chrism takes away Sin, as Christ's Blood. 10. That
there is no Salvation without praying to Saints.
They deemed our Lord Jesus Christ but half a Savior; and therefore they
devised Francis, Peter, Baruardons Son, as if he had been wounded with the same
Wounds of Christ, and in the same parts, and consecrated him in the Lateran
Council, the typical Jesus. Also how profanely do they speak of the Scripture,
calling it, A Leader, Rule, Aesops Fables, a Nose of Wax, black and inkie
Divinity, a Delphian Sword; and Christ's Ministers, Scripture-Men, Inkie
Divines. He will judge all Men, but will be judged by none. Therefore I infer,
he that fitteth in the Temple of God, and opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called God, is the Man of Sin, the Antichrist: But thus the Pope of
Rome does; therefore it is not Rome Heather, but Rome Apostate, that is this
Mother of Harlots.

Object. 2. It cannot be (say they) the Church of Rome that can be this Mother
of Harlots, the Antichrist: Because the Scripture sets him out to be a single
Man, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. called there, that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition.

Answ. This word here [Man of Sin] does not respect the singleness of the
Person, but the nature of the Antichrist: He shall be a Man, or succession of
Men, which shall be full of Sin, a Man of Sin, as if there was nothing but Sin
in him. As Christ is called a Man of Sorrows, to show that his whole Life was
full of Sorrows: So the whole state of Antichrist is a state of Sin. A Man of
Sin, it is an apparent Hebraism, it is one given up to commit Iniquity. We read
of Men of Knowledge, of Patience, a Man of Strife; which are Persons arrived
above the common pitch: So he is called a Man of Sin, also Son of Perdition,
one past all hopes of Honesty.

Secondly, It cannot be one single Person, as some of the Fathers suppose, or
one of the Tribe of Dan, a Jew which shall rise in Jerusalem; he must not be a
Jew, but a pretended Christian. And the City cannot be Jerusalem, because she
is not built on seven Hills; nor can Antichrist be one single Person, because
we find he had a being in the Apostles days, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. For the mystery of
Iniquity does already work. And this mystery of Iniquity will continue until
the coming of Christ, whom he shall destroy, ver. 8. Now surely this Person, if
a single Man, must be very Aged, that should be in the Apostles days, and
continue till Christ come in the Flesh the second time: What is his Name? Where
does he dwell? It is ridiculous so to think. You see therefore it must intend a
succession of Men, and not one single Person.

Object. 3. Rome Christian cannot be Antichrist: Because the Apostle St. Paul
says, that Antichrist, that Man of Sin, was in his days, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. But he
whom the Apostle speaks of, Rev. 17. 10. was not then in being by your own
account, which you say must be the Antichrist.

Answ. It Is true, Antichrist was then in being: But though he was then in
being, he was not then revealed, as the Apostle phraseth it, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. he
had not arrived to his full Power, which is that the Apostle St. John means,
when he says, Five are fallen, one is, and the other is not: Not that he
means he had no beginning; no, for he tells us he had, in that phrase, Rev.
17. 8. The Beast that was, is not, and yet is: He is, says the Apostle, yet is
not: He is an Infant, but not a Man. Antichrist began to work in the Apostles
days, 1 John 2. 22. but was not revealed, in full power, had not ten Kings to
assist him, till that which did let, was taken out of the way, which was the
Roman Empire, which many Learned did believe; therefore prayed that the Empire
might stand, that Antichrist might be kept out. But the reason why the Apostle
might not name the Heathen Emperor, was, because in all probability Persecution
would have issued from Nero (then in Power) against the Christians; and that it
was the Heathen Emperor did let Antichrist from being revealed, is the opinion
of many of the Learned, even some of the Church of Rome, Cyril, Chrysostom,
Tertullian, the famous Bishop of Hippo, Theodorus: see a Book called, The Man
of Sin, page 9, 10. As the Babylonian Monarchy must make room for the Persian,
that for the Macedonian, and that for the Roman: So the Roman must make way for
the Man of Sin, Antichrist, the Beast, and he at last must make way for Christ.

So that though Antichrist was in the Apostles days, yet he was then but as an
Infant, by degrees he grew more and more, till he came to his perfection; to
have ten Horns, ten Kings, which gave their power to him according to the
Prophecy.

Having thus proved that Rome is that Mystery Babylon, and Mother of Harlots, I
now come to show what a Harlot she is.

First, She is a close, secret, cunning Harlot: Well may the Apostle call her
the mystery of Iniquity, or iniquity in a Mystery; or Mystery Babylon, or
Babylon in a Mystery. The Apostle does well describe her, Rev. 13. 11. The
Beast that came out of the Earth had two Horns like a Lamb, but a Voice like a
Dragon. She pretended to be like Christ, but she really is like the Dragon, the
Devil, from whom she has her power; she has a form, a show of Godliness, but
the power of Ungodliness: She has the name of a Christian, but, like Sardis,
is dead indeed. She is in a counterfeit show Christ's Vicar, Christ's
Vicegerent; in presumption a Fellow-mate, in purpose an Adversary. She hides
the greatest Impieties under the name of Piety; and indeed she gets her Riches
by her Cunning. Not a little of her Cunning and Craft is discovered in making
that a Principle. That the Public Worship should be performed in a Language
unknown to the People. And the Pope knows what he does well enough: For seeing
there are so many Idolatries, Errors, and Heresies, in the Mass Book, it is
better to be in Latin, than in the Mother Tongue, least it should be
discovered, and the People come to know their Delusions.

But if you please to read 1. Cor. 14. the Apostle Paul condemns these
Principles throughout the whole Chapter.

And indeed no less is Antichrist's Subtilty discovered in his invention of
Purgatory; a place that they say the pains are as sharp, but not as eternal as
the pains of Hell. But for as much as the Scripture speaks not one word of
Purgatory, but only Heaven and Hell, one for the Godly, and the other for the
Ungodly, how dares the Pope to invent such a place! O, Beloved, half his
Religion, if not half his Gains, depends upon it. Therefore the Pope has
cunningly determined that there is a Fire. (which is not in the very Hell of
all) where souls after this Life are purged from Sins, and that by the help of
Masses, Dirges, and Prayers, these may be pardoned and delivered out of those
Torments, especially if they leave the Pope a good round sum of Money to
procure Indulgences, and have a Mass-Priest to pray for their souls.

Again, Her Cunning is seen in her pretense of having things impossible to be
seen and had; their lies further appear in that.

They say, they can produce the Foreskin of our Savior, after Circumcision;
the Platter Christ eat the Paschal Lamb in; the Challice Christ gave the
Sacrament in; yea, the Towel he wiped himself withal at Supper. Surely it was
made of good Flax. So the Waterpots, wherein the Water was turned to Wine in
Cana of Galilee; yea, the Cross, and also the Nails that nailed Christ to the
Cross, if you will believe them. The Text says, one Man carried the Cross: Yet
Calvin says, They have so much Timber, which they pretend to be Christ's
Cross, that a Horse cannot carry it, nay, not many Horses. Can you imagine they
can show the Virgin Mary's Hair, her Comb, upper and under Garments, yea, her
Milk also: John Baptist's Head, Bones, yea, the Finger that pointed at Christ
when he said, Behold the Lamb of God! John 1. 29. also St. Peter's Jaw Bone,
his Beard, one of his Teeth, his Chair, Garments, Altar, and a hundred Relics
more if needful.

Again, They have Holy Water, Holy Oil, Spittle, Salt, Beads, and those other
Superstitions, for which not one word can be found. But what faith the Pope to
them? Can he make no use of them? Yes; hereby we pick the Pockets of credulous
Fools; hereby we get their Money, and give them bits of Virgins Wax, fine
Beads, Toys for Children to play with: For all which she receives good and
lawful Money. Thus she is a cunning Harlot.

2. She is a Blasphemous Harlot, Rev. 17. 3. Upon her Head was the names of
Blasphemy, Rev. 13. 5. A Mouth speaking great things, and blasphemous, ver. 6.
He opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. It Is said, he had not only the Name,
but Names of blasphemy: He is not content with one Name, as Nebuchadnezzar,
Epiphanius, Domitian, his Predecessors were: but this Beast as he was to
succeed in their Room, so he was to inherit their Nature, and outdo them in the
worst of their Actions. Now he may be said to open his Mouth in blasphemy
against God, two ways:

1. Either denying the very Beingof God, as Pharaoh, and Sennacherib, saying,
Who is the Lord, that we should obey him? Or,

2. When frail Men shall intrude into the Place of God, by assuming to
themselves some of his Divine and Incommunicable Attributes. Thus the Prince of
Tire blasphemed God, when he said, I am a God, I sit in the Seat of God, Ezekiel.
29. 2, 4, 7. This description St. Paul gives of the Man of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
He exalts himself not only above Magistrates, called Gods, but declares and
labors to demonstrate that he is God, by pretending to a God-like Power, to
pardon Sin, and offer up a propitiatory Sacrifice in their unbloody Mass: yea,
to absolve from Laws, dispense with Oaths, to be Infallible, and the like.
Which Title and Power whoever dares assume to himself, the same is Antichrist,
a Blasphemer, and consequently a Beast. This the Pope does assume, therefore he
is the Beast, and Antichrist.

Take some further Instances of their Blasphemy: The Gloss says, he that
denies the Pope's Obedience, lies under the same Sentence of Damnation, as he
that denies the Almighty Power of God.

Stapleton, an English Jesuit, styled Pope Gregory the 13th, The Great, most
Gracious and Sovereign God on Earth.

The Sicilian Ambassadors coming to ask Pardon of Martin the 4th, delivered
their Supplication, by saying three times, O Lamb of God, which take away the
Sin of the World.

Again, It Is Heresy to think that our Lord God the Pope, has no power to
decree as he has decreed. And the Canonists say, one Article of the Popish
Creed is, That the power of Indulgences was left by Christ, and that the use of
them is very available to Salvation.

Secondly, She blasphemeth the Tabernacle of God. 1. This may either signify
the Church of God, which oftentimes is called the House of God, over which the
Beast does sinfully assume a Power. Or, 2. It holds forth the Humane Nature of
Christ, which the Author to the Hebrews does elegantly call it, because it was
the true Tabernacle which the Lord had pitched, and not Man, which is
blasphemed, when the merit of those Sufferings which God himself underwent in
the Humane Nature is lessened, and Christ's Blood not accounted sufficient to
cleanse from Sin, without something added by Men to inch out its value. Nay,
these Blasphemers do take away the property of each Nature in Christ; the
Godhead is Infinite, the Humane Nature, Finite. The Pope does set out the Deity
of the Father in Pictures and Images, and does imagine the Humane Nature of
Christ to be in many places at once: With this shift, Is any thing too hard for
God? So he forges a Finite Divinity, and an Infinite Humanity. He does also
confess in words, that Chirst is Just and Merciful, but in deed does indirectly
deny both. For perfect Justice does not admit of imperfect Satisfaction, that is
humane; and perfect Mercy does not grant imperfect Pardon. Christ does not
remit the Fault, and retain the Punishment. The Pope does teach indirectly,
that imperfect Satisfaction and Pardon is performed by Christ to the Faithful,
and so makes Christ a plain Idol.

Thirdly, Those that dwell in Heaven, says the Text, are Blasphemed, Rev. 13.
6. They are Angels, or departed Saints. Now when any thing is done to them that
are in Heaven, which they would not own on Earth, is to blaspheme them. You
know when the Men of Lystra, Acts 14. 14. offered to worship St. Paul and
Barnabas, which had the excuse of an amazing Miracle to justify them, yet it is
said, they rent their Clothes: Which was usual in cases of Blasphemy, 2 Kings
18. 37. So when St. John would have worshipped the Angel, said he, I am thy
Fellow Servants: Worship God, Rev. 22. 8, 9. So the Son of God himself appearing
unto Manoah in the shape of an Angel, would not have sacrifice offered to him,
but said, If thou offer an Offering, offer it to God.

Yet one Article of the Popes Creed is, I do hold that the Saints reigning with
Christ, are to be worshipped and invocated; that they offer up their Prayers to
God for us, and that their Relics are to be worshipped. When they pray to St.
Gregory, they say, Let him save us from our Sins, that in Heaven with the
Saints we may rest. So of St. Peter, and St. Paul, Grant that by both their
Merits, we may obtain the the glory of Eternity.

Again,

O Queen of Heaven most mild, dearest Mother to thy Child.
Despise me not, O Dust, in thee alone I trust.
God's sweet Heart springing, and Star of Grace,
Think on me still, till I have run my Race.
We do thee praise, and beg always,
Christ Jesus's Mother dear;
That thou attend, and us defend
From sad Death, which we fear.
Again,

O, Mary, the Mother of Grace and Mercy, defend us from our Enemies, and
receive us in the hour of Death. O holy Cross, our only hope, increase our
Righteousness. O Saint, says the holy Servant of Christ, prepare for us the
Glory which thou have merited. O Prince Gabriel, be on our side against the
Wicked, and all that work Iniquity. Jaspar, Melchior, and Belthazar, with all
the twelve Apostles, help me in my necessity.

Thus they invocate the Saints and Angels, which is proper only to God: Call
upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50. 15.

Relics Invocated.

A Prayer to the Cross.
O, Cross, our only hope, all hail
Now on this Passion Day,
Make good men's Goodness more prevail,
Take Sinners guilt away.
Devotion to a Rag.
A piece of Linen, they say, that wiped our Savior's Face when he sweat in
his Passion, on which the lively picture of his Face was imprinted, if you will
believe it.
All hail our Redeemer, the most holy Face,
Wherein does shine the beauty of Divinest Grace;
Imprinted on a Snow-white Cloth by the Power above,
And on the Vernacle beside, as pledge of Love.
Be to us, we thee pray, a Buckler, and Relief,
A sweet Refreshment, and great comfort from our Grief;
That Foes may never hurt us, but we still the same,
May heavenly rest enjoy for evermore, Amen.
Thirdly, The Church of Rome is a proud Harlot. This appears in that she cannot
be satisfied without Ruling and Reigning over men's Bodies and Souls, yea, over
the best Kings and Princes in the World; and all under pretense that the Pope
is St. Peter's Successor. Which makes nothing for him if he were, but against
him, for St. Peter tells us, that Bishops must not be Lords over God's
Heritage, 2 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Christ alone is the chief Shepherd of the
Sheep. Therefore Shepherds are so far from being Lords over God's Heritage,
that they are to be Servants; as Christ says, He that will be greatest among
you, let him be a Servant: As Christ commanded Peter, to feed his Lambs and
Sheep, John 21. 15, 16, 17. Shepherds have an equal Power here under Christ,
and he is the Head of all. See Ephesians. 1. 22. Col. 1. 18. Besides, St. Peter
exhorts to a subjection to Kings, and Kingly Government, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.
such as are a Terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well. But the
Pope is so unlike St. Peter, that he tells us he has power to dispossess
Princes, if they will not root out such as he calls Heretics.

Pope Alexander the third, made one of the Emperors fall down before him in the
Temple of St. Mark, at Venice, all the People being present, putting his
beastly Foot on his Neck, and uttered these words of the Psalmist, Thou shall
tread on the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and Adder thou shall trample
under foot. The usages of King Henry the second, and King John, do very plainly
prove his Usurpation over Kings. They did what they could against Queen
Elizabeth, when they Excommunicated her, and they would have dispossessed her
of the Kingdom, they did what they could by their Invincible Armada (as the
Pope christened it) in 1588. but through God's Goodness it proved Vincible.
When the Scripture tells us we must be subject to the higher Powers, which are
Magistrates and Princes, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. etc. The Pope exempts himself and
all his Clergy, (Priests, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Nuns, and all Religious
Persons) from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, and takes upon him to
absolve all their Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance (if they do not please
him) and give away their Kingdoms and Dominions to others, that will submit to
him, and do him better service: As Gregory did spoil Leo the third, in taking
from him all the Government of the West. Again, her Pride is seen in laying the
Sriptures of God so low, and trampling upon them. The Council of Trent says,
That holy Council was to have the same Veneration and Honor as the Scripture.
And we read in their Decrees, That the Doctrine of the Christian Religion, is
rather taken from the Popes mouth than the Scripture. It Is they that have
pronounced the Apocrypha Authentic, which was not written by the Prophets, nor
received by the Jewish Church. And how often do they take from, and add to the
Scripture? Yea, say they, the Scripture owes its Authority to the Church; and
she is superior to it: And none are Commandments of Christ, but such as are
accounted so by the Church; and that Tradition is the very rule of Truth, and
the Pope's Instructions better than the Scripture, say the Decrees. The
Scripture is a dumb and dead Thing, and the tale of Christ, says Leo the
tenth. No less is his pride seen, when he calls himself the Foundation, Head,
Husband, Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David.

And though the Scriptures speak sufficiently of their own clearness, Psalm. 19.
7. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. etc. Yet Antichrist is of another mind, he says they
are very ambiguous in their meaning, and may be twisted any way, like a Nose of
Wax, or Leaden Ruler; therefore it is not for the Common People to look into
them, lest they are poisoned with Errors and Heresies; and (say they) the
Scripture is defective in many things, and there is much more of the Mind of
God to be known than in the Scripture, which is conveyed down by unwritten
Traditions. Now those truths in which the Scripture is defective, are such as
these; the Offering on the Altar, Sacrifice, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for
the Dead, the Primacy of the Bishops of Rome above Kings and Princes, the
Sacraments of Confirmation, Orders, Matrimony, Penance, Extreme Unction, Merits
of Works, Auricular Confessions, and many more weighty and necessary truths,
say they, which must be supplied by Tradition, because the Scripture is silent
in them, and I question not but ever will.

Will you hear the Decree of the Council of Trent, That Traditions are to be
received with the same pious affection as the holy Scripture. O pride, above
all pride! One Marta expounds that saying, in Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8. Thou have put
under his feet (the Popes) all Sheep and Oxen, Christians and Sarazens, Fowls
of the Air, the Angels in Heaven, the Fishes in the Sea, and Souls in Purgatory.

Again, In the Year of Jubilee, the Pope is carried in Procession in a Chair of
State, a sumptuous Canopy born over his Head by Kings and Nobles: He is a King
over all the Children of Pride.

His Pride is Illustrated in his endeavoring to have the whole World at his
command, and to wear his Mark in their Foreheads, and Hands. She has but too
many Souls that have received this Mark. So Rev. 11. 3. The World wandered after
the Beast, ver. 16. He causes all, both Rich and Poor, Small and Great, Free
or Bond, to receive a Mark in their right Hand, or in their Foreheads; and that
no Man might buy or sell, but he that has the Mark, or the name of the Beast,
or the number of his Name. In Rev. 17. 1. her pride is painted out there to the
life, she sits upon many Waters, that is, People, Multitudes, Nations, and
Tongues. Ver. 3. And I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of
names of blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns. Seven Heads, which is
seven forms of Government; and ten Horns, ten Kings, that gave their power to
the Beast. The Woman is the City; the Beast is Antichrist; her Names of
Blasphemy you have heard. The Beast is called a Scarlet-colored Beast, to show
her sins are of a very deep Dye; they are Scarlet-sins, and accompanied with
the greatest Impenitency.

Fourthly, Her Character: She is an Idolatrous Harlot: Which is made manifest
in her worshipping of Images: And that she may do this with the more ease, they
have taken away wholly the second Commandment out of their Bibles. And lest the
People should miss one, they divide the Tenth into two. And when they are urged
with the breach of the second Commandment, they say, It Is not Images we are
forbidden to worship, but it is a Thing in the Original. Suppose that be true,
Is not an Image a thing? Notwithstanding this second Commandment, they set up
Images (in their public places of Worship) of the Virgin Mary, of St.
Winifred, of God like an old gray headed Man sitting in a Chair, and of the
Trinity like a strange Monster with three Faces, before which the People fall
down and worship. O horrid Idolatry! And that they might make the World believe
this is lawful, though forbidden in Scripture, they feign that Christ in the
thirty first Year of his Age, himself sent his own Image to King Abdager, and
made it also by Miracle on the Handkerchief of St. Veronica, and on his own
shroud. He that will believe it may. This we might have put among the popish
Lies and Forgeries. And therefore the Nicene Council anathematizes
Image-breakers (that is, such as shall break them in contempt or scorn) and all
such as alledg the places of Scripture which are against Idols, against their
sacred Images. It Is one of the Articles of the Popes Creed, I do hold that the
Images of Christ, ever blessed Virgin, and all other Saints, are to be had and
adored with due worship.

They commit Idolatry at Mass also, when they shall bow to a Wafer, as if it
were a God, after Consecration: also they make Mediators of Saints and Angels,
though the Apostle Paul speaks so very plainly, that there is but one Mediator
between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. The Pope has found out
a great many. The Virgin Mary is prayed to, that she would command her Son to
have mercy on them: For as one of the Jesuits says, The Virgin's milk is as
precious as the Blood of Christ. And as for what St. Paul says in this Case,
it is not much to be heeded: For as one Canon in the Decretal says, St. Paul
spoke against all Reason and Truth; and others have said, That if the Apostle
St. Paul be not warily expounded, he will smell of Heresy; and that St. Paul'
s Epistles have need of a Roman Commentary.

But may we not be too bold to come to Christ, and by him to God the next away?
Would it not be more decent and mannerly to come by Angels: As when we come to
a King, we make use of Courtiers to get access to the presence Chamber. But the
Scripture plainly tells us, we must come to God by Christ alone, John 14. 6.
Besides, what will it avail us to go to God by Saints? they cannot hear our
R^quests, neither know they our Wants, nor can supply them, Heb. 4. 15.

Fifthly, She is a Drunken, Blood thirsty, Cruel, Inhumane Harlot: Not without
cause is she called the Scarlet-colored Beast, having drunk so much of the
Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. And when he had
opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the Souls of them that were slain
for the Word of God, and for the testimony that they held. And they cried with
a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do not thou judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Rev. 17. 4. These came out of
great Tribulation. Rev. 16. 6. For they have shed the blood of Saints and
Prophets. Rev. 18. 20. Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and
Prophets; for God has avenged you on her. Ver. 24. And in her was found the
blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain on the Earth. This
further confirmed: For under Charles the Ninth of France, more than thirty
thousand Protestants were slain in one Month, Anno 1572. Bellarmin confesses,
that an hundred thousand of the Albigenses were slain in one day, under Pope
Innocent the Third.

Let me here call in the Powder Plot against England 1605, for a Witness to
this truth. Let me not forget the many thousands Americans, whose guilt was
their Gold. Also that Inquisition of the Duke of Alva in the Netherlands, which
he called the Council of Blood, where were above fifty thousand Christians
murdered at once. Will not Ireland witness for me here, where were about three
hundred thousand Massacred, Starved and Drowned, whose Blood calls aloud to be
reckoned for? So in Piedmont, how many quiet peaceable souls were murdered
there? Shall I not bring in their Design of firing London, Semptember 2. 1666,
as a Witness in this matter? Let me not forget Sir Edmond-bury Godfry, who will
in the great Day of Judgment come in against this Church, and prove her a
Blood-thirsty Harlot, yea, the Mother of Harlots. I would not have you forget
this last Conspiracy, in some part (blessed be God) discovered.

Sixthly, She is a Lying dissembling Harlot: Which appears in her pretended
Miracles. And this is one sign and mark the Apostle gives of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
Power, and Signs, and Lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish.

Rev. 13. 14. He does great Wonders, insomuch that he makes Fire come down
from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of Men. And that you may not think this
is real, but only seeming, in the 14th verse. the Apostle says, He deceives
them that dwell on the Earth.

Bellarmine, and some others, would not have the Pope and Rome, to be this
mystery of Iniquity: because, says he, the Pope never brings down Fire from
Heaven in the sight of men.

Answer. But the Pope pretends to it, or as bad, if you will believe their
Legends: How often by them are Images counterfeited to move, to sweat, to nod,
to speak, in the account of poor simple Men and Women, that they may be assured
to the worshipping of those Images they see. See a Book called, A Looking-Glass
for the Pope.
The Devil did often speak in the Images of Heathen Rome; and no doubt but the
Devil does sometimes speak in the Images of Mystery Babylon.

Now the Apostle Paul calls them Lying Wonders and Signs.

1. In respect to the End, because they serve to seduce Men.

2. Called so in respect of the Matter: For they are either the counterfeits of
Lying Men, or the Wonders of Deceitful Spirits.

3. In respect of the Form: For whereas true Miracles exceeded Nature, and were
wrought by the Omnipotent Power of God, false Wonders are those that are
effected by Natural Causes, and partly by the power of Satan. The Miracles of
the first kind have been infinite in the dark Kingdom of Antichrist; the
Apparitions of Spirits, the Visions of Angels, our Lady Mary; How often has
she been coming gliding out of Heaven? How often have the miserable Souls crept
puling out of Purgatory, besetting Highways, and recounting their Torments, to
procure Men to pity them. Hence the Market of Purgatory is grown so very
gainful. How often have Images walked on foot, if you will believe it, the
Bells struck alone without help, the Angels like Choristers chant it in
Canterbury Minister, and play upon Dunstan's Harp; the Apostles to come down
from Heaven, to help Basil to say Mass? These Lying Miracles were feigned by
Cheating Priests, to confirm strange Lies, and cozen simple People of their
Coin: For how often has a Spirit been apprehended by a Magistrate, Angels
stripped, and our Lady sent to her Cell? All of them have been notably whipped, so
that they had better have been in Purgatory. These had a show of Miracles, but
were not really so. Nay, how have they pretended to confirm their Mass with
Miracles, and the Transubstantiation? Witness that Pillar of Fire from Heaven
falling to the Earth upon that place, whereby the negligence of the Priest, as
the Legend does report, the Body of God fell out of the Pix upon the Grals,
that Pillar of Fire shining like the Sun about the Body of God, so that all the
Beasts of the Field (except one black Horse which bended but two) bended all
their four Legs to the Body of God. This is like the rest of her Miracles.

Pray see a few of their own Authors against their pretended Miracles.

Lyranus says, The People in our Church are grievously guld with Miracles, the
Priests fain for worldly Gain.

So Ludovicus Vives, a learned Papist, says, There be those who thought it a
piece of Piety to tell Lies for Religion.

Says Chrysostom, Miracles were of good use in the Apostles days, but of none
now: But because there is none now, think not there were none then.

St. Augustine says, He that asks now for a Prodigy, or Miracle, is a
Prodigy himself.

Theophilact, speaking of the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, says, They
were ceased long a-go.

So Erasmus says, That the gifts of Miracles are now ceased.

The College of Paris, in a Writing in 1389. says, Miracles ought to be
suspected, since our Lord says, Mat. 24. False Prophets shall arise.

From whence I infer from this last Mark, That whoever pretends to work
Miracles, which are nothing else but Lies and Impostures, is Antichrist: But
the Church of Rome does so pretend, yet nothing but Lies is the bottom of it;
Therefore the Church of Rome is this Antichrist, this Beast, this Man of Sin,
this Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth.

Seventhly, The Mother of Harlots, the Church of Rome, is a cross crooked
Harlot. The Holy Ghost says one thing, she another quite contrary. The Spirit
says, It Is lawful for all sorts and degrees of men to Marry: But Antichrist
forbids it, and says, That the Priests must not, though Whoredom probably may
pass, or else six thousand Infants Sculls had not been found in the Pope's
Pond. And a Book in Henry the Eighth's days, represents to the King, that there
were one hundred thousand Whores made by the unmarried Clergy. And Pope Joan
had a Bastard, proving her self the Literal Whore of Babylon.

They say it is much less sin for a Priest to have many Whores, than have one
Wife; and he that has no Wife, but in stead of that a Whore, may not for that
be suspended the Communion. Many Instances we might give. At Bath, one Monk had
seven Whores, three married, four single, and was a Sodomite to boot. At
Monk-fairlee, the Prior had nine Whores, and the Convent many more. At
Maidenbradly, the Prior had five Whores, and six Bastards.

Many more Instances might be given; but let these suffice: Here are too many
of these.

Again, God says that all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags and menstruous
Clothes: But the Pope says, That our good Works do properly merit Salvation;
so that God would not be Just, did he not reward our good Works with Heaven:
And that we have ability to do all that God commands, and more too, so that we
may merit for our selves and others. These are Works of Supererogation. Look
but into the Lives of the Popes, and you will see this confirmed backward.

Again, Christ in his last Institution, said, Drink all of this Cup, all my
Disciples: But the Pope says, The People must be contented with half the
Sacrament, which is enough for the poor inferior sort of People; the Priest
alone must drink of the Cup.

Again, The Scripture never speaks of the Minister's Communicating by himself:
But this the Church of Rome does, which they call private Mass. See what the
Scripture says to this, 1 Cor. 10. 16. But it is enough for the People to stand
and gaze on the Priest (says the Pope) while he mumbles over his Latin,
saying something they know not what, and doing something they care not what,
and drinking something they taste not, and yet it is a Communion for all this.

Again, The Scripture says, That the Heavens must retain Christ's Body, till
the time of the Restitution of all things. But the Pope says (and is not this
a cross Harlot) that as soon as the Priest has said these few words, Hoc est
Corpus meum, This is my Body, that the Bread and Wine are transubstantiated
into the same Body of Christ, that was born of the Virgin Mary, and hung upon
the Cross: When if People did but believe their own Eyes, Taste, and Feeling,
they must needs conclude it is nothing but a Wafer, which the Priest makes many
scores of, and consecrates at the same time: And though this be done in a
thousand places besides, so many Bodies Christ must have. O horrid! O senseless!
and unreasonable! that a man cannot be a Papist, but he must become a Beast.

Again, The Word of God says, That Christ by his own Offering, has for ever
perfected those that are Sanctified, Heb. 10. 12, 14. Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26. But
this cross Harlot says, That Christ is offered up once every day as an
Unbloody Sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead, to fetch souls out of Purgatory;
and every time the Priest lifts up the Wafer, he makes an Atonement for the
sins of the People: But it is dangerous to trust to that Atonement. It Is an
Article in the Pope's Creed, I profess that there is offered up in the Mass to
God, a true proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick and Dead. The
Scripture is full and clear, that Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice for sin in
number is but one, Heb. 10. 14. For Time, but once offered; the Priest was
himself alone: the Place, upon the Cross: the Manner, not Unbloody, but Bloody:
for the Virtue, Exceeding, Effectual: For what reason then does the Pope devise
another Propitiatory Sacrifice, I know not, except it be to fill his Coffers.
Yea, they give the same Honor to their departed Saints as to Christ. Thus they
speak of Gregory, Let him save us from our Sins. It Is true what some say,
Christ can hardly be discerned from the Apostles.

Again, O blessed Mother, sanctify us from our Sins, by the right of Mother,
command a Redeemer. So she forbids Meats, 1 Timothy 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. in Lent, and
other times, which God has commanded to be received with Thanksgiving; And is
not this a perverse Harlot?

Eighthly. This Harlot is an impenitent, yet a secure Harlot; notwithstanding
all the Blood she has shed, and all the Judgments threatened, she is yet secure
and impenitent, and will be like Babylon of old, that Type of Mystical Babylon,
Isa. 47. 7. Thou say thou shall be a Lady for ever. So Rev. 18. 7. For she
says in her Heart, I sit as a Queen, I am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow.
And as God plagued Imperial Rome with sending the Goths and Vandals to burn up
their City: So God will plague Mystery Babylon, yet she will not repent of her
Fornication. Rev. 16. 8, 9, 10. Men are scorched with Fire, and great heat
shall be their Judgment. But how will they behave themselves? Do they repent
and beg for Mercy? No, They blaspheme more and more the Name of God, which had
power over those Plagues, and they repented not to give him Glory. Ver. 11.
They blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their Pains, and their Sores, and
repented not of their Deeds. No, they could not, for they were judicially
hardened in their Sins. So in Rev. 11. 18. when Judgment is poured down upon
them, they are angry, they fret and vex, they cannot have their Will on God as
they have had on his Saints. So in Rev. 9. 20. The rest of the men that were
not killed by those Plagues, yet repented not of the Works of their Hands, that
they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold, Silver and Brass, Stone, and
of Wood: which neither can see, nor bear, nor walk. Ver. 21. Neither repented
they of their murders, (mark that) nor of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornication, nor of their Thefts. Thus you see she is an impenitent Whore, a
brazen-faced Harlot, she is not ashamed of any thing she has done against God,
or his People.

Ninthly, She is a Superstitious Harlot; full of Ceremonies that Christ never
gave any Toleration for. Out of what Evangelist did Christ command your Altar?
Did not he Administer the Sacrament at a Table, in all probability? Where do
you find any other Garments that Christ wore, than his usual Garments, when he
Instituted the Sacrament? Why do your Priests then wear so many foolish antic
Garments, more fit for a Stage Player, than a Minister of Christ? Which of the
Apostles wore the Amiss, or Linnen-Vail, or Albe? Who commanded you to wear a
Girdle, in signification of that Cord (you say) Christ was bound in the Garden
withal? the Maniple that bound Christ to the Pillar? The Stole, a Cord by which
Christ was led to be Crucified with? I do not remember I have read of such a
Cord in the Scripture, neither do I find any Chalice the Apostles used, nor a
Pattin, or Altar-Clothes, Corporal or Pall. Where did Christ ever say the
Sacrament is for three sorts of Men; those in Heaven to increase Glory; them in
Purgatory, to free them from pain; them on Earth, to increase Grace? or the
Ministers going back three steps from an Altar, in token of Christ's
prostrating himself? Where did the Priest learn to beat his Breast at Mea culpa,
and to bow at the Confiteor, and to kiss the Altar? Where do you find in God's
Word the Introit? In what Chapter do you find the Kyrie Eleison, to repeat nine
times, Lord have mercy upon us; three times to the Father, three times to the
Son, three times to the Holy Ghost? What Book in the Scripture do you find
Prayers called the Collects, or that Allelujah is repeated at Easter, more than
any other time of the Year? Where is the Trackt to be found; that is, to be
read with a slow and a long Voice? Where did any of the Apostles read the
Gospel at the North-end of the Altar, or St. Peter, or St. Paul, sign the Book
with the sign of the Cross? Or the Minister and People sign themselves in three
places with the sign of the Cross, on the Forehead, on the Mouth, and on the
Breast? Where do we find Christ wash his Fingers just after the Sacraments
Institution, as your Priests do? In what Epistle do you find the Apostles adore
the Bread and Wine that were in his Hand when he Administered it? Where have
you any Office of the Virgin Mary consecrated in Scripture, as Hymns, Psalms,
Canticles, Antiphones, Versicles, Responsories, and Prayers, which you divide
the Virgins Office in? Not in holy Writ, I am sure. Who bid you beg for the
assistance of the Virgin Mary, to perform your service to God's Glory? Where
did the Apostles ever pray that God would pardon their negligence in the
service of the blessed Virgin? What Rule have you for keeping a Feast in
remembrance of our Savior's Birth, or for the observation of Circumcision, or
Epiphany day? What Rule have you for blessing your Candles you use in your
Worship? and why must the Day called Candleman-Day, be the day above all
others? So we may ask a Rule for the keeping of Ascension-Day, Pentecost,
Trinity, Sunday, Corpus Christi, Transfiguration Day, as you call it? Who
commanded this, I pray? The Pope, not Christ. So Advent-Sunday, the four
Lords-Days which precede Christmas Day (as you say): Where do you find that the
Apostles observed those four Days which preceded the Resurrection of Christ,
Septuagesima, Sexagestma, Qui^^^^gesima, Quadragesima, hard words for the
Simple to understand? Which are four days of Penance and Mortification. Where
do you find a Lent commanded by Christ? In what Chapter is Palm Sun^y, or
Passion Sunday mentioned? or Low-Sunday? Who taught you to keep a Feast, and
solemnly observe the Conception, Nativity, Presentation, Annunciation,
Visuation, and Assumption of the blessed Virgin? Where is any time in Scripture
set apart for the People to confess their Sins to a Priest? Where are any holy
Ashes spoken of in Scripture to be used on the Forehead on Ash Wednesday? These
and forty more Ceremonies I could recount, that the Church of Rome practices;
all which prove her to be a Superstitious Harlot. Let the Church of Rome prove
that she has received those Ceremonies from the Spirit of God, as she
pretends, and I will own them too.

Tenthly, I might show that this Harlot is a rich Harlot. See what Rev. 18.
throughout, says, The Merchants of this City which were made Rich by her, they
seeing her Destruction, shall say, Alas! alas! that great City! which was
clothed in fine Linen, and Purple, and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and
precious Stones, and Pearls. Her Worldly Pomp she has in her present Church
state, even among the Clergy only, is quite out of the reach of the best
Arithmeticians. Add to this that of Experience, and it will show us that when
that Church had her Domination in this Land, they knew where the best ground
lay, as the Ruins of their Abbeys do evince.

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that the Church of Rome is this Mystery Babylon, Mother of Harlots?
Then let all the People of God that are out of it, bless God for that Mercy.
Had God suffered Popery to continue in England, as it was in the Marian Days,
had not thousands, and ten thousands (in all probability) of us in England,
been in that False Worship, which now are freed from it? O let us bless God in
Deed, with all our Hearts, lest our Sins should let her in again upon us; as
the Sins of Israel brought in the King of Assyria upon them; and not only so,
but laid their City desolate, and caused God to take away their Prophets,
Priests, Ark, Vrim and Thummim, their Solemn Assemblies, Sabbaths, and
appointed Feasts. Let us keep our ground that we have got against Antichrist,
and stand up as Witnesses for the Lord: Though we may be slain for it, comfort
your selves in this, the Witnesses shall live again.

2. Let all that are in Babylon, be exhorted to take the Counsel of the Spirit
of God in Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her: And that first, because she is a false
Church. Whatever she pretends, as marks to denote her a true Church, she cannot
be so, because National. The Church of the Jews was so indeed: But the
Gospel Church is Congregational; only such to be Members of the Gospel Church,
which can give an account of the Work of Grace upon their Hearts, Acts 2. 42,
43. Acts 8. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. As little can they say for their Holiness,
which they say must be in a True Church. See the Lives of many of them which
have been Heads of that Church, I mean the Popes; some have been Drunkards,
some Whore-mongers, Thieves, given more to War than to Christ, profane
Scoffers of Christ, Murderers, Poisoners of their own Parents, calling on the
Devil to help them, Players at Dice, and Drinkers of the Devil's Health,
Traitors to Princes, etc. Bernard was a little moved with the Popes of Rome,
when he called them Tyrants, Defrauders, Ravenous, Traitors, Darkness of the
World, Wolves and Devils. Are these St. Peter's Successors? I am sure he never
taught Men to live at this rate; neither did he live so himself. If they will
have Peter's Seat, they must have Peter's Doctrine and Life. But the Church of
Rome has neither; therefore not St. Peter's Seat.

And as to their pretended Miracles, we have already spoke to them. The
Mahometans may as soon prove themselves Christ's Spouse upon that account, as
the Church of Rome.

And as to her Unity, as little can be said upon that account, if we may
believe History, there is some scores of Orders of Monks and Friars amongst
them; and some of them have been so divided, that they Burnt one another for
matters of Religion, and for different Opinions.

And if you will see the Pope's Infallibility, or rather Fallibility, look into
their Lives, which I just past.

And as for her pretense of Visibility, if we ever behold and see the True
Church (but as we look on her we shall never see her the true visible Church of
Christ) it has Christ for its Head, so has not the Church of Rome. All her
Members are such as profess Repentance from dead Works, and Faith in Christ: So
do not all the Members of the Church of Rome, and it is impossible they should,
being National. The true Visible Church observes all Christ's Ordinances, have
a true Baptism both in respect of Manner and Subject; so the Church of Rome
has not. The true Visible Church of Christ on Earth, may be known by these
three Marks: First, A right Gathering, Acts 20. 25. not by the Sword, but by
the Word. Secondly, A right Constitution, which consists in free Fellowship of
the Doctrine of the Apostles, Acts 20. 40, 41, 42, 47. Acts 17. 4. The second
thing pertaining to Church-Constitution consists in the disposing her Members
to those Places to which they are fitted to serve in, 1 Cor. 12. 27. with ver.
18, 28. Acts 6, 3, 4. The third mark of the true Visible Church of Christ, is
Government, according to the Primitive Practice, which was only Spiritual, and
did reside not in the Pastors and Elders apart from the Church, but in the
Pastors together with the Church, Acts 15. 22, 25. yet so as that those to whom
the Church has committed her Power, are the Instruments in the Name of Christ
and his Church, to exercise Government: Which Government consists in these
things, Exhortations, Reproofs, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.
2. And if this prevail not with Offenders, then is the power of Excommunication
to be exercised, according to Mat. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5. But can any
of these Marks be found in the Church of Rome? No, she makes Members by the
Sword, as the True Church by the Word; She forces them to be of her Religion.
Whereas Members of the true Visible Church are Volunteers, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Rome's
Government is by the Sword, not by God's Word; it is Carnal, not Spiritual, as
the Government of Christ's Church is: Therefore you see she is still the false
Church, the Mother of Harlots, what ever she pretends.

In the last place. Come out of Babylon those that are in her: And you that are
out, keep out; because if you partake of her Sins, you will partake of her
Plagues. Take an account of them in several Threatenings of God against her: the
Apostle calls upon us in Rev. 17. 1. to see the Judgment of the great Whore,
that sits upon many Waters. In this Judgment they shall kill one another,
Rev. 6. 4. making good that Prophecy in Rev. 17. where it is said that God shall
put it into the Hearts of the ten Horns, the ten Kings, to hate the Whore, to
burn her Flesh with Fire, and make her desolate, Rev. 18. 16. Reward her double
even as she has rewarded you: And double unto her double according to her
Works. In the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double.

The King of France, who proved so Treacherous and Cruel to the Admiral
Coligny, and the Protestants in France, to the number of about an hundred
thousand Massacred in a most Inhumane manner; though he gloried so much in that
Action, as to make certain Medals to perpetuate the Memory of it, yet the same
King was inwardly tormented with the Horrors of a guilty Conscience, which the
Effusion of so much Blood did justly raise in him, being sometimes troubled
with Visions, he was often heard to say, Ah! my poor Subjects, what had you
done? But I was forced to it. The strange manner of his Death, looked like a
signal Judgment from Heaven, for that Bloody Day: For after a long Sickness,
believed to be the Effect of a Lent Poison, given him by the Queen Mother,
Blood not only came out at all the Conduits of his Body, but through the very
Pores; so that he was sometimes found all bathed in his own Blood: And he that
made the Kingdom swim with Blood, died thus wallowing in his own. Thus wicked
Men fall into the same Pit they thrust others into, and their violent dealing
comes on their own Pate: As lately here in London, one Edward Coleman, a
Papist, who was found to be a grand Conspirator against the Protestant
Religion, intending to subvert and overthrow Religion, and the People of God,
was himself (with diverse others) taken in the said Conspiracy, Judged,
Condemned, Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, as his just Demerit for that Act and
Deed, December the 3d. 1678. at Tybourn, in the view of thousands.

Yet again, in Rev. 15. 5. we have an account of seven Viols, or Goblets of
Gold, all filled up to the brim with the Wrath of God, which often in Scripture
is compared to Wine; and because of the effects of it, called the Wine of
Trembling, or Astonishment. And they are called the seven last Plagues, or
Stroke: Because in them the Wrath of God is finished. Then he stirs up all his
Wrath against them, that the sufferers do know their Tongues for pain. And well
they may: For mark that in Rev. 14. 10, 11. it is like Zechariah's Roll, filled
with Curses within and without. Those that receive the Mark of the Beast in
their Forehead publicly, or in their Hand privately, shall drink of the Wine
of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
Indignation, and they shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of
her Torment ascends up for ever and ever. They have no rest Day nor Night,
who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his
Name. And when the Voice shall be, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Rev. 17. 2.
which shall be when she is very secure, and says in her Heart, I sit as a
Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow: Then shall Worldly spirited
Men lament and tremble, and cry, Alas, alas, while the blessed Inhabitants that
are in Heaven, the holy Apostles, Prophets, and Angels, are commanded to
rejoice over her destruction; for which also the Blood of the Martyred Souls
under the Altar does cry, and all their Brethren, who are yet witnessing in the
Wilderness, do earnestly pray, as being then to receive a full Reward for their
Labors, and to Reign with Christ, for whom they suffered. Even so, come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

POSTSCRIPT.
THat the Church of Rome does look upon shedding of the Blood of Protestants
(which they call Heretics) as Meritorious, let us take a view of their
Practices after the Massacre in France. The News being brought to Rome, on the
6th of November, 1572. A Consistory was called of Cardinals, and the Legates
Letter, that contained a Relation of the Massacre, was presently read. See
Thuanus. Upon this they went straight in a Procession to St. Mark's Church,
where they offered thanks to God for this great Blessing to the Sea of Rome,
and the Catholic Church. And on Monday following, there was another Procession
made by the Pope and Cardinals, to the Minerva, where they had high Mass, and
then the Pope granted a Jubilee to all Christendom; and one Reason was, that
they should thank God for the Slaughter of the Enemies of the Church lately
executed in France. Two days after that, the Cardinal of Lorrain had another
great Procession of all the Clergy, the Ambassadors, Cardinals, and the Pope
himself, who came to St. Lewis's Chapel, where the Cardinal Celebrated Mass
himself, and in the King of France's Name, he thanked the Pope and Cardinals
for their good Counsel, the Help they had given him, and the Assistance he had
received by their Prayers, of which he had found most wonderful Effects. He
also delivered the King's Letters to the Pope, in which he wrote, that more
Heretics had been destroyed in that one Day, than all the twelve Years of the
War.

Nor did the Pope think there was yet Blood enough shed, he sends Cardinal
Vrsin, his Legate, in all haste to France, to thank the King for so great
Service he had done the Church, and desired him to go on and extirpate Heresy,
Root and Branch, that it might never grow again. And as the Legate passed on his
Journey, he gave a plenary Absolution to all that had been actors in the
Massacre.

Besides, the best Picture-Drawers and Workers of Tapistry, were also put to
work, to set off this Action with all possible glory: And a suit of these
Hangings are to this day in the Pope's Chapel. So well do they like that Act,
that they still preserve the Memory of it. I must confess, such a
Representation does well agree with their Doctrine.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 35. for 11th, Read 13th. P. 6. l. 3. for three days. r. few
Months. P. 9. l. 7. for among, r. against. P. 18. l. 29. for designed, r.
desired. P. 23. l. 13. r. because as she is. P. 25. l. 35. for 567, r. 1567. P.
31. l. 38. f. O Saint, says, r. O St. Since. P. 34. l. 17. for Purgations, r.
Purgatory. P. 39. l. 16. for 1 Cor. 10. 6. r. 1 Cor. 10. 16.


