Advertisement.
THere is lately Published, A Letter of Advice to the Churches of the
Nonconformists in the English Nation: Endeavoring their Satisfaction in that
Point, Who are the True Church of England?

And now in the Press.

Short Animadversions upon Dr. Calamy's Discourse (in the Conformists Cases
against Dissenters) concerning a scrupulous Conscience.

An Examination of Dr. Hascard's Discourse concerning Satisfaction, wherein it
is inquired, How well the Author of the said Discourse has proved, That it is
not lawful for a Man to go from his Parish Church to Meetings, that he might
better Edify.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. SCOT's CASES AGAINST Dissenters CONCERNING Forms of Prayer.
AND The Fallacy of the Story of Commin, plainly Discovered.

LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1700.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. SCOT's CASES of CONSCIENCE ABOUT Forms of Prayer.
IN the Question, relating to ( Forms of Prayer) agitated of late Years betwixt
Learned Divines, of several Persuasions, Three Things are considerable, which
are no light Prejudices against their Opinion, who have been so Zealous for
them.

1. The Difficulty of bringing them to State the Question right, or to speak
closely to it, when so stated. 1. Whether Forms of Prayer be lawful yea or no?
2. Whether supposing them lawful, they may be lawfully imposed on Ministers of
the Gospel? 3. Whether (supposing they may be lawfully imposed on by some) they
may be lawfully imposed universally on all Ministers, and by all Ministers used
in their Public Ministration? 4. Whether People may join with Ministers using
them? Are Four distinct Questions. The first of which is (that I know of)
denied by none. The last, by none, or very few. The Author of the Book called,
A Reasonable Account, why some pious Nonconforming Ministers in England, Judge
it sinful for them, to perform their Ministerial Acts in Public, solemn Prayer
by the prescribed Forms of others. Chap. 1. Stated the Question thus.

Whether it be lawful for Ministers (having the Gift of Prayer) ordinarily to
perform their Ministerial Acts in Solemn, Stated, Public Prayer; by reading,
or reciting Forms of Prayer composed by other Men, confessedly not divinely and
immediately inspired, although by Superiors required so to do?

His Learned Answerer confesses, That he had Stated the Question with
sufficient plainness and clearness. Let that then be taken for the true
Question, for we are concerned in no other.

2. A Second considerable Prejudice is, That those who have pleaded the
lawfulness of the Use of Forms; have laid a great deal of more stress, upon the
inartificial Arguments, drawn from Authority and Antiquity (as they have
pretended) than upon any artificial Arguments drawn from the intrinsic Nature
of the Action; whereas one Scriptural, or Artificial Argument is worth a
Thousand others; and till the lawfulness of an Action be proved, no Argument
from Authority commanding, or Antiquity, or present Usage approving, can come
into any Consideration at all; it being most certain, that no Authority of Man
can oblige us contrary to the Will of God, neither ought any Examples of Men to
be produced, as Temptations to move us to any Thing of that Nature.

3. A Third is, Their extravagant Zeal to load the Opinions contrary to theirs,
with odious Prejudices and Imputations. Three of these I have taken more
special Notice of in this Case.

1. The First is great Impertinence, and Nonsense, and Rudeness to say no
worse, that are sometimes mingled with extempore Prayers (so our Casuist
phraseth it) Part 2. page 14. 2. The Possibility that fluency of Expression may
be from Diabolical Inspiration. P. 2. page 13.
This our Casuist also hits upon, I do not remember any higher Authority for
this, than that of Ravilliac Redivivus. Since the Notion mightily pleased Dr.
Falkner, in his Vindication of Liturgies, p. 41. Ravilliac produced only the
Instance of Major Weier, to prove what he said, our Casuist has found more. 3.
The Third is, That these conceived Prayers, were first brought in by Jesuits.
This also our Casuist hits upon, P. 2. pa. 59, 60.
For the First of these, I do not think it worth the while to say any Thing to
it, the Knowledge of the contrary, to so many Thousands in London for Twenty
Years together (whiles hardly any others were publicly used) and the
Experience of Two or Three and Twenty Years since, whiles the Forms have been
used in Public Temples, yet others also have been used in the hearing of many
Thousands, is so eminent a Confutation of this, as nothing need be added, to
say nothing of what has been already said, that Forms for the Desk will not
prevent this, unless we have some for the Pulpit, and that for Sermons, as well
as Prayers, and for Families, etc. and that as large an Experience has showed,
that a wandering Mind in a Minister, will expose Forms to the like Absurdity (of
which Instances enough might be given) besides, that it is no small Imputation
upon those who are entrusted to send out faithful, and able Preachers, that
they send out such as cannot Pray, without Impertinency, Nonsense, and
Rudeness, or Worse.

But the two latter have in them so much of falsehood (if not, something much
worse) that it is necessary to vindicate, free, conceived Prayer, from such
black and odious Imputations, fit for nothing; but to make some profane
Persons, matter for Discourse over a Pot of Ale, or Pint of Wine.

I will begin with the latter first, P. 59. Part 2.
as to which our Casuist faith, P. 59. Par. 2. "That we should do well to
consider who it was that first introduced it [that is praying by conceived
Prayer] into England, and set it up in Opposition to our Liturgy. For First,
There was one faithful Commin, a Dominican Friar, who in the Ninth of
Elizabeth, to seduce the People from the Church, thereby to serve the Ends of
Popery, began to Pray Ex tempore, with such wonderful Zeal and Fervor, that he
deluded a great many simple People, for which he was afterward amply Rewarded
by the Pope. Vid. Foxes and Firebrands, p. 7. P. 17.
After him one Thomas Heath a Jesuit, pursued the same Method, exclaiming
against our Liturgy, and crying up Spiritual, or Ex tempore Prayers, thereby to
divide the People from our Public Worship, telling the Bishop of Rochester, by
whom he was examined. That he had been Six Years in England, laboring to
refine the Protestants, and to take off all Smacks of Ceremonies, and to make
the Church purer Of which see more in the Preface of the learned Treatise, The
unreasonableness of Separation beginning, p. 11.
And I hope, when our Brethren have well considered, who it is they join with,
and whose Cause they advance, while they thus decry our Liturgy, and Cry up
their own Ex tempore Prayers, in the Room of it; they will at last see Cause to
retract a mistake, which none but the Church of Rome will have cause to thank
them for."

The Learned Author quoted by our Casuist in his Margent, thus expresses
himself in the Place cited.

"Of this, we have a considerable Evidence lately offered to the World, in the
Examination of a Priest so employed at the Council Table, A. D. 1567. being the
Ninth of Queen Elizabeth, which is Published from the Lord Burleigh's Papers,
which were in the Hands of the Archbishop Usher, and from him came to Sir James
Ware, whose Son brought them into England, and lately caused them to be
Printed." To prove this, he quotes no more valuable Author then Foxes and
Firebrands, 1680.

So that to the Author of that Reverend Pamphlet, Foxes and Firebrands we must
go, and if he proves Romantic, all this Story is spoiled.

The Author of that Pamphlet has this Story, Page 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. Too long for any to transcribe. I shall only make some Remarks upon it,
sufficient to make it appear ridiculous enough.

1. He tells us, it was a Story which happened 1567. Ninth Elizabeth. And p.
14. he says, "It produced the Act for preventing Popery, and other Sects,
which injoined all People from Ten Years old, and upward, not having a lawful
Impediment, to repair every Sunday, to hear Divine Service under the Penalty of
forfeiting Twelve Pence for every such default." Whereas First, There was never
any such Act, as took Notice of Persons Ten Years Old. Secondly, For the Twelve
Penny Act, it concerns none under Sixteen Years of Age, and was made first
Elizabeth, which was Eight Years before, (surely the Worthy Author read first
Elizabeth, decimo Elizabeth) was not this think we a very judicious Author fit
to have his Word taken? How this falsehood could escape the Eyes of the Learned
Dean, that thought fit to give such a Paltry Pamplet Credit I cannot but
admire; but we shall find more than this to defame this Romance by.

2. He tells us the Story was transmitted (being an extract out of the
Memorials of my Lord Burleigh, to Bishop Usher) from his Papers to Sir James
Ware, from him to Robert Ware Esquire his Son. So then, here are Papers, which
in their Original are pretended to be but Extracts (by we know not whom) these
Extracts, are 116 Years Old (wrote in Paper) never that we heard of discovered
by Bishop Usher all his Life Time, but coming, none knows how, or when, to Sir
James Ware, (who is not said to be the Bishops Executor) neither did Sir James
communicate them, but Dies. At length, it is pretended one Mr. Robert Ware his
Son, has obliged the World, not by Publishing them himself, but by
communicating them to the Author of Foxes and Firebrands (in whose Hands,
Papers of that Nature whatever they got, were like to loose nothing) thus the
World comes to be blessed with them; and I presume this Story, deserves just as
much Credit as the Catholic Letter, Published a little after this, the Forgery
of which was detected by Parliament, and the Author cried Peccavi for it.
Surely, if we were not very partial in our Judgments, upon Relations and
Stories, that favor our own Opinions, and Fancies it were hardly possible any
Learned Man could call this a considerable Evidence, which has nothing of an
Evidence in it. Here is a Paper Evidence, that is, but a pretended Abstract,
and that of a Relation of Matter of Fact more than a hundred Years Old (it were
worth something to see it) and this communicated to the World, after I know not
how many Descents. My Lord Burleighs, the Primates, Sir James Ware, and at last
at the Second Hand, not by him that had this Relick, but by one who has not
given the World much Cause to be confident of the Truth of what he has wrote.
And as it will appear by what follows, has no more deserved any Credit from
the World for this Story, (which will appear, if not a Romance, yet to have
such Marks of one, as any one upon an Hue and Cry would) see Reason to stop it
upon Suspicion, as such.

3. In the first Place, he says, Faithful Commin was a Friar of the Order of
St. Dominick. This encouraged the Dean of Paul's to call him a Priest, and our
Casuist to call him a Dominican Friar; but how does this appear from any Part
of the Story, as related at large in the Pamphlet? He confessed no such thing,
all that he said, was, that he was of Christ's Order, a Preacher of the Holy
Gospel. No such thing was proved against him. Clerkson (the Archbishops
Chaplain) says, he fell from the Church of Rome, and puts him to prove his
Ordination; objects, that he never came to our Liturgy, nor received the
Sacrament from any of our Orthodox Clergymen. Draper the Cook and his Maid
witnessed nothing, but their hearing of him Pray two Hours in his Private
Chamber. Neither does Baker the Ship-master prove any such thing, he only tells
the Council of a Story that one Martin Daval, should tell him, of which this
was no Part. Possibly he had been a Dominican Friar, but that he was so now,
appears from nothing in the whole Story, and there is no doubt but in the
Ninth of Elizabeth, there were some hundreds of Dominican Friars, that were
Protestants; for it was but Nine Years after the generality of the Nation had
been Papists. So as all that should have been said (if so much could) was, that
this Faithful Commin (who formerly had been a Dominican Friar) was accused by
John Clerkson (Chaplain to Archbishop Parker) Nicholas Draper, and Mary Dean a
Maid Servant.

4. They Deposed (as is said) upon their Oath. What? That the said Faithful
Commin, was no true Protestant, but a false Impostor, a Sower of Sedition among
Her Majesty's Loyal Subjects. This is a pretty Strange Oath, as if one should
go and depose before a Justice of the Peace, that A. B. is no Honest-man, but a
Thief, a Murderer, etc. I wonder what Judge or Justice of Peace would Convent
any upon such an Oath? Yet we are made believe (not very probably) that upon
this he was Convented, Monday April 5. before the Queen and the Council, where
Archbishop Parker examined him. I hope upon his Examination, something will
appear further.

5: The Archbishop (as is said) asked him, Of what Profession he was? He
replieth, Of Christ's Order. The Archbishop asks him, What Order was that? He
replieth, A Preacher of the Holy Gospel. The Archbishop asks him, What Gospel
he called the Holy Gospel? He replies, The Gospel of Jesus Christ. The
Archbishop asks, Under what Porrer do you own to bold that Gospel? He replieth,
Under Christ and his Saints. The Archbishop asks, Do you acknowledge any other
Power save that of Christ to be on the Earth? He replies, Yes I do. Archbishop
says, What is that? He replies, The Holy Catholic Church. The Archbishop
says, Do you not acknowledge, a Defender of the Holy Catholic Faith? He
replieth, God is the only Defender. Then the Archbishop tells the Queen, he was
instructed, or else was a Man of Craft. I would now gladly know, what upon all
this his first Examination, spoke him a Papist. His Answers are as like the
Answers of some simple, weak Noncon, as is imaginable. Neither does the
Archbishops Questions argue his Suspicion of him to be a Papist. He does not so
much as ask him, what Religion he owned, nor propound any Question to him about
any distinctive Point of Popery. Nor do the Archbishops Questions found like
Questions indeed, propounded by a Man of Archbishop Parker's Learning, who
would hardly have phrased his Questions so, 1. Under what Power do you own to
hold [certainly he would have said to preach] the Gospel. 2. Do you acknowledge
any other Power, save Christ on the Earth?


Those who formed these Questions, seem to be some Persons short of the
Learning and Judgment of Archbishop Parker.

After this, the Author of Foxes and Firebrands tells us, that Commin was
ordered to withdraw, then the Witnesses were called, of which John Clerkson
(the Archbishops Chaplain) was the first, who told the Queen he had been
acquainted with Commin for a Year before past. The Queen asked him, What he had
to say against F. Commin, that he suspected him to be an Impostor? He Answers
Three Things.

1. Let him (says he) prove his Ordination, since he fell from the Church of
Rome. 2. Why he never comes to the Prayers of the now established Church of
England. 3. Let him prove, that ever he received the Sacrament according to the
Church of England, from any of our Orthodox Clergymen.
6. This is all so Romantic, as hardly any thing can be more; I suppose the
Accuser after an Oath taken, ought to have averred before so great a Presence,
not to have said, Let him prove. At this rate the Council might have sent for,
and Charged every Subject the Queen had, was it ever before heard, that an
Accuser charged with an Oath, to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth, should begin his Deposition with, Let him prove. How must the
Entry of this be? This Deponent being sworn and examined, says, Let him prove
his Ordination, since he fell from the Church of Rome, etc. My Lord Burleighs
Clarks knew better how to draw a Deposition sure. 2. But besides, what should
Commin prove? That, which none in England (being a Priest of the Church of Rome
before) was ever required to prove, nor ever had, viz. a Second Ordination,
after his Conversion from the Romish Religion.

The Author goes on telling us, that after some Consideration, he was called
in again and asked, Whether he was ever ordained, and by whom? Commin says he
was, and by the Cardinal Pool, (who was dead nine Years before this) the
Archbishop asks, If he had not any other Certificate under the Bishops Hands
since the Reformation? He says, not any. The Archbishop asks him, Wherefore be
would dare to Preach, having not got a License of Permission, under some of our
Bishops hands, how shall we be assured you are not of the Romish Church? Commin
Answers, There are several have heard my Prayers, and my Sermons, and can
testify that I have spoken against Rome, and her Pope, as much as any of the
Clergy have, since they have fallen from Her, I wonder therefore, why I should
be suspected.

7. So certainly might any one else wonder, till they had proved some Popish
Tenets broached by him, and either publicly Preached, or secretly Whispered.
The Archbishops Question too was admirable, how should his Purchase of a
License to preach, have secured them that he was no Papist. Though he had taken
the Oath of Supremacy, he might have vomited it up, both Bonner and Gardener
had done as much.

But the Archbishop is made to go on thus. By your Answer Mr. Commin, I
perceive you would have any one Preach, so that he speak but against the Pope
in his Sermons. Commin is made to Reply, not every one, but he whose Function
it is, and who has the Spirit of Grace and Truth. The Archbishop replieth, But
is this Spirit that is in you, either the Spirit of Grace, or Truth, that does
not comply with the Orders of the Church, lately purged from Schism and
Idolatry?

8. This Question now proceeds upon this Hypothesis. That a particular Church
lately purged from Schism and Idolatry, can make no Order, that cannot by all
be lawfully complied with (that is, cannot err) which is directly contrary to
our Thirty Nine Articles, and not like to have been the Speech of so Learned
and Judicious a Person, as Archbishop Parker was.

But to proceed, Commin is brought in replying to the Archbishop. Therefore I
endeavor to make it purer, as far as God permits. The Archbishops asks, How do
you endeavor to make the Church purer, when you neither communicate with Her
in Sacraments, or in Prayer? To which Commin Answers, Yes, I endeavor, if when
I Pray to God, that he would open the Eyes of Men to see their Errors, and
several have joined with me, when I have prayed among them, and I have both
given, and taken the Body of Christ to those of tender Consciences, who have
assembled with me in the fear of the Lord. The Archbishop replies, By your
Words then, you have a Congregation that follows you. Commin replies, I have.
The Archbishop asks, Of what Parish, and in what Diocese? He replies, neither
in any certain Parish, nor in any certain Diocese. The Archbishop replies,
Where then I Pray? He replies, In the wide World among the flock of Christ,
scattered over the whole Earth. The Queen replies, Your Diocese is very large
Mr. Commin.

9. I would gladly know of any, who understand Sense, what there is in all
this, to prove this Commin was a Papist.

After this two other Witnesses were examined, one Draper, and Mary Dean his
Maid.

Draper, says, "That Commin, came to his House at the Maidenhead, with
several of his Followers, where he bespoke a Joint of Mutton, and Two Hens for
his Dinner, hearing that his Profession was a Cook, that he showed him a Room,
for him and the Company that came with him, perceiving several to come and
inquire for him. That by Chance going up to the Stairs, he heard one Groan and
Weep, which caused him to lift up the Latch, at first he was startled and stood
amazed, but inquiring of one of his Followers, what ailed the Man; he replied,
Do ye not see we be all at Prayers? The Maid (says he) wondering where I was,
came to seek me, and found me amongst them, and can testify the same. The Maid
( Mary Dean) testified the same, adding, that she thought he was Distracted,
when she heard him Pray; but the People said, he was an heavenly Man, and that
it was Gods Spirit made him weep for the Sins of the World. Draper added, That
he continued about two Hours in Prayer, then some went away, about Ten staid,
and did eat what they had spoken for, and paid him to the utmost Penny."

What was there now in all this, to prove Faithful Commin a Popish Priest? Was
it his Praying two Hours? Here is nothing else evidenced against him, yet this
was the whole Proof, as recited by the Author of Foxes and Firebrands. But it
may be, we shall meet with something afterward, more Effectual. Let us
therefore proceed with the Story.

The aforesaid Author tells us, that after this the Queen caused Commin to be
called in, and told him that, If he would receive Orders, and become of the
Church of England, he might; otherwise he must not be permitted to Pray and
Preach among Her Subjects. How improbable a Story this is, may be understood by
any that understand, that according to our English Discipline, none once
ordained by the Church of Rome is to be reordained; and it is not likely the
Queen would have put him more upon a Reordination, than a Rebaptization. His
fault apparently was, a Preaching without License, and so much is imported by
the Queens next Words (if ever they were Hers.)

You have usurped over the Power both of Church, and of State, in doing
contrary to the Order, that We, our Council, and Parliament have agreed on
unanimously, by, and with the Consent of the whole Clergy of my Realm.

Commin (as the Tale is told) desires Time to give the Queen an Answer. The
Queen requires Bond for his Appearance, pretending other Examinations to be
taken, and Questions to be propounded.

How Preaching without License, and Praying Two Hours in an Inn, came to be a
Council Board Case, deserves thinking-Mens Deliberation; for here is nothing
else either confessed by him, or objected, or proved against him; but not
coming to the Prayers, and not receiving' the Sacrament, for both which, the
Statute, and Ecclesiastical Law was plain enough; and in Cases where the Law
has provided, the Council Board uses not to concern themselves.

(...)
The upshot of the Story is, that one Bland, and Twenty others were Commin's
Security, for his Appearance again at the Council Table, 12 April, 1567.

When they did appear, but were put off till the next Day. When (as the Tale is
told) Commin did not appear, his Bail was sent for, but they were discharged,
being bound only for his Appearance 12 April, when he did appear.

Commin, if we may believe the Author of Foxes and Firebrands, went away that
Evening, April 12.

The same Author tells us, p. 12. "That Commin coming from the Council, told
his Followers, that Her Majesty, and the Council had acquitted him, and that he
was warned of God to go beyond the Sea, to instruct the Protestants there, and
that ere long he would return to his Flock, with better Success. He told them,
that Spiritual Prayer was the chief Testimony of a true Protestant, and that
the fett Form in England, was but the Mass Translated- So after he had with a
Multitude of Tears like a Crocodile, first prayed an Ex tempore Prayer, the
better to prey upon the poor deluded People; he took his leave of them, telling
he had not one Farthing to support him in his Journey, yet being Gods Cause, he
would undertake it out of Charity; and he was assured that the Lord would raise
him up Friends where ever he traveled. This Speech set most of the People on
Weeping, especially the Women, who requested their Husbands to contribute
toward his Necessities, and it was made appear after his escape out of
England, that they Collected for him 130 l. besides what the compassionate Sex
bestowed upon him unknown to their Husbands."

All this now is either True or False, if it be all a Forgery, and of the same
Batch that the Letter which came out a little before this Pamphlet from the
Jesuit in Paris, to his Correspondent in London, showing the most Effectual Way
to ruin the Government, and Protestant Religion (complained of in Parliament,
March 21 st. 78. which the House of Commons was informed, one Dr. Nelson was
the Forger of, March 26. 1679. and upon it, that Day ordered him into Custody,
and for which he had upon his Knees a Reprimand, May 2. 1679.) it signifies
nothing. If any think it was true, he should do well to consider, how the
Author of Foxes and Firecrands, should know it to be so. It is a Passage 116
Years Old, and not likely (as any will say that ever saw any Minutes of the
Council Board) to be all entered there, or so taken by the Secretary Cecil, as
to be so whole in his Papers. It was not the product of any judicial
Examination, few I think will be so credulous as to believe such Romances. Let
us yet go on with the Story, in the latter Part of which (if any where) must be
the Proof of Commin's being a Popish Priest.

The Author of the Book aforesaid, tells us, there was no further Account of
Commin, till the 14. Sept. which was just five Months, and no more from Commins
going away. Then, "One Baker, factor of Queen (...) for him.
a Shipmaster arrived at Portsmouth, and told (we know not who) that he had
seen Commin in the Low Countries, and that coming to unlade some Goods at
Amsterdam, one Martin Van Daval, a Merchant of that City, hearing him talk of
the said Commin; told him, that this Faithful Commin, had been lately at Rome,
and that the Pope Pius Quintus had put him in Prison, but that Commin writing
to the Pope, that he had something of Importance to communicate to him, the
Pope sent for him the next Day, and as soon as he saw him said. Sir, I have
heard how you have set forth me, and my Predecessors among your Heretics in
England, by reviling my Person, and railing at my Church: To whom Commin
replied, I confess my Lips have uttered that which my Heart never Thought, but
your Holiness little thinks, I have done you a most consid erable Service,
notwithstanding I have spoken so much against you. To which the Pope returned,
How in the Name of Jesus, Mary, and all the Saints have thou done so? Sir (said
Commin) I Preached against set Forms of Prayer, and I called the English
Prayers, English Mass, and have persuaded several to pray spiritually, and Ex
tempore, and this has so much taken with the People, that the Church of
England is become as odious to that fort of People, whom I instructed, as Mass
is to the Church of England, and this will be a stumbling block to that Church,
while it is a Church; upon which the Pope commended him, and gave him a Reward
of Two Thousand Ducats for his good Service."

Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua Carmina Maevi.

Let those whom a Romance, or notorious Forgery will tickle, be pleased with
this most inartificial One, which has as many Brands of such a thing, as it is
almost possible a Story should have, 1. First, Here is but five Months allowed
for one to go in to Rome; be there taken Notice of, Imprisoned in the
Inquisition, delivered, to come back into Holland, for a Merchant in Holland to
be informed of all these Transactions; to tell them to a Shipmaster unloading
Goods, for him again to load his Ship, to come to Portsmouth, from thence to
London, and be Examined before the Council; which makes it alone much like the
Story of him that shot the Deer through his Claw, and Right Ear at the same
shot, which might be true, but not very easy to be credited by any thinking
Man. 2. Here are set, formal Speeches reported betwixt the Pope and Commin,
upon his Private Discourse with the Pope, which none could know, or relate,
unless they wrote the Words in Characters (a thing not so usual in Rome) and
upon the Truth of these Words of Commin to the Pope, lies all the Stress of the
Matter for which this Story is brought. This is so bare-faced-a piece of
Fiction, as any Man of ordinary Modesty would blush at. 3. Here are Forms of
Speech used, not very likely to be used, either by a beggarly Priest to a Pope,
or by a Pope unto him; it would also be inquired, Whether Pius Quintus used
that Phrase ordinarily, In the Name of Jesus, Mary, and all the Saints? 4. It
is not very probable, that he being committed for so high a Crime, as railing
at the Pope or the Church of Rome, should be so soon discharged, upon writing a
Lie; all know in such Cases there use to be Petitions upon Petitions, nor is
the Pope so much at leisure, as to send for a Prisoner the next Day. 5. What
Evidence had the Pope of the Feats Commin had done; did he take his own Word
(think we) for the good Service he had done, so as to acquit him of such a
Crime? 6. All I can say is, If the Pope gave him 2000 Ducats upon these Terms,
Pius Quintus and his Money were sooner parted, than I think any reasonable Man
will believe they should.


I Appeal to the Judgment of the whole World, whether this Story has any thing
of credibility in it.

The next Story brought to persuade us, That free, Spiritual Prayer was brought
in by the Jesuits and Romish Priest's is the Story of one Heath, related
largely by the aforesaid Author of the Pamphlet called Foxes, and Firebrands,
out of a pretended Registry of the Episcopal See of Rochester, which begins
Anno 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. and continued to the 15 th Elizabeth. The Passage
which makes up the Story, he says was 11. Eliz. he tells us the Story at
large, p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Dr. St. mentions it in his Preface to
his Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 13, 14. Our Casuist has it again, Part
2. p. 60. I shall not trouble my Reader with the History at large, which may be
read by any that are curious in the aforementioned Pamphlet called Foxes and
Firebrands.

All in it which looks toward our Purpose is, that this Heath confessed, that
he had been a Jesuit Six Years before, viz. Anno 1562. but owned himself at
that Time a Protestant, and accordingly applied himself to the Dean of
Rochester (his Brother having been lately Bishop of that See) for some Church
preferment, and had encouragement, only the Dean would first hear him Preach,
and appointed him, 21. Nov. when he Preached, and that in the Cathedral upon
Acts 12.6. Peter therefore was kept in Prison, but Prayers were made without
ceasing to God for him. It seems, this subtle Jesuit was so simple, as in a
Probation Sermon to tell the Dean, and his other Hearers. That they were not
the Prayers of the Church of England as then established, that brought Peter
out of Prison, but spiritual Prayers.

The Sexton (as the Story goes) after Sermon found a Letter in the Pulpit,
Tin of (...) i^.
directed to one Mr. Thomas Thinn, he carries it to the Bishop, and it was as
follows Brother,
"THe Council of our Fraternity, have thought fit to send you David George,
Theodorus Sarter, and John Hutts, their Collections, which you may distribute
where ever you see it may be for your Purpose, according to the Peoples
Inclinations; these mixtures with your own, will not only puzzle the
Understandings of your Auditors, but make your self Famous. We suppose your
wants are not considerable at present, by what we have heard, how your Flock do
admire you every Day, more, and more. Be not over zealous in your Proceedings
in the beginning, but gradually win on them, as you visit them; and according
as you find their Inclinations bend to your Design. Let us hear how you have
proceeded, for it will satisfy our Brethren much, and enable them to instruct
you for the Future; Hallingam, Coleman, and Benson have set a Faction amongst
the German Heretics, so as several, who have turned from us, have denied their
Baptism, which we hope will soon turn the Scale, and bring them back, to their
old Principles. This we have certified to the Council, and Cardinals. That
there is no other way to prevent People from turning Heretics, and for
recalling others back again to the Mother Church, then by Diversity of
Doctrines; we wish you to Prosper."

Madrid, Oct. 26, 1658. Samuel Malt.




Upon this Letter thus found, the Bishop of Rochester Convented the Preacher,
Nov. 22. charge him with nothing, but a Suspicion that he was a Jesuit, and
that this Letter came indeed to him, though under the Fictitious Name of Thomas
Thinn. If we may believe the Story he confessed, that he had been a Jesuit Six
Years before, 1562. but faith, that he had for Six Years before, past,
withdrawn from them. The Bishop (to prove him a Jesuit still) urged his Saying
in his Sermon the Day before. That they were not the Prayers of the Church of
England, but spiritual Prayers, that brought Peter out of Prison (and was not
this a concludent Argument that he was a Jesuit?) And by and by, the Bishop
asks him, if he had no Letters from those of his own Order? If he knew one
Malt, shows him the Letter supposed to be by him dropped in the Pulpit. He
owned, that he had heard of Malt, and perhaps had formerly known him, but would
not own that he yet was a Papist. But it is said, that upon search at his Inn
(for he had been in Town but Three Weeks) his Beads were found in his Boots,
and amongst his Papers, a License from the Fraternity of the Jesuits, and a
Bull dated the first of Pius Quintus (which by the way was that Year) To Preach
what Doctrines that Society pleased, for dividing Protestants, and in his Trunk
were found several Books denying Infant Baptism. Upon which it is said, the
Bishop adjourned the Court Three Days, to the 25. Nov. and in the mean time
sent to the Council for Instructions. Upon 25. Nov. be remanded him to Prison,
Sentenced him to stand in the Pillory Three Days, and on the Third Day to have
his Ears cut off, his Nose slit, Forehead branded with F. and to be
perpetually Imprisoned. This is the Story.

Admit, now it were true in all Points, I see nothing in it, that either makes
against free, conceived, Prayer, or against Dissenters. Who doubts but that
Jesuits will turn themselves into all Shapes, this very Jesuit was a
Probationer for a Son of the Church, he Preached before the Dean for that
Purpose. One of them may be all for the Prayers of the Church, and for the
heighths of Ceremonies (as we know Popish Priests are generally.) Another of
them may be for conceived Prayer, and exclaim against the Ceremonies, when both
the one, and the other, drive the same Design, that they may rule. Now had we
no Liturgy universally imposed, nor any Ceremonies so imposed, their Designs
were spoiled, and they would be put to new Topics. I never thought the good
Angels in the least defamed, by the Devils transforming themselves into their
Appearance.

But this Story as related by the Author of Foxes, and Firebrands, has as
great Appearances also of a Forgery, as can well be imagined.

1. It comes to us only upon the Credit of a Registry, and concerns a Matter
of Fact 115 Years since, is justified by no Print, though both Itolinshead and
Cambden wrote the History of Queen Elizabeth's Reign with great
Particularities. Now we know the Authority of an Ecclesiastical Court, is such,
as none of our Civil Courts will admit their Scripts for Records. 2. We know
there was for Twenty Years an Interruption of those Registrings, in which Time
they lost many of their Books and Papers, this must be supposed to have escaped
the common Fate. 3. The Register must be presumed to have made a true Entry,
and that Verbatim, of what the Bishop said, and Heath answered. Those who have
been acquainted with those Courts will tell us, they could never find a true
Entry made, of what was said between the Judges and Parties questioned, when
they have looked for them within Fourteen Days or a Month. 4. This Examination
was in Court. Registers use not in Court to set down Questions and Answers at
large, but to make Minutes of them, and then extend them at their Leisure; so
as this Examination was probably set down when the Court was done, as Mr.
Register's Memory would serve him, and it was for the Interest of the Church to
set down, so as we cannot be assured that so much as one Question with the
Answer to it, is truly set down. 5. By what Authority did the Bishop Sentence
him to the Pillory, to have his Ears cut off, his Nose slit, and to suffer
perpetual Imprisonment? And for what Crime? All the World knows, that since the
Reformation, no Bishop ever had such a Power. The High Commission, and
Star Chamber, in latter Years exercised some such Power, but this was in the
Bishops Consistorial Court, which never had such a Power. 6. It is neither
probable, that a Jesuit should put his Beads into his Boots, nor keep a Letter
(of no more Moment) in his Pocket to drop in a Cathedral Pulpit. 7. The having
of Popish Beads, or Books denying Baptism, or speaking such Words, was by no
Law a Crime, subjecting a Person to so severe a Punishment. 8. In the Year,
1536. (but Thirty Two Years before) there were not Ten Jesuits in the World.
In the Year, 1540. (but Twenty Eight Years before) Pope Paul increased them to
Sixty. In the Year, 1543. (but Twenty five Years before) he established them
without Limitation. In the Year, 1541. (but Twenty seven Years before this
Year) Their College at the importunity of Peter Mascarenhaz (the Portugal
Ambassador to the Pope) could afford but Two (and those were Two of the first
Twelve) Xavierus, and Rodericus for all Portugal. This Story happening within
Twenty seven Years, supposes them a formed Body, with settled
Correspondencies, so as there was a Communication fixed betwixt Rome, Madrid,
and England. The probability of which I leave to my Readers Judgment. 9.
Whereas Common Fame speaks the Jesuits the most subtle of all Orders. This
Narrative, speaks their Fathers (for so all their Missionaries are) the veryest
Coxcombs in Nature. Otherwise Heath would never at first have owned himself a
Jesuit, 1562. muchless would he, preaching a Probation Sermon, and that in a
Cathedral, have so sillily reflected on the Prayers of the Church, or told the
Bishop. That he had labored to refine the Protestants, and to take off all
smaks of Ceremonies. The poor Jesuit is made here beneath a tolerable Fool. 10.
Nor was the Jesuit Malt made less. Whereas the Anabaptists had been once up in-
Germany, 1524. and finally quelled upon their after-rising in the Years, 1534,
1535. Malt the Jesuit is here brought in, endeavoring to persuade his Friend,
that Hallingam, Coleman, and Benson, Thirty one Years after, and 1568. had
raised this Faction. Was not this a great Blockhead, think we for a Jesuit?
These Difficulties (as to Credibilty) this Story labors under, how much
soever it pleased the Dean of Paul's, or now pleases our Casuist.

I am aware of what the Dean has further said to strengthen this Story, and to
evince the suitableness of these pretenses about spiritual Prayer (as he calls
them) to the Doctrine, and Practice of the Jesuits; but he has received an
unanswerable Answer by the Learned Author of the Book called. A Modest and
Peaceable Enquiry into the Design and Nature of those Historical Mistakes that
are found in Dr. Stillingfleets Preface to his Unreasonableness of Separation,
p. 7, 8, 9. where is proved.

1. "That the Jesuits were not the first Inventers, nor the first bringers in
of spiritual Prayer; spiritual Prayer, being owned, acknowledged, and privately
practiced ever since the Apostles Days; for the Church never did forbid the use
of it, faith Filiucius. 2. That the Jesuits ever have, and still do zealously
oppose the use of Free Prayer. 3. That wherein the Jesuits and the Dissenters
agree, as to this, it is in no other respect, than wherein the Universal Church
agree with them. 4. That wherein the Dissenters, and the Doctor differ about
spiritual Prayer, the Dr. closes with the Jesuit; our difference if any, being
about the Public Use of Free Prayer, against which the Jesuits are. See these
Four Things made good in the Book beforementioned, p. 6, 7, 8."
But methinks, the Dean, and those other Divines we have to do with in this
Controversy, if they have a mind to make People a little Sport, about this
grave business of Prayer, in the Use of Men's own Abilities, they should give it
another Name than that of spiritual Prayer. Prayer is then spiritual, when it
is so with respect to the Matter, being such Things as the Holy Spirit in the
Word, has directed us to Pray for. Or as to the Manner, when it is the Action
of our inward Man, not the outward only, not a mere Lip labor, and so it is
opposed to what is merely Verbal. Or else, when it is attended with Holy, and
spiritual Affections excited, and inflamed by the Holy Spirit. I am sure all
other Prayer is an Abomination in the sight of God.

All the Question is, betwixt our Brethren and us, whether the Words we use in
Prayer, should not be first formed in our own Hearts, and whether that Prayer
which is such, be not more spiritual than other. That is, 1. Whether there be
not more of the Work of our own Spirit in it (which I think no modest Man will
deny?) 2. Whether there be not in such Prayer more room left to the Spirit of
God to bring to our Remembrance what we have to confess, to supplicate and give
Thanks for?

No Words diminutive of spiritual Prayer, become a Divine who ought to know,
that God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth.

What, if some Jesuits have discoursed for this kind of Prayer under the Name
of Oration acquisita, acquired Prayer? So they have discoursed very well, for
the Divine Nature of Christ, the Trinity, the Love of God, etc. All Sober
Divines will grant, that this acquired Prayer, is the most perfect Prayer. The
Jesuits never discoursed for it, but in Private. They agree with some others
that are no Dissenters, as to Public Prayer. There was a Time, when many can
bear both the Dean, and our late Casuist Witness, that they both approved, and
practiced this kind of Praying; if they see better now, they must Pardon
others, that cannot see by their Spectacles; still acquired Prayer, or free
Prayer, is what it was in the same Degree of Goodness, and Praeference. I know
nothing that Spiritual Prayer can be opposed to, but either carnal, or mere
formal Prayer, from both which the good Lord deliver the whole Generation of
those that seek his Face. But this is enough to deliver free, or conceived, or
acquired, or (if they will have it so) spiritual Prayer; from the false and
fordid Calumny of being brought in by Jesuits.

3. The Third is yet worse. That the Devil may have a Causation in it. The
first that I remember I have met with, who has taught the World this new
Imputation, was the Author of Ravillac Redivivus proving it from the Instance
of that prodigious Hypocrite in Scotland, Major Weier. The next that approved
his saying was Dr. Falkner in his Vindication of Liturgies, p. 41. who
speaking, how the faculty of Expression in Prayer may be procured, faith, It
may be procured, as he has read in some particular Instances, by Diabolical
Contracts. What his Answerer replieth to him, see p. 43, 44, 45. Our Casuist
has improved the Notion, Part 2. page 13.

"But then Secondly, As for Diabolical Inspirations, of Matter and Words in
Prayer, we have sundry very probable Instances; such as Major Weier (who is
said to have received his Inspirations through a Staff) Hacket, David George,
and that Monster of Wickedness John Basilides Duke of Russia, who were all of
them possessed with such a wonderful Gift of Prayer, as did not only charm, and
ravish those that heard them, but seemed in the Opinion of the most wise and
impartial to exceed the Power of Nature, which renders it very probable, that
the Matter of their Prayers was for the most part agreeable to Scripture;
otherwise it is hardly conceivable, how they could have procured to themselves
so many Admirers, and abused so many honest Minds into a belief, that they were
immediately inspired by God."

For Answer to our Casuist, his probable Instances of the Devil, his inspiring
ill Men with Matter and Words in Prayer; I shall only desire the Reader to
consider these few Things following.

First, Consider, That it is worth the observing, how unreasonable this
Casuist, and his Liturgical Brethren are, while they find a Difficulty to allow
the Holy Spirit (who is called, The Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Zech.
12.10. The Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba, Father, Romans 8 15. Gal.
4.6. The Spirit that helps our Infirmities, because of our Selves, we know
not what we should Pray for, as we ought, Romans 8. 26.) any influence on our
Words in Prayer, which is a good and Holy Action; and yet find no difficulty to
yield the evil Spirit, such an influence, who abhors Prayer, and will leave
the Room, where he is molesting Men, when they go to Prayer, as we are assured
in good Histories of such Molestations by the Devil, such as that of the Devil
of Mascon, Published by Dr. Peter du Moulin, and others. Is not this very
unfair dealing, and an horrible Derogation from the Dignity, and blessed
influences of the Holy Spirit?

Secondly, Consider, That as for us, we freely grant the possibility of all
that our Casuist and his Brethren can reasonably demand, and rightly infer from
the foregoing Instances. That is, we grant it is possible that by Gods Holy
Permission, Satan may suggest many Things to ill Men, he may represent various
Objects to the Imagination and inward Sense; he can impress the ideas of
Objects upon Men's Fancy and Imagination; and by means of those ideas, he can
raise their Passions, and excite their Lusts and corrupt. Affections: He cannot
only imprint new Idea's upon their Imagination, but he can also revive in them
the Memory of Things past, and restore to them the Ideas of Things which they
had forgotten, and seemed to have lost; and by the one, or the other, or by
both these Means he can influence their corrupt Affections, and put them into
Motion. These are his venomous Darts, wherewith he agitates their Blood and
Spirits, and fixes their Lusts and Passions. He can also suggest to them
Thoughts, that it is Gods good Spirit who thus moves them, and makes those
Impressions upon them; and then their own wicked Hearts, inclining them too
readily to believe the Truth of his Suggestions, because of the agreeableness
of some of the things suggested, to the Vanity of their Minds, out of the
abundance of their Hearts, their Months naturally speak, and that with such
defining and flourish of Words,as bears Proportion to the natural volubility of
their Tongues, or to that readiness of Speech, which by Use and Exercise they
have acquired. Thus it is granted, that without bodily. Possession, the evil
Spirit might Work in those Children of Disobedience ( Ephesians. 2.2.) and so
doing, might furnish them with Matter of Discourse, and thereby so excite and
inflame their corrupt Affections and Passions, that their wicked Hearts so
warmed, should readily prepare Words for their Tongues to utter, by a natural
or acquired volubility of Speech. But now,

Thirdly, Consider, That in all this, there is nothing of that truly,
spiritual, vocal Prayer, which is the proper and genuin Effect of Gods Holy
Spirit, influencing the Souls of true penitent Believers. For that vocal
Prayer, as such, consists of gracious Words proceeding from, and reverently,
and aptly expressing the inward workings of Grace, the gracious devout
Affections of the Heart, and the Holy and humble Desires of the Soul toward
God through Christ. But the Words spoken from the aforesaid wretched Men, were
no such gracious Words, they proceeded from no such Good, and so were
expressive of no such gracious Affections, of no such holy and humbly Desires.
The utmost that with any color of Reason can be said, is, that they were the
Counterfeit, and had the Semblance and Appearance of so good a thing. But then,

Fourthly, Let it be considered, That the Devils, and wicked Men's
counterfeiting the Inspirations of the Spirit of God, and the spiritual Prayers
of good Men, is so far from being an Argument against the Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, and against the spiritual Prayers of good Men influenced by the
Holy Spirit of Prayer; that it is rather an Argument for them: Just as there
having been so many false and counterfeit Miracles in the World, is an Argument
that there really have been true Miracles; and as there having been so much
counterfeit Coin in England, is a good Argument that there has been, and there
is in it, true and good Coin. For if there had never been any thing of that
Nature, true and good; Devils and ill Men would never have been at the Pains,
to make their Counterfeits.

Fifthly, Consider, That what ever might be the Design of the Devil in being
the Author of such counterfeit delusive Inspirations, (which to be sure was no
good one;) and what ever also might be the Design of our Casuist in objecting
against us such counterfeit delusive Inspirations; yet certain it is, that in
Truth and Reality, it is no Reproach to the Holy Spirit of God, that he suffers
the Devil and his Instruments to counterfeit his Holy Inspirations; no more,
than it is a Reproach to Gods Holy Angels, and faithful Ministers, that Satan
transforms himself into an Angel of Light, and that Satan's Ministers also are
transformed into the Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15.

Consider, Sixthly, That the right Use which Men fearing God, should make of
the Instances of Diabolical Inspirations beforementioned, is not to reject the
true Influences of the Holy Spirit in Prayer; for fear of being imposed upon by
the counterfeit Inspirations of Satan (that would be as wise a Course, as to
throw away all Money good and bad, for fear of being cheated with counterfeit
Coin) but to be upon our Guard, and to try the Spirits, (1 These. 5. 19, 20, 21.
1 John 4.1.) examining the Motions of the Spirit within us, by the sure Rule of
Gods written Word; which even Cardinal Bona confesses to be a sufficient Rule
to try Spirits by. ( Cum Scriptum sit (inquit) lucerna pedibus meis, verbum
tuum, and lumen semitisi meis: sit que sacra Scriptura, sicut, Apostolus (2 Timothy 3 16.) Divinitus inspirata, utilis ad docendam and ad erudiendum in
Iustitia, ut perfectus sit homo dei, ad omne opus bonum instructus; suffciens
apparatus ad spirituum Discretionem, in ea ^rocul dubio reperitur. Bona de
discretione spirituum, Edit. Paris, 1673. Cap. 5. p. 54. Without doubt (says
the Cardinal, there is in the Scripture sufficient means to discern Spirits
by.) And withal, we ought to be very modest, humble, holy, and charitable;
exercising our selves to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God
and toward Men. And if we do so, God, who is faithful, will not suffer us to be
tempted above that we are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. The infinitely Good, Wife, and
Faithful God, will not suffer any of his Faithful People to be invincibly
tempted by Satanical Delusions. God, by his Word and Providence, always
furnishes his People with Means to discern Divine from Satanical Inspirations
and Enthusiasms: Otherwise, if we could not discern the one from the other,
Divine Inspirations would be of no use, but might be a Trap and a Snare to the
Best of God's People; which were Blasphemy to assert, and is contrary to the
daily Pattern of the Church of England, which continually prays, That God would
cleanse the Thoughts of their Hearts by the Inspiration of his Holy Spirit: And
let any sober, intelligent Man read the Life of Hacket and his two Prophets, as
it was written and published by Dr. Cousms, no Friend, but an Enemy to
Dissenters, and he may see, that their Pretended-Inspired Prayers had the
Devil's Mark imprinted upon them in Capital Letters. I will mention but one
such Mark: It was usual with them, in their Prayers, to call upon God to
confound them, to destroy and damn them, if what they said was not true, and
they were not Men extraordinarily and immediately called of God to reform the
Church, as they pretended to be. By this one Mark it is easy for any Man of
Sense to see and judge that certainly they were Melancholy to a Degree of
Madness; or, that they were deluded by the Devil; or, that they were both one
and the other. So much is sufficient for an Answer to our Casuist his Instances
of Men Diabolically inspired, as he says; which should indeed make Christians
watchful against the Stratagems of the Enemy of God and Men, but should never
so far fright them out of their Wits, as to make them reject the true genuine
Influences and Inspirations of God's Holy Spirit who helps our Infirmities in
Prayer, Romans 8.26.

If my Style in handling this Argument appear to any too severe, I must beg
their Pardon, if I want a little Patience to hear the more-than-probable
Effects of the Operations of the Holy and Blessed Spirit traduced for
Iesuitical Inventions, and the Effects of the Unclean Spirit in such Cases.
Difficile est Satyram non Scribere --



I have been large in this Argument, because it is new; and all I expect to
find new in, the Discourses I am Animadverting upon: In the other Parts, I
believe, fewer Words will serve the turn.

The First Case which our Casuist undertakes to speak to, P. 3. and so to the
26th. is,

1. Case. Whether Praying in a Form of Words do not stint and limit the Spirit
of Prayer?

I must confess, I have always thought it no inconsiderable Argument prevailing
with me to judge it unlawful for me, ministering in Prayer, to use the
prescribed Forms of others; because, by doing it, I must necessarily exclude
what Influence or Assistance the Holy Spirit may give me in the Performance of
that Holy Duty. It is true, this is done as to all the People that join with
him that ministers, but that is quite another Species of Prayer. We know it is
the Will of God, that as we sometimes should minister to our selves, and to
others, in the Duty of Prayer; so at other times we should only pray by
Communion, or joining with another in Prayer. This is evidently God's Will, as
appears by the constant Practice recorded in Holy Writ. Now, if it be the Will
of God that we should sometimes pray only mentally, whilst one only uses Words
in Prayer, and if it be lawful here to shut out the Spirit's Influence upon our
Words, when we are to use no Words, but only to join our Amen to him that uses
them; it will not therefore follow, that we may do it, when we are our selves
to use Words, as to which the Holy Spirit may influence us. And this is all the
Unlawfulness in this Case we plead, and which some phrase a stinting or
limiting the Spirit. For the clearer understanding of this Matter, I will first
set down what Influence upon our Words in Prayer we challenge for the Holy
Spirit. It lies, as I said in the former Chapter, in two things: 1. In
bringing to remembrance the Word of God. What Acts are contrary to it, and have
been our Sins, and so are Matter of Confession; what things the Word of God
gives us leave to ask, and under what Circumstances, and what we have need of,
what Promises God has made for giving them to us. Now this is no more than
Christ promised, Job. 14. 26. The Holy Ghosts shall bring all things to your
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. We challenge no such thing for the
Holy Spirit, as dictating new Matter, not contained in the Word, but bringing
to our Minds what Things are in the Word fit for Confession, Supplication, or
Thanksgiving, as to us, or others. 2. Nor, Secondly, must that Power be denied
the Holy Spirit which any of our Brethren have; they can whisper such things in
our Ears, and so bring them to our Minds (though it may be we were not aware of
them, or had forgotten them) we believe the Holy Spirit can make immediate
Impressions upon our Spirits, proportionate to the Sounds Creatures can make in
our Ears, from which Impressions are made upon our Souls: Those who deny this,
must deny all Spiritual Motions from the Blessed Spirit of God. 2. We also
challenge for the Holy Spirit a Power to excite and inflame the Affections,
which, so beated, thrust out Words in a natural Course. This is all we plead
for in the Case, and say, That if in Prayer we be limited by a Form of Words,
such kind of Impressions as these cannot affect us, nor have any Effect upon us
suitable to the Nature of them, and the Holy Spirit's Design in making of them;
and this we think is not lawful for us to allow, because it is a quenching of
the Spirit.


Our Casuist tells us, That he will also examine, What the Scripture
attributes to the Spirit in Prayer. 2. What it is to stint or limit the
Spirit. He says, The Scripture attributes something to the Spirit in Prayer,
which was extraordinary and temporary; and something ordinary, fixed, and
standing. That which he mentions as extraordinary, is, the Inspiration of the
Matter of Prayer, together with an Ability to express it in known, or unknown
Languages. To which I answer,

There is thus much Truth in this; That it is sufficiently probable, that
before the full Revelation of the Will of God in Scripture, God did
extraordinarily inspire his Servants, as to some particular Matter of Prayer,
how otherwise could they know what was his Will? And that also upon the first
going of the Apostles to the Gentiles, it pleased God also to enable the
Apostles to pray with diverse Tongues; nor was this only for a Sign to them that
believed not, but as a necessary Mean, by which the first Messengers of Christ
to the Gentiles were enabled both to pray with, and to preach to several
Nations. But that after the full Revelation of the Divine Will in the Holy
Scriptures, God at any time more than other has revealed the Matter of Prayer
unto his People, more than the Matter of Preaching, is more than I know, or any
can prove; nor can any Reason be given for such an Assertion, he had in his
written Word told his Ministers and People what they should pray for; nor might
they pray for any thing but what was according to that his revealed Will.

2. If by revealing the Matter of Prayer, this Author means no more than
bringing to Ministers and Peoples Minds such things as they stand in need of,
and God in his Word has declared himself, ready to give, it is no more than
God yet does every Day.

2. If by it he means his exciting them, at this or that time, to pray for
some particular Good, either for a Nation, or Church, or a particular Family,
or Person, which he had only generally promised in his Word, and left them at
Liberty to pray for, conditionally, and with a reference and Submission to his
Divine Will and Wisdom, neither can this be called extraordinary, with
reference to any Period of Time, it being no more than what God has by his
Spirit done in all Times, and yet does; though in another Sense this be
extraordinary, such more-than-ordinary Impressions, being but at such
particular Times, when God intends to give out such Mercies; other
extraordinary and temporary Revelations of the Matter of Prayer, after the
Sealing of the Canon of Scripture, are such as nothing in Scripture guides any
to expect. And to assert any such thing, is but to dictate without Shadow of
Proof eithe r from Scripture or Reason.

Nor is it more true, that there ever were any extraordinary Assistances of the
Spirit at any time, as to the Words used in Prayer, further than the inabling
the first Ministers and Christians to pray and preach in other Tongues than
they had learned. Nor can it be proved, that as to praying in their own
Language, the Holy Spirit ever was further promised or given to any, than to
bring to their Remembrance the Things they stood in need of, and which God had
given them leave to pray for, and promised to give, and the like, and exciting
their Affections, and inflaming them, which being heated, they spoke with their
Tongues; which Assistance, we do say, is an ordinary and standing Influence
communicated, as to former Ages, so to our present Age, and will be
communicated to Believers to the End of the World. Let us hear what Reason our
Casuist has to the contrary: He pretends to give us Four, P. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
etc. to 21.

1. His First Reason is, Because there is no Promise of any such Gift, which,
were it true, were indeed a strong Reason, though not against the thing, (for God
may give what he has no where particularly promised,) yet against our
Expectation of any such thing. But this is very far from being Truth: For, 1.
There are general Promises of all good things, and of his Spirit. 2. There are
particular Promises of the Holy Spirit to help us in the Duty of Prayer. So
that, if this Influence be a good thing, and what is possible, without any
Derogation to-the Honor of God, there are Promises enough for it. He who
looks for a particular Promise for every thing, will deprive himself of the
comfortable Expectation of much Good, and disable himself from praying in Faith
for most things he prays for. God has promised, Psalm. 84 11. No good thing
will be withold from them that walk uprightly. He has promised to give his
Holy Spirit to them that ask him; and he has told us, that by this Spirit we
cry, Abba Father, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. and told us, Romans 8. That the Spirit
helps our Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought.
He gives his Spirit to his People, they are joined to the Lord, and one Spirit,
and his Spirit dwells in them, as we often read in Scripture. He has promised,
that his Spirit shall bring to remembrance the things we have heard of him,
Joh. 14.26. But it may be he will say, There is no Promise of Assistance as to
Words in Prayer: What should be the Meaning of that? There is no Promise indeed
of the Holy Spirit standing by, and dictating to us what Words to speak, nor
yet of the Spirit's so possessing us as the Evil Spirit does a Demoniack, so as
to lay our Souls asleep, while he uses our Tongue. But there are Promises of
his teaching us to cry, Abba Father; of his bringing to our remembrance what
the Scripture has of his making Intercession for us, etc. These are enough for
us, and to prove all that ordinary Assistance as to Words in Prayer which we
plead for.

Nor does our Casuist say any thing of Force, to persuade us, That such
Influence and Assistance of the Spirit is not within the Latitude of the
Promises, in saying, That there are many good Christians who would never
pretend to any such Inspiration, but are some of them beholden to their own
Recollection and Invention for the Matter and Words of their Prayer; and
others, for want of a sufficient Quickness of Invention, to be beholding to
Forms of Prayer of other Men's Composure. ( P. 6.) Now there are no such
Blessings of the New Covenant, to which good Christians may have no Right and
Title, and of which they may never actually partake, which is utterly to
destroy the Nature of the Covenant, etc.

That there are no Blessings of the New Covenant, to which every true Believer
has no Right or Title, or which they may never actually partake of, is most
freely granted. But that there are some Blessings of the New Covenant, which
every good Christian does enjoy, though he lies under other Apprehensions, and
which he may have a Ius Remotum, a Right and Title to, which, pro hic and nunc,
he does not actually enjoy; and some Blessings of the Covenant which a
Christian might enjoy, if indeed he did not by his voluntary Fault deprive
himself of the Benefit of them; and some Blessings which a young Christian does
not at present enjoy, must be denied by no Considerate Divine: For who ever
says it, must deny both the Quickening and Consolatory Influences of the Holy
Spirit, and many more also indeed; for the Promises relating to Justification
and Regeneration, as every Believer has a Right to them, so he actually
partakes of them, as he shall do of Eternal Life. But for those Branches of the
Covenant which concern further Grace, or Gifts, the Case is otherwise. Every
good Christian has a Right and Title to the Spirit of Adoption, teaching him
to cry Abba Father, influencing him in the manner I have opened, as to Words in
Prayer. But yet it is very possible, 1. That by his own voluntary Fault he may
shut out these Influences by tying himself up to Forms of Words. 2. He may want
them, through his own Default, in not studying the Scriptures, and gaining a
full Knowledge of them. 3. He may deprive himself of them by wilful Sinnings,
which may make the Holy Spirit withdraw himself in those arbitrary
Manifestations. 4. He may have them, and not know it, but take them to be mere
Humane and Natural Recollections, to which the Holy Spirit has assisted, by
bringing to remembrance what Christ has said.


Our Casuist's Second Reason, p. 7. is, Because there is no need of any such
immediate Inspiration. This indeed (were it true) were a great Argument, and
would Prove what he said before, That there are no Promises of any such
Tendency. But how will he prove this? He says, 1. As to the Matter of Prayer,
it is sufficiently revealed in Scripture. 2. He says, For Words, if we have
not Quickness enough of Fancy and Invention to express our Wants and Desires in
our own Words, we may readily supply that Defect by Forms of other Men's
Composure, which, with very short Additions and Variations of our own, we may
easily adapt to all our particular Cases and Circumstances. This is the Sum of
what he says, P. 2. p. 8, 9.

If the Matter of Prayer be sufficiently revealed in Holy Writ, there neither
is, nor ever was, since the Apostles Time, any need of any extraordinary
Assistance of the Spirit to dictate that. But (admitting this, which we freely
grant) is there yet no need of the Spirit to bring to remembrance the things we
have had of Christ's? Our particular Violations of the Divine Law, our
particular Wants, or the Promises warranting us to beg a Supply: To assert no
need of the Spirit's Help, we must not only assert the Perfection of the Rule
of Prayer, but the Perfection of an Human Memory too, which, I suppose, our
Casuist will not.

2. As to Words, our Casuist talks as if he thought we pleaded for the Spirit's
dictating formed Words to us, or made use of our Tongues to speak Words not
formed in our own Hearts: What else does he mean by Words immediately inspired?
Alas! we mean no such thing, but only a bringing into our Thoughts the Matter
of Scripture, relating to Things forbidden, commanded, promised, etc. From
which, our Souls, by a natural Power, form Words, and warming and heating our
Affections, which also contribute to them, and then thrust them out at our
Lips, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 39. 3. Now how it can be, that Forms should
not shut out this Assistance and Influence, poseth me to understand.

3. Our Casuist's Third Reason is, p. 9. Because there is no certain Sign nor
Testimony of it amongst us. By Signs, as he expounds himself, p. 10. he means
Miracles. He gives his Pretended Reason for this, Because, without such Signs
to distinguish it from false Pretenses, we were better be without Inspiration
than with it, because we shall be left under an unavoidable Necessity, either
of admitting all Inspirations which pretend to be Divine, or of rejecting all
that are truly so.

According to this rate of Arguing, we must conclude nothing to be the Effect
of the Spirit of God, but what we can confirm to be so by working some Miracle.
Alas! how should Christians (if this had a Grain of Truth in it) ever be able
to satisfy themselves that they truly believe in Christ, or love, or fear God,
or exercised, or had any Habit of Grace? God indeed gave the Gift of Miracles
to confirm new Doctrines, or some Prophecies, or Persons extraordinary
Missions. But did ever any Divine make Miracles necessary to confirm every
Manifestation of the Spirit? And why are they necessary for this more than any
other?

Is it not Sign enough to him who believes the Scriptures to be the Word and
Revealed Will of God, that the Inspiration is from God, if it be according to
the Revealed Will of God? Surely one, who being about to pray, has any thing
brought into his Mind to confess, beg, or give Thanks for, which he knows is
according to the Revealed Will of God his Duty to confess, beg, or give Thanks
for, may know, or at least reasonably think, it is brought to his Thoughts by
the Holy Spirit of God, though he cannot confirm it to be so by a miraculous
Operation.

But (says our Casuist) though the Scripture may be sufficient to discover the
Matter of the Inspiration, whether it be true or false, yet it is not
sufficient to distinguish the Inspiration, whether it be Divine, or Natural, or
Diabolical. Then he runs into a Discourse of Natural and Diabolical
Enthusiasms; and concludes, That Men may be inspired naturally, or from the
Devil, and how dangerous it is to father such Inspirations upon the Spirit of
God.

1. For natural Inspiration, it is a kind of unintelligible Thing; for surely
he that is inspired, does aliquid pati, suffer something, and to suffer it to
receive the Action of a foreign Agent: So that, to speak modestly, (though
Natural Inspiration be a Canting Term, devised by some of late for no very good
Purpose,) it is no very good Natural Sense, carrying with it contradictionem in
adjecto, which is not very Scholastic. It is true, a Man may have a natural or
accidental Fervency of Spirit, occasioned several natural and honest ways, as
well as by some less honest; and I do not think it much dishonorable to the
Holy Spirit to make use of those natural Means to excite the Affections.

Our Casuist is aware that this Third Reason of his will have the same, if not
a greater Force against that Assistance of the Spirit in Prayer, which he, and
others of his Mind, are willing to allow, (that he might not be called the
Spirit of Supplication for nothing,) viz. in exciting and inflaming the
Affections, whose Fervor cannot be denied also, to proceed sometimes from the
Temper of the Body, and they will be at a Loss there also to distinguish
betwixt the Fervor that is Divine and that which is Natural in its Causation.
But how will he avoid it? He tells us, p. 12. That as to this, we have a sure
Word of Promise; but not for the latter; and therefore, if we can claim a
Promise, we have just Reason to conclude, that how much soever other Causes
might contribute toward it, the Holy Spirit was the Principal Cause.

I hope my Reader, from what I have said before, will see Reason to conclude,
that we may as well claim Promises, and more than one, for that Influence which
we claim for the Holy Spirit upon our Words in Prayer, as for the Influence it
has upon our Affections; and if he will but name us the Texts and Promises he
has for the Spirit's Influence upon our Affections, it is ten to one but we
shall prove, that those very Texts, if Romans 8. 15, 26. Gal. 4. 6. as much
concern Words, and contain Promises for Assistance as to Words, as the exciting
of Affections; and we are pretty sure of it, considering the great Influence
raised Affections have upon our Words expressive of them, so as we are Even;
and if there need no Miracle to prove the one to be Divine, neither does there
need any to prove the other Influence Divine also.

2. As to Diabolical Inspiration, we have spoken before. The Probability of
such a thing is a very bold Suggestion: We cannot deny but the Devil may
sometimes suggest Scriptures to us.' He did so to our Savior, Matthew. 4. 6. But
it is a sure Rule, that he never does it but for obvious and apparently sinful
Ends. If a Minister, or a conscientious Christian, be conscious to himself,
that he has no other Ends in Prayer than to glorify God, in obeying his Will,
to humble his Soul before God for his Sins, and to beg and obtain his Pardon,
and such Influences of Grace as his Soul stands in need of, and he finds
Scriptures pertinent to these Things brought to his Mind, he has no Reason but
to conclude they come from the Holy Spirit; nor needs he any Miracle to
confirm it. The End will both demonstrate the Act, and also discover the
Principle plainly enough.

But, p. 14. Our Casuist rises higher, telling us, That we have not only no
certain Sign of any such Inspiration in the conceived Prayers of those which
most pretend to it, but many certain ones of the contrary. Four he will
instance in, upon which he deseants, p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

1. The great Impertinence, and Nonsense, and Rudeness, to say no worse, that
are sometimes mingled with these extempore Prayers. 2. That they are so
generally tinctured with the particular Opinions of those that offer them. 3.
That that which gives them the Reputation of being so inspired, is not so much
the Matter, as the way and manner of expressing them. 4. That that
extraordinary manner and way of expressing them, for which they are thought to
be inspired, does apparently proceed from natural Causes. The two latter be
calls Plain Signs: Let us try the Certainty and Truth of any of them.
I observe his first Sign is wonderfully qualified with Sometimes, which takes
out all the Efficacy of it; for I suppose our Casuist has heard of such an
Axiom as this; Spiritus Dei non semper tangit Prophetatum, etc. The best
Prophet is not always a true Prophet; even Nathan himself falsely revealed the
Will of God to David, 2 Samuel 7.3. Go do all that is in thine heart, for the
Lord is with thee. God sent him the next Morning to tell David the quite
contrary. And Paul, who sometimes spoke what he had received from the Lord, 1
Cor. 11.23. and 1 Cor. 7.10. says, Unto the married I command, yet not I, but
the Lord; v. 12. of that same Chapter, says, But to the rest spoke I, not the
Lord. So that (with our Casuist's Leave) supposing it true, that at some time
some Phrases may slip, which some Critics may call Nonsense, (and oft-times
they will call that so which is not so,) or which should, in their Judgment, be
rude and indecent, or perhaps worse: Supposing, that some at some times should
in their Prayers declare their own Opinions, which are not Truth: Neither of
these would any more prove, that these Men's Words, in other Parts of their
Prayers, or at other Times in Prayer, were not influenced by the Holy Spirit;
then David's Murder and Adultery, Lot's Incest, Peter's Denial of his Master,
would prove that they were not in the general Course of their Conversation led
by the Spirit of God; or, that Nathan was never influenced in his Prophecy by
the Holy Spirit, because he was not when he approved of David's Resolution to
build God an House. So plain are the two first Signs, that indeed they are no
Signs, nor have any color of such a thing, further than concerns those Phrases
so culpable.

2. Nor, it may be, upon a strict Enquiry, will it be found, that in Public
there is more Nonsense in free Prayers than some make by their careless reading
Forms. I do not think our Casuist, who has sometimes used, and does still
sometimes in the Pulpit use free Prayer, so Chargeable; and I have Reason to
think there are some Hundreds of Ministers in England, of whom it may be full
as Charitably presumed.

2. For this Second Sign, I know no Error can be in a Man's declaring his own
Opinions in Prayer, if they be true. I know no Man who prays by Forms, or
otherwise, but must declare some of his own Opinions. If he means by Opinions,
his (...), singular Opinions, which are false, it will only prove, that he did
aliquid humanum pati, and was not influenced, as to those Words, by the Spirit
of Truth.

3. For his Third, which he calls a Plain Sign: That that which gives them the
Reputation of being so (that is from the Spirit) is not so much the Matter, as
the way and manner of expressing them. What gives them the Reputation amongst
weak People, of coming from the Spirit, is one thing; what indeed makes them
so, is another thing. That which makes them so with others indiscernable, being
the secret Work of the Spirit upon the Heart, bringing Scripture to
remembrance, and exciting and inflaming the Affections, which cause the
Thoughts to form Words, which are by the Affections thrust out of the Lips; all
this is now a thing indiscernable to an Hearer, who can only probably and
charitably judge from the expressed Affections by Sighs and Groans, and proper
Expressions.

I know none makes the Spirit's Influence upon our Words to respect the Matter
of Prayer, further than bringing to the Mind of him that prays, Matter before
prepared in Scripture, fitted for his Circumstances at this or that time. All
his other Discourse under this Head, has nothing in it of Argument, but is
only Defamatory of any other Prayer than by Forms, (so far as he is able to
defame it,) and proceeds wholly upon a Mistake of the Principle; for the
Spirit's Influence does not only respect the way and manner of expressing, but,
as I have said, the very Matter of Prayer it self, for this or that time,
bringing to a Christian's Remembrance the true Matter of Prayer, and what at
that time is proper for a Christian. Nor can I imagine with what Consistency to
himself our Casuist makes this a plain Sign of conceived Prayers not being
inspired: That that which gives them Reputation to be so, is not so much the
Matter, as the manner and way of expressing them; when himself allows all
along the Spirit's Influence to excite pious and devout Affections, which
certainly do not respect the Matter, but the manner and the way, and manner of
expressing our Prayers. Our Casuist trifleth too much in making the only
Difference between Forms and Conceived Prayers, to be, 1. That the one is in
Set Words, the other in Extemporary Words: 2. In the Largeness of them, and
repeating the same things over and over again. Before he had wasted his Paper
in confuting such Fooleries, he should have heard us asserting them here. --
Qui capit, ille facit.

4. His Fourth plain Sign, is, That that extraordinary manner and way of
expressing them, for which they are thought to be inspired, does apparently
proceed from Natural Causes: Which neither he, nor an Angel of Heaven, can
know, nor any but he who knows the Heart, and what Hand strikes those Strings
of the Affections, from the touching of which, those Sounds proceed. 2. How
unreasonable is this for him to say, who will allow the Holy Spirit no
Influence, but upon our Affections, exciting and inflaming them? 3. Suppose
they do proceed from natural Causes, why may not the Holy Spirit set those
natural Causes on work? All which being most certain, there needs nothing be
said to the further vain Philosophy he uses upon this Head. Whether it be
true, or false, is not of a Pin value, as to the Cause in hand. It may be from
natural Causes, and yet too from a first Cause setting them on Work. None will
say, but the Holy Spirit makes use of natural Causes for spiritual Effects.

In his 21. p. he comes to a Fourth Argument, to prove, That the Gift of
Inspiration of Prayer (as he odly phraseth it) does not continue, is, Because
then conceived Prayers must be Infallible, and of equal Authority with the Word
of God. We are very unhappy that in these Debates, we either will not or cannot
understand one another.

Do we plead for any more than the Spirits helping our weak Memories, in
bringing to remembrance what Things are contrary to the Divine Law, for the
Matter of Confession; and of what God has declared in his Word, he will give
to them that ask him, upon such Terms as he has declared his Will, for Matter
of Petition, and the Divine Promises, for Arguments to enforce our Petitions,
etc. So that, if the Word of God be infallible, that which is so brought to
remembrance, must certainly be so too; and surely the Scripture must be of the
same Authority with it self. If we mistake in the Applications, we father not
our Mistakes on the Holy Spirit, but beg Pardon for them. This being rightly
understood, I refer to any Intelligent Reader, what strength there is in this
Argument more than in those we heard before.

Our Casuist, having thus far given us his Opinion against the Continuance of
that Influence of the Spirit upon us in Prayer, which he called extraordinary,
comes p. 22. to favor us with his Opinion; Wherein the ordinary influences of
the Spirit consist, relating to the Duty of Prayer. He tells us it is, In
exciting in us the Graces, and proper Affections of Prayer. Such as Shame, and
Sorrow in the Confession of Sins, a Sense of our need of Mercy, and an hope
(surely he should have added also an intense Desire) of obtaining it, in our
Supplications for Pardon, etc.

In all this, we most freely agree with him, saving only in the Restriction of
the Spirits influence to this only. Nor can we possibly understand, how the
Spirit should thus influence our Affections, and not our Words; which are and
ought to be thrust out by those Affections. We will suppose a Soul to be guilty
of wandering Thoughts in the Duty of Prayer (a guilt common to all Persons) and
the Spirit, who in the Word has accused and condemned this, to bring this to a
Souls remembrance when it is praying, or about to Pray; and to excite in the
Soul, a shame and sorrow for it, and inward Desire and Hope of Pardon for them.
Can this Soul be thus far in this Particular be influenced, and not influenced,
as to Words also expressive of this Desire and Hope? Our Casuist further tells
us, p. 32.

That Words and Expressions are of no other Account with God, than as they
signify the Graces, and Affections of our Hearts, without which he regards
them no more then the whistling of the Wind. All this is very true, but what
then?

Therefore (says our Casuist) since these Affections are the main of our
Prayer, and Words are nothing in his account in Comparison with them; can any
Man be so vain, as to imagine that those Affections will be ever a whit the
less acceptable to him, because they are presented in a Form of Words, and not
in extemporary Effusions. To which I Answer, truly no.

But admit, that the Holy Spirit to Day or to Morrow, bring to our Mind from
Scripture, some Particular Sins as Matter of Confession, which are not
mentioned (unless generally) in the Form we are to use, and excites in us a
shame, and sorrow for them; and an earnest Desire, or Hope, for the Pardon of
them, and the Christian has no Words in his Form expressive of such Shame,
Sorrow, Desire, or Hope, how acceptable do we think will this Prayer be unto
God, which is but half a Prayer? For though the Motions of the Affections be a
part of Prayer, yet it is not all Prayer, and scarcely any where in Holy Writ
called by that Name; at least not in one Place of Forty, where Prayer is
mentioned. As for the Senses which our Casuist puts upon those Texts, Gal. 4.6.
Romans 8.15, 26. Jude v. 20. He should have done well to have proved what he
Dictates, that they concern not our Words in Prayer, we are quite otherwise
minded, and think that the Spirit may influence us with Sighs and Groans, that
cannot be fully uttered (as no great Passions can) yet may be in a great
measure uttered, and so uttered, as to let those that hear them, know they are
imperfectly uttered, which is often discerned, though not by Nonsense; yet by
abruptures of Phrase and Expression, and the incoherence of them also sometimes.

In the next Place our Casuist comes to explain stinting, and limiting the
Spirit. Where first he quarrels at the Phrase as being not found in Scripture
nor Antiquity, he says. It is a Term of Art invented by us, applied only to
the present Controversy, and this plainly argues the Argument to be New.

I dare say, the Author cannot find the Term of Natural Enthusiasms, or
Inspiration in Scripture; nor yet the new invented Notion of Diabolical
Inspiration of Men to the Duty of Prayer, in any Antiquity: Yet our Casuist
makes no scruple to use them both, why may not we have the same Liberty? Nor
do we apply it merely to the present Case, we are every whit as much against
Forms of Sermons. And what matters it, if the Argument be new, provided it be
an Argument, and be strong? But, neither is it new; it is a great while ago,
since the Apostle commanded the Thessalonians, saying, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Quench
not the Spirit. Now if the Spirit Kindles, and inflameth the Affections, and
they influence the Thoughts to form suitable Words, and then the Tongue cannot
utter them, because it is tied up to some certain Words and Syllables, I think
it is quenched, so far as it is capable, that is, its Operations are quenched,
and made to die in the Heart.

Nor does our Casuist perfectly express our meaning in this Phrase of Limiting
the Spirit, for we by it do not so much mean hindering the Spirit from affording
us some Assistance which we might otherwise expect from it. As, That we hinder
our selves from making a due and perfect use of that Assistance, which the Holy
Spirit is ready to give us, both by bringing Things to remembrance which we
have forgot; and also exciting, and inflaming our Affections. For though they
may yet burn within us, yet in the use of Forms, they cannot (as they ought to
make up a perfect Prayer) burst out at our Lips, we must not speak with our
Tongues, as David, Psalm 39.3. And this indeed may provoke God to withdraw
these Assistances from us.

And now in Opposition to our Casuists Conclusion I also conclude. I have
showed at large, that there is an ordinary Assistance which the Holy Spirit
gives to conscientious Christians about to Pray, or in Prayer. 1. By bringing
to remembrance the Matter of Prayer (recorded in Holy Writ) proper for this, or
that Time of Prayer, both for matter of Confession, Supplication, and
Thanksgiving, which (through the frailty of our Memories) we often do not at
that Time think of. 2. By exciting and inflaming Holy and Pious Affections,
suited to every Part of that Duty. Now by keeping our selves to forms, we shut
out these Influences of the Holy Spirit, either rejecting them, or not being
able (because restrained by Forms) to make use of them as to a perfect Prayer.
What our Casuist has said, or any one can say to disprove this, I refer to any
Reader endued but with common Sense to Judge. So much in Answer to what our
Casuist has said as to the first Case stated by him. The Second follows.

Case 2. Whether the use of Public Forms, be not a sinful neglect of the
Ministerial Gift of Prayer?

Our Casuist has here very rightly stated our Case thus, p. 26. "By the Gift
of Prayer, they mean an Ability to express our Minds to God in Prayer, or to
offer up our Desires and Affectito him; in Words, befitting the Matter of them.
Which Ability, say they, is given by God to his Ministers, as a mean for
Public Prayer; and in order to their being the Mouths of the Congregation to
God, to represent to him, the common Cases, and Necessities of the People. And
therefore, since God (say they) has given us this Gift, it may be justly
questioned, whether we may lawfully omit the use of it, by using Public Forms
of other Men's Composure."

In speaking to his Case, our Author premiseth two Things, and then lays down
four Conclusions, all which I shall heartily examine in their Order.

1. That this Case concerns the Clergy only, not the Laity. That is true, so
far as concerns Public Prayer in Churches. This Argument will not indeed
conclude it sinful for Christians to join in Prayer, with such Ministers as use
pious and good Forms. What others may do, I cannot tell. 2. He premiseth, That
this is not the Case of the Clergy of the Church of England, who though they
stand obliged to the constant use of the Liturgy, yet are not hereby restrained
from the Exercise of their own Abilities in Public Prayer in their Pulpits. I
shall say nothing to the Case of these, or these Clergymen. There has been
enough said as to this, by the Author of the Reasonable Account, p. 12, and 13.
I therefore come to his Conclusions. 1. He says, That this Ability to express
in our own Words the common Devotions of our Congregations to God, is either
Natural, or Acquired. We will grant this without more Words about it. It is
partly Natural, speaking is so, partly Acquired, to speak fitly, and properly
to God in Prayer is Acquired. 2. He says, That this Natural, or Acquired Gift
is no where appropriated by God to Prayer, but left common to other uses and
purposes. Whether in Words of Scripture it be any where by God so appropriated,
is not worth the disputing; if from the Nature of the Ability, Gift, or thing
it self it be so appropriated; which that it is, I think is clear enough from
the Description of it given by our Casuist, p. 26. where he has these Words,
By the Gift of Prayer, they mean an Ability to express our Minds to God in
Prayer, or to offer up our Desires, and Affections to him, in Words befitting
the Matter of them.

Nor has our Casuist before contradicted this Notion, now how it is possible
that an Ability fitly to express our Minds to God in Prayer, can relate to any
thing but Prayer, I cannot understand; if he had indeed in stating the
Question, or explicating it, have denied this Notion, there might have been
some color for this Assertion, but now to tell us (as he does p. 30.) That the
Gift of Prayer is nothing but a freedom of Elocution, or Utterance is very
impertinent. But this is fully answered in the Reasonable Account, p. 10. and
again in the Answer to Dr. Falkners Vindication of Liturgies, p. 36, 37. but to
add, yet a little further.

The Question is, Whether an Ability, fitly to express our Minds to God in
Prayer, be a Gift differing from the Lawyers Ability to plead well at the Bar;
or a Man's Ability to Discourse pertinently in good Company, or a Scholars
Ability to Dispute well in the Schools. Our Casuist says plainly, they are but
one and the same Gift.

1. By our Casuists Ratiocination, those also must be the same Gift with the
Gift of Preaching (which admitted) it must necessarily follow, that he who is
able to plead a Case well at a Bar, or to Discourse well in Company, must be
able also to Preach a good Sermon, and to express himself fitly to God in
Prayer. Which (besides, that it would justify the Socinian, in telling the
World, That they have been a long Time troubled with a needless sort of Men
called Preachers or Ministers) is most demonstrably false, there being some
Thousands in the World, that can Discourse well in Company, and many Lawyers
that can Plead very well at a Bar; and several Scholars that can Dispute in
Mood and Figure, that if they were put to it to Pray and Preach in a Pulpit,
few would think they had a Gift, that is an Ability for either.

2. According to this Notion all Gods Gifts, as to external Action might be
reduced to the Gift of Motion. All spiritual Habits to the one Gift of the
Spirit; but the Apostle speaks after another Rate. 1 Cor. 12.4. Now there are
diversity of Gifts, but the same Spirit. And tells ver. 8. To one is given by
the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge by the same
Spirit. Ver. 10. To another Prophecy -- to another the Interpretation of
Tongues. All these now flow from the same Spirit, and are all Species indeed of
the Gift of Utterance; but if the Apostle understood himself, they were diverse
Gifts, and by his Authority we must crave leave to call them so.

3. Besides, What can make, or argue a Diversity of Gifts, if a Diversity of
Knowledge, as the Foundation of their Exercise, and a Diversity of End, will
not? And with what Sense can two Gifts be made the same, when it is
demonstrable that every one who has the one of them, has not the other, nor
any thing like it? Neither is that true which our Casuist tells us, and I
admire to read him asserting what is contrary to all Men's Experience; for he
says, "We find, that those who have this Gift, (viz. of Prayer) have it not
only while they are speaking in Prayer, but when they are speaking on their
Occasions; and that ordinarily they can express themselves to Men with the same
Readiness and Fluency in Conversation, as they can express their Minds to God
in Prayer." Either he means all such, or only some such. If he speaks of all,
it is most evidently false: How many have we known that want no Words or proper
Expressions in Prayer, that in Worldly Affairs cannot speak to any purpose. If
he means it of some only, he speaks true, but nothing to the purpose; for
the same Man might, in the Apostles Times, have the Word of Wisdom, and the
Word of Knowledge, and Prophecy, and Interpretation of Tongues. The Apostles,
doubtless, had them all, yet the Apostle determines them, Diversity of Gifts, I
Cor. 12. 4, 8, 9, 10.

3. In the Third Place he tells us, That this Gift of Utterance not being
appropriated by God to Prayer, may, upon just Reasons, be as lawfully omitted
in Prayer, as in any other Use or Purpose it is designed for.

Here our Casuist supposes, that the Gift of Prayer is nothing but the Gift of
Utterance, which we have disproved under the former Head. 2. That the Gift of
Prayer is not appropriated to Prayer, which we have also disproved; so as this
Conclusion falls by the Fall of the two Pillars on which it is built only. I
must not omit what our Casuist has here said excellently, p. 31. "I do
confess, had God any where appropriated it to the End of Prayer, those who have
it were obliged to use it to that End, and to omit it ordinarily, by confining
themselves to Forms of other Men's indicting, would be to neglect a Means of
Prayer of God's special Appointment and Institution; for had he any where
intimated to us, that he gave it us purely to enable us to pray, without
respect to any other End, we could not have omitted the Use of it, without
crossing his Intention, and frustrated him of the only End for which he
intended it." Here our Casuist has spoke our Heart; only we think, that if
this appears from the Nature of the Gift, which is such as it is impossible to
use it any other way, it is the same thing as if he had told it us in so many
Words in Scripture, or by an Angel from Heaven. Let it now be left to any Man
of Sense to judge whether we have not proved this, and that from our Casuist's
own Words, p. 26. where he accepts the Question as stated by us, as well as
from the Nature of the Gift it self, being not Utterance, though a Species of it;
a Gift exercised from a different Species of Knowledge than other Gifts are
that fall under Utterance as the Genus, and to a quite different End, and not
found in Thousands who have Utterance good enough in other things.

4. Our Casuist's last Conclusion upon this Case, is, "That to rend our Desires
to God in other Men's Words, is as much a Means of Prayer as to speak them in
our own; for to speak in our own Words, is no otherwise a Means of Public
Prayer, than as it serves to express to God the common Cases and Necessities of
the Congregation; and if these may be as well expressed in other Men's Words as
in our own, the End of Public Prayer is as effectually served by the one as
the other, p. 32."

1. In the first place, It is not yet agreed, that Reading in Prayer is that
sacred Action which the Scripture any where calls Prayer. This has been argued
in the Reasonable Account, Chap. 7. and what is there said, has been
vindicated, Chap. 7. of the Answer to Dr. Falkner's Vindication: So as that
Point lies not yet cleared.

2. When we speak of Means, referring to Divine and Sacred Actions, we vainly
philosophize in our measuring true Means from the Proportion we judge they have
to the End. If God, either in Nature, or in his Revealed Will, has directed
any Means, it is most certain that Means is to be used now; that he has so,
has been proved in the Reasonable Account, p. 6, 7. and what has been there
said, has also been vindicated from Dr. Falkner's Exceptions to it, in the
Answer to his Vindication of Liturgies, p. 39. 62, 63, 64. When what is there
said, has received a just Answer, there will need more Words in this Argument.
It has also been told our Adversaries in this Point, That the speaking of
Words first formed in our own Hearts, is not only a Divine Mean, but Natural
and Proper, (there can be nothing more natural than for the Tongue to speak,
out of the abundance of the heart; nothing more proper to express our Words,
(...), formed in our Heads, than by our own Words, (...), and certainly any
Means, Divine, Natural, and Proper, ought to have the Preference of others: It
is a kind of Force upon the Soul, to make the Tongue speak what is not formed
in the Heart.

3. It is true, if Forms were to be made new for every Public Prayer, it were
not impossible but that the End of Prayer might be as well obtained by the use
of other Men's Words, as his that ministers; otherwise it is not possible. The
invariable Wants of a Congregation are very few; Pardon of Sin, and further
Sanctification, and upholding Habits of Grace bestowed, are so: But how many
more? Have not all Congregations renewed Sins, Wants, and Mercies?

4. But to make this Business short. Till what has been said to prove, That
the Gifts of him that ministers in the Duty of Prayer are the Means which God
has directed and given the Minister for that use, and the most natural and
proper Means imaginable for the Performance of the Act, be answered, we vainly
discourse of other Means, unless any Person has not obtained this. This is
enough to have said, as to what our Casuist has spoken upon his Second Case.

The Third Case which our Author speaks to, is,

Case 3. Whether the Use of Public Forms of Prayer does not deaden the
Devotion of Prayer?

That which our Author here calls the Devotion of Prayer, the Nonconformists
call. The Attention of our own, or others Thoughts; or the Intension and
Fervency of our own, or others Spirits.

Our Reverend Casuist grants, p. 34.

"If Forms are in themselves, and not through our Fault, and erroneous
Prejudice, less apt to quicken and raise Devotion than conceived Prayers, it
will be granted on all hands that this is a good Argument against them."

Here then is an Issue joined: The Medium is granted to be good, if true. Our
Author propounds, in order to the Trial of the Issue, to consider, 1. "What
those Advantages are which conceived Prayers pretend to. 2. Whether they are
not, for the most part, fantastical and imaginary; and whether, so far forth as
they are Real, they are not much more peculiar to Forms. 3. Whether, besides
those Common Advantages, Public Forms have not peculiar Advantages which
conceived Prayers cannot pretend unto."


If our Author rightly enumerateth the Advantages pretended by the
Nonconformists, and makes it good, that they are but imaginary and fantastical
for the most part; and that what of them is real, is more peculiar to Forms,
(which is his Second Task) and that besides those common Advantages, Forms have
real Advantages peculiar to them; we must yield he has won this Game. But let
us examine what he says.

Only it must first be observed, that the Nonconformists have acknowledged the
Truth of this Proposition variable: And that may be the best Means to one, both
of Attention of Mind, and Intention of Affections, which to another is not so.
Reasonable Account, p. 44.. 27. It very much depends upon Men's having, or not
having an Ability to express theirs and others Wants to God in Prayer, and the
Degree in which they have it.

Our Casuist thus enumerateth the pretended Advantages that are in free,
conceived Prayers: 1. "Our Minds are kept more attentive to our Business. 2.
That the Minister is more affected. 3. That the Affections of the People are
raised by the Performance of the Minister. 4. That in conceived Prayers the
Words follow the Affections; whereas, when a Man prays by Forms, his
Affections (if any) must follow his Words. 5. That Words formed in our own
Hearts are more expressive of our Affections, than it is possible Words formed
by others should be. 6. That the Soul can better direct its Affections to God,
whilst it has nothing else to do, than when it has a previous Work to direct
the Eye to read right."


This is the Substance of what our Author says Nonconformists say in Proof of
their Proposition; and indeed it is a good Summary of what has been said on
this Argument, Whether they be merely imaginary, or real Advantages of
conceived Prayer, that is the Question.

Our Casuist ingenuously grants, p. 36.

That by expressing a serious and devout Affection, the Minister does really
advantage the Devotion of the Congregation: Which is the Third of those Things
beforementioned.

"The first ( pretended) Advantage, he says, p. 37. is, That the very
conceiving the Matter of his Prayer, does naturally more bind his Attention,
than the reading it out of a Form."

This is undeniable, and granted by our Author. But he goes on: "But, I beseech
you, what does it more bind his Attention to? Is it to attend to the Words and
Phrases? If so, then it is not to attend to the Acts of Prayer: Or is it to
attend to those Acts which are the proper Business of Prayer; such as being
ashamed of Sin, and bewailing of it in Confession, etc."

I answer, It binds the Thoughts of a Man praying, to his Business, and to
one principal Act of Prayer, that is, the uttering of the Desires of his Heart
in fit Words. This Answer of our Author depends upon this mistaken Hypothesis,
That the uttering of fit precatory Words without Lips, is no part of Prayer;
whereas it is an essential part of perfect vocal Prayer: And we scarcely read
of any thing else called by the Name of Prayer in Holy Writ. Which Words being
first formed in our own Hearts, must necessarily more affect us than Words
formed by others, and are always attended in pious Souls with more of all those
Affections, the Exercise of which God requires, than it is almost possible
foreign Words should. A Man cannot pronounce another Man's Oration with so much
natural Life, Vigor, and Fervency, as one himself has composed, and which is
so fitted to his own Thoughts: Now what should he that ministers in Prayer,
attend to, but his Business, and the Work he is about? Which is as much to
utter Words expressive of his inward Shame, and Sorrow, and Hope, and Desire,
as to be ashamed, and sorrowful, and to desire, and hope.

Our Author, p. 38. confesses what none can possibly deny, "That he who
prays by a Form, being released from attending to the Invention of his Matter
and Words, his Mind is more at leisure to wander, and instead of attending (as
he ought) more closely to the Acts of Devotion, by employing those Thoughts
which in conceived Prayer he employeth in Invention, in a closer Attention to
the Acts of Devotion, he may, if he please, permit them to rove abroad; but if
he does, the Fault is in himself, not in the Form he prays by. He makes an
ill use of a good thing." To all which I reply,

That whether our Thoughts divert in Prayer to other Objects by Consent, or
from their own natural Wildness, not being sent upon any Errand from the Will,
it must be confessed our Duty to use all lawful Means to keep them at home; and
to use no Means that shall give them further Scope and Liberty of Diversion.
Our Reverend Author grants, That the Mind is more at Liberty to wander, when it
prays by a Form, which is Argument enough to oblige us, if we have an
Ability, to pray by conceived Prayer. Our Author herein differs from us; for
he says the Fault is in our selves, if our Thoughts do wander, not in the
Form. Those Words [ the Fault is in himself] may be taken in a double Sense;
either, 1. The Fault is in the Will of Man, which wills them to wander. 2.
Or, the Fault is in the Infirmity of Humane Nature; which is such, as they will
wander, if they have a Scope and Liberty. Our Author thinks the former; for he
says, he may, if he please, permit them to rove: But may he also, if he
please, keep them from wandering and roving? I do not believe there is that Man
or Woman upon the Earth, that can in truth say so, upon his own Experience;
nay, I much question whether any can say so, who adds to willing, the use of
this Means, praying by a free and conceived Prayer, (though it must be granted,
that he shall do it much better that way than any other.) The Fault therefore
is in our selves, that is, in the common Infirmity of Humane Nature, its
Averseness and Awkwardness to Spiritual Employment, and the Contemplation of
Spiritual Objects, and Exercise of it self upon them; and though it be such a
Fault as will hardly be perfectly corrected, whilst we are in the Flesh, yet it
is such as we may use Means to correct, and in a good measure actually correct,
and praying by a conceived Prayer, by our Author's own Confession, is one Means
by which it may be corrected; (for he acknowledges, that when we use Forms,
our Mind has a greater Scope and Liberty to wander:) So that if free and
conceived Prayer be what God has not forbidden, it is what he has commanded,
(where he has given an Ability to it) as a Means in order to this great End,
in the obtaining of which lies much of the Life and Soul of Prayer; (for the
Affections of a roving, wandering Heart will be cold enough,) Thoughts of an
Object being necessary to the Workings of the Affections about it, and
previously necessary. But says our Author, p. 39.

"To invent the Words and Matter of Prayer, is not to pray, but to study a
Prayer; and till our Brethren have proved, that our inventing the Matter and
Words is a part of our Duty of Prayer, (which is the Question in debate betwixt
us) we can by no Means grant that our Attention to it is attending to the Duty
of Prayer."

The Matter of all Prayer is already invented for us, and prescribed to us in
Holy Writ: This our Author has often already told us, and we have agreed it.
The only thing to be premeditated and done, is, 1. To consider what of that
Mutter of Prayer, allowed and directed in the Word, is proper for us, under our
Circumstances, at the Time when we Pray. 2. To form Words in our Hearts, by
which our Lips shall express the Desires of our Souls. The first is, and will
be every good Christian's Work, before he comes to minister in Prayer, and the
Matter may vary every Day, according to the various Contingencies to Persons
and Families, occasioned through the Wisdom of him that governs the World,
and the daily Breakings out of Sin and Corruption, occasioned through that
Fountain of Lust in Man's Heart: But yet can never be so well done, (through
the unfaithfulness and slipperiness of our Memories) but there will be room
left for a Dabitur in hora, the Spirit of God, in the very time of our Prayer,
to bring to our Minds some Violations of the Divine Law we did not think of,
and some Wants which we had forgot.

2. The Second needs no study or deliberation; our Thoughts in a moment form
Words, when they are sensible of Wants. The Beggar studieth not for Words to
ask for Bread, no more does the Malefactor for Words to ask for his Life. That
Words are apart of perfect Prayer, and of all Prayer, where one ministers to
others in Prayer, must not be denied, and an essential part too; for without
them he cannot so pray: So as he whose Thoughts are employed in forming of
Words, whether to express his own Premeditations, or present Impressions, or
Monitions, cannot certainly be denied to have his Thoughts employed about his
Work in Prayer.

Our Casuist goes on, p. 39. and says, "It is pretended, that conceived Prayer
is more apt to fix the Minister's Attention in Prayer, because he utters his
Words in conceived Prayer, immediately from his Affections, by reason of which,
his Thoughts have not that Scope to wander, as when he reads them out of a
Book." To which he answers,

"That if he has devout Affections, he may utter his Words as immediately from
his Affections in a Form, as in a conceived Prayer, and therefore this Pretense
is insignificant."

There is no doubt of this, nor do I know who has made this Pretense: But the
Question is, Whether a Man can have the same devout Affections attending a Form
of Words composed by another, as he may have attending Words flowing from his
own Heart; as a Bullet taken up from the Ground, and thrown by a Man's Hand, is
never so hot as one shot out from a Gun, and heated with the Fire there First
kindled: So I do think Experience will demonstrate, that no Form of Prayer made
without the Man, and taken up into the Lips, will so affect the Soul as Words
formed within it, and then thrust out of the Lips.

Our Author, in the next place, comes to answer the Arguments for conceived
Prayers most raising the Minister's Intention, that is, of Affection, he says.

They pretend, That in praying by a Form, the Minister's Affections follow his
Words; whereas, in conceived Prayer, his Words follow his Affections. As to
this, he says, 1. That it is a very curious Distinction. 2. That he is not
able to apprehend either what Foundation there is for it, or how it it
applicable to the Matter.


The Distinction is used both by Dr. Ames in his Cases, and by Mr. Calderwood
in his Altar Damascenum; Men both of Learning, Reason and Piety. If our
Casuist cannot apprehend the Foundation of it, our Charity to them will oblige
us not presently to conclude that it has none; and our Charity to our Author
obliges us, if we can, to help his Apprehension.

When our Souls are employed about any Object, it first discovers that
Employment, by Thoughts upon it, which produce the Motions of the Affections
according to the apprehended Nature of the Object which the Thoughts are so
employed about, if the Object be something to be begged or pleaded for, of or
from another. The Soul is presently forming Words for the Tongue, in the use of
which they shall beg it. Do not the Words here follow the Affections? And are
they not thrust out by them as a Bullet is driven out of a Gun by the Powder
first fired beneath it, and affecting it.

In praying by Forms, it is not possible that the Heart should be sutably
affected by any inward Motion of the Soul forming the Words for the Lips, (for
they are already formed for them.) So that all the Affection that can possibly
attend them, must either be raised, 1. From a serious Premeditation of the
Matter of those Forms; or, 2. From Post-Thoughts or Reflections upon them when
they are uttered. If the latter only, then what is said is true, in the use of
Forms. The Affections follow the Words, and have no Work either in the forming
of them, or sending them forth. As to the former,

It must not be denied, but we may be affected with the Premeditation of the
Matter in any Form, as well as an Orator may be affected with the Matter of a
Speech, which he is to utter before he utters it, though the Speech he made
not by himself, but by another. But, I beseech this Reverend Author to consider
as in the presence of God.

1. Quotus quisque est. How few there are, or are like to be found in the
World, who being to Pray only by Reading Forms, does take any considerable
Pains with their own Hearts every Time they use them, to affect them
praeviously, with the Matter of those Forms; which if one does not, it must be
true, that his Affections only follow his Words?

2. Suppose we could find one of many that did so, whether it would be possible
for him to raise his Affections to that degree upon such prepared Forms, as
when his own Thoughts form the Words which he is to utter?

3. Besides this, it is hardly possibly (to be sure not ordinary) for Men and
Women, to be equally affected with Shame and Sorrow, for past Sins; as for Sins
newly, and lately committed, or to be equally intense with Desires, for
ordinary and common wants, as for such wants as presently pinch us, and press
hard upon us, as to which Forms cannot serve, unless they be renewed every Day;
but as to this, we shall have occasion more to speak, when we come to its
proper Place. This is enough said, to make the Distinction plain and
intelligible.

But then Secondly (says our Author) Suppose it were true, that in conceived
Prayer the Words follow the Affections, and in a Form the Affections the Words;
how does it from hence follow, that conceived Prayer does more intend, and
heighten the Affections then Forms? What Reason can there be assigned, why
those Acts of inward Affections, should not be as intense and vigorous as those
that go before them?

Suppose, that there can no Reason be given (which yet I think may) yet this
follows, that whereas the Grace of Prayer, and the very Life and Soul of it (as
our Author somewhere speaks) lies much in the Holy Affections that attend
it. If the Affections only follow the Words (the Prayer being done, when the
Words are once uttered) that Prayer is put up without any such Holy and
inflamed Affections. Nor sure is Shame and Sorrow (two of the Affections
mentioned by our Author) so properly Consequents to, as Concomitants of the Act
of Prayer.

Our Author goes on, p. 42. But then Secondly, it is pretended that the
Minister cannot so well express his devout Affections in other Men's Words, as
in his own. To which he Answers. That the Ministers business in Public Prayer,
is not to express the degrees and heighths of his Affections, or to acquaint
God of the particular, and extraordinary fervencies of his own Soul; for in
Public, he prays as the Commonmouth of the Congregation, and therefore he
ought not to express to God in the Name of the People, any matter that is
peculiar to himself, etc.

This now is what I cannot possibly understand. To express our particular
Affections and fervency is one thing, and to Pray for any particular Matter
peculiar to himself is another thing; yet certainly, the first is the Ministers
Duty, and the latter his Liberty, if not his Duty also.

Let a Man be praying in Public, or Private, or Secret, certainly he ought to
do it with the most fervent, intense, and raised Affections which he can. Let
the Matter of his Prayer be what it will or can, still Affection must be an
adjunct to an acceptable Prayer, and the more (...), the more raised, and
setting the Soul on Work it is, the better it is, or else St. James was
mistaken, James 5.26.

Nor is it true, that a Minister in Public Prayer ought to confess no Sins,
but what the whole Congregation is guilty of, nor to put up Petitions for any
wants, but what are the common wants of the whole Congregation. The common
Practice both of the present Church, and the Church in all Ages confuteth this.
If this were true, in vain were the desires of any particular Person or Family,
in vain their Papers desiring the Prayers of the Minister and Congregation for
them, in vain are we in Scripture, commanded to Pray one for another, to make
Supplications for all Saints, Ephesians. 6.18. If our Brother Sin not unto Death, to
Pray for him, 1 John 5.16. And certainly the Minister has the same Liberty,
and Privilege that the meanest of the People have. I cannot therefore conceive
what our Author means by this, who surely has a Hundred Times, prayed for some
things for particular Persons, and Families which have not been needful for,
nor the wants, and desires of all the Persons in the Congregation for
themselves, and their Families.

Our Author yet proceeds, and tells us, " Thirdly and Lastly, It is also
pretended, that in the use of Forms, the Ministers Soul is so engaged in
directing his Eye to read, that it cannot be so intensely affected with that he
prays for. In Answer to which he says, *He leaves the Reader to judge,
whether the recollecting of the Matter of Prayer, the disposing of it into a
due Method, inventing of proper Phrases to express it (neither of which are
Acts of Prayer) as (he pretends) he has showed before, must not much more
busy his Soul, than the directing of his Eye to read."

The Reply is easy. The Matter of Prayer is already directed, and needs no
inventing, only a considering what is applicable to present Circumstances,
which is a work previous to Prayer, the disposing it into a due Method, is
another imaginary Thing; Confession, Supplication, and Thanksgiving, are the
Three Parts of Prayer, which is put before another is nothing material, though
every one will without any Study, know it is rational to put Confession of Sin,
before Supplication for Pardon. The inventing of proper Phrases, is another
thing as imaginary, for they are already invented, being Scriptural Phrases or
formed with as little Study, as the hungry Beggar, need take for Words by which
to ask a bit of Bread. But the Souls looking through the Eye upon the Book to
see what is there Printed, then recollecting what it sees, and forming the
Words first in the Mind, then uttering them by the Lips, is surely a greater
Diversion. Besides, that the meditating of the Matter of Prayer, then forming
the Words in the Heart, are both of them as proper Acts relating to Prayer, as
the killing the Sacrifice, the cleansing of it, the laying on the Altar were
Acts relating to the Sacrifice; and therefore lawful, and the Priests Duty, as
well as the burning of it, but of this I have before spoken.

Our Casuist proceeds, p. 44. "It is pretended, That Forms of Prayer deaden
Peoples Affections -- by a more direct, and immediate Influence, because they
still express the Matter of Prayer in the same Words -- whereas the very
newness, and variety of Words in which conceived Prayers are expressed, does
naturally awaken and entertain their Minds, and keep them more fixed and
intent. For Answer whereunto he says, Let us consider upon what it is that
this novelty, and variety of Expression does keep our Minds so fixed, and
intent upon. Is it upon the Matter of Prayer? doubtless no. For that is
generally the same, especially the matter of Public Prayer, and therefore if
it were that, fixed our Minds, it would as well do it in the same, as in new and
varied Expressions. -- But if it be nothing, but the newness of the Phrase, it
is expressed in that fixes their Minds, there is nothing in it, but a mere
surprise and amusement of their Fancies, which instead of fixing their Minds
does unfix them, from the internal Acts of Prayer, and divert its Attention
from the Devotion to the Oratory of it, etc."

1. To make this Experiment, let the Author, comprize the Matter of all Sermons
in Six, or Twelve Sermons (which it may be were not impossible) or as some have
done in Fifty Two Sermons, and never Preach no other in Forty or Fifty Years
Time to his People, and by that Time he has preached them five or six Times,
ask his People, whether they do generally hear him with that Attention and
Intention, as if he clothed that Matter with new Phrase. I do not believe that
one of five Hundred would say so.

2. But Secondly, The Matter of Prayer is principally, Petitions or Arguments
to enforce those Petitions; admit the Petitions or the Matter of them be always
the same, are the Arguments also? Does there any Form comprehend all the
Arguments to implead Petitions, which the Scripture warranteth to use, though
it commands not us to use them all at the same time; nor it may be, are they
all so proper for one and the same Time, or for Persons under some
Circumstances, as others. So that by our Authors leave, there may be new Matter
of Prayer to draw out Attention and Intention.

3. Thirdly, Suppose there were not, does not the Holy Scripture express the
Matter of the same Petitions by different Phrases. Why may we not express it by
these Phrases as well as those? And yet Peoples Attention, and Intention be
upon the Matter of the Prayer; and if varying of Phrases will help to it, and
the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost knowing this has canonized a variety of Phrase,
how any can be restrained the use of that variety which God has left us? I
cannot tell.

4. The gingling, tickling, Oratory of Prayer, is a thing Nonconformists abhor,
as a puerile, pedantick Thing, not worth any Man's Attention or Intention: But
the asking the same Things in other Words, and those such as the Holy Ghost
has taught us in Holy Writ, or such as are proper and expressive, is what
deserves a better Name. Nonconformists are a kind of Men, that think that Meat
good enough, that is wholesome and nourishing enough; and those Clothes fine
enough, that cover enough, and are warm enough, little regarding as to the
former; the Turnips cut into several Figures, and laid about the sides of the
Dish, nor yet what the Laces, and Fringes of their Clothes are, or whether they
be of the Spanish or French Fashion. The like Judgment they make too of
Sermons, and Prayers. They judge those Sermons the best that most instruct, and
affect the most intelligible, and Scriptural, and those Prayers best, where the
Things which God has given us a Liberty to ask, are most intelligibly and
plainly asked, and urged by Arguments, that are most scriptural; but they know
the Holy Scripture has a variety of Phrases, and all of Equal Authority, and
Dignity, equally canonized, and expect that he who is a Teacher should be
mighty in the Scriptures, and bring to their Ears and Tastes out of that
Storehouse, things new, and old, and are apt to think that he that does it
not, has made but a little entry into that blessed Storehouse. That, de
facto, Novelty in Phrase does most affect cannot be denied, that it is not
sinful, is as evident, and it is as certain, That the same Matter may more
affect in a Novelty of Phrase, then in an old Style.

Our Reverend Author comes in the Last Place, to show us the Advantage which
People have for their Devotion from Forms, to which conceived Prayers cannot
pretend. He instanceth in Six, from p. 46. to p. 55.

1. The First is, That People may address themselves to Prayer with greater
Preparation. 2. The Second is, That in joining with them, the People may Pray
with more Understanding, then they can well be conceived to do in extemporary
Prayer. 3. A Third is, That they may join with them, with much more Faith, and
Assurance. 4. A Fourth is, That they have much less in them to divert the
Affections of the People from the Matter of Prayer. 5. A Fifth is, That they
are more secured, as to the decency, and Solemnity of their Public Worship. 6.
The Last is, That in joining with them, the People are more secured of the
Reality and Sincerity of their own Devotions. To all which in General, there
are several Things may be said. 1. That all this is to be said as much for
Prayers by a prescribed Form in the Pulpit, as in the Desk; and if there be any
thing in these, as to Prayers in the one Place, it holds as strongly as to
Prayers in the other. That People may address themselves to join in those
Prayers with greater Preparation, and Pray with more Understanding. More Faith,
and Assurance, have less to divert them, from the Matter of Prayer, be more
secured as to the decency, and order of Public Worship, and People be more
secured of the reality and sincerity of their Devotions: Nay these Arguments
will run home to a Man's Family, and hold as strongly there. Nay most of them
will ascend up into his Closet after him, three or four of them will hold as
strongly there. So as they serve to destroy all conceived Prayers. 2. It is an
amazing thing, that if these Things were necessary, and indeed such real
Advantages to Peoples Devotion; neither Solomon, nor Moses, nor Asa, nor
Hezekiah, nor the Levites mentioned Nehemiah 9, that prayed that long Prayer,
should think of this mighty Help to the Peoples Devotion, and give out Copies
of their Prayer there mentioned to all the Congregation, that they also might
have addressed themselves to God with more Preparation, and have prayed with
more Understanding, and with more Faith, and Assurance, and have had their
Affections less diverted from the Matter of Prayer, and have had the decency,
and solemnity of their Public Service more secured, and have been more secured
of the reality, and sincerity of their Devotions, they were all things as
necessary then, as they are now, yet we have no mention of any such thing; but
this it seems, is a new discovery, reserved to the later Times, or rather a new
device, to uphold the Necessity of Forms. 3. If the Wise God had seen these
Things so necessary for so great Ends, we certainly should not have been
without an Institution, or at least some Declaration of the Will of God in the
Case, but we find nothing of that in any Part of Holy Writ. 4. All these Things
will signify nothing, if it prove impossible, that he who ministers in Prayer
unto others, should by Forms (unless drawn for every Time he ministers)
confess the Sins, or put up Supplications for the good Things, he ought to
confess, or put up Supplications for; but this will fall under our Debate, when
we come to consider what our Author has said to the Fourth Case stated by him.
5. It is not what we fancy, and think we can prove by our Reason to be a more
apposite mean for the performance of a Duty that indeed is so: But the mean
must have a Divine Institution, if it be not so naturally. A Papist will
Discourse bravely for the usefulness of a Crucifix to be set in our Eye, to put
us in Mind of what Christ has suffered for us, to encourage us to hope in the
Mercy of God through him; but yet it is a mean to be abhorred, not used; to
speak more particularly to our Authors Six Things. 1. Nonconformists know that
they are to Pray intelligibly, and not in bumbasted non-intelligible Phrases to
the meanest of the People. So as there is no such need of Preparation to
understand Words and Phrases, which are ordinarily such as are understood
as soon as heard. They detest such kind of Language in Prayer, as Dr. Featly
reflects on, where the Minister spoke to Christ under the Name of the Dolphin
of Heaven, such kind of stuff indeed, had need have Time allowed the Hearers to
understand. Nonconformists would have all Prayers in such a Phrase as needs no
Companion to the Temple to expound, which they judge of no great significancy,
because he is not like to be a Companion to one of an Hundred. 2. For the same
Reason, they see little in our Authors second pretended Advantage of Forms. 3.
There is as little in his Third Thing, for nothing can Advantage Faith and
Assurance, but a Knowledge that the thing asked, is what God has promised to
give, which a Form will not instruct him in, that does not otherwise know it;
and if he otherwise know it, it is needless as to any such Thing: However I
know of none, but allows the Use of Forms for Instruction, which if Men will
Use, they may easily know, by examining Scripture, what God has willed Men to
ask. 4. For the Fourth Thing. Men in praying ought to take Care not only that
their Affections be not separated from the Matter of Prayer, but that their
Thoughts may not be separated from the Words, by which that Matter is
expressed: Nor can I understand, how the Affections should attend the Matter
expressed, if the Thoughts be out of the way of expressing, or of Words, by
which it is expressed. I am sure, he who prays by Forms gives his Thoughts
more Liberty to leave both, than he who prayed depectore, by Words formed in
his own Breast; whether there be any Soul so pious, that it will not take it? I
cannot tell. It is probable, that the Souls of the most Will (I am sure my own
would) and if the Thoughts be once separated, the Affections in the Course of
Nature will not stay behind. 5. As to the Fifth. If our Author means no more by
Decency, and Solemnity, then gravity, and expressiveness, and the absence of
what usually Men will call Rudeness, who understand any thing of Religion, he
is a lamentable Minister, that cannot so Pray without a Form, and indeed aptior
ad stivam, fitter for some other Employment: If he means delicate Words, Curt,
and comprehensive Exprehensions, it may be such Prayers will be found not wrote
after any Scriptural Copy; unless that of the Lords Prayer, which we rather
judge a directory of Matter, than a Copy of Words, and has always been so
judged by the Church, extending it in all Practice, and never judging that
enough, either for the Desk, or Pulpit. 6. It will pose any to understand how
People should, more by Forms than by free Expressions, be secured as to the
reality and sincerity of their Devotions, considering that to Devotion in
Prayer is required not only Intention and Fervor of Affection, but Attention of
Thoughts also; and the latter cannot be without the former, especially if Forms
give a greater Liberty to the roving of Thoughts, and the Heart of Man be so
bad, that not one of many, but will take it.


Thus much come our Author's Six pretended Advantages to Devotion from Forms of
Prayer to. There are two eminent ones that it must want.

1. One obvious Means to keep the Thoughts of him that prays from wandering:
And this is true, both as to him that ministers in Prayer, and those who only
pray, the Thoughts of both have apparently a further Liberty to rove, whether
they will take it, or no. Let every one speak from his own Experience, and if
they do differ in their Experience, let it be considered whether their natural
Temper does not make the difference; which is not a thing eligible, but
natural, and upon that account necessary. If the Ministers Thoughts be not
attent, he must speak Nonsense; if the Peoples Thoughts be not, they must say
Amen to they know not what. 2. A Second Advantage they must want, is the
Confession of renewed Sins, and begging Pardon of them, the making known of
renewing Wants, and giving Thanks for new Mercies, which, whether they ought to
be the Matter of Confession, Petition, or Thanksgiving in Public Prayer, will
fall under our Consideration in speaking to the next Case. 3. To these two must
be added, That those who in Public pray by Forms, are tied up to those
particular Opinions which the Composers of these Forms have, which indeed is
not an Evil falls upon the People that do not minister, who may withold their
Amen, but yet by their Presence will appear to do what they indeed do not; but
it will fall heavy upon those that minister by them. We have a plentiful
Instance of this in the Popish Missal, where their Idolatrous Opinions are
mixed with their Prayers, viz. That of the Invocation of Saints, the
Application of their Merits to us, as well as their Heretical Opinions of
Purgatory, and departed Saints Intercession for us, and the Merits of our own
Works: All which indeed are upon the Reformation left out of our Liturgy, but
may be put in again whenever we have Superiors of that Faith. It is true, in
conceived Prayers the People are exposed to the same Danger as to their Ears,
but not the Person that ministers, and the People have a Power to withold
their Amen, and to complain of such as are guilty of such Errors: But there is
no complaining of Forms by Public Authority confirmed.
Our Casuist says truly, p. 55. and 56. That Experience (the best Judge in
this Case) is pleaded on both sides: Some say, they can keep their Thoughts
most attent, and their Affections most intense, in praying by Forms; others say
the quite contrary. But I do not think that our Reverend Casuist directs the
best way for reconciling these Experiences, by endeavoring to persuade them,
That the Fault must lie in their Prejudice or Temper: For it may be, the Fault
lies on the other side, in their customary Practices and Usage, or a not right
understanding their Duty in Prayer, but judging, that it only lies in their
saying Amen, whether their Thoughts be kept attent to the Words and Matter of
Prayer, and their Affections intense, yea, or no: If so, the Cure must be
wrought on the other side. If our Author, by his many good Christians, means
many such as have an Ability to express their own and others Wants to God in
Prayer, and exercise that Ability in a daily Prayer with their Families, and in
their Closets, I do very much doubt whether many such will say so, at least I
have not met with many such do say so. If he means others that have not
attained to this Ability or Practice, he ought to distinguish between a
metaphysical Goodness and a moral Goodness, and again, betwixt the Degrees of
moral Goodness. We desire to speak Wisdom to those that are perfect, and to
all, to strive after Perfection; forgetting (...), the things that are behind,
and pressing on to those things that are before; and this is that which we
wish, even every Soul's spiritual Perfection. This is enough to have spoken to
our Casuist's Three Cases handled in his First Part; we now proceed to his
Second, which begins with this Case: Case. 3. Whether the common Cases and
Wants of Christians can be so well expressed in one constant Form, as in a
conceived Prayer?



The Author has a little perplexed this Case, by putting in the Word Common,
the Question had been well enough without it. Nor has he sufficiently
explained what he means by Common Cases and Wants; whether he understands it
with reference to Time, and by Common understands Constant; or with reference
to Persons; in which Sense, Cases and Wants cannot be called Common, unless all
propound or have them. We cannot therefore well speak to what this Reverend
Author says, as to this Case, without putting a previous Question, viz. Quest.
What, and whose Cases, or Wants, the Minister is bound to represent or make
known to God in the public Congregations or Meetings of Christians?



I find our Author in part determining this Question, P. 2. p. 2. Public
Prayers (says he) ought not to descend to particular Cases and Necessities,
because they are the Prayers of the whole Congregation, and therefore ought to
comprehend no more than what is, more or less, every Man's Case and Necessity.
I take this to be a false and mistaken Hypothesis, and the Reason given for it,
because they are the Prayers of the Congregation, to be utterly insufficient;
for surely the whole Congregation is concerned in the true Wants and Welfare of
every Member, that they may rejoice with those that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep, Romans 12.15. otherwise they are not kindly affectionated one to
another, according to v. 10. And this is the declared Will of God, Ephesians. 6.18.
that there should be made Supplications for all Saints, yea, for all Men, 1 Timothy 2.2. How are these Texts (think we) to be understood, That Supplications
should be made for all Saints, so far as their Wants are all the same, and no
further? Or, that Prayers should be made for all Men, as to those things that
are the Common Wants of all Men, but no further? I would fain see one good
Reason for this, or one Text of Scripture to prove it.

It is true, we cannot confess the Sins of particular Persons, unless we know
them, nor put up Petitions for a Supply of the Wants of particular Persons,
unless we know them; and though we do know them, yet some particular Sins or
Wants are not fit to be made the Matter of public Confessions, or public
Petitions: But it is as true, there are a multitude of other Sins, which are
not the Sins of all, but of some particular Persons in Congregations, and many
other Wants, which likewise are not the Wants of all the Congregation, but of
some particular Persons in them, which may well enough be confessed, and Pardon
begged for, and which we may well enough beg a Supply of; and these ought to be
made the Matter of a public Prayer, either upon the Pastor's Knowledge of
them, though the Sinner does not desire them, or upon such Persons Desire. It was
in a public Assembly and Prayer, that Ezra confessed and bewailed the Sins of
those that had married strange Wives, Ezra 9.12, 13, 14. For, v. 4. They were
assembled, all them that trembled at the words of the Lord God of Israel; yet
that Sin was not the common Sin of all the People. Ezra 10. they are numbered,
and it appears they were but 100, Priests 17, Levites 6, 1 Singer, 3 Porters,
and 73 Israelites, (who may be called Laics.) He who consulteth Ezra 1. will
find the whole Number was ( v. 64.) 42360. besides 7337 Servants; the Priests
alone were above 4000, v. 36, 37, 38, 39. and these were but the first
Companies came out. So that it seems that excellent Scribe thought, that in
public Prayers, Confession was to be made of other Sins than what were the
Sins of every Individual of the Congregation. More Instances might be given,
but this is enough. Besides that, our Savior's Prayer upon the Cross was
public enough, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do; yet he
knew, that all there present were not guilty of crucifying him. The like might
be said of Stephen's Prayer, Acts 7.60. So that this new Notion is quite
contrary both to the Practice in the Old Testament and New.

2. Secondly, It must necessarily deprive all private Christians of the Benefit
of public Prayers in all their particular Distresses, whether respecting their
outward or inward Man, and leaves them only to Family and Closet-Prayer of
their Friends, and to what Prayers they can make for themselves.

3. It is directly contrary to the Apprehension of the Generality of
Christians, who have used to send to their Ministers to pray for them in the
public Congregation, and to the Practice both of our Church, and I believe all
others.

4. Whosoever looks into Scripture, will find, that the Ministers of God never
thought it enough, in the Case, to make general Confessions of Sin, or general
Requests for good things, or to give Thanks for Mercies in general; but have
descended to particular Confessions of the particular Sin regnant, or committed
lately, and to particular Petitions for specifical Mercies, and to particular
Mercies in their Thanksgivings.

5. Our Author, p. 5. of P. 2. has given us a good Account of such things as
are the common Wants of all Persons, and at all Times, viz. 1. Forgiveness of
Sin, Peace of Conscience, (the giving, or preserving of it,) the Assistance of
Divine Grace, to deliver us from the Power of Sin and Satan, and make us meet
to be Partakers of the Saints in Light; Redemption from Death and Hell;
Protection and Success in all our Honest Concerns and Undertakings; the Daily
Supply of our Bodily Wants and Necessities; and in general, the Preservation
and Direction of our Governors; the Peace and Welfare of our Native Country;
the Prosperity of the Church, the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Success of
its Ministers in the Work of the Lord.

Our Reader must also remember how much our Author has reflected upon
conceived Prayers, for having in them the same things over and over again,
Part. 2. p, 17, 18. as contrary to the Order of our Savior, who expressly
forbids us vain Repetitions, Matt. 6. 7, 8. Now unless this be only Faulty in
conceived Prayers, not in Forms also, and we ought in Public only to pray for
things which a whole Congregation (in common) wants, and to confess Sins which
a whole Congregation (not some Persons only in it) are guilty of, one single
Collect is enough. Here are but eleven or twelve Lines made comprehensive of
all this; nor must any particular Confession of Sin be made, but only in the
general, That we have all sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; for there
are few Sins that every individual Person in a Congregation is guilty of.

6. Supposing that none but the same Sins (and those the Sins of the whole
Congregation) ought to be in public Prayer confessed, and none but the same
good things, and those such as are the Wants of the whole Congregation, ought
to be petitioned for; yet neither are such Sins, nor such Wants, always the
same, much less such Mercies as refer to a whole Congregation. God's Mercies to
Congregations, as well as Persons, are new every Morning: So as the same Forms
will not serve.

7. I therefore conclude, That although this be the best Argument I know can be
brought for the constant Use of a stated Form of Words in Prayer, if it could
be maintained; yet the Hypothesis is in no degree true, and the Argument built
upon it must needs be very weak, supposing what is far from Truth. Prayer is
the Communion of the Church, wherein the Members of it are not only to confess
their joint Sins, but the particular Sins (though not all the particular Sins, of
which some may not be sit for public Notice) of each Member, or any Number of
Members, and to beg not only a Supply of such things as they all want, but as
any Member of their Body, or Number of their Members are guilty of, and known
to be so, or stand in need of. This is enough to have spoken to the first thing
said by our Author, as to this first Case.

2. He tells us, Secondly, That such. Alterations of the common Cases of
Christian Churches, as could not be foreseen, and provided for at the first
Forming of their Liturgies, may, for the most part, be provided for in new
Forms. To which I say, 1. That this proceeds upon the former Supposition,
That no Sins are to be confessed in public Prayers, but such as are the common
Sins of the Congregation; no good things to be begged, but such as all Persons
in the Congregation want; no Thanksgigivings to be made, but for Mercies
affecting the whole Congregation; which is not true, and contrary to all Reason
and Practice, as I have already showed; and therefore I need not here enlarge
again on that Discourse. But supposing what I have before proved, That the more
notorious and publickly-noticed Sins of any Member, or Number of Members in
Congregations; such as Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness, noted Uncleanness, etc.
are Matters of public Confessions, and the Wants of any Member, or Number of
Members in a Congregation, known to the Minister and better part of the People,
are Matter of public Petition; and any noted Deliverance or Mercy, bestowed on
any Member, or any Number of Members of a Congregation, is also Matter of
public Thanksgiving. These are so frequently renewing, so often varying, that
our Casuist could hardly have said New Forms were likely to be made sufficient
for them, and proper to them: Especially considering Public Forms are not
ordinarily made by the respective Ministers of Congregations, who alone, by
watching over his Flock, is like to know its State. 2. Secondly, There may be,
and ordinarily is, so great a Variety in the State of particular Congregations,
as to Sins, Wants, and Mercies, that it is not reasonable to imagine, that
Forms enough should be made suited to each Congregation: So as our Author must
assert, that no Sins ought to be confessed publicly, but the Sins that are
common to all Christians; no Mercies to be begged, but what all Christians
need; no Mercies to be given Thanks for, but such as all Christians receive, or
at least all within the Compass of those Churches to whom those Forms are to
extend, or his Second Conclusion will not hold. 3. His Third Conclusion is but
for a Quousque, viz. "That supposing such Provision for extraordinary Cases
cannot be made in the public Forms, yet that is no Argument why it should not
be used so far forth as it comprehends the Main of the common "Cases of the
People." This indeed is true, against such an Use this Argument does not
conclude; but it does not follow but some others may.

4. The last thing our Author says, That the Defect of such new Provision may
be supplied by the Minister in a public Prayer of his own. May, may be here
understood as referring to Naturally or Legally: Of the first, there is no
doubt; for the second, our Author says no more, than that our Church allows,
or at least permits Ministers so to do. As to this, I have spoken before; and,
it may be, if it be inquired into, it will be found, that within these Twenty
Years it would neither be allowed nor permitted in some Diocese. Besides that,
Permission is the same with Connivance or Indulgence, which is a very uncertain
thing, until it be established by an Act of Parliament. Besides that, many
Ministers will not allow themselves any such thing; the Reason of which
(doubtless) is, because they have at least an Apprehension that no such thing
is allowed by the Law: Whether it be, or no, I shall not dispute.


Our Author proceeds to his Fifth Case.

Case 5. Whether there be any Warrant for Forms of Prayer in Scripture, or pure
Antiquity?

I dare say there is hardly one Dissenter, of any Judgment, that will not
readily grant there is; though some of them very much doubt, whether there be any
Warrant for Forms of Prayer to be universally imposed or used in Prayer. By
Warrant, our Learned Author says right, must be meant some positive Command,
or allowed Example. I cannot tell who it is that has affirmed, That nothing
ought to be used in the Worship of God, but what is commanded by him: Whosoever
has so said, has spoken crudely and rashly, and himself (if he understand
himself) will at the next Breath grant, That Pulpits and Pews, Seats and
Cushions, and Habits of Clothes, (not entailed to Worship only,) and many
things more, may be used in the Worship of God, which God has not particularly
and in Specie commanded. These things indeed Dissenters will say, 1. That God
may be worshipped by no Act but what himself has directed, because no other
Act can be an Act of Obedience to him; and where there is no Obedience, there
can be no Homage paid to God: And here both Conformists and Nonconformists are,
I suppose, fully agreed. 2. That no Means by which any Act of Worship shall be
performed, may be used, which God has not directed, either by the Light or Law
of Nature, or by a positive Institution in his Word. Their Reason is, Because
the Law of God extends to the Means as well as to the Act; nor has God
directed any Act of Worship or Homage to him, but he has also, either by the
Light or Law of Nature, or by some part of his Revealed Will, directed
sufficient Means for the Performance of that Act, which every obedient
Christian is bound to observe, use, and prefer; particularly as to Prayer, they
say, the Act is directed both by the Light of Nature, (whence it is that the
Heathens prayed, and directed dies Supplicationem to the Divine Being) and also
by Scripture, and his revealed Will, which rectified the Light of Nature, and
has taught us, as to the Object, that Prayer is to be directed to the Only
True God; and many things, as to the manner of Performance, viz. That it be
directed to the Father, in the Name of Christ, and with the Spirit; and for
things only, which are according to the revealed Will of God, and under such
Limitations as the Scripture has directed. 3. That even the Light of Nature,
as well as Scripture, has not only directed Men and Women to pray, but to use
Words in Prayer: They are the Calves of our Lips, the Homage of our Tongues
unto God; and whereas Prayer is the Expression of our Wants and Desires unto
him who is able to supply them, though God indeed understands the first Motions
of our Souls in Desires, yet these without Words are not what the Scripture
ordinarily calls Prayer, nor what Men have ordinarily called so. 4. That God
has not directed the Words which we should use at all times, (though he has
directed some Words and Forms of Words which we may use) but has left us at
Liberty to use what Words we please, expressive of the Matter of Prayer
directed in Holy Writ; and this could be no otherwise, the same Matter not
serving us at all times, and consequently not the same Words. 5. That our Words
are (as the Philosopher expresses it) (...), or (...), inward and outward. Our
internal Words are our Thoughts, (our Hearts being our Shops, wherein the Words
of our Lips are first forged or formed: Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, (says our Savior.) While I was musing, (says David, Psalm.
39.3.) the fire burned, then spoke I with my tongue. 6. That as we best know
our own Wants, so our own Hearts can best form Words, by which our Lips shall
express and utter them: So as the forming of Words expressive of our own Wants
and Desires, in our own Hearts, is the most natural and proper Means of Prayer,
and Divine, because most Natural, and not restrained by any par tof the Divine
Rule. 7. Lastly, They think that nothing but a plain Divine Revelation of the
Will of God, as to the use of another Mean, can excuse them from the use of a
Mean that is proper and most natural for the End: So as they think there must
be something in Scripture, either in a Command, or something which has the
Force of a Command, (as universal Example has) which must justify their
ordinary use of Forms of Words, not first formed in their own Hearts, to
express their Wants and Desires to God in Prayer. This is all, I think, that
Dissenters will say in this Case. Let us now hear what our Reverend Casuist
opposes to this: He will prove, as he tells us P. 2. p. 6. 1. "That supposing
this were true, yet it does not conclude against Forms. 2. That supposing it
did conclude against the Use of Forms, it equally concludes against conceived
Prayer."



As to the First, he says, 1. "That they do not pretend that God has any
where commanded us to pray by Forms, and no otherwise. So that then public
praying by Forms is not the only instituted public Prayer.

2. Nor, Secondly, do they pretend, that all the Prayers we at any time offer
unto him, should be first composed into a Form."


Then some conceived, free Prayer in Public is our Duty, or at least lawful.

But this our Casuist pleads for, "That God has injoined some Forms to be
used and offered up in Prayer: Tho together with those Forms, we grant there
might be, and doubtless were, other Prayers to be offered up unto him." This he
proves, p. 7. and to p. 19. of the Second Part. He instanceth in the Form of
Blessing, mentioned Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. the Directions for Prayer, forth
Expiation of Murder, Deuteronomy. 21.7, 8. and for the Prayer to be used at their
Payment of their Third Year's Tithe; the Prayers mentioned in the Psalms,
delivered to Asaph, 1 Chronicles. 16.7, used in Hezekiah's Time, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. and
by Ezra, chap. 3.10, 11. and the Lord's Prayer, upon which he enlarges from p.
8. to p. 19.

To all which so much has been already said, that nothing need be added. See
Mr. Cotton about the Lawfulness of Set Forms; the Reasonable Account, and
Supplement, etc. But all these are indeed no Proof. The Reason is,

Because, what was lawful for God himself, and Christ, and Holy Men inspired by
God, by a Prophetical Spirit, and employed by him (as David was to set his
Temple-service in Order) 2. Chron. 28.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
must not be concluded lawful for others, and what might be lawfully complied
with upon such Direction; and indeed Divine Institution, must not be concluded
lawful to be complied with upon no such Direction or Divine Institution. The
Three first Instances produced by our Author, are Forms instituted by God
immediately; the other by David employed by God, and made by his Spirit to
understand his Will, and the Pattern of his Temple-service. The Last by Christ
himself, sent to erect a new way of Worship.

Not therefore to enter into any further Disputes. 1. Whether Christ intended
the Lords Prayer, for a Form of Words, or only a Direction for Matter, if as a
Form of Words, it does not agree with it self, Matthew. 6. Luke 11. the Words
differ much in those Two Places; whether for a constant Use, or temporary Use
are Things, many Words have been spent about, and I see no help; but Men must
opine as they please in the Case. Our Author thinks, that only Luke 11. it was
prescribed as a Form of Words, and truly it is probable (if it were at all so
prescribed) but then those Words. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the
Glory for ever, Amen. are no part of the Lord's Prayer, for they are not in
Luke at all, but I say all this signifies nothing; for, from Christ's, or the
Apostles Acts, is no Conclusion to justify other Men's Acts, without other
Warrant of Precept, etc. and to this Answer to these Instances our Author
comes, p. 19. for what he says of the Lord's Prayer, let Men judge as they
please; I know no sober Dissenter, but will say it is their Duty to make the
Matter of that Prayer, the Matter of their Prayers; and that they may use the
Phrase, or entire Form (if they understand it) as well as other Words of
Scripture. And if our Brethren judged that we should use that, and none else;
we should have no other Liturgy for the Desk, nor other Prayers in the Pulpit.
The Difference therefore about that, is not worth mentioning, and a Dispute
about spelling this or this.

That which we insist upon, is, that though Christ had Authority to prescribe a
Form, yet none else has any.

Our Author says very true, p. 13.

1. That this Answer allows the prescribing Forms of Prayer to have in them no
intrinsic Evil, no contrariety to the Eternal Rules and dictates of right
Reason. 2. That the prescribing of Forms (under the New Testament) is good and
useful. This is expressed too indefinitely. For nothing will follow, but only,
That Christ's prescribing a Form was good and useful; if we extend it further,
it must be upon this Principle, That others have the same Authority, to direct
means of Worship that Christ had. Now this will ask a great many Words to
prove. Christ had undoubted Authority to institute Acts, and Means of Worship
for and in his Church? But how does it appear that others have? His very
Apostles commissionated by him to settle the first Gospel Churches, neither
claimed nor practiced any such Power. 3. Thirdly, He says. This Answer must
also allow, that God's prescribing Forms of Prayer by inspired Persons (by his
Son, he should have said, for we under the Gospel, find no Forms of Public
Prayer prescribed by other inspired Persons) is so far forth a warrant for our
Imitation, as the thing it self is good, useful, and imitable by us. If God
does such, or such a Thing, because it is good, and useful to some End; that is
sufficient warrant for us to do the same, provided we have the same Reason, for
to imitate God, is our Duty, etc.
Here now is a great Fallacy. Forms of Prayer in themselves are neither Good,
nor Evil; God, or Christ have not prescribed us any Forms, because they are
good and useful; but because he has prescribed them, therefore they are good;
and it is our Duty to use them (if such a Prescription can be proved) as Forms,
or the prescribing Forms, has in it, or them no intrinsic Evil; so neither
has it any intrinsic Goodness, or suitableness to the Eternal Dictates, or
Rules of right Reason (as our Author expounded it, p. 19.) It is very true, we
are bound to imitate God in any thing which he has done, because it is good
and useful, but not in such things, which are made good only by his Command and
Institution. God instituted Acts of Worship, which but for his institution had
had no goodness in them: Such were Sacrifices under the Old Testament. The Two
Sacraments under the New, he directed Forms as means for the Celebration of
both Sacraments. Will it therefore follow, that we may imitate God, in making
New Sacraments, and New Forms.

But (says our Author) Our Governors have the same Reason that God had, viz.
because they are useful. What Christ's Reason was we cannot inquire, so far as
the Evangelist acquaints us with it, it was to gratify the Disciples, desiring
him to teach them to pray, Luke 11.1. Indeed it is probable, that our Savior
would not have gratified them, if he had not known it had been useful for them.
But he never imposed upon them, either never to use any other Words in Prayer;
nor yet always to use these. Nor does our Saviors Direction refer more to the
Church, than to the Family, and the Closet; besides, what might be useful for
some, and at some times, might not be useful for all, and at all Times.

2. Our Reverend Author, p. 25. comes to his Second Thing promised, viz. to
show, That supposing it were true, that nothing were to be admitted in the
Worship of God, but what has a Divine Institution; it equally concludes
against conceived Prayer, as against Forms. His Answer is, because God has no
where instituted conceived Prayer, i. e. That Men in Prayer should Pray by
Words first formed in their own Hearts. We need no Institution for what Nature
it self dictateth in any religious Act. All Institution of that Nature must be
corrective, not directive. Institution indeed, often corrects our corrupt and
imperfect Nature; and so it is in this business of Prayer. God has commanded
us to Pray. It is Written in the Law of Nature, that there is a God, that this
Supreme Being, being the first Cause, and the first Mover, must be the Author
of all Good. Hence it directs us Prayer for the good Things we want, and Praise
for good Things received. Prayer is a making known of our wants to God. God
has given us Sense and Reason to tell us what those wants are, a Power to
Will, and desire a supply of them, to form Words to be uttered by our Lips as
expressive of them, to help us to the better Knowledge of our wants, he has
given us his Word; if in that, he has given us any Forms of Words to be
ordinarily used in that Duty, we are to use them. Others he has left at
Liberty, under the more general Laws, and Directions of his Word: What need any
Institution of what Nature it self directs and teaches? We have indeed
Reason to look for an Institution, if we will correct this natural Course of
Man's Soul, of expressing its desires by Words formed in our own Thoughts; we
have Reason to look for a supersedeas from a Divine Institution, any Forms
instituted by God himself, make up such an Institution, corrective of the
natural Motions and Inclinations of our Souls. Which is a sufficient Answer to
what our Author says, p. 25, 26. I cannot apprehend what can be called Vocal
Prayer, but what is such from a natural Course and Order, or from a Divine
Institution. Scriptural Forms (if given and enjoined for ordinary Use) are
doubtless so by Divine Institution, what can be so in a natural Course or
Order, but those which we call free, and conceived Prayers I am yet to learn.
For what our Author says of the Jews use of Forms, it has been abundantly
spoken too. Particularly, in the Answer to Dr. Falkner's Vindication of
Liturgies, p. 232, 233, 234. Chronologers Account that the Jews were carried
into the Captivity of Babylon about the Year of the World, 3350. and came out
thence about the Year, 3420. after 3630. we have little Account of them, they
being in a miserable distracted State; till Pompey conquered them about 3888.
and in like manner under the Romans, to the coming of Christ about the Year of
the World, 3947; how they were in Christ's Time, the Gospels, and Acts of the
Apostles tells us. About the sixty fifth Year of Christ, they were utterly
destroyed. Philo is by Chronologers computed to have lived about Twenty five
Years before the final Ruin of Jerusalem; but our Author quotes him proving
nothing, but that the Priests were want to offer Prayers with their Sacrifices,
so they might, and yet use no Forms. For the Samaritane Chronicle, which p. 27.
he tells us of, which mentions a Book wrote in the Year of the World, 4713.
which contained the Songs, and Prayers also used before the Sacrifices. Those
who will give it any Credit may, but the Year of the World, 4713. was 760. and
odd Years after Christ, (that was the pretended Time for its first Appearance
to the World) for it could not be Printed till above 1500. Years after Christ;
and this Book must give an Account of the Affairs of the Jewish Church before
the Year 3360. which was more than a Thousand Years, before that (for who will
regard what the Jews did, after they came under the Power first of the
Grecians, then of the Romans.) I Appeal now to any reasonable Man, who will
give Credit to any Manuscript, that (wrote more than a Thousand Years after)
should pretend to give us Account of what was done in Ezra's Time, or before
the Jews were Captivated by the Grecians and Romans (for admit the Jews when
Tributaries to the Grecians, or Romans did use Forms, it is no imitable
President) especially when the New Testament gives us the Story of the Church
at least Seventy Years of the Time, and says nothing of it. For our Authors
Quotation out of Josephus about the Essenes, besides, that it signifies little,
what a Particular Sect did, and a Sect that sprang up too after Christ's Time,
of which the Scripture says nothing. I say besides this, if our Author knows
how to translate (...), better than certain Prayers, which they received from
their Ancestors, the Translator of Josephus into English will help him, who
translates it, They made certain Vows and Prayers, after the Custom of their
Country; which they might do without Forms.

I am not of our Author's Mind, "That there was not a more urgent Occasion for
an express Prohibition of any Rite or Usage of the Jewish Church than praying
by a Form:" For I believe there was no Reason for it at all, because there was
no such thing in use; and if there had been any such Rite, I know no Reason why
either John the Baptist should teach his Disciples to pray; or why Christ's
Disciples should beg of him to prescribe them a Form: It should seem they had
Forms enough.

Our Author, in the next place, P. 2. p. 29, 30, etc. comes to answer those
Places of Scripture which Dissenters produce to prove it their Duty to pray
free and conceived Prayers.

The first he instanceth in p. 29. Zech. 12.20. I will pour out upon the house
of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
supplications. I shall say little as to what our Author speaks as to this
Text, because I am not concerned in other Men's forming the Argument from it.
The Spirit of Grace and Supplications signifies either our own Spirit, and
then the Promise concerns the fuller Effusion of the Spirit of Grace under
the Gospel, giving unto God's People generally more Gifts for his Service,
especially for Prayer; or else it must be understood of the Spirit of God,
which is called the Spirit of Supplications, because it particularly helps
our Infirmities in that Duty. Now whether this Infirmity respects only our
Affections, or our Memory and Understanding, bringing to our Remembrance
Matters contained in Holy Writ, according to the Promise, John 14.26. is the
Question betwixt us and our Casuist. Let it be interpreted which way it will,
it is all one to us. If of the Third Person in the Trinity, we say he ought not
to be shut out, we must give him a Liberty so to bring to our Remembrance; and
thus this Text is reducible to the first Case propounded by our Author. Or let
it be interpreted as to the Spirit of a Man, under the Gospel renewed and
sanctified, so it relates to our Author's Second Case; and enough has been
spoken to each of them. We ought not so to pray (if we be able to do otherwise)
as to exclude the former; nor yet so as to omit our own Gift, which is the
Effect of the Spirit, which is all we contend for: For all that our Author
says about the Word in the Hebrew used (...) whether it sometimes signify
Prayer in the general, signifies nothing as to the Argument, especially
considering, that if by the Terms of Praying and Prayer, etc. be thrice in
Scripture signified merely mental Prayer, yet vocal Prayer is for those three
times forty times understood; and I believe it is not capable of Proof, that
merely mental Prayer is thrice called Prayer.

For his next Texts, 1 Cor. 1.5. 2 Cor. 8.7. I know of none that has pleaded,
that the Gift of Utterance is to be restrained to Prayer; for my own part, I
always thought it respected Preaching as well as Prayer; but that it is to be
understood and limited to extraordinary Gifts, is what I cannot yield: For what
is the Gift of Utterance, but an Ability to utter? which certainly is
applicable as well to the utterance of our Minds to God in Prayer, as of God's
Mind to us, in the interpreting or applying of God's Will to us; and let our
Author prove the contrary, if he can.

These extraordinary Gifts were certainly not so common as that of Utterance,
which seems to have been the Portion of the whole Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
1.5. And by 2 Cor. 8.7. it appears no more extraordinary than Faith,
Knowledge, and Diligence, with which it is ranked there; and if Utterance be no
more than Ability to utter, or a Freedom of Speech, it is demonstrable that it
was not (as our Author says) peculiar to the primitive Ages of miraculous
Gifts; because we find by Experience, that Multitudes have it now, and that
both as to Prayer and Preaching. Utterance is expressed by (...), 1 Cor. 1.5.
Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. or (...): Now Speech, or a Freedom of Speech, was no
extraordinary miraculous Gift. Acts 2.4. (quoted by our Author) is thus, They
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues as
the spirit gave them; (...), to utter or speak. It is also used v. 14. and Acts
26.25. I speak the words of truth and soberness, for which Paul needed no
extraordinary Gift. By this Reply, the Insufficiency of our Author's Answer to
these Scriptures, produced by Dissenters, will appear.

But, p. 33. he goes on, and says,

"But they object further, That supposing God has not given to all Christians
the Gift of Prayer, extempore, yet to a great many he has; and therefore
these, at least, he requires to pray by their Gifts, not by a Form, 1 Timothy
4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Pet. 4.20. Romans 12.6."

It is very true, that some Dissenters have quoted these Texts, and see no
Reason yet to quit them, though they at first granted them ex abundanti, not as
needing them to to prove what is all that they do prove; for even Nature it
self teaches Men and Women (being able to do it) to express the Wants and
Desires of their Souls by Words formed in their own Hearts, and tells us no
Words are so natural and proper; and what Nature teaches, we need no
Institution for. If any corrective Institution has restrained us in the use of
what is a natural, proper Means to an Action, it must be produced. The Jews
needed no positive Law, requiring them to eat Flesh; but it being the Will of
God, that, to show their Obedience to him, they should forbear eating some
kinds of Flesh, there was need of an Institution corrective of what Nature
otherwise taught them. But yet what Nature it self teaches, may also be taught
by Revelation, as we have always thought this was, by the Texts quoted, which
have not been brought to prove, in Specie, That those who have the Gift of
Prayer, ought to use it; But that those who had any Gift, serving them to the
Performance of a Religious Act, ought to use it in the Performance of that Act,
unless they be restrained by some corrective Institution, that is, by some Law
of God, declaring his Will for their Forbearance of the use of that Ability,
which the Declaration of his Will, in his Word, for the use of this or that
Form of Words in Prayer we confess is. This is the general Sum of what has
been said.

All that our Author says, as to these Texts, is, That by Gifts in those Texts
is only to be meant Office. What has been said to this, may be read in the
Answer to Dr. Falkner's Vindication of Liturgies, p. 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67,
68. Nothing of which our Author takes notice off.

1. It is gratis dictum said, and not proved, that (...) signifies in three
Texts, Office, not Gift, it being manifest, that in many Texts it signifies
Gift, not Office. Er^smus, in all those Texts, translates it Donum, the Gift.
Dr. Fulk, against Martin, sath, it is never taken in Scripture but for a free
Gift; or a Gift of his Grace. The Vulgar Latin so translates it. Erasmus notes,
that Ambrose so understood it.

2. Romans 12.6. says, Having then Gifts, differing according to the Grace given
to us; (...). It may be, it is the only Text where (...) can with any Pretense
be translated Offices, and not necessarily there. See Romans 5.15. chap. 6.23.
Romans 2.11. 1 Cor. 12.4, 9, 28, 30. chap. 11.7. Romans 11.29. 1 Cor. 1.11. 1 Cor.
12.31. I think it is hardly used in any other Texts, and in no Heathen Author:
So as we must have the Sense of it from Holy Writ. Let any one peruse those
Texts, and judge whether, contrary to the Sense of most Authors, he can
translate (...), Office, or Dignity.

For what our Author says, as to 1 Timothy 4.14. that the next Words [ which was
given thee by Prophecy] make it plain, that this is the Sense of it (the Reader
may see in the aforementioned Answer to Dr. Falkner, p. 63. what is said to it)
That is obscurum per obscurius. Piscator, Vatablus, and Beza, make the Sense,
That thou may Prophecy. Three ancient Versions, viz. the Syriack, Arabic,
and Ethiopick, read it, with Prophecy. Our Translators indeed, and Vulgar
Latin, read it, by Prophecy. The Greek Particle, (...), is translated with
great Variety, per, propter, prae, ob, post, cum, quoniam; which gives
Interpreters such a Liberty. Because of, or for Prophecy, is a very good
Interpretation, and justifyable from Matthew. 10.22. and chap. 13.21, 58.

"But (says our Author, p. 37.) suppose that (...) does signify Abilities,
not Offices, yet they must be exercised so far forth only as is consistent for
Edification."

That is granted; but it is not granted, that our Author has proved Part 1.
Case 3. (as he says) That the Use of Forms is more for Edification. Let the
Reader judge what has been said in, and replied to that Case.

Our Author comes, p. 39. to his last Task, to prove a Warrant in pure
Antiquity for the Use of Forms; and here, first, he will answer what is
objected to the contrary, which, he says, are but two or three doubtful
Authorities.

There needed not so many; for the Proof lies upon the Affirmer's Part,
surely: It is much to find two or three Authorities to prove a Negative; but
neither are they so blind and doubtful as our Author would make them: That
(...) signifies with all our might, rather than as we are able; that sine
monitore signifies, without a Mummer, or a Custos, or a Corrector; that (...)
signifies an agreeing in Rites, rather than agreeing in Words, or Phrases, are
things impossible to be proved, and therefore vainly attempted. We lay no
Stress upon these, but look upon them as very good probable Proofs, which may
be, I hope, allowed, where Demonstration is impossible. See what is said as to
these Quotations, in the Supplement to the Reasonable Account, p. 19, 20. Let
us rather see how our Author proves, That pure Antiquity did impose any such
Forms. The Author of the Answer to Dr. Falkner, makes it appear, p. 209, 210.
That it is a thing not capable of Proof, and p. 207. That if it could be
proved, it signifies nothing; the Practice of Men being no Argument to prove
any thing lawful or unlawful. But yet, let us consider what our Casuist says;
for we do indeed believe that there can be no Proof brought from Antiquity for
near Six hundred Years after Christ.

To prove, 1. That Public Prayers were made within that time. Or, 2. That the
Lord's Prayer was frequently used in the Public Congregation and Worship. 3.
Or, That there were Rules and Orders made for Churches meeting together for
Prayers, in certain Places, and at certain Times. 4. Or, That many good Men,
did from the first, compose Forms of Words for the Instruction of the Weaker,
in the due Method, and Matter of Prayer, which some weaker People might
arbitrarily use, or let alone. Is to prove nothing denied.


That which is to be proved. That in the Times of purer Antiquity, there were
Forms of Prayer composed by the Governors of the Church, and universally
imposed on Ministers, even upon those who had the Gift of Prayer, and that the
Christian People and Ministers, did universally comply with such Use. Which (as
was said before) is so far from having been by any proved, that it is
impossible to be proved, for more then Three Hundred Years after Christ, which
were the Times of purest Antiquity.

Nor (to give our Reverend Author his due) does he say more than it seems
most probable, p. 46. Now probable Things may appear to others not probable,
for otherwise they would commence into Demonstrations. But let us examine upon
what Grounds he says, it is most probable, highly probable: His first Ground
is, Because so far as we can find, there never was any Dispute amongst
Christians, concerning the lawfulness of Praying by Forms. Nor is there now,
for those who are not able to pray without it, or who make Use of a Form of
Divine Prescription.

2. How should there be, or what need was there of any Dispute about it, till
it came to be universally imposed?

3. Who so knows how little Record we have that gives us Account of the Church
for the first Three Hundred Years, and by what Hands that little comes to us,
will see no Reason to wonder at our having nothing on this Argument, Immemorial
Usage, proves nothing in Divine Worship. But he comes in the next Place to
Matter of Fact.

1. He instanceth first in the Three Ancient Liturgies of Peter, Mark and
James, which though (he says) they have been all of them corrupted, yet are
doubtless, as to the purer Part of them of great Antiquity, and probably even
from the Apostolical Age. There is enough said, as to this in my Lord of
Morneyes Book de missa, Cap. 2. And in the Reasonable Account, p. 66, 67. It is
enough to say, So Cap. 6. Liturgias has omnes falsi postulo, (says the Learned
Morney.)
That it is not a Thing conceivable, that if Mark, or Peter, or James, or
Andrew, or any other Apostle had left any such Liturgies, that either Basil, or
Chrysostom, 300, or 310 Years after, should (as is pretended) go to make new
ones: Nor that, if either they, or Basil, or Chrysostom, had made any, then
known or taken Notice of in the World; that ever the Council of Melenis (as is
pretended) should direct the making any for their Province, and not only injoin
the Use of them: Nor considering, that Peter, James, Andrew, and Peter, and
Mark, were all Apostolical, and inspired Men, would the Use of any other than
theirs have been lawful.

2. For our Authors Second Proof, p. 49. about the Forms of Questions in
Baptism, it is quite another Thing; And those who doubt of the lawfulness of
Forms of Prayer, to be universally and publicly used, never doubted of the
lawfulness of a Form of sound Words, containing Matter of Doctrine.

3. In all that our Author further says upon this Argument. I find nothing of
Moment insisted on, but what Dr. Falkner has said, either in his Libertas
Ecclesiastica, or in his Vindication of Liturgies, and has been largely
answered, in the Reasonable Account, p. 66, 67. Or, in the Supplement to it.
(wrote wholly upon this Argument) Or in the Answer to Dr. Falkner's Vindication
of Liturgies, Cap. 3. Or in the Postscript to that Answer, containing the
Review of that Chapter. There the Reader will find a full Answer to what is
here said about the Councils of Laodicea, and Milenis, to his Argument from
(...) and (...), and (...)* his (...), Constantine's Forms. I shall not take
the Pains to Write, what is already written so plentifully on this Argument,
till I see something said to take off what has been already said.

4. Our Author says true, that after the Year Six Hundred, when Gregory was
come to be Pope, or rather after the Year Eight Hundred, when Charles the Great
had by his Civil Authority enforced the Use of Gregory's Liturgies by Fire, and
Sword. No other Prayers were admitted into the Public Worship, of what was
then the Popish Church, but what was in the Established Liturgy; But what they
did then in the Wilderness of the Valleys of Piedmont, and Lucerne, or other
Places where the true Church fled, we do not so well know; but never read of
any Liturgy they carried along with them, or used.

5. For what our Author further says, about the Calvinistical and Lutherane
Churches, there is enough said in the aforementioned Books to Answer it. It
lies upon him to prove, that the Churches in France and Holland generally
impose the Use of Forms in all Parts of Public Worship. If any do voluntarily
Use any Forms which are prescribed, and left to a free Use, we have nothing to
do to Condemn them; though we be of another Mind. I have indeed heard, That in
the Administration of the Sacraments, and Marriages, The Ministers of the
Reformed Churches in France, and Holland generally, keep to Forms. Marrying
Persons is no Ministerial Act by any Institution of Christ. It is a great and
weighty Action, and possibly what is fittest to be done by such whose Office it
is to Exhort, and to Pray for People. As for the Sacraments, the Ministration
of them is indeed a Ministerial Act. If we cannot satisfy our selves, in that
Ministration by tying our selves to prescribed Forms. We hope, it is not a
Thing of that Nature, but we may without any great Danger differ in it from
Persons and Churches which we Honor. In the mean Time, the Churches of
Scotland, and New England have hitherto been of our Minds, so that we are not
wholly alone, we differ from the Lutherane Churches in far greater Things than
this, and further yet from the Popish Synagogues. But as I have often said,
admit all here said as to Antiquity or Practice of other Churches were true
(which manifestly is not) it were but a presumptive, no concluding Argument. In
the mean time, 1. We (many of us as we have said, and it has appeared by our
Practice, do not judge it sinful, though we do not judge it under all
Circumstances eligible) to join by Communion in Prayer with Ministers who use
the prescribed Forms, or any other, whose Matter is not sinful, to be assented
to, or begged of God. So that all our Question is about the Ministerial Use. 2.
Nor as to that, do we judge our selves so infallible, as to condemn any
Ministers, that are satisfied, so to perform their Public Ministerial Acts in
Prayer. We only say, we cannot, and offer our Reasons in Vindication of our
selves.


For what our Author says, p. 59, 60. about Jesuits, and Romish Priests,
introducing conceived Prayers, into Public Use; we hope enough has been said
in our first Chapter to make him alter his Mind. Indeed Forms of Prayer were of
general Use in the Popish Worship, many Hundred Years before there was a
Jesuit in the World. But we do not believe them so much as Canonically
injoined before Pope Gregory's Time, but first by him. Nor universally
practiced tell Charles the Great's Time, which was Eight Hundred Years after
Christ. Nor do we see the least Color of Proof for any such Thing.

Our Author thinks fit to propound, but to speak very little to a Sixth Case,
viz.

Case 6. Whether it be lawful to comply with the Use of Public Forms, when
they are imposed.

Our Author I hope means Public Forms, containing no Matter, but what God has
given us leave to pray for. 2. With a Liberty also to Use others in the Pulpit
(for I observe our Author has all along pleaded for that) This supposed,

The Term complying, refers to Ministerial Use, or to a Popular Use, whose
Work is only to say Amen in Heart and with Faith, and due Affection, desiring
those Things of God. As to the latter it is not in Question betwixt us. We are
so far agreed. That such Use (though possibly under all Circumstances not
eligible) yet is not sinful.

So as the only Question is of Ministerial Use. This our Author knows many of
us Judge not lawful, we have given him our Reasons. Our Author has pretended
to Answer them. We have now showed him, that his Answers appear to us
insufficient, and bottomed upon Mistakes. So as yet sub judice lis est, and the
Question is not (as our Author States it.) Whether a lawful thing when imposed,
may be lawfully complied with. But whether what some Persons judge lawful, may
be done by others, who verily believe it unlawful.

Yet were the Question (as our Author stateth it) Whether a Thing [in the
Worship of God] lawful [that is apparently, neither commanded nor forbidden in
Gods Word] may be lawfully complied with, if commanded by Men. It could not be
determined affirmatively without determining.

That it is in the Power of Man to determine Things in Gods Worship, which he
has left to Peoples Liberty; and consequently, when God had given his People a
Liberty; for a Peace Offering to offer of the Herd, or of the Flock, either
Male, or Female, Lev. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Or a Goat. It was yet lawful for Asa,
or Iehosaphat, or Hezekiah, or Josiah, or the Jewish Sanhedrim to have by an
Humane Law restrained them to offer none but Bullocks, or Sheep, or Goats, or
of them none but Males, or none but Females, which as we read not was ever
attempted; so the lawfulness of such a Restriction, or Compliance with it may
deserve serious Thoughts. For what our Author says, That if the Imposition of
Prayer in Public by Forms may not be lawfully complied with, then neither may
the Imposition of Prayer ex tempore. We say, who asks any such Thing? For my
own Part, I think it would be unreasonable, surely those who plead for Liberty
in this Thing, cannot Plead for Imposition any way; and therefore what our
Author says here, seems to me wholly Impertinent.

FINIS.

