Imprimatur,

April 6. 1687. GVIL. NEEDHAM.

A MODEST ENQUIRY, WHETHER St. PETER WERE EVER AT ROME, AND Bishop of that
CHURCH?

WHEREIN I. The Arguments of Cardinal Bellarmine and others, for the
Affirmative, are Considered.

II. Some Considerations taken notice of, that render the Negative highly
Probable.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1687.

A MODEST ENQUIRY WHETHER St PETER were Bishop of Rome, Or ever there? etc.
CHAP. I.
The Occasion of this Disquisition is Administered by the Romanists. It does not
much concern Protestants: But of the highest Importance to the Church of Rome,
as being made an Article of Faith, and her loftiest Pretensions bottomed
thereon; To overthrow which it is enough, if we show, That their Arguments are
not Cogent.

THERE is no man (I think) can desire more heartily than thy self, An end of
Controversy desirable.
the accomplishment of that Prophecy, When Swords shall be turned into
Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks: All the Weapons of Contention
changed into Instruments for cultivating the Lords Vineyard* That, our
Controversies ended, no strife might remain amongst any that profess the
Christian Name, but an happy Emulation who should most glorify God, and adorn
the Gospel by a meek, Holy Conversation. That all our Tongues and Pens, freed
from the unwelcome Toil of Polemics, might be jointly employed in Eucharistics,
celebrating the Praises of the Divine Majesty, and exciting each other to the
practice of Virtue and Piety.

But since the All-wise Sovereign Disposer of things, By what obstructed.
has not thought fit to allot that happiness to our Times, but that Religion
(of it self the highest and most Sacred Bond of Love and Unity) is by the
Ignorance, the Prejudices, the Passions and secular Interests of men, made one
of the greatest occasions of Difference, or a common Subject of Debate; since
there are a sort of People in the World, who neglecting the humble Simplicity
of the Gospel, and dreaming of nothing less than Infallibility, Universal
Sovereignty, and such like Grandezzu's not only assume to themselves the
highest Privileges on the weakest Pretensions, but would impose their Dictates
(no less groundless than Imperious) as necessary to Salvation, and Damn all
that cannot see with such Spectacles as they please to put upon their Noses; I
cannot but think every one, seriously studious of his future State, obliged to
use all the just means he can for satisfaction in things that (are said to)
concern his everlasting Peace and Happiness.

Amongst the several Questions agitated between us and the Church of Rome, The
occasion of this Discourse.
some are purely Theological, the discussion of which most properly belongs to
Divines: others (however advanced or made use of to boulster up lofty
Pretensions) are no more than Historical, as relating to a mere and indifferent
matter of Fact. And the subject of these Papers being of the latter kind, I
thought a Layman, without incurring the censure of Presumption, might be
allowed fairly to sum up the Evidence produced on either side, leaving the
Impartial and Judicious Reader to give the Verdict in the Cause, as he shall
think fit. Especially, since I undertook not this Enquiry out of any Pragmatic
Humor of contending, or vainglorious Itch of arguing an unnecessary Problem;
But as invited, or rather (if I may be allowed to say so) provoked thereunto by
diverse Books and Pamphlets very lately (as well as heretofore) published
amongst us by the Gentlemen of the Roman Communion, wherein it has been
asserted as a notorious Truth, or rather taken for granted as a thing out of
Dispute, That St. Peter not only Preached the Gospel at Rome, but by Gods
command fixed his Chair there (that is, became the proper Bishop of that City)
and therefore the Popes are his Successors, etc. The Pope or Bishop of Rome
(says the Author of the late Book, Entitled, A Papist Misrepresented and
Represented, chapter 18.) is the Successor of St. Peter, to whom Christ committed
the care of his Flock, and who has been followed now by a visible Succession
of above 250 Bishops. The famous French Prelate now of Meaux (formerly of
Condom) in his Exposition not long since published in English, Sect 21. has
these words, The Son of God being desirous his Church should be one, and
solidly built upon Unity, has established and instituted the Primacy of Peter
to maintain and cement it, upon which account we acknowledge this Primacy in
the Successors of the Prince of the Apostles, to whom, for this CAUSE, we owe
Obedience and Submission -- And again, The Primacy of St. Peter 's Chair is the
common Center of all Catholic Unity. The Author of two Questions, Why are you a
Catholic? And why are you a Protestant? p. 41. tells us of the Bishop of
Rome's being Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Christ. Nay, so confident they seem of our Credulity, That an Almanac called
Calendarium Catholicum, for the last Year 1686. (commonly cried about the
Streets, and dispersed throughout the Nation) sets it down as an unquestionable
piece of Chronology, thus, Since the removal of St. Peter 's Chair from Antioch
to Rome [Anno 43.] where he remained 24 Years, and was afterward Crucified
with his Heels upwards under Nero, then Emperor, The Gentleman's skill in
Arithmetic seems as extraordinary as in History, when he takes 43 out of 1686,
there remains precisely 1647.
1647. Years.

Now though this brisk assurance wherewith they deliver themselves, suits well
enough with those that shall abandon their own understandings to make room for
an Implicit Faith in Humane Guides, as being resolved to receive their Priests
Dictates blindfold, and may perhaps make Impressions on spirits that are ready
to entertain every warm Asseveration as an Oracle, rather than be at the
trouble to examine its verity; yet in me (who have long since learnt of the
great St. Augustine Lib. 2. De Not. and Great. cap. 61.
to defer that Honor to the Sacred Scriptures alone, of commanding my Belief)
it had a quite contrary effect, and so much the more awakened my Curiosity to
inquire what substantial Proofs they had for what they alleged so peremptorily.

It Is true indeed, Protestants not much concerned in the Question.
That it does not much concern Protestants, Whether ever St. Peter were, or
were not at Rome; For even to grant, That he was the first Bishop of the Church
there, will nothing prejudice our Cause with considering men, who before they
can admit the modern Roman Claims, will besides That, expect some solid proof.

1. That Peter was constituted by Christ Prince of the Apostles, Things to be
proved by Romanists, besides Peter's being Bishop of Rome.
or sole Supreme Governor on Earth of the Universal Church.

2. That this Empire of his was not only Personal, but Successive, and to be
continued to the end of the World in some other Persons in the quality, and
upon the account of being his Successors.

3. Why this supposed right devolved to his Successors in the Bishopric of
Rome, rather than to those of Antioch, which they say, was his first Episcopal
See? Or that St. Peter's removal from thence to Rome, was by Gods special
Command to make That the Seat of Ecclesiastical Empire; and that accordingly he
did actually bequeath his Authority to the latter rather than to the former?
for his being put to Death at Rome (suppose it true) will not alone prove any
such matter.

4. That the modern Bishops of Rome (after eight or nine and twenty Onuphirus
in Chron. Pont. confesses 30.
acknowledged Schisms in that See, God knows how many Usurpations, and
Simonaical, or other undue Elections; and notwithstanding manifest Depravations
of, and Apostasy from St. Peter's Doctrine, and a Conversation, for the most
part, Diametrically opposite to his humble Holy Life) have yet every one of
them been undoubtedly his true and Lawful Successors.

All these Particulars, I say, as well as St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome,
must be undeniably proved, before their modern Pretensions can be adjudged good
and valid: Yet in the mean time their continual noise of St. Peter, and of his
being Bishop of Rome, and they his Successors, may be apt to inveigle some
ignorant People, if no opposition be made thereto, nor Caveat given, That what
they thus avouch as a notorious Truth, will upon a due scrutiny scarce appear
so much as a probable Opinion. Therefore I chose to spend a few vacant Hours in
rummaging this subject, not so much for the weight of the thing it self, as to
obviate so popular a suggestion, and let all the World see, That what the
Church of Rome builds its loftiest superstructures upon, is merely Bogg and
Quicksand, a supposed matter of Fact, which they assert Gratis, as not being
provable by any convincing Reason.

For on the other side, This Notion of St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, is of
the nearest concernment to that Church, it is prora and Puppis Papismi, the
main hinge of Popery. Jus successionis Pontificum Romanorum, etc. The Right
(says Bellarmin De sum. Pontif. l. 2. c. 1.
of the Popes Succession to Peter is founded on this, That Peter, the Lord so
commanding, placed his Seat at Rome, and sat there until his Death. Others of
their most Learned Authors Cajet. de Div. Instie. Pontif. c. 13. Canus Loc. l.
6. c. 8.
say, That the Popes succeeding Peter, is derived (not from Christ's
Institution, but) from Peter's Fact, which Fact was, that he made his Seat at
Rome, and there dyed; and so it comes about that the Roman Bishop succeeds him,
depending altogether on this Fact of Peter, which contains his being at Rome;
his being Bishop of Rome; his dying at Rome, and his dying there, by our Lords
special appointment, that the same might be the Mistress of all Churches. Now
what ever certainty, or rather how much uncertainty soever there be of all or
any of these particulars, yet the whole in a lump is (if I mistake not) made an
Article of Faith in the Church of Rome. Peter's being Bishop of Rome an Article
of their Faith.
For Pope Pius the fourth in his Bull, prescribing a Form of Confession of
Faith in pursuance of the Decrees of their Council of Trent, Dated 13 Nov.
1564. requires and commands all the Clergy and Regulars, etc. of his Church
(amongst other things) to take this following Oath, viz. I acknowledge the Holy
Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church to be the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches; and I do solemnly promise and swear true Obedience to the Bishop of
Rome the Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus
Christ. The very same Oath (amongst other things) is at this day exacted of all
Protestants that are pretended to be converted to the Roman Church in France,
as I am very credibly assured.
They will perhaps say, That the Article of Faith here intended, is not, That
St. Peter was ever at Rome, or Bishop there, but only that the the Roman Church
is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and that Obedience is to be paid to
its Bishop. But who sees not, That both the one and the other are expressly
grounded on This, That the Pope is Peter's Successor (which cannot be meant of
his Apostleship, for that they do not pretend to, but in his being Bishop of
Rome) and how should that be, if St. Peter should happen never to have been at
Rome, nor Bishop there? For it is impossible to prove or believe the Bishop of
Rome to be St. Peter's Successor in that Bishopric, unless it first appear,
That St. Peter was his Predecessor in that See; so that it is plain, this
Article imports no less than if it were said, I believe that St. Peter was
Bishop of Rome, and that therefore, That Church is the Mother and Mistress of
all Churches; and on that account to her Bishops, because they are St. Peter's
Successors, obedience is to be paid by all Christians.

Nor will it be to any purpose to say, That this is not one of the Church of
Rome's Articles of Faith, because only the Ecclesiastics are enjoined to take
this Oath; for what do they generally mean by their Church, when they talk of
it even in a large sense, but their Clergy? at least if the Guides are obliged
so to believe, and (as it is well known) all Lay-Members are to follow them, and
believe as the Church, that is, as the Ecclesiastics believe; does it not
follow, That every one that is of the Roman Communion, must so believe?
especially since it is there required, That they shall further swear in these
Words, Hanc veram Cathotholicam fidem, extra quam, NEMO SALVUS ESSE POTEST,
quam in presenti profiteor and teneo, eandem ad ultimum vitae spiritum
constantissime retinere spondeo, voveo and Juro. This is the true Catholic
Faith out of which no man can be saved, and which as at present I do profess
and hold, so I do promise vow and swear most constantly to retain the same to
my last breath.

Nay more (if you will believe them) all Christianity stands on this foot. The
sum of Christianity.
The same Bellarmin who affirmed that the Primacy of the Popes was founded on
St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, acquaints us further, That on this Primacy of
the Pope the Christian Religion depends; for these are his Words, De sum.
Pontif. in Praefat.
Etenim de qua re agitur cum de Primatu Pontificis agitur? brevissime dicam, de
summa rei Christianae. What is it, I pray, we treat of, when we handle the
Popes Supremacy? I will tell you in a word, it is touching the sum total or main
Interest of Christianity. Hence it is evident, that the Claims of the Church of
Rome or her Bishops, to an universal Headship over all the Churches of Christ,
to infallibility, and all the rest of their far-spread Pretensions, are
bottomed on St. Peter's being once their Bishop, and fixing there his Episcopal
Seat. Ask them why the Bishop of Rome rather than any other Bishop ( e. g. of
Toledo or Canterbury) is Head and Governor of the Universal Church? They will
tell you, It Is because the former only is Peter's direct Successor, to whom it
was said, I will give thee the Keys; and, Feed my Flock: Ask them why the
Church of Rome above all other Churches is exempt from falling into Errors in
Matters of Faith? They will say; it is because she was founded by, and had for
her first Bishop Peter, to whom it was said, I have prayed for thee that thy
Faith fail not; and, -- Thou art Peter, -- and on this Rock I will build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Which Privileges
were to descend to all that should succeed him in that Chair, which he should
think fit to choose, and happen to dye at. And the like Answers they must
(according to their Principles and Pretensions) give in other particulars.

Now who hears of such a stupendous Superstructure, The reasonableness or
necessity of examining this point.
but will expect that the foundation should be firm beyond exception? If they
will perpetually be amusing us with the Din of Peter's Chair, and Peter's
Successor, and the wonderful things they are thereby estated in; I cannot
imagine why we may not be allowed to inspect their Title; To consider whether
the groundwork of all these Magnificent Pretenses have any thing of certainty?
If the Popes Primacy be the Center of Catholic Unity; The sum of Christianity,
a matter so Essential, that none without believing it, can obtain Salvation:
And if this Primacy be founded on Peter's being at Rome, and fixing his
Episcopal Chair there, why should any body be angry with me for endeavoring to
satisfy my self or others therein? Does it not at this rate become the concern
of all the Christian World to inquire into matter of Fact, whether St. Peter
were indeed once at least in his Life at Rome, and Bishop there? Can we expect
less than a Divine Oracle, some plain text of Scripture, to warrant so
Important a Matter? At least, will any thing shor of a Demonstration, proof
beyond Doubt or probable Contradiction, be allowed for good Evidence in a Case
of such weight and moment?

I know well it is not only difficult, The Negative not undertook to be proved.
but many times impossible, to prove a Negative: I shall not therefore
undertake, nor am I obliged to prove, that St. Peter was never at Rome, or
Bishop thereof; But they that affirm he was, and draw thence such advantageous
Inferences to themselves, are bound by all Rules of Law and Reason to make that
Affirmative appear by sufficient Evidence. We are only on the defensive part;
if they will require us on the pain of Damnation to submit to their Bishop of
Rome, because he is St. Peter's Successor, they ought surely in the first place
to demonstrate that he does succeed him; it is therefore enough for my purpose,
and will invalidate all their claims derived from St. Peter, if I can show,
That all they have to allege for his being at Rome, and Bishop there, is not
necessarily conclusive; but that notwithstanding any thing they can offer, the
contrary opinion is still at least probable, viz. That St. Peter was not Bishop
of Rome, nor ever there.

Which I understand was long since asserted by VELENVS, a Learned Lutheran, in
a just Treatise on this Subject; but not having been able to get a sight of his
Book, nor knowing of any other Protestant that has ex professo treated thereof
(though many have occasionally spoken sufficient to satisfy any impartial
mind) I shall only offer such plain Natural Remarks as hastily occurred to my
own thoughts and slender reading, leaving the further improving or disproving
the matter to persons of a greater stock of Books and Judgment.

But this I can without injuring truth avow, That I have handled it with all
sincerity, not wittingly baulking any material Argument, Testimony or
Objection, nor abusing or misciting any Author to serve a turn; for my sole aim
is a free impartial sifting out of Truth, not the advancement of any
self-interesting Opinion; and if any where I have stumbled into Error, it is the
unhappiness of my Understanding, not the pravity of my Will, being always ready
with thanks to acknowledge mistakes, when convinced thereof, as I have heartily
and not altogether indiligently endeavored to avoid them. Therefore I hope the
Gentlemen of the Roman Persuasion, will not be offended at any honest innocent
endeavors to plain the way to truth, and remove Rubbish out of their passage;
for though they are zealous for that mode of Religion they have been educated
in, or upon plausible Motives entertained, yet I cannot persuade my self, that
their Noble Ingenuity will ill-resent the detection of any groundless Tales
hatched to support it. There is no Gentleman but esteems the Lie even in common
Discourse, as the greatest dishonor and affront imaginable, much more incensed
must he be at those that would impose upon him to believe and maintain a
falsehood as a point of Faith, and suspend his Salvation upon dark stories and
uncertainties; and consequently will acknowledge his obligations to their pains
(even though represented as Enemies) that would refcue him from the hazard of
so scandalous a Precipice; Truth is both the Basis and Bulwark of Christian
Religion, which needs no pious Frauds, nor fond Tales, nor forged Evidence to
maintain it, but is always ready to endure the strictest Scrutiny; he must
either be a self-designing Hypocrite, or (which generally is all one) a lewd
Atheist, not a true Catbolick, that will persist in owning or avouching That
for certainty, which his Reason and Conscience cannot but tell him is either
false or doubtful.

Thus much I thought fit to say in Apology for my self and the Undettaking, or
(if you please) let it pass as a Preface to the Reader.

CHAP. II.
The Roman Account of St. Peter's Life. Bellarmin's five Arguments for his
being at Rome, with an Additional one of other Romanists, Answered.

It Is but reasonable, That the Church of Rome, which pretends to hold so vast a
Lordship by Succession from St. Peter, should in the first place as clearly as
she can, make out her Relation to him. Now the story she tells, is in short to
this effect, viz. That some time after our Lords Passion, St. Peter went into
Syria, and became Bishop of Antioch, and continued there, or (as they love to
speak) held that See seven Years; and then he removed his Seat from thence to
Rome, and thenceforth was Bishop of the Church of Rome, and held the same four
or five and twenty Years, viz. until he was Martyred there under Nero.

I am forced to use General Terms, because most of those that undertake to
relate the matter, do wondrously vary in the Particulars, and cannot agree
either in the Year wherein his Bishopric at Antioch should begin; or in the
time of its continuance; nay, there is a dispute amongst them, whether his
being Bishop of Antioch were before he went to Rome, or after he had been
there. The time too, when he came to Rome, and the length of his Episcopate
there, and other material Circumstances, are very differently delivered.
Touching which confusion and intersetings of the evidence, I shall have
occasion to speak more in another Chapter, as also concerning the whole
business of Antioch.

That which at present lies before us, is to consider what special Relation St.
Peter had to Rome above other Churches. Concerning which, the Learned and
Laborious Cardinal Bellarmin (whose Works, with those of his no less diligent
Brother Baronius, are the grand Magazine of that Party, and both whose Industry
might justly claim the highest Commendation, if bestowed in a Cause that
deserved it) states four Questions. 1. Whether Peter were ever at Rome? 2.
Whether he dyed there? 3. Whether he was Bishop of Rome? 4. Whether after he
had once assumed that Bishopric, he ever changed it for another? All which he
handles (after his manner) severally, and at large. But indeed the second
comprehends the first; for if Peter were Martyred at Rome, he must needs be
there: And the fourth, though he puts most stress upon it, may fitly be
included under the third; for if they can prove, That St. Peter was at any time
Bishop of Rome, we shall not much trouble our selves, whether he afterward
removed from thence, both because I think the practice of a Bishops Translation
from one See to another, was not altogether so early in the Church (their talk
of the same Apostle's removal from Antioch to Rome, shall be further considered
anon) as also because I remember not any but their own Onuphrius that has
insisted upon, or objected any such matter: so that the main Question is only
this, Whether St. Peter were ever in a proper sense Bishop of Rome? And because
that will be improbable in the highest degree, if (besides other Reasons) it
cannot plainly be made appear, that he was at some time or other there; It will
therefore be sufficient to discuss these two Questions.

1. The two chief Questions.
Whether St. Peter were ever at Rome?

2. Whether supposing he were there, he was Bishop (in the strict and now usual
signification of the Word) of that Church?

To prove Peter to have been at Rome, Cardinal Bellarmin produces five
Arguments, which we shall severally consider.

The first from that Text, 1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church that is at Babylon saluteth
you. By Babylon here (says he) is meant Rome; therefore Peter when he wrote
that Epistle, was there: Now that Peter did mean Rome by the word Babylon in
that place, he would prove, 1. Because Eusebius Records, that one Papias did
say, That this Epistle of Peter was written from the City of Rome, which the
Apostle did there Tropically call Babylon: To which purpose the Cardinal also
cites St. Hierom and others, as being of the same Opinion, or rather following
Papias therein. 2. Because Rome in the Revelations is frequently called Babylon.

To which I answer.

1. This is proving Ignotum per Ignotius, a doubtful thing by a thing utterly
Improbable; a controverted matter of Fact by an uncertain groundless Opinion.
Does not all the World know, that there were at that time two great Cities,
whose proper name was Babylon? One in Assyria, famous in all ancient Histories,
as being the seat of the first Monarchy: The other in Egypt, mentioned in
Strabo, l. 17. and by Ptolomy called Babulis, the same (if I mistake not) which
at this day is called CAIRO, or near it; and why might not Peter date his
Epistle from one of these? For as he, for the most part, preached to the
dispersed Jews, of whom, no doubt, many were scattered through Chaldaea and
Assyria; so he might probably exert his Ministry at the first mentioned
Babylon, being so eminent a place on the same Continent, and at no great
distance from Jerusalem, especicially since Nicephorus tells us he Preached all
through Palestina and Syria.

Nor is this only my private Sentiment, the great Scaliger Annot. in Jo. 18. 31.
speaks boldly, Petrus Romae nunquam fuit, sed praedicabat (...), cujus
Metropolis erat Babylon, ex qua scribit Epistolam suam. Peter was never at
Rome, but preached to the dispersed Jews in Asia, the Metropolis whereof was
Babylon, from whence he wrote his Epistle. Whom the very Learned de Marca
Archbishop of Paris Seconds in these Words, De concord. Sacerd. and Imper. lib.
6. cap. 1. Sect. 4.
Although the Ancients imagined, That Peter by the word Babylon signified the
City of Rome; yet Scaliger's conjecture is probable, who thinks that Peter
wrote from Babylon it self, this Epistle to the dispersed Jews.

Or on the other side, if it be true, which the foresaid Nicephrous writes Lib.
14. cap. 39.
That from Pontus, Galatia, etc. Peter went down into Egypt, Where he created
St. Mark Bishop of Alexandria; then why might he not send this Epistle from the
Egyption Babylon? so that either way, by Babylon, is far more likely to be
understood one of those places, rather than Rome. For,

2. What an extravagance is it to imagine that S. Peter should disguise and
conceal from whence he wrote? or qualify the place, which he had chosen to be
his Episcopal See, and perpetual Seat of Church-Soveraignty (as they would have
it) with so uncouth a Title, when there was not the least color of reason (as
far as we can now learn) or occasion why he should so do, nor any example of
the like kind to be found? For though S. Luke in the Acts, and S. Paul in his
Epistles, frequently speak of Rome, yet they never call it Babylon.

Now when the Apostle says, the Chruch at Babylon salutes you, certainly he
intended (as all men do in their Epistles) that they should know where he was,
and who they were that saluted them; but this was (I think) impossible for them
to do, if by Babylon he meant Rome, no Author either Civil or Sacred having
then ever called it so.

3. That St. John in the Revelations above fifty Years after (for Baronius, who
says this Epistle was wrote An. Chr. 45. tells us also that the Revelation was
wrote An. 97.) did call Rome Babylon, is nothing to the purpose; for though a
Tropical Denomination suit well with a Prophetic Style, yet it will not
follow, that in a plain Epistolary Salutation, a proper Name must be wrested
from its genuine signification to such an abstruse and remote sense. St. John,
writing mysterious Prophecies, used Types and Figures to express future things;
but that Peter in a familiar Recommendation, should do so, has neither Truth
nor Probability. The Reason why St. John denominates Rome, Babylon (though
represented in a Vision) was not yet actually in Being; for it was by way of
allusion, That as Babylon of old held the Jews, the then People of God, in
Temporal Captivity, so she should in time to come bring Christians into a
Spiritual Vassalage; and thence she is called Mystery Babylon.

It seems the Learned Cardinal thought some Text of Scripture would be expected
to prove Peter's being at Rome, and finding nothing looking that way, was
forced to hedge in this, though it cost him dear; for thereby he confesses and
proclaims Rome to be the Apocalyptical Babylon. But though an hard pinch
reduced him to this necessity, yet he hopes to secure his retreat, by
affirming, That Rome is termed Babylon, not in respect of the future Roman
Church, but as it was the Seat of the Roman Empire that then domineered over
the Earth, as Babylon did of old. -- But this evasion is as gross as the
occasion of it, since it is plain, the Revelations from the 4th Chapter,
especially; is a Prophetic Book, not Historical; for so are the express words
there, v. 1. Come up hither, and I will show things that shall be hereafter.
And also it relates all along to the future state of the Church, not to the
present condition of Worldly Empire; and almost all Interpreters agree, That
this Babylon which, Rev. 17. is called The Scarlet Whore, etc. described by
this Title, Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations
of the Earth; can be no orher than that Antichrist which was to sit in the
Temple of God, that is, in the Church, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

4. As for what is alleged, that Papias, St. Jerome, or others, thought this
Epistle of Peter might be written from Rome, Tropically called Babylon; it is
at most but their Opinion touching a matter of Fact long before their time; and
as we have shown that there is no need or Reason for admitting any such Trope,
so the Ancients may be excused, if they understood not the true occasion why,
or in what respect Rome was called Babylon, since that which qualified it such,
and was intended to be signified by the Divine Vision, appeared not in the
World till some Ages afterward. Whence that Mighty Monarch of Letters, as well
as of Great Britain, King JAMES the First (Grandfather to our present Gracious
Sovereign) in his Proemonition to all Christian Princes, judiciously observed
in a like Case. That the Fathers of the first Ages speak of this matter but
only by conjectures, whereas we speak of it by experience. For Scripture
Predictions after the Events, become Histories; and the Promises, Performances;
and so are much more intelligible.

5. As for the credit of Papias, the first Suggester of this Interpretation,
and consequently the first Author in the World (for ought I can hear) that gave
occasion to the Conceit of Peter's ever being at Rome, we shall give a further
account anon.

In the mean time cannot but remark, That this Interpretation is yet the more
absurd, because the same Bellarmin, who to maintain Rome's Supremacy, because
of Peter's being there, does here, without any probable grounds, expound
Babylon to be Rome, does elsewhere Preface to his Treatise De Pontif.
ascribe that Prophecy of Isaiah, cited 1. Pet. 2. Behold I put in Sion a
cornerstone elect and precious, etc. to be meant of the Pope (at least
secondarily) contrary not only to St. Peter and St. Paul's express
Interpretation, who attribute the same (as indeed it wholly and solely belongs)
to Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 6. and Romans 9. 32. but also to that of our Lord, who
refers those words to himself, Matt. 21. 42. so that the Cardinal makes Rome to
be both Sion and Babylon; he will have it Babylon; to prove Peter there, and
Sion to exclude (in effect) Christ from being Head of the Church, and advance
the Pope in his stead.

The second thing (for I know not how to call it an Argument) brought to prove
St. Peter's being at Rome, Bellarmins second Proof.
is this, There were many Christians at Rome, nay, a large and flourishing
Church gathered there before Paul came thither, as appears by his Epistle
(which it is evident he wrote before ever he had been at Rome) But who gathered
that Church, if Peter were not at Rome?

There is no doubt but the Learned Author saw through the weakness of this
Discourse, Ans.
and therefore put it by way of Query to amuse weak heads, rather than as an
Argument to convince the Learned; for how odly would such a Syllogism look from
the Pen of a Cardinal? There were Christians at Rome before Paul come thither,
ergo* St. Peter was there before him, as if there were no other Preachers of
the Gospel of the blessed Jesus, but those two For,

1. Not to urge, That though we read of Saints at Rome, yet we no where find
the Church of Rome, or a Church at Rome mentioned in terminis; the Holy Spirit
possibly forbearing to qualify it with that Title in Holy Writ, as a check to
their foreseen Usurpations. And although it expressly tell us of several other
Churches first planted by this or that Apostle, yet it says not that any
Apostle was the first Seeds-man of the Gospel at Rome. Not to insist I say upon
this,

2. Let us consider how and by whom Churches were gathered in Samaria and at
Antioch (which they make Peter's other and first Bishopric); if we may be
allowed to read and credit the Bible, there we find, that by a great
Persecution at Jerusalem, the Disciples (except the Apostles) were scattered
abroad, every where (and so who knows but some of them to Rome) preaching the
Word, Acts 8. 4. particularly Philip, a Deacon in Samaria, made great numbers
of Converts, v. 6. which when the Apostles heard of, they sent thither Peter
and John (an odd procedure for Subjects to send their Sovereign on an errand,
if they had thought Peter such) who having further spread the Gospel in
Samaria, returned again to Jerusalem, v. 25. others of the said scattered
Disciples Preached the Lord Jesus to the Grecians at Antioch, and many believed
and were turned unto the Lord, Acts 11. 19, 20. whereupon Barnabas was sent to
them, who brought Paul into Antioch, and a whole Year they (viz. Paul and
Barnabas) assembled themselves with the Church (so that there was a Church
there before) and taught much People, and the Disciples were first called
Christians there, v. 26. If therefore Christianity (both Name and Thing) were
first planted at Antioch (which they say was Peter's first Diocese) neither by
Peter, nor by any Apostle, but by certain scattered Disciples, why might not
the like happen at Rome?

3. It Is evident that the Gospel had been Preached to many Romans at Jerusalem
immediately after Christ's Ascension; for when the Apostles received the Gift
of the Holy Ghost, and Preached in other Tongues, it is expressly said, That
amongst the multitude that came to hear them, There were strangers of Rome,
Acts 2. 10. St. Paul also witnesses, That Andronicus and Junia (who dwelt at
Rome when he wrote his Epistle, that is, before he came at Rome) were in Christ
(that is, professed the Christian Faith) before himself (which must be at least
5 or 6 years before Peter is pretended to come at Rome) And that they were of
Note amongst the Apostles, Romans 16. 7. Why then might not They by their pains
and zeal, at least in some measure, gather a Church there? Besides, the
Scriptures mention not which of the Apostles, or who else in particular,
collected diverse other Churches, must they therefore all be ascribed to the
particular pains of St. Peter?

4. What the Cardinal affirms, That none of the Ancients name any other but
Peter that should first Preach the Gospel at Rome, is not strictly true; For he
himself a little after confesses, That Clemens (whom they will have to be
Peter's Successor) in the first Book of his Recongnitions, and Dorothoeus
Tyrensis, Record, That Barnabas Preached at Rome in the Reign of Tiberius; that
is, Barnabas said to Preach at Rome before Peter.
within 3 or 4 years after our Lords Crucifixion; Whereas their most common
story is, That St. Peter came not there till the second of Claudius, which must
be about five years at least after the Reign of Tiberius.

It Is true the Cardinal endeavors to weaken the credit of those Authors, by
saying, That the first is thought to be Apochryphal; and the latter contains
many things fabulous and false; yet still as they are of their own producing,
and he will not deny but they are Ancient; so whenever they serve his Turn, he
is ready enough to make use of them, as Authentic Witnesses. And indeed if all
Authors must be discarded that contain many things fabulous and false, His
numerous Citations from pretended Antiquity would grow very thin and
inconsiderable.

Besides, That Testimony which he himself mentions from Orosius and Platina,
That the Senate of Rome in the Reign of Tiberius, when upon a Letter from
Pilate concerning the Miracles of Christ, that Emperor moved them to Canonize
or receive him amongst the number of their Gods, not only refused so to do,
because Pilate wrote to him and not to them about it, but also made a Decree
Exterminandos [or Pellendos, as Platina's word is] ex Vrbe esse Christianos;
That Christians should be banished or driven out of the City: Proposing also
(says Platina) Rewards to the Informers against them; seems to me a plain
Evidence, That there were Christians there in the Reign of Tiberius. And I dare
appeal to the common sense of any indifferent man, whether the Cardinal's
Gloss, That the meaning thereof was only this [That if any Christians should
come there, they should be Banisht] be not forced, and almost Ridiculous;
Especially since with Orasius he confesses, Tiberium poenam statuisse
Accusatoribus Christianorum; That, Tiberius made a Law to punish the Accusers
of the Christians; and Platina says the punishment threatened was Capital; For
tho it be not hard to Believe, That Tiberius acting as an absolute Emperor, and
having received an affront in this very matter from the Senate, might set forth
an Edict contrary to the Senates Vote; yet it is altogether absurd to imagine,
That he should threaten to punish the accusers of Christians, if indeed there
were there no Christians to be accused.

Now if there were Christians at Rome in the days of Tiberius, since Peter is
not pretended to have come to Rome till the time of Claudius, before whom,
after Tiberius, Caligula reigned very near four years; it follows undeniably,
That the Church of Rome was not first planted by St. Peter.

Bellarmin's third Argument is, The Third Argument.
That Grave Authors write, That Mark wrote his Gospel at Rome, according to
what he had heard Peter Preach: Therefore Peter was at Rome. And here cites in
the first place his Friend Papias again, and after him others.

1. What value we are to have for Papias's Testimony, Answ.
will appear hereafter; and it is most likely that the other Authors followed
him, so that the whole depends upon his Authority; but the notion it self is
indeed Impious and Derogating from that reverence we ought to pay to the Books
of the Gospel; For there is no well-instructed Christian but believes, that St.
Mark and every other Evangelist wrote by the special assistance and inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, and not only by Hearsay, either from Peter or any others.

2. The meaning of those Authors may be, That Mark wrote his Gospel by the
excitement or privity of St. Peter, but that therefore Peter preached at Rome,
follows not; and most of the Ancients reckon St. Mark the Evangelist to be
Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, therefore it is not probable, that he ever was,
or continued long at Rome.

3. That which might deceive Papias, and the rest, might be, that, whereas they
had heard somebody say, St. Mark the Evangelist was a Companion of St. Peter,
and wrote his Gospel partly at his motion, and also found one Mark mentioned in
several places of the New Testament to have been at Rome, as Coloss. 4. 10.
Philem. v. 24. They thence concluded, That St. Peter must be at Rome, and Mark
write his Gospel there. But in truth, that Mark whom in Scripture we find to
have been at Rome, seems not to be the Writer of the Gospel, but the same that
is mentioned, Acts 12. 12. Who is there said to be otherwise named John, and
Mark only his surname; The same whom Paul and Barnabas (whose Sisters Son he
was, Col. 4. 10.) took along with them from Jerusalem to Antioch, v. 25. But
after some time he left them, and returned from Pamphilia to Jerusalem, Chap.
13. 13. About whom, on that occasion, a controversy arose between Paul and
Barnabas, with which last he went into Cyprus, Chapter 15. 32. But was afterward
at Rome with Paul, as appears by the Texts before cited, and sometimes employed
by him to visit the Churches abroad, as is probable from Col. 2. 4, 10. Now
that this Mark could not (according to their own account) be the Evangelist,
appears,

I. Because St. Paul, in his second Epistle to Timothy, Chapter 3. 11. sends for
him again to Rome; which Epistle Bellarmine says was written in the Fourteenth
year of Nero; and indeed it seems to be but very little before St. Paul's
Death, from his words, Chap. 4. 6. I am now ready to be offered, and the time
of my departure is at hand; whereas Mark the Evangelist dyed in the 8th year of
Nero, as Hierom, De Viris Illustribus, witnesses, and is elsewhere owned by
Bellarmin himself: And would Paul send for a man that was dead five or six
years before?

II. Because themselves make the Evangelist, not only to write his Gospel at
Peter's motion, but to have been his common Attendant or Assistant in his
Travels and Preaching the Gospel, and by him to have been made Bishop of
Alexandria in Egypt, where he suffered Martyrdom. Whereas the other Mark that
was at Rome did (as we find in Scripture) generally accompany Paul and
Barnabas, or one of them.

So that when any of the Ancients talk of Mark's writing his Gospel at Rome
after Peter's Dictates, they seem unwarily to confound the story of the two
Marks, and jumble them into one, and so contradict themselves. And therefore,
Whether St. Peter's being at Rome can thence be sufficiently proved (especially
when it is most probable the whole was borrowed and derived at first from the
Hearsay of Papias, or some such Apocryphal Traditionist) is left to the
judgment of the discreet Reader.

Bellarmin's fourth Argument is drawn from the story of Peter's Victory over
Simon Magus at Rome: The fourth Argument.
And indeed the same, if we may credit their Authors, is not only a proof of
St. Peter's being at Rome; but one of the Two Causes which moved him to remove
from Antioch thither; For thus Platina -- Petrus Romam Caput Orbis venit, and
quod hanc sedem Pontificali Dignitati Convenientem Cernebat; and huc profectum
intellexerat Simonem Magum; Peter came to Rome the Head of the World, both
because he saw this was a seat convenient or suitable for the Pontifical
Dignity, and also for that he understood Simon Magus was gone thither: So that
it seems his going to Rome was not Jubente Domino, by any special command from
Christ, as Bellarmin would have it; but because Rome being at that time
Metropolis of the World, he thought no other place so worthy to be the seat of
his Ecclesiastical Principality, and was afraid (forsooth) lest Simon the
Sorcerer should usurp and get possession of it before him, and therefore he
hastened thither to expel him. -- Sed hoc obiter.

To show the weakness of this pretense, The Answer.
I shall, first consider what we find in Scripture touching this Simon Magus;
2dly, Relate the Story they tell about him at Rome: And 3dly, Show the Vanity
thereof, and that the same was first hatched by Fabulous Authors.

I. We read Acts 8. That Simon Magus lived at Samaria, and having long Bewitched
(or seduced) the people there with Sorceries (or Juggling Impostures) was highly
esteemed: But upon Philip's Preaching, seemed to Believe the Gospel, and was
Baptized, and wondered at the Signs and Miracles which were done; but when Peter
and John were sent down thither from the rest of the Apostles at Jerusalem, and
on their Prayers, and laying on of Hands, the Believing Samaritans had received
the Holy Ghost (that is, as I conceive in this place, were endued with the
Power of speaking Strange Tongues, and working of Miracles) This Simon offered
him Money, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he
may receive the Holy Ghost; But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with
thee, because thou have thought that the Gift of God may be purchased with
money; Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray
God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee; for I perceive
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. Then answered
Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things that ye
have spoken, come upon me.

This was indeed a sig^al Victory obtained by Peter over this wretched
Magician, but achieved at Samaria, not at Rome. And from such his wicked
overture, all Giving and Receiving of Money, or other secular profit for any
Office or Preferment in the Church, is ever since (from his name) called Simony.

But the Combat and Victory meant by Bellarmin is supposed to have been at
Rome, and thus related by Platina -- That the said Simon Magus had the
confidence to vye Miracles with Peter about raising a dead Boy to Life, whose
Corpse his Charms at first did seem to move; but when afterward,
notwithstanding all the Conjurer could do, the Lad lay breathless as before;
yet at the Command of Peter, in the Name of Jesus, he revived, and stood on his
feet: Which Simon the Magician took so much in dudgeon, that he told the people
they should behold him fly from the Capitol to Mount Aventine, if Peter would
but follow him; whereby they should perceive, which of the Two was the greatest
Saint, and most beloved of God. But when he was got upon the wing, at the
Prayer of Peter, stretching out his hand toward Heaven, and beseeching God,
That he would not suffer so many People to be deluded with Magic Arts, down
came Simon and broke his Thigh, whereof shortly after he dyed. And this being
so, Peter must needs be at Rome.

1. Now let any sober Reader judge, Whether this whole story in all its
Circumstances do not smell rank of Romance and Fable. That Simon the Conjurer
of Samaria should ramble to Rome, and the blessed Apostle Peter travel thither
after him so many hundred Miles on purpose to vye Miracles with him there, when
there were not wanting many Saints in that City in that Age when God was
pleased to give frequent Testimonies to his Church by Miracles, who might as
well have confounded the Sorcerer: That he who was so far convinced of the
mighty Power of God in Peter at Samaria, as to beg his Prayers, should offer to
challenge him to work Miracles at Rome. That being so shamefully baffled in the
business of raising the Dead Boy, whom Peter presently raised to Life, he
should yet have the confidence to propose a new Trial of Skill by Flying.-
Credat Judoeus Apella.

But waving the Improbabilities, being a matter of Fact, the Credit thereof
must wholly depend on the first Relaters; and pray observe from what Authors
they have this story; Eusebius Lib. 2. Ca. 15.
says it was reported by Clemens, and by Papias; and Bellarmin adds, Egesippus
de Excido Hierosolym, l. 3. c. 2. -- As for Papias, we have nothing of his
extant; nor if we had, is his Credit much, as will by and by appear; and the
other two supposed Books of Clemens and Egesippus are both Forgeries, contrived
in after times under those ancient Names, and not written by them, as amongst
other feigned Antiquities, I doubt not but to satisfy the Reader in a
particular Chapter on that Subject.

And what man of sense will give so much as a common Historical Credit, much
less admit that as an Article of Faith, which has no better Foundation than
what is bottomed on counterfeit Authors? Especially since it is not pretended
to be attested by any that were Eyewitnesses, or that lived for a considerable
time after; nor is it credible that so wonderful and public a Miracle, if
truly transacted at Rome, should have escaped the notice and mention of some of
those Roman Historians who have so exactly given us the Memoirs of that curious
and very Learned Age.

2. This Tale does not quadrate or hang well together; for Platina, as it is
plain by his Words, makes this Exploit done at Peter's first coming to Rome;
for as he assigns one main part of his Errand in going thither, to be for
obviating the mischiefs of that Impostor; so by his Relation the matter seems
to have been quickly determined after Peter's arrival; and he expressly says
Simon Magus dyed of that fall, non ita multo post, not long after: Now they say
Peter went to Rome in the second Year of Claudius, Anno Chr. 43. and so in that
or the next Year Magus must be defeated. But Cardinal Baronius Bar. Tom. 1. ad
Ann. 68. No. 16, 17.
assures us Simon Magus did not dye till the Year of our Lord 68. that is in
the 13th Year of Nero, the very next Year before they say Peter suffered there;
and no less than about 25 Years after they pretend Peter went first to that
City. Did St. Peter go to Rome almost on purpose to suppress the Magician, and
yet could not meet with him in all that time? Or did the Sorcerer lie sick of
the bruises of his fall, four or five and twenty years? Then how did he die
quickly after? If Simon were playing his tricks at Rome, and making the People
believe he was a Great God in the beginning of Claudius's Reign, and died not
till almost the end of Nero's, that is 25 years after, (just the term they
assign to St. Peter's coming and continuing Bishop there) It would almost
persuade one to suspect a mistake, and that they unhappily attribute to the
Apostle the Residence of the Conjurer.

In a word, That Simon Magus might be at Rome, I will not much dispute; since
so many Tracks of his footsteps seem to have been visible there these thousand
years or upwards; but that Simon Peter was there, I must crave leave to say,
does not to me sufficiently appear by this Argument.

The fifth Reason, Bellarmins 5th argument for Peter's being at Rome.
Why we are to believe that Peter must needs be at Rome, is, Because he was put
to Death there: Which (they say) is evident enough from his Sepulcher, which
was shown there, and the Pilgrimages undertook by multitudes to visit it, and
by the Testimony of many Writers, who take the same for granted.

1. Answ.
This seems but a Negromantic Logic, the carcass only of an Argument in a
matter of Faith, that is fetched from Tombs, and raised I know not how, from
Caemiteries; a very rambling Reason, that depends merely on Pilgrimages; it is
nothing probable, if Peter were Crucified by that cruel Tyrant Nero, that the
Christians were allowed at all (much less publicly) to Interr his Corpse, or
build him a sumptuous Monument. For we find in Eusebius, l. 4 That the
Christians had very much ado to obtain the body of their Bishop Polycarpus,
which was refused them by the Heathens, thinking they would make a God thereof,
and adore it; but the Christians protested they did Worship only and alone the
true God. The custom of Worshipping departed Saints, and Pilgrimageing to dead
men's shrines, came up long after. And who knows but a forged Story might
boulster up an Idolatrous, or at least Unlawful Superstition? But as to this,
you shall hear more in a subsequent Chapter.

2. However, could they evidently and beyond all contradiction demonstrate that
they have indeed St. Peter's bones at Rome, yet this would be no proof that he
was ever there in his Lifetime, much less that he was the particular Bishop of
that Church; for nothing is more frequent amongst them, than the Translation of
the bodies of Saints from one place to another, many hundred years after their
Decease. But as they have no Authentic evidence, that they have one true Grain
of that blessed Apostle's dust, so we are too well acquainted with their Art in
Counterfeiting Relics, and building glorious Shrines (for drawing together
vain superstitious People, and bubbling them of their money) to credit them on
their bare words about the Body of Peter, any more than concerning the Head of
St. John Baptist, the Milk, the Comb, the Scizzars, and the Traveling Chamber
of the Blessed Virgin, Cartloads of Chips of the Cross, whereon our Savior
suffered, the Head of St. Denis, the Bones of St. Vrsula, and her Eleven
thousand Virgins; The Heads of the three Wisemen of the East (whom they call
the three Kings of Cologn) and a Thousand more impostures daily boasted of,
visited and worshipped through several parts of the Roman Catholic World.

But they will perhaps urge, Touching the place of St. Peter's Death.
If Peter did not suffer Martyrdom at Rome, where died he?

To which I Reply.

1. What imports it if it be not known? Can they tell us where and when St.
Matthew, St. Jude, and others of the Apostles died? Nay rather, as God
concealed Moses's Grave to prevent Idolatry, it may be the same Gracious
Providence foreseeing what a noise some people would make about St. Peter, left
the latter stages of his Life, and place, time and circumstances of his Death,
purposely in the dark, to check such presumption.

2. St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, Nicholaus Lyranus, and the Interlineary gloss
on that Text, Matthew. 23. 24. Behold I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes, [whereby those Authors understood Apostles and Evangelists] and some
of them ye [that is, the People of Jerusalem] shall kill and crucify, Se also
afterward, chapter 5. quest. 4.
and some ye shall scourge, etc. do say, That St. Peter was Crucified at
Jerusalem (which may reasonably be supposed after his return out of Syria or
Egypt, if we credit Nicephorus) for otherwise there being none of the Apostles
that suffered by way of Crucifixion there, that Prophecy should not be
fulfilled; the words of Lyra are these.

-- Ex ijs Occidetis sicut Jacobum fratrem Johannis, Acts 12. and Stephanum,
Acts 7. and Multos alios, and Crucifigetis ut Petrum and Andraeam. To which
Testimony of that most Learned Man (who lived near 400 years ago) the Cardinal
has nothing to say, but that he speaks unwarily; but whether himself does not
speak full as unwarily and groundlesly, is still a just question. The rather,
if we consider, that Josephus who lived and wrote at Rome, and not only
mentions the Death of St. John Baptist and Christ in Judea, but of many
Christians put to Death at Rome by Nero, yet takes no notice of Peter's
Crucifixion; which he was not likely to omit, if Peter had been then accounted
the head of the Christian Church, and did suffer at Rome. So that Peter's being
at Rome and Crucified there, still remains doubtful, and those Authors that
talk of it, seem all to follow the before mentioned Papias.

There is yet another Argument urged by some Romanists, A sixth Argument.
grounded on a Story related by Platina and others, viz. That St. Peter
endeavoring by night to make his escape, and fly out of Rome for fear of
Persecution; Christ personally met him, a mile out of Town, in the Appian way,
to whom Peter saying, Lord whither go thou? And Christ answering, I come to
Rome again to be Crucified; Peter taking these words to be meant of his own
Martyrdom (as the Lord might seem to suffer in his person) went back, and
having settled Clement to be his Successor, was soon after apprehended and
Crucified; in which place of their meeting, where these words passed, Platina
tells us, there was in his time a Chapel Extant. And there is a Tradition too,
that the very print of their feet as they two talked together, was long after,
(and for ought I know some may say, to this day) plainly to be seen.

As it suited not with the honor and zeal of Blessed St. Peter, Answ.
(supposing him the proper Bishop of Rome) to offer thus timorously to desert
and abandon his flock in time of Persecution; so neither can the Romanists
vouch any better Original Testimonies for the same, than either a Book in the
Name of Egesippus, which is acknowledged, and we doubt not but to prove it to
be a Counterfeit: Or another ascribed to Linus, the Author whereof, whoever he
was, Baronius himself terms a foolish counterfeit Writer; and consequently all
that follow or relate the Story after them, how numerous soever, are not to be
regarded. And should any Christian give up himself to believe this Fable, (that
Christ was so corporally there, as to leave the Impression of his sacred Feet)
it were to make shipwreck of Faith; for by the Holy Ghost (and speaking by the
mouth of St. Peter too) it is expressly declared, that the Heavens shall contain
our Lords Body till he come, (to the last Judgment) Acts 3. 21.

CHAP. III.
Whether St. Peter were Bishop of Antioch, or Rome.

IF it cannot be sufficiently made appear, That St. Peter was ever at Rome, one
would think we might supersede our pains of enquiring, Whether he were Bishop
of Rome. No, says Bellarmin, many have been Bishops of Rome, *De Sum. Pontif.
l 2.
that never were at Rome, as Clement the 5th, John the 22th, Benedict the 12th,
Clement the 6th, and Innocent the 6th, who being Ordained in France, did always
remain there. -- How properly those Gentlemen could be called Bishops of Rome,
that were neither chosen there, nor ever saw that City in their lives, I shall
not inquire; not repine at his Holiness if he please to make Titular Bishops of
remote places in Asia or Africa, where perhaps there may not be one Christian
soul living; or if he will gratify his Favorites with Episcopal Sees in
Vtopia or Fairy-land; such as Panormitan De Offic: Ordin. C. Quoniam.
complains of, and calls Episcopi Nullatenenses, Bishops of Nullatia, Diocesans
of No-land. But this I am pretty confident of, That St. Peter, who so earnestly
exhorts Bishops or Elders 2 Pet. 5. 2.
to feed their Flocks, would scarce set the first Pattern of Non-residency that
ever was in the world. Nor do I see any necessity for calling Clemens the 5th,
and the other French Popes, Bishops of Rome, rather than Bishops of Avignion;
For I am taught by a very Learned Roman Catholic, Camer acensis, Qu. Vesper.
Act. 3.
That the Papacy and Bishopric of Rome are two distinct things, and not so
necessarily conjoined but they may be separated: As for example, If a Pope and
a Council think it convenient, he may leave the Church of Rome, and unite
himself to another Church; in which case the Church of Rome should no longer be
Head, nor have any Sovereignty over Christians.

But letting that pass, we come now to consider the Arguments brought to prove
Peter's being Bishop of the particular Church of Rome; and because they who
affirm he was so, do with equal confidence maintain, That he was also Bishop of
Antioch for about seven years, we will here take that part of the Story into
our thoughts.

1. That Peter was an Apostle, no man that believes the New Testament can
doubt; but that there is some difference between an Apostle and a Bishop
properly so called, A Difference between being an Apostle and Bishop of such a
particular place.
will, I think, not be denied: For, the Apostles were immediately called by
Christ, and all the World was their Diocese; for so runs their Commission, Mark
16. 15. Go you into all the World, preach the Gospel to every Creature; so that
it was an Extraordinary Office, consisting of Personal Privileges, as
Immediate Vocation, power to work Miracles, Universality of Jurisdiction, and
Infallibility in all things they preached or writ relating to the Gospel, being
dictated unto, and specially guided by the Divine Spirit. But Bishops are
chosen by men, and have a certain Seat and Church, and their Office is
ordinary, 1 Timothy 3. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Therefore Peter being an
Apostle, could not, I conceive, be Bishop either of Antioch or Rome in the
proper strict sense of the word, for this had been a kind of Degrading him from
a superior and more ample Office, to one Inferior and Restrained.

I am not ignorant, That as the word (...) signifies at large an Inspecter or
Overseer, every Apostle where ever he happened to come, might be said to be
Bishop of that place (but not exclusively to others.) And thus you may (if you
please) call Paul a General Bishop, 2 Cor. 11. 28.
because he testifies, That he had the care of all the Churches. And in this
respect we read of the Episcopate of Judas, Act. 1. 20. His Bishopric let
another take, [(...)] and in such a sense St. Peter calls himself Presbyter or
Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 1.

I also agree, that Peter or any other Apostle might, wherever he came, act and
discharge all parts of a Bishops Function, whether Ministerial or Governing.
But all this will not Constitute him proper Bishop of this or that particular
Church, or of one more than another; for tho a Prince in his Progress may do
some acts that belong to the Office of a Mayor, or other particular Governor of
that Town, where he happens to lodge; yet it cannot be said that he is the Mayor
or particular Governor of such a Corporation, for that would be a Diminution of
his Royal Dignity; no more did the Apostles become Local Bishops, because of
their exercising Episcopal Power in any particular Church by virtue of their
Power Apostolical, wherein the other was included. Nor can the first Planter or
Establisher of a Church as such, be styled the Bishop of such a Church, for
then both Paul and Peter, and all the rest of the Apostles must be Bishops of
many several Diocesses.

2. Peter was not Ordained Bishop of any particular Church.
If Peter were Bishop either of Antioch or Rome, then either he must be
Ordained such by Christ, or by men after Christ's Ascension; or else he
constituted himself Bishop there: But nether of these three can be said.

Not the first, for as there appears no footsteps of such an Ordination in
Scripture; so if by Christ he were Constituted President over any one
particular Church, how could he share in that Command, Go forth and preach to
every Nation? Nor were there before our Lords Ascension any such Churches in
being.

Not the second; for then he must relinquish the Apostolical Office, which he
received of Christ, and suffer himself to be so far Degraded by men, as to
undertake a meaner and more limited Office: As if the Bishop of London should
be made Parson of Pancras. Hence too, it would follow, That St. Peter
thenceforth, instead of being Prince of the Apostles, should as Bishop of
Antioch or Rome be inferior to the other Apostles, who were not Ordained of
men, nor by men, Gal. 1.

Not the third; for no man assumeth this honor to himself, Heb. 5. 4. Peter or
any other Apostle might Ordain others to be Bishops in such places as needed
them: But that they should or would Create themselves Bishops of this or that
Peculiar Church, we have no Ground to believe: By what Words, what Rites, what
Ceremonies did they do it? Or how, when, where, did Peter declare himself to be
the proper Bishop either of Antioch or Rome?

Is it not utterly incredible, That Peter the Supreme Head and Monarch of the
Church on Earth (as they pretend) should for thirty two years be Bishop, and
have the particular Charge and Cure of Two of the greatest Cities in the Roman
Empire, and that too, whilst most of the other Apostles were living, and yet
none of them (nor he himself) in any of their Writings should say one syllable
of it, nor mention so much as one single Episcopal Act done by him in either of
those Cities in all that time? No, nor St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles,
nor St. Paul who lived long in Antioch, and longer at Rome, and had
opportunity, nay (had it been true) we may say a kind of necessity to have
mentioned it.

I confess, Peter more likely to be Bishop of Jerusalem, than of Antioch or
Rome.
were it pretended, that Peter had been Bishop of Jerusalem, it might seem
somewhat probable; for as he is styled the Apostle of the Circumcision; so it is
apparent from Scripture, that he took much pains, and spent seveal years in
Preaching there, and in the neighboring Territories; and if he were the chief,
or most notable of the Apostles, and they were all to have several and
respective Bishoprics, since that of Jerusalem was the first and Mother
Church, from whence the Gospel was spread abroad into all the Earth; (other
Churches being but as so many Colonies derived from thence) 'twas reasonable he
should have the conduct thereof, and be Bishop of the first that was planted in
the World; but there appears nothing so much color of Reason to call him
Bishop either of Antioch or Rome.

For as the Gospel was first Preached at Antioch by some of the scattered
Believers from Jerusalem, and further advanced by Barnabas, and afterward more
fully Established there by Paul, who both labored there for one whole year, and
with Eminent success; insomuch that the Disciples were first called Christians
at Antioch, Acts 11. It might thence seem reasonable, to Entitle one of them to
that Bishopric; but to assign Peter thereto, is to make him build on other
men's foundations, and to reap where he had not sown; especially since we find
no Intimation of his ever being there, save once mentioned by the by, and then
so far from acting as Bishop there, that he seems not thoroughly to have
understood the state and usages of that Church, but was withstood and rebuked
by St. Paul, Gal. 2. 11.

When Barnabas and Paul had planted so flourishing a Church at Antioch, would
Peter merely to show his power, thrust himself in to be Bishop there? Or if he
did, why would he leave it and go to Rome? Was it because the latter was the
Richer, the larger and the more Honorable? So indeed Platina (as you heard)
seems to intimate, saying, that it was because that Imperial City was more
suitable to his pontificial Dignity. But certainly Peter, who heard Christ
telling him, amongst the other Disciples, when they began to vye for
superiority, that it should not be so amongst them; and who himself charges the
Ministers of the Gospel, not to carry it as Lords over the Flock committed to
their charge, could not so quickly forget both, and abandon that Humility so
much recommended by his Master and himself, to seek out a splendid place to be
Bishop of, that thereby he and his Successors might seem great in the World.

Suppose Peter once Bishop of Antioch, how could he Translate his See from
thence to Rome, unless he were removed by some Order or Mission of the rest of
the Apostles, or else that he himself had some special Vision or Revelation so
to do? But neither of these are as yet proved, nor so much as attempted. Osius
Bishop of Corduba (one of no small account amongst the 318 Fathers of the first
Council of Nice) in the Council at Sardis, held about the year 340, did
Declare, That it was not Lawful for a Bishop to leave his City, and undertake
another; for thereby it would appear that he was inflamed with Covetousness, or
a slave to Ambition, that he might domineer, which was Synodically by the word
Placet, agreed unto by all the Fathers.

This was likewise the sense of several other Councils, Con. Nic. Can. 15. 16.
l Conc. Antioch. can. 21. 22. Conc. Chalcedon. Can. 10.
and that all the Acts of such a Bishop at the second place, should be
accounted Null and Void, and he Remanded back to his former Church. These being
the sentiments of those Ancient Fathers, certainly if Peter had removed his See
from Antioch to Rome, they would out of Reverence to the Prince of the
Apostles, have suspended their Opinions in the Case. If Councils are Infallible
in their Decrees, then it appears Peter being once Bishop of Antioch, did an
ill act in Translating himself to Rome; if Peter did well in Translating his
See from Antioch to Rome, as being the much greater and Imperial City, then
these Councils were Rash, and did Err in such their General Condemnations of
the like Removes; so that either way, the Authority of Peter, or that of
Councils, must be Impaired.

Bellarmin indeed tells us, That Peter's Remove from Antioch to Rome, was
Jubente Domino, by the Lords Command; but offers no kind of proof of that
Command, when yet all the strength of his Argument to Confirm the Supremacy of
the Roman Chair, must depend thereon. Let them but show that Divine Command for
Peter's fixing his Episcopal Chair at Rome, and it will put an end not only to
this, but diverse other Controversies; we will then readily obey our blessed
Lords Command, and the Popes too; but they cannot produce any such Command, nay
confess that there is none, Nullum Christi ea de re Decretum Extat, no Decree
of Christ is extant about that matter, says Cornelius a Lapide, in Apoc. 17. v.
17.

If it be alleged, Object.
That the Fact of the Apostle does argue Gods command as its precedent Cause,
and they shall urge, That Peter did remove to Rome; But Peter was Inspired by
the Holy Ghost, Therefore we ought to believe that this Translation of his seat
was by the special Dictates or Guidance of the spirit.

I answer,

1. This Argument has no place nor force until such time as they have
substantially proved the fact it self, Answ.
that is, That Peter did remove from Antioch to Rome, and with an intent to
establish at the latter place, the seat of Ecclesiastic Empire; but this
cannot at all be proved, or at least as yet is not.

2. Cardinal Bellarmin of all men, ought not however be allowed to plead this;
for in his Treatise De Verbo Dei, L. 4. C. 4. he sticks not to deny, That
Peter, Paul, or other of the sacred Penmen wrote the Holy Scriptures by Gods
special command: And will the same man, without any proof, obtrude on us a
Command of God for placing Peter's Chair at Rome? Justly may we retort his own
words ( Mutatis mutandis) in the place last cited. If it had been the purposse
of Christ and Peter to place the seat of Christian Empire, or visible Headship
of the whole Church, at Rome, undoubtedly, it being a thing of such moment,
Christ would have commanded it, and Peter would somewhere have witnessed, That
he by the Lords command fixed his seat there; But this we no where read, no not
so much as one word, that he ever was at Rome, or had any thing to do there;
Therefore we are not bound to believe it.

Eusebius's Chronicon is commonly cited to prove Peter was Bishop of Antioch
seven years, Eusebius abused to color Peter's being Bishop of Rome.
and of Rome Twenty five years. Now Eusebius does there indeed say, That Peter
founded the Church of Antioch (which yet is plainly contrary to Scripture) but
so far is he from saying, That he was Seven years Bishop there, That he
expressly tells us, Euodius was its first Bishop. And so far likewise from
affirming that St. Peter was Twenty five years Bishop of Rome, that he does not
say he was Bishop of Rome at all; but only, that Peter having first founded the
Church of Antioch, went to Rome to Preach the Gospel. Peter's being Bishop of
Rome Twenty five years is none of Eusebius's Testimony, there being not a
Syllable to that purpose in the Original Greek (in which Language he wrote) but
those words were foisted into the Latin Copies, which are very much
Interpolated and corrupted, as may be seen by Scaliger's Animadversions. Hence
that Learned Roman Catholic Valesius In Not. ad Eusebius. l. 3. c. 21.
publicly acknowledges -- Sciendum est Eusebium Apostolos in Ordine
Episcoporum minime Numerare, That Eusebius did not rank the Apostles in the
Order of Bishops.

Nay it is plain that those Ancients who speak of Peter's being Bishop of Rome,
do use the word Bishop in a large sense, to imply that during his abode there
(which upon Papias's conjecture and vulgar same they supposed) he Preached
unto, and took care of that Church: For the same persons do no less affirm,
That Paul also was Bishop of the same Church at the same time, which cannot be
understood but in such a large sense as aforesaid. Hence Ruffinus says Praefat.
Recogn. Clement. ad Gaudent.
Linus and Cletus fuerunt ante Clementem Episcopi in Vrbe Roma, sed superstite
Petro, videlicet ut illi Episcopatus Curam Gererent, iste vero Apostolatus
Impleret Officium -- Linus and Cletus were Bishops in the City of Rome before
Clement, but whilst Peter was yet alive, They performing the duty of Bishops,
and He attending to the Office Apostolical. In which words, tho he (who
flourisht toward the end of the 4th Century) takes for granted Peter's being
at Rome, yet he plainly distinguishes the Apostolical and Episcopal Offices,
and refers them not to one, but several persons, and so denies that Peter was
ever Bishop of Rome, naming two others who governed that Church in that
capacity during his life time.

Let us consider Cui Bono? To what purpose should Peter be a Bishop.
to what purpose serves this Assignment of a fictitious Episcopacy to Peter?
Whatever Privileges could attend his person, were bestowed upon him either as
a Believing Disciple of Christ, or as an Apostle. As such the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven were given unto him. As such he was commanded to feed the
flock of Christ; as such Christ promised to build the Church on the Faith he
professed; as an Apostle he (with the rest) had the care of all Churches (that
is, as far as every one was able) committed unto him; As an Apostle he was
Divinely inspired and enabled infallibly to reveal the mind of Christ: Now, all
these things belonging to him as a Believer and Apostle, I desire to know what
further Privilege could accrue to him besides, as Bishop of any particular
place, were it either Antioch or Rome? If the Romanists will show us any body
succeeding Peter in the enjoyment of those extraordinary Privileges before
mentioned, they must bespeak such person to succeed him in his Apostleship, and
not in his pretended Bishopric: For whatever Authority, Power or Jurisdiction
Peter had over all Churches in the World, or whatever unerring Judgment in
matters of Faith, the same belonged unto him as he was an Apostle, long before
he is fancied to have been the Bishop of any particular place; so that if it
were necessary that some one should succeed Peter in his Episcopacy, Why not
much more necessary in his Apostleship? And then why was it not needful that
Paul should have a Successor as well as Peter? and John the survivor of all the
rest of the Apostles, as well as any of them?

Again, If we must believe the Bishop of Rome to be Peter's Successor, it will,
I hope, not be unlawful to enquire wherein? And therefore I demand,

1. Does the Pope succeed St. Peter in all that he had in Commission, and was
empowered to do in reference unto the Church of God? Does he succeed him in the
manner of his Call to his Office? Peter was called immediately by Christ in his
own person; The Pope is Elected by the Conclave of Cardinals, concerning whom,
their Office, Privileges, Power and Right, to choose the Successor of St.
Peter, there is not one syllable, either in Seripture, or any Monuments of pure
Antiquity for diverse hundred years; and how many times the Cardinals have been
Influenced by powerful Strumpets, Baronius himself has informed us; and how
much in latter Ages to this day, the Factions of several Princes prevail,
cannot be unknown to any that is not a stranger to History, and the Modern
Transactions of the World.

2. Does the Pope Succeed Peter in the way and manner of his personal Discharge
of his Office and employment? Not in the least: For Peter in the pursuit of his
Commission and Obedience unto the Command of his Lord, traveled to and fro
Preaching the Gospel, and planting and watering the Churches of Christ in
Patience, Self-denial, Humility, Zeal, Temperance and Meekness; whereas the
Pope Reigns at Rome in ease, exalting himself above Kings, and without taking
the least pains in his own person for the Conversion of Sinners, or edification
of the Disciples of Christ.

3. Does every Pope or Bishop of Rome succeed Peter in his personal
qualifications, which were of such extraordinary advantage to the Church of God
in his days, viz. His Faith, Love, Holiness, Light and Knowledge? This cannot
with any modesty be alleged, since the best Historians of the Roman Cast,
confess many Popes to have been grossly Ignorant, and flagitiously Wicked.

4. Does the Pope succeed Peter in the way and manner of Exercising his Care
and Authority toward the Churches of Christ? As little as in any of the rest:
For Peter did it by his Prayers for the Churches, by his personal Visitation
and Instruction of them, by his Writings Divinely inspired for their direction
and guidance according to the Will of God. But the Pope proceeds by Bulls and
Consistorial Determinations, executed by Intricate Processes and Officers,
unknown not only to Peter, but all Antiquity; and whose Ways, Orders, Terms and
Practices St. Peter himself, were he here again upon Earth, would as little
understand, as approve.

5. Does the Pope succeed Peter in his personal Infallibility? Let the
Romanists agree, if they can, amongst themselves upon an Answer to this
Question. Or does he succeed him in his power of working Mirales? I do not hear
that his present Holiness pretends to that Talent, tho Pope Gregory 7. seems to
have had some inclinations that way, when he was wont to scare the people by
shaking fire out of his sleeve, as Cardinal Benno relates the Story. Lastly,
Does the Pope succeed Peter in the Doctrine that he taught? It has been proved
a Thousand times (and we are ready when ever called upon, to demonstrate it
again) That he does not, but has added to, detracted from, and many ways
perverted it.

Wherein then does this Succession of the Pope to Peter, which they talk so
much of, consist? Why, in his Power, Authority, Jurisdiction and Supremacy over
the whole Church; In the Ecclesiastical Monarchy, with the secular Advantages
of Riches, Honor and Pomp that attend it. An excellent contrivance! In the
things that Peter really enjoyed, and which were of singular advantage to the
Church of God, the Popes disclaim, or dare not pretend any Succession unto him;
but fix it on things wherein he was no way concerned, but which vastly make for
their own worldly Interest. On this supposititious Anvil do they forge out to
themselves a Monarchy direct and absolute in Ecclesiastical things over the
whole Church; Indirect at least, and in Ordine ad Spiritualia, over the whole
World. And this is the great Diana, in making of Shrines for which, the main
business and livelihood of many Thousands of their inferior Craftsmen does
consist.

But still to prove Peter 's being Bishop of Rome, Whence the Dignity of the
Church of Rome.
the Cardinal argues from the Dignity of the Roman Church; which (says he) was
ever accounted the chiefest of all others: But there can be no other Reason why
it should be so, but because St. Peter the Prince of the Apostles was the
proper Pastor and Bishop of that Church; Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 4.

For Answer to which, be pleased to observe,

1. What a pretty Circle is here; The Church of Rome is the chief of all
Churches, because St. Peter was its Bishop; But how does it appear, that St.
Peter was its Bishop? Because Rome is the chief of all Churches -- Risum
teneatis?

2. As the calling Peter, Prince of the Apostles, is but a Complement (For tho
some of the fourth Century call him so, yet they explain themselves to mean
thereby (...), the first or chief in Order, as a Chairman or Speaker, but not
(...), the Prince or Ruler; And when the Ambiguity of the Word began to be
abused unto pretensions of Preeminence, the Council of Carthage expressly
condemned it, allowing none to be called Princeps sacerdotum, the Prince of
Priests) so neither is it true, That Rome was always accounted the chief of all
Churches; for Jerusalem was the Mother Church, planted by our Savior in
person, and his Twelve Apostles, with whom were the Seventy Disciples, such
Teachers as no other Church ever had at once; and from thence the Gospel was
propagated to the rest of the World, and to Rome it self. The Church of Corinth
is celebrated in Scripture for being enriched with all Utterance, and all
knowledge, and for coming behind in no Gift, 1 Cor. 1. 5, and 7. The Church of
the Ephesians (for I think that place may much more justly be restrained to
that particular Church, than it can be applied to the Roman, which we often see
done) is called, The Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church of the Thessalonians is commended for following the
Churches of Judea [not that of Rome, tho the Epistle was wrote from thence] 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. It Is true the Primitive Church of Rome wants not its praises too;
For St. Paul faith, That their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World,
Romans 1. 8. That is, was taken notice of in places far distant; but this was
because Rome was the chief City of the Empire, to which strangers from all
parts did daily (upon secular occasions) resort. Their Faith was the same that
was in all Nations; amongst (not above) whom are ye also, Romans 1. 5, and 6. But
what is this commendation of their Faith then, to the Church of Rome in after
times, when they might be declined therein; for that 'twas not impossible for
the Church of Rome totally to fall away by unbelief, we learn from the same
Apostle, Chapter 11. 20. And therefore he admonishes them not to be high-minded,
but fear.

3. In the next Ages there was no such extraordinary account of the Roman
Church; its Bishop by the most Ancient Fathers is styled no more than Brother,
Colleague or Fellow-Bishop, as is evident in the Epistles of St. Cyprian;
Appeals to Rome were forbid by several Councils. Conc. Nic. c. 5.
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, one of the earliest of the Fathers (for he flourisht
before the year 200) sharply reproved Victor Bishop of Rome, Conc. Melevit. c.
22.
because he went about to excommunicate the Eastern Chruches for not keeping of
Easter after the same manner he did Vid. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
St. Hierom allows him no such superiority; Quicunque fuerit Episcopus sive
Romae sive alibi, ejusdem est Meriti and Sacerdotii Hier. ad Evagrium.
whosoever (says he) shall be a Bishop, whether of Rome, or elsewhere, is of
the same worth, the same Priesthood: Nay, we have the Testimony of one that was
afterward a Pope himself, I mean Aeneas Sylvius Epistol. l. 1.
who confesses, That before the Council of Nice, Every Church kept to it self,
and there was but little respect paid to the Church of Rome. And as its esteem
at first began not on the account of Peter, but because it was the Imperial
City, for so says the Council of Chalcedon (held Ann. 451.) (...), etc. Because
old Rome was the Imperial City, Therefore the Fathers have rightly given
Privileges to that See. So the Reverence and Vogue of Jursdiction it
afterward obtained, was by the favoar of the Emperors; and especially from the
Artifices of its Bishops, improving all advantages, and making use of many very
Carnal means, very well known, and therefore not necessary here to be recounted.

CHAP. IV.
Ancient Authors alleged for Peter's being Bishop of Rome, considered; as
Papias, Linus, Egesippus, the Decretal Epistles, etc. Forgeries in the name of
Antiquity detected; particalarly a feigned Decretal Epistle from Clemens to St.
James, and another from Pope Cornelius about removing Peter's Body. A
remarkable Testimony from Baronius.

ALthough I have gone through Cardinal Bellarmin's special Arguments (and all
that I know of, producible by any of the Romanists) for proving Peter to have
been Bishop of Rome, or at any time there; and have briefly shown (as I think)
that none of them are free from just Exceptions, nor all conjoined of
sufficient weight to oblige a rational man's assent, much less such a firm and
steady Belief as is requisite in a matter so highly concerning Religion as this
is supposed to be; yet since both he and other cite many pretended Ancient
Authors, as giving Suffrages in favor of their assertion, I hold it not unfit
to inform the unlearned Reader (whom such a specious Parade may possibly amuse)
somewhat more particularly concerning the same.

1. This Testimony, were it never so numerous, is still but Humane, and so
cannot (I conceive) be a sufficient ground for any Article of Faith.

2. That although we do seriously pay a just Reverence to Antiqnity, yet still
we hold our selves obliged in Discretion to put a difference between pure and
counterfeit Records, not to suffer our selves to be betrayed into an unwary
prejudicial Confederacy with a parcel of neighboring upstart Gibeonites merely
for their showing us moldy Bread and clouted Shoes of their own contrivance:
He must be too much a stranger to Ecclesiastical History to be discoursed
withal about these matters, who knows not, that soon after the Decease of the
Apostles, Many Counterfeits under pretense of Antiquity.
there were counterfeit Gospels, Acts, Epistles, Revelations, etc. put forth in
the names of the Apostles, or as received from them by Tradition, which are
pointed at by Irenaeus, and said to be condemned in a Roman Council by
Gelasius, An. Chr. 494. The Itinerary of Clement, and the Book called Pastor, a
Book called the Gospel of St. Peter, and another Entitled his Acts, being some
of them. More particularly St. Jerome In Catalog.
mentions five Books that in his time were abroad under the name of St. Peter,
viz. one Entitled, the Acts of St. Peter, another, St. Peter's Gospel, the
third concerning Preaching, the fourth St. Peter's Revelations, and the fifth a
Book of Judgment -- All which he owns to be Apocryphal. And Eusebius tells of a
long tedious Disputation between Peter and Apion far different from Apostolical
Purity and simplicity; which (says he) came forth but yesterday under St.
Clement's Name, never once heard of in former Ages. Nor is there scarce any
thing more frequent in the Fathers, than complaints of suppositious Books,
Interpolations and Forgeries made in their Works, or those of their Ancestors,
by Heretics of one sort or other. Thus Dionysius of Corinth in Eusebius Lib.
4. Ca. 22.
bewails, That the Apostles (Messengers or Agents) of Satan had sown Tares in
his Epistles, omitting some things, and adding others. And hence it is, that
many Books wearing the Names of Orthodox Fathers, and inserted in their Works,
are even by the most Learned of the Romanists themselves confessed not to have
been Penned by those to whom they are attributed, but foisted in under their
Names.

Since therefore such ill practices were rise so early, We must not take all
for Gold that Glisters with the Gloss of Antiquity; but make use of the
Touchstone of Judgment to distinguish between Adulterate and Genuine Records.
If there were then people of so much Confidence and so little Conscience, as to
forge so many false Books in St. Peter's Name, and Father their own Dreams on
that Blessed Apostle, much more credible it is, That false Reports and Rumors
(which in time gained the venerable Name of Traditions, especially amongst
those whose interest it was to promote them) might be spread touching the parts
wherein he Preached and Resided, the place, time and other circumstances of his
Death, etc. Nor is this a bare supposition, or probability only, but, de facto,
true: For all the Authors vouched in this Dispute by the Romanists, may be
reduced to three Ranks; 1. Some that are of very doubtful credit. 2. Others
that are known forgeries, and stigmatized counterfeits. 3. Certain expressions
of some of the Fathers, who living at a considerable distance of time, might by
Hearsay take it upon Trust, without ever examining the matter, That St. Peter
suffered at Rome, and consequently accomodating their Language to the popular
vogue, call Rome St. Peter's Chair.

Touching the last, We shall have occasion to speak somewhat further toward
the close of this whole Discourse. Of the other two we shall treat jointly in
this Chapter; Wherein it will concern us chiefly to enquire into the first and
Original Authors of this Opinion, and if we can evince, That they are not
Testes probi and Idonei, of good and sufficient Credit, It will not be
difficult to determine, what sentiments we ought to have for the Testimonies of
such as innocently (but unwarily) might follow them.

The most Ancient Authors (or such pretended) which I find produced, are, 1. A
Book in the Name of Linus. 2. The Report of Opinion of Papias. 3. Egesippus. 4.
The Decretal Epistles.

As for the first, Of Linus.
(which I place so, because I suppose they would have it believed to be wrote
by Linus, whom some of them pretend to be Peter's next and immediate Successor)
it is entitled de passione Petri and Pauli; and was first published (if I
mistake not) in the Bibliotheca Patrum); But whoever peruses it, cannot but
judge it a vain Romance full of Fictions; and as it was unknown to the Ancients,
so it is censured by the ablest Romanists themselves Baron. ad Annum 44. N. 45.
and Annum. 60. N. 6.
to be a Counterfeit: And therefore I think I need say no more of it. Possev.
in Appar. V. Linus. Of Papias.


Papias is Davus in Fabula, A Voucher brought in at every turn in this Case by
Bellarmin as you have heard; and as those that make use of Knights of the Post,
always take care to put good Clothes on their backs, the Romanists will tell
us, He was a most Pious Learned Man, a Disciple of St. John the Evangelist, and
some of their Chronologers place him in the first Century. Nor will this
Comparison (I hope) be though too severe and unbecoming, when the judicious
Reader shall have considered the following just Animadversions, wherein we
shall make it appear, both that there has been gross Forgery committed to
inhance the credit of this Papias, and that he was indeed a person whose
Judgment or Testimony ought to be but of very little value.

First then, be it observed, That in the latter Editions and Translations of
Eusebius, there is an high Character given of Papias -- At the same time (says
Eusebius, as Valesius renders him) Papias was famous, a Man very Eloquent and
Learned, well skilled in the Scriptures. Christopherson in his Translation,
adds further beyond the Text, That he was a person most excellently skilled in
the knowledge of all other Arts -- But the Truth is, all this commendation of
Papias is a Forgery; Eusebius is corrupted, and these Encomiums (by I know not
whom, but we may guess for what end) shuffled into the Text long after Eusebius
was dead; which I prove by the following Reasons:

1. Ruffinus who translated Eusebius above 1200 years ago in that place, has
only this -- About these times flourished Polycarp Biship of Smyrna, and Papias
of Hieropolis -- giving us not one world of that praise of him, which is now
extant in Eusebius; whence we justly conclude that anciently it was not there,
since no Reason can be Assigned why Russinus should omit it.

2. Valesius, a very Learned Roman Catholic, who last published Eusebius,
confesses, that of 3 or 4 Greek Manuscripts of Eusebius, which he made use of
in his Edition, not any of them had that commendation of Papias: And therefore
he doubts not, but those words were added by some Ignorant Scholiast contrary
to the Judgment and sense of Eusebius [Non dubito quin haec verba ab Imperito
Scholiaste adjecta sunt praeter Eusebii mentem and sententiam -- Vales. in Not.
ad L. 3. Eusebius. ca. 36.] For.

3. The Addition of these Words (as the same Learned man observes) makes
Eusebius write Nonsense and contradict himself, by calling Papias a most
Learned man, and most skilled in the Scriptures; of whom in the same Book, he
says, That he was a Rude and simple person, of very little wit and judgment,
etc. of which he gives several Instances: So much for the Forgery.

2. Our second Observation touching Papias, shall be, That he is said to have
been a friend to, or familiar with Polycarpus; Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.
But Polycarpus according to Baronius, suffered Martyrdom in the year of our
Lord 167. Baron. Mart. ad diem Jan 26.
And the same Baronius places Peter's Martyrdom, Anno Chr. 69. So that Papias
must flourish near. 100 years after Peter's Death, a distance long enough in
those times when so many false things were bruited abroad touching the Apostles
Acts and Sufferings, for one that dwelt at a great distance of place, and took
his Information but upon Hearsay to be deceived.

3. Since none of Papias's Books are Extant, whereby we might be enabled to
judge of the man by his own Works, it will be requisite to remark what Character
Eusebius, who brings him on the Stage, gives of him; which in brief is this --
That he was one that neither heard nor saw any of the Apostles, but received
what he heard from their followers, as Aristo and John (not the Apostle, but) a
certain Elder. That he thought he could not benefit so much by reading the
Scriptures as by Conference with men that had been acquainted with the Authors
of them. That he was so little acquainted with the Scriptures, that he mistook
that Philip whose Daughters were Prophetesses, to be Philip the Apostle [when
the Text, had he read or remembered it expressly, says, It was Philip the Deacon]
That he had, by such Traditions, strange Parables and Preachings of our Blessed
Savior, and other things very Fabulous; amongst the rest advanced the Heresy
of the Millenaries; and that he fell into those Errors through Ignorance, and
not understanding aright those Narrations that were told him as from the
Apostles; That he Expounded a certain History of a Woman accused before Christ
of many crimes written in the Gospel according to the Hebrews [which was a
counterfeit]. In fine, That he was a man of little wit, or small judgment, as
appeared by his Books; yet gave unto diverse Ecclesiastical Writers occasion of
Error, who respected his Antiquity, see Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22. 35, 39. and
Nicephorus l. 3. c. 20.

Here you have both the Genius or Humor of the Man, easy to be imposed upon,
taking up things by Hearsay; one that was not ashamed to own, That he thought
hearing Oral Tradition more profitable than Reading the Scriptures, that is,
That to hearken to the Stories and Tales of private fallible persons (in
matters of Religion) was more beneficial than to study the Sacred Oracles of
God penned by Divinely inspired infallible persons, and able to make the man of
God perfect in all good works; one of small judgment, and who embraced Fables,
Heresies and Counterfeit Gospels: As also you are told the bad effects of all
this, viz. That he misled many subsequent Ecclesiastical Authors into Error,
paying too great a reverence to his Antiquity, without due enquiry into the
Truth of his Assertions, or Examination of the Grounds whereon he delivered
them.

Now since such a person was the first that insinuated Peter's being at Rome
(for I do not find that he plainly affirmed it (much less that Peter was Bishop
there) only inferred it by interpreting Babylon in St. Peter's Epistle to
signify Rome) if, I say, such an one were the first (as for ought appears he
was) that ever intimated any such thing, how far either his Talk, or that of
those that relate it after him, is to be valued, I leave the intelligent Reader
to judge; since nothing is more common in Historics, than for the mistake of one
to draw others into error; and that this Papias actually did mislead many, we
have the home Testimony of Eusebius before recited; and why not in this
business of Peter's being at Rome, as well as in that of the Millenary Reign,
etc.? Nay rather in the former than the latter, since good innocent men were
more like to swallow this report of an indifferent matter of fact (as they
could not but apprehend this of Peter's Writing from Rome, to be, not imagining
what fine consequence aftertimes would thence derive) than to entertain a
Doctrinal point without Examination, and to be more easily inveigled into a
mistake in History, than into Heresy; for under no better figure was that
opinion of the Chiliasts, looked upon in succeeding Ages, tho for some time on
the credit of the said Papias received (or at least unopposed) by not a few
Fathers of the Church -- So much concerning Papias, who (for ought I know)
might in the main be a very honest well-meaning man, though misled by
unwarrantable reports, and a Zeal not according to knowledge. Nor should I thus
have repeated his Failures (which I charitably hope God has forgiven) did not
the importunity of some People, vapouring with his Name and Authority, render
these Reflections necessary.

As for Egesippus, Of Egesippus.
when he lived is doubtful, some say about the Year 101. others 145. others
170. but this is certain, That what we have now abroad in his Name, could not
be wrote by the same Person whom Eusebius mentions l. 4. c. 8. For whereas he
is said to have gathered his Books out of the Gospel secundum Hebraeos [the
best of their Vouchers you see followed counterfeit Gospels] and wrote
Commentaries of the Doctrine and Acts of the Apostles, and that too in a plain
homely style, as St. Hierom notes; this counterfeit Egesippus affects a very
losty Phrase, and affords us only five Books of the destruction of Jerusalem,
out of Josephus; and particularly makes mention of the City of Constantinople,
a name not known in the World till the great Constantine, who, beginning to
Reign (alone) but in the Year 327. caused Byzantium to be called so; therefore
the Writer thereof, whoever he was, must of necessity live near 200 Years, if
not much more, after that good man in whose name they would obtrude it.

We come now to the decretal Epistles; Of the Decretal Epistles.
and indeed were these Genuine, they would not only dispatch the Business of
St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, but of the Popes Supremacy too, and many
other of their modern Articles of Faith. But touching such Epistles, we shall
briefly observe; 1. What they are, and when, and by whom first Midwiv'd into
the World. 2. Offer Reasons demonstrating (as I apprehend) that they are
generally spurious. 3. Recite the substance of two of them more peculiarly
relating to our present Argument, with a few Animadversions thereon.

These Decretal Epistles are Letters supposed to be Authoritatively written
upon emergent Occasions by the Primitive Bishops of Rome, What they are.
beginning with Clement (one of Peter's pretended immediate Successors) in
whose name there are five; four in the name of Anacletus, two of Alexander's,
three of Sixtus's, and so downwards, sometimes one, sometimetimes two,
sometimes three, from every succeeding Bishop of Rome for the first 300 Years,
and further.

All which Epistles came first abroad about the Year of our Lord 790. under the
Title of A Collection of Councils and Decretal Epistles, pretended to be made
by Isidore Bishop of Hispalis (that is Sevil) in Spain, with a Preface in his
Name, wherein he declares that he collected the same by the Advice of fourscore
Bishops.

But the truth is, The Collection ascribed to Isidore a counterfeit.
to make the piece uniform, not only the materials are Forgeries, but the
Collection it self, and its Author are Counterfeits; for although there were
such a man (and of eminent note in the Church) as Isidore Bishop of Sevil, yet
he could not be the Author of this Collection and Preface, as is proved at
large by Blondel in his Book Entitled Pseudo-Isidorns, or Turrianus Vapulans,
where Pseudo Isidor. cap. 2.
he observes, that those that write of Isidore's Death, at highest, fix it on
the Year 647. as Vasaeus; in his Chronicle; others on the Year 643. as Histor.
l. 2. c. 18.
Rodericus Toletanus; or on the Year 635. as the proper office of the Saints of
Spain; or lastly, on the Year 636. as Redemptus Diaconus, who says he was
himself an Eyewitness of Isidore's Death; and with whom agree Baronius and
many others of the best Learned Romanists; so that the same is the common
Opinion.

Now this counterfeit Isidore, that is, the Prefacer in Isidore's Name before
this Collection* makes mention of Pope Agatho, who came not into the Chair
until the year 679. See Onuphr. Chronicon. Pontif.
which must be about 40. years after Isidore's Death; follow which of the
before-cited Authors you please. And talks of the 6th Ecumenical Council,
which was the 3d of Constantinople, held An. Dom. 681. Nay, writes of Boniface
of Mentz, slain (as Baronius observes) in the year 755, long after himself was
in his Grave.

Hence the Romanists themselves cannot agree about this Authors Surname, some
call him Isidore Pacensis, others Isidore Mercator Vide Baron, in Notis
Martyrolog. ad 4. Apr.
the Merchant; and others Isidore Peccator, the Sinner, which Addition they say
he assumed out of Humility.

Besides, soon after the said Collection peeped abroad, not only Hincmarus
Archbishop of Rhemes, one of the Learnedest men of that time, wrote against it,
but the Generality of the French Bishops about the year 865, opposed it,
alleging that Isidore's Wares (then newly beginning to be sold) could not have
the force of Canons, Baron. Anno Christ. 865. N. 5.
because they were not contained in the Authentic Code, or Book of Canons
formerly known.

Bellarmin confesses, De Roman. Pontif. L. 2. cap. 14.
That Errors are crept into these Epistles, and that he dare not say, they are
Indubitable; yet hopes to excuse all by saying, That he doubts not at all but
they are very ancient. But what imports it how old they are, if they are not so
old as they pretend to be; nor wrote by those whose names they bear? As if an
old Deed being called into question, and the matter of Fact made undeniable,
that it was a Forgery, he that holds his Possession by it, should say, It has
been Interlined indeed, and corrupted in many places, nor was it signed or
sealed by the person that is named a party thereunto, nor in the presence of
the same Witnesses, but yet I hope you will credit it in favor of my Title,
for I am confident it is very old; who would not smile at such an Advocate?

Baronius, who saw more clearly through the Imposture, and how much dishonor
such an heap of Forgeries detected in this Learned Age, would reflect on the
Contrivers and Abetters; acknowledges, Baron. ad Ann. 865. N. 5, 6, 7, 8.
That this Compilement was falsely fathered upon Isidore of Hispalis, and that
all those Epistles of the Roman Bishops, from St. Peter down to Siricius (that
is, till the year 387.) are justly suspected. Nay, he calls them Infirm,
Adventitious, and lately Invented: And (to remove the scandal of forging them,
from the Church of Rome) tell us, They were first brought out of Spain into
France by one Riculphus in the time of Charlemaigne, That none (says he) may
slanderously say the Church of Rome feigned them.

But notwithstanding they were first started in Spain, the Church of Rome may
still not unjusty labounr under a suspicion of having an hand in the intrigue,
if we consider, first, That the main drift of these Epistles is to advance her
Honor: Now if (as most plain it is) they are Forged, Cui Bono? Who should do
it but they, whose interest alone is thereby promoted? 2dly, That when
Hincmarus opposed them, he was by the Bishop of Rome so rigorously dealt with,
that it is said he was forced to retract. 3dly, That when Benedictus Levita had
out of them extracted Canons, being conscious how weak their credit was, he
sued, and easily obtained to have the same Confirmed by the Popes Authority:
Baron. Ibid. N. 7.
So that if they were not Originally underhand His Holinesses Natural Children,
they thenceforth at least became His by Adoption.

Thus much touching the Author of this Collection; and indeed to show the
Epistles themselves to be Forgeries, or of no Credit, we need go no further,
having proved that they were handed into the World by a Counterfeit; For what
need false Lights, where the Wares are not Braided? Why a Vizard in an affair
otherwise so safe and honorable, if no ill intrigue on foot? -- However I will
add some further Reasons taken from the subject Matter, Phrase, Absurdities,
and late appearing of these Epistles, which to me are Invincible Arguments,
That they are altogether spurious.

1. As to their Matter or Contents, Reasons to show the Decretal Epistles to be
Forgeries.
they purport to be written in the most Primitive Ages (some of them, whilst
some of the Apostles, at least St. John, were yet alive) by Holy men zealous of
Gods Glory and the good of Souls, living under afflictions and dreadful
Persecutions, scarce one of them but was a Martyr for the Gospel: Now if such
men had indeed left behind them any Letters or written Memoirs surviving the
fury of their Pagan Enemies, to our times, there is no doubt but we should
there find the sweet Breathings of the Spirit of Meekness, the Mysteries of the
Gospel, Gods infinite Love to miserable mankind, manifested in the Incarnation
and Suffering of the Blessed Jesus for their Redemption, and the Terms of the
Salvation thereby purchased, freely offered to Sinners: We should observe the
most pressing exhortations to Repentance, Holiness, and newness of Life; The
grand concernments of Religion, Faith in Christ, Mortification, Self-denial,
Contempt of the World and all outward Grandeurs, and such like truly Christian
Duties every where seriously inculcated: But of all this in these Epistles
there is Altum Silentium, their drift looks not that way; they forget the state
of the Church in that time, handle nothing of Doctrine, nothing of the
necessary Office of the Ministers, nor main Duties of Christian People, nor
indeed any thing else suitable unto that Age, or much worth consideration; For
their main business every where appears to be by wresting of Scriptures,
falsifying stories, and other indirect means to advance and lend Colors to the
supporting or spreading the Honor, the Pomp and Empire of the Sea of Rome.
Thus Anacletus in his first Epistle is brought in Glossing those Words of
Christ, Upon this Rock (that is, upon the Church of Rome) I will build my
Church; And in the 3d Epistle, The Church of Rome is the Hinge and Head of all
Churches; for as the door is turned about on the Hinge, so all Churches are
ruled by the Authority of this Holy See; and (not to be tedious in numerous
Instances) the effect of all is, That all those good humble men, whose Names
are abused to these Letters, are made to say of themselves this much, We are
the Universal Bishops, We are the Heads of the whole Church; Appeals from all
Places ought of right to lie before us. We cannot Err, We may not be
controlled; for it is written, The Disciple is not above his Master, etc. Can
any man persuade himself, that those godly Fathers that were daily in jeopardy
of their Lives, and put to Death for Preaching and professing the Christian
Religion, which condemns nothing more than Pomp, Vainglory and Ambition, had
either Leisure or Inclination to write Letters up and down the World filled
with such Imposthumated Extravagancies?

2. The style of these Letters is remarkable as well as their matter; they are
pretended to be originally written in Latin, and why not, if from Bishops of
Rome, whose mother Tongue was at that time Latin, and that too not yet
degenerated, but famous for its Elegancy; and understood through a very great
part of the then known World? But in these Decretals, instead of the purity of
the Roman Phrase, you shall familiarly encounter such expressions as these,
Persecutiones patienter portare; Peto ut pro me Orare debeas; Episcopi
Obediendi sunt, non Insidiandi. Ab illis omnes Christiani se Cavere debent,
etc. Wherein there is nothing of the Congruity or Natural Idiom of the Latin
Tongue: And shall we think that for 300 years and more, there was not one
Bishop of Rome that could write true Latin, at a time when the common people
there, Men, Women and Children did speak the same as their common Language? It
is a Text of the Popes own Law Extrav. de Rescriptis; Ad Audientiam.
Falsa Latinitas vitiat Rescriptum Papae, False Latin spoils the Popes own Bull
or Writ; if so, the Credit of these is gone: Indeed their Voice hewrays them,
and shows they were Coined in a far latter Age, when after the Gothic
Incursions into Italy, Barbarisms had overran the Roman Tongue, as well as
error and ambition the Roman Church.

3. The absurdities and false Chronology of these Epistles loudly proclaims
them to be Antedated and spurious; as St. Clemens informs St. James of the
manner of St. Peter's Death, yet it is as certain as any thing we have of those
times, and St. Clemens undoubtedly knew it, That James was put to death 7 years
before St. Peter; Anacletus (whom some make next Successor to Peter) wills
and straightly charge, That all Bishops once every year do visit the Threshold
of St. Peter 's Church at Rome ( Limina Petri) touching which, besides the
absurdity of such an injunction, whereby most part of the Bishops throughout
the World, must have spent all their time in trudging to and fro to Rome, it is
observable, that there was not then, nor for a long time after any Church built
there in the Name of St. Peter. Zepherinus (Epist. 1.) says, That Christ
commanded his Apostles to appoint the 72 Disciples, but St. Luke, Chapter 10.
testifies, That Christ himself appointed them. Antherus (Ep. 1.) makes mention
of Eusebius Bishop of Alexandria, and of Faelix Bishop of Ephesus, yet was
neither Eusebius nor Foelix either Bishop, or Born all the time that Antherus
lived. Fabianus writes of the coming of Novatus into Italy, yet it is clear by
St. Cyprian and Eusebius, That Novatus came first into Italy in the time of
Cornelius who succeededed this Fabianus. Marcellinus (Epist. 2. ad Oriental)
says, That the Emperor might not presume to attempt any thing against the
Gospel, yet was there then no Emperor that owned or understood the Gospel.
Marcellus writes to an Heathen Tyrant, and charges him very gravely with the
authority of St. Clement. And whereas St. Luke, Chapter 3. sets forth how John
advised the Soldiers to be content with their Pay, Meltiades quite alters the
story, and names Christ instead of John; diverse the like Incongruities may
frequently be met with in these Epistles.

4. If these Letters had been real, Where did they lie hid 4 or 500 years or
upwards? Who after so long a burial was able to demonstrate their sincerity?
How came the Decretals of the Bishops of Rome, first of all to be heard of, and
found by no body can certainly tell who, in a corner of Spain? It Is evident,
neither St. Jerome, or Gennadius, nor Damasus, nor any Ancient Father ever
alleged any of them, and consequently we may conclude knew nothing of them.

Nay the former Bishops of Rome never insisted upon them, when they might have
been very serviceable, as for example, at the Council of Carthage held An. 418.
by 217 Bishops (amongst whom the great Augustine was one) where two pretended
Canons of the Council of Nice, sent thither by Zozimus then Pope, to give
color of Right to his receiving of Appeals from Foreign Provinces, were
detected to be forged, and so the claim of the Bishop of Rome rejected, and his
Ambition and ill practice smartly reproved by Letters, as by the Acts of the
said Council yet extant, appears. Now had Zozimus known or dreamt of such a
number of Decretals sent abroad by his Predecessors, wherein their Right of
Universal Headship, Appeals, etc. was so plainly derived and asserted all along
down from St. Peter himself, and that not by the Canon of any Council, but by
Absolute Divine Right, undoubtedly he would have produced or referred unto
them, rather than stoop to so poor and shameful a shift as that of two
counterfeit Canons. But that you may the better judge of the Genius of these
Decretal Epistles, I shall here present you with the effect of two of them,
which particularly relate to our present subject.

The first a Letter pretended to be wrote by St. Clemens to St. James, A Letter
from Clement to St. James.
wherein an account is undertaken to be given of Peter's last words, and how he
solemnly appointed the said Clement his Successor, in which, after a tedious
Harangue as from St. Peter's mouth, concerning the Dignity and Excellency of
the Roman Chair, he proceeds thus, When he [St. Peter] had said these things in
the midst before them all, he put his hands on me, and compelled me (wearied
with shamefacedness) to sit in his Chair, and when I was sat, I beseech thee
(said he) O Clement! That after (as the Debt of Nature is) I have ended this
present Life, thou would briefly write to James the Brother of our Lord,
after what sort thou have been a Companion unto me from the beginning even to
the end of my Journey, and my Acts, and what, being a sollicitous Hearer, thou
have taken from me, disputing throughout all the Cities, and what in all my
Preaching was the Order both of my Words and Actions, as also what End shall
find me in this City. All these things write unto him; Nor fear that he will be
too much grieved at my End, since he will not doubt but I endure it for the
sake of Piety; but it will be a great solace to him to learn that no unskilful
man, or unlearned and ignorant of the Discipline of Ecclesiastical Order, has
undertaken my Chair, -- Wherefore my Lord James, when I had received these
Precepts from him, I held it necessary to fulfill what he commanded, etc. And so
goes on to tell St. James he had there sent him the whole story of Peter's
Preaching under the Title of the Itinerary (or Journies) of Clement; For so he
says St. Peter ordered him to call it.

Now not to insist on the matter of this Epistle, there are two Considerations
besides, which I conceive very clearly demonstrate it to be a Forgery. A
Forgery.


1. That this very Book called the Itinerary (amongst other Writings ascribed
to Clement) was by Pope Gelasius, Anno 494. Condemned as aforesaid, Therefore
he did not believe this Epistle to be written by Clement; for if he had, he
would undoubtedly have received the Itinerary with Reverence, since he could
not imagine so Holy a Man would have given so large a testimony thereto, nor
taken such pains to have sent it to St. James, if it had not been true and
authentic; when therefore Pope Gelafius expressly condemned the Book, he
vertually condemned the Epistle, that pretends to recommend it; for if the
former be Apocryphal, the latter must needs be Counterfeit.

2. By the Testimony of St. Hierom, and current stream of Antiquity, St. James
to whom St. Peter takes such care to have his Memoirs communicated, was
Martyred in the 7th year of Nero, whereas they say Peter suffered not till the
14. year of of that Tyrant; so that Clement must write to a Person that was
dead 7 years before. Nay more, this being reckoned a Decretal Epistle, and the
greater part of their Authors not placing Clement actually in the Chair till
after Linus and Cletus (of whom they say one sat above 11 years, Vide Platin.
and the other above 12) this must be wrote above 30 years after St. James's
death; for tho Clement might at any time write an Epistle, yet he could not
write a Decretal Epistle till he was Pope.

Another of these Epistles notably relating to our present business, is in the
name of Cornelius Bishop of Rome in the year 254. which is published amongst the
rest of the Decretal Epistles in these words:

Cornelius Bishop of Rome to his dear and most beloved Brethren, A Decretal
Epistle about Removing St. Peter's Boues.
the Sons of the Holy Church of God, and to all them that serve our Lord in the
right Faith.

Considering the Benevolence of your Charity, because ye are Lovers of the
Apostles, and hold their Faith and Doctrine, I determined to write unto you, (
THE LORD BEING THE AVTHOR) some of those things, which are at this time
NECESSARY TO BE KNOWN, and which the Lord assisting by the MERITS of the
Apostles were lately done amongst us in the Church of Rome, or, are now in
doing, because Charity patronizing, I believe, with Fatherly Grace, ye
willingly receive the WRITINGS OF THE APOSTOLICAL SEE, and perform THE
COMMANDMENTS OF THE SAME, and REJOICE IN THE INCREASES thereof: Because
whosoever engrafts himself in the Root of Charity, neither fails of Greatness,
nor becomes void of Fruit, neither does he by Love lose the efficacious work of
fruitfulness; for Charity it self does exercise the hearts of the Faithful,
corroborates their senses that nothing seems grievous, nothing difficult, but
all is easy, which is done while its property is to nourish Concord, to keep
the Commandments, to join things dissevered, to correct evil things, and to
consolidate all other virtues by the Bulwark of its perfection.

Wherefore I beseech you to Rejoice with us, because by the entreaty of a
certain devout Woman and most Noble Matron Lucina, the Bodies of Peter and Paul
were lifted out of the Catatumbae The Catacumbae (or Catatumboe as here
written) were vast public Vaults, or underground Repositories for dead
Bodies; see a handsome discourse of them at Rome, and those other more spacious
ones at Naples, in Dr. Burnet's Letters; who proves that they could not be the
workmanship of the Primitive Christians for the bestowing of the bodies of
their Martyrs as is commonly suggested, and intimated here by this feigned
Epistle) but rather were cut out from the first beginning of the City for the
common Burial places of the Ancient Heathens, especially the Vulgar sort,
Slaves, etc.
And first of all the Body of the blessed Paul was carried with silence, and
put in the Grounds of the foresaid Matron in the Ostiensian way (or Street)
near to that side where he was beheaded: But afterward we received the Body of
the blessed Peter, The Prince of the Apostles, and decently placed it near the
place where he was Crucified amongst the Bodies of the Holy Bishops in the
Temple of Apollo, in the Golden Mountain, in the Vatican of Nero's Palace, the
third day of the Calends of July June the 29th.
Praying God and our Lord Jesus Christ, that these his Holy Apostles
Interceeding, he would purge away the spots of our sins, and keep you in his
will all the days of your lives, and make you to persevere in the fruit of good
works; but see that you Rejoice together for these things, because the Holy
Apostles themselves do also Rejoice together for your joy. Praise ye God
always, and he shall be glorified in you: For it is written, What shall I
return unto the Lord for all that he has returned to me? I will take up the
Cup of Salvation and call upon the name of the Lord.

This Epistle is a Quiver whence the Modern Church of Rome can draw several
Arrows to serve her turn; Here is Worshipping of Relics intimated, Merit and
Intercession of Saints owned; the willingness of all Christians so long ago to
obey the Commands of the Bishops of Rome, supposed; as also Peter's being
Prince of the Apostles, and how much it concerned all Sons of the Church to
rejoice for the removal of his Corpse from one Grave to another.

But that the same is wholly a Forgery, Proved to be a Forgery.
besides what we have objected against all these Epistles in general, and
waving too the odd matter and conceited Phrase of this in particular, we need
but Animadvert, That it is supposed to be written by Cornelius, who they say was
Bishop of Rome, Anno Chr. 254. Which happens to be a time when that cruel
Tyrant, Decius, was Emperor, and in the very midst of the 7th Persecution, one
of the fiercest that ever Harrass'd the Church from Heathen hands: Now during
that Horrible storm, when no Christian could appear at Rome without certain
danger of his Life, Who can imagine this Bishop so much at leisure as to write
Letters to all the World, requiring them to rejoice for the removal of a parcel
of Bones, as one of the most important Adventures, or singular Blessings of
that Age? What probability is there why Madam Lucina, in that dismal time,
should attempt to disquiet the Apostles dust, and bring both her self and all
other Christians then at Rome into jeopardy on so frivolous an occasion? Or how
was it possible that the Bodies of the Apostles, supposing they could be found
after nigh 200 years private Burial, should however be then removed and
interred so gloriously? How the Christian Bishops of Rome even in the height of
Paganism* and Idolatry, came to be buried in the Temple of Apollo? or how Peter
could be laid in so many places at once, viz. amongst the Bishops of Rome, in
the Temple of Apollo, in the Golden Mountain, and in the Vatican of Nero's
Palace?

But further, to convince you of the Fraud, Binius, tho he set down this
Epistle very formally as a good Record, as his Predecessors in that kind had
done before him, yet tells us, That this story of the Translation of the
Apostles. Bones, which it attributes to Cornelius, seems to be an Error crept
in from amongst the rest of the Mistakes of the Pontifical attributed to Pope
Damasus (who lived above 100 years after this Cornelius) For more truly (says
he) this Translation happened in the first Age a little after their Passion;
for which he cites St. Gregory the Pope, who lived long after both the other
Two.

So that it seems amongst them it is no strange matter for a Prior Author to
suck in Errors from a latter, and yet for a modern Authors Testimony to
overthrow that of others more Ancient, and therefore more Authentic, one would
think (in a matter of Fact relating to their own times, or much nearer them)
than himself.

But this mention of the Pontifical, brings into my mind 2 or 3 other pretended
Ancient Authors whom I had almost forgot, that are sometimes alleged to prove
St. Peter's being at, and suffering in Rome, viz. Clement's Constitutions and
Recognitions, St. Abdias, and the said Pontifical. But all these may in a few
words be dispatched; for as for those two Books of Clements, Of Clemens.
they are acknowledged by the most Learned Romanists to be Counterfeit, or
dubious; and his Recognitions is said to be the same that is otherwise called
his Itinerary, Condemned by Gelasius. Of Abdias.
St. Abdias of the Lives of the Apostles was first found out, and set forth by
one Wolphgangus Zazius not very many years ago, and the Work shows it self to
be vain and fictitious; Insomuch that Bellarmin In Recogn.
says of that and the Epistles of Martial (called the Apostle of France)
Citantur a nobis, quamvis non Ignoremus eos Libros non esse tantoe Auctoritatis
ut in iis Dogmata fundari possint; They are Cited by us, tho we are not
Ignorant that those Books are not of such Authority that any certain opinions
can thereon be grounded. -- But if they know them to be of no Authority, Why do
they Cite them? Causa patet.

Touching the Pontifical (Liber Pontificalis in Latin, Of the Pontifical.
or the Book of the Popes) it is pretended to be written by Damasus (who was
Bishop of Rome, Ann. 369.) describing the Acts of the Bishops of Rome from Pope
Peter downwards. Binius affords us this Note, That Damasus did not write it,
but rather it is patched up [Consarcinatus est] by diverse Authors, as may be
proved by this; That almost in every Popes Life, it contains things
contradictory and clashing one with another; see also Baronius, Anno 69. N. 37.
and Anno 348. N. 16. And Possevin. Apparat. sacr. verb. Damascus.

I have the longer insisted on these counterfeit Ancients, because the
Romanists frequently do flourish with their Names to amuse the ignorant, not
only in this matter, but several other important Controversies; but I hope by
these few Remarks, our People will learn what value is due to such Authors; for
though by dint of Reason and Authority our Opponents are now and then forced to
brand these witnesses, yet they shall for all that, continue to vouch them (of
which, you had but now Bellarmin's Confession, and the same might be made out
by a multitude of Instances) which as it is the highest disingenuity, so it
argues some great but very bad. Design. And as it is an undoubted mark of an
ill Cause, wherein there is found Subornation, Perjury or Forgery; so to me it
is a shrewd sign, that the whole Story of Peter's being at Rome, is false,
since there have been such ill means contrived, or at least made use of to
support and recommend it to the Worlds Credulity.

I shall conclude this Chapter with a very remarkable Acknowledgment from
Cardinal Baronius, Baronius dispairs of any certainty of the Apostles Actions
not mentioned in Scripture.
one as well skilled (I think I may say) in Antiquity as ever any that appeared
for the Church of Rome, who speaking of the History of the Apostles, does thus
Ingenuously express himself, quod verse pertines, etc. But as to what relates to
the things done by them [the Apostles] after they were once separated one from
another, it is very obscure; for since there are both Actions and Writings in
the name of the Apostles found to be supposititious; and if any thing were told
of them by true and sincere Writers, the same does not all remain entire and
uncorrupted, it will plainly make one despair of ever obtaining any truth and
certainty therein. If this most Learned Antiquary of their party, found it so
difficult and hopeless a Task to retreive any certainty of the Apostles Acts or
Writings (further than expressed in Scripture, for so I conceive he would be
understood) from the Monuments of the Ancients, because they were so confused,
supposititious and corrupted, we ought sure at least to suspend our opinions
touching Peter's being at Rome and Bishop there so many Years, which with all
the minute Circumstances, is so confidently affirmed by less Learned Writers on
such supposed Testimonies of the Ancients.

CHAP. V.
The improbability of Peter's being Bishop of Rome, argned from the
Incoherences of their Testimonies who write thereof.

WE have gone through the proofs offered for the affirmative, viz. That Peter
was at Rome and Bishop there; we now proceed to some Considerations, which if
they do not evince the contrary to every impartial man's full satisfaction, must
yet at least be acknowledged of such weight as may justly render the Negative
probable to the highest Degree. All which I shall reduce to two Heads. 1. The
Incoherences of the Story. 2. Its unlikelihood from the account given of Peter
in Sacred Scripture.

1. Then, the Reader must be reminded, that the business of Peter's being at
Rome, or Bishop there, depends wholly on Humane Testimony; for there is but one
only Text, viz. That of, the Church of Babylon saluteth you, produced in favor
of the Story; and how impertinently, and not without gross wresting, we have
shown. Now there is nothing that more invalidates Humane Evidence than
Disagreement; for as Truth is always uniform, so falsehood being various is
frequentyl attended with Repugnancies and Contradictions. In the story of
Susanna (which the Roman Church regards as Canonical) the two Elders were by
one variant Circumstance convict of Perjury; and the falsehood of those that
appeared against our Blessed Lord, is remarked by the Holy Ghost from this,
That their Witnesses agreed not together, Mark 14. 56. Now therefore let us
examine separately the Witnesses in the Case before us.

1. Question. When did Peter come to Rome?

Answ. Of the time of Peter's coming to Rome.
At the beginning of the Reign of Claudius, says Orosins, l. 7. c. 6. In the
2d Year of his Reign, says St. Hierom, in the 3d says Onuphrius; no, cries
Fasciculus Temporum, it was in the 4th Year of his Reign; and so says
Nauclerus; Nay, upon my word, says Paschasius de vit. sanct. it was in the 14th
year of Claudius's Reign -- But as the aged Lady could see the Needle but not
the Barn; so tho they are no surer of the Year, they are exact as to the Day,
it was precisely the 18th Day of January; this you may be sure of, for the
Church of Rome, that is, Pope Paul the 4th, as long ago (forsooth) as the year
of our Lord, 1557. thought fit to appoint that Day to be kept Festival on that
occasion; and accordingly you may see it set down in the Calendarium Catholicum.

2. How long he staid there?
Question. How long did Peter continue Bishop of Rome? Answ. 27 Years says St.
Hierom, 29 says Venerable Bede, 25 Years 7 Months and 8 Days says Fasciculus
Temporum, just 25 Years 2 Months and 3 Days, says the Pontifical pretended to
be written by Infallible Pope Damasus. -- But hark ye Friend! if he came to
Rome the 18th of January, and continued Bishop thereof 25 Years 2 Months and 3
Days, then he must be put to Death on the 22th of March; and if so, why does
the Church Celebrate his Martyrdom on the 29th of June -- Ay, but Damasus is
mistaken (says Binius with the consent of Barnious) Peter did not hold the
Chair twenty five Years, two Months, and three Days, it was exactly twenty four
Years, five Months, and twelve Days, and so he might be Martyred on the 29th of
June -- Very good! this indeed avoids one Inconveniency, but it dashes upon
another -- For if he were put to Death on the 29th of June, then he could not
dye in the fourteenth Year of Nero; but almost all Writers of the story attest
that he dyed in the 14th Year of Nero: Now the 14th Year of Nero began the 13th
of October, and on the 10th of June following Nero being declared a public
Enemy killed himself; so that if Peter were put to Death (according to the
former Opinion) on the 22th of March, it might be in Nero's 14th Year. But if
it were on the 29th of June, it must be either in his 13th or some other
foregoing Year, which is contrary to the whole stream of your Evidence, or else
after Nero's Death, which likewise will utterly mar the credit of the whole
story; for no man ever talked of Peter's being at Rome, but he also affirmed
that he suffered there under Nero.

3. What Year Peter suffered
Question. In what Year after our Lords Passion was Peter Martyred?

Ans. It was in the 38th Year after the Passion of our Lord, says the
Pontifical; the 37th says Nicephorus; no, cries Binnius, it was in the 35th Year
after the Passion, An. Chr. 69. And yet Onuphrius is confident it was exactly
34 Years 3 Months and 4 Days after our Lords Passion, the 29th of June, An.
Dom. 68.

4. Did Paul suffer at the same time.
Question. Were Peter and Paul put to Death at the same time.

Answ. Yes, on the same Day, says the Pontifical, not the same Year tho, say
Prudentius and St. Augustine -- I will tell you how it was, says Binnius, it
was the same Day of the Month indeed, though not the same Year.

Well, but if one outlived the other at least a year, since Paul seems likest
to be the survivor, because, as St. Peter was much the elder man (for he was
Married when first called to the Apostleship, whereas Paul at the stoning of
Stephen is expressly said Acts 7 58.
to be a young man) so also if he were Prince of the Apostles, Sovereign Head
of the Christians, and Bishop of Rome, he was on that account likest to incur
the fury of Nero. If, I say, Paul did (as he might for what appears to the
contrary) outlive Peter, why might not he have been as fit to succeed as
another? Would it it not be very hard, that Paul who avowed himself not
inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles, should in his old Age be made Subject
to a Linus, a Cletus, or a Clement? Or suppose he was put to Death before or
with Peter, yet if Peter did as they say constitute a Supreme Pastor over the
Universal Church to succeed him, why should he not have committed that Charge
to some other of the Apostles? especially since all Ecclesiastical Historians
seem agreed, That St. John (who is honored with the Title of the Beloved
Disciple) did survive for many years after, and consequently must become
inferior to some one that was no Apostle.

But not only Prudentius tells us, That Paul suffered a Day after Peter, but
Abdias (one of our Adversaries Worthy Authors) avers it was two years after;
nay, if that be true, which the same Abdias relates, That after the Crucifying
of Peter, Paul remained in his free Custody at Rome, mentioned in the 28th of
the Acts (which was as St. Hierom witnesses in the third or fourth year of
Nero) then it must be ten years betwixt the Martyrdom of Peter and Paul,
forasmuch as it is by all Writers acknowledged, That Paul suffered in the last,
that is, the 14th year of Nero.

Vspergensis says these Apostles were both Executed in one Year, but he notes
not that they dyed in one Day; Sabellicus says, both in one Year and one Day;
some say, as St. Ambrose, they dyed together both in one Place; but Dionysius
seems to say otherwise, telling us that the one bad the other farewell when they
were parted asunder going to Death; most Writers charge Nero as the Author of
both their Deaths; but Linus says, That Agrippa commanded Peter to be put to
Death* (which must be at Jerusalem) because by his persuasion four of the said
Agrippa 's Concubines refused to live any longer in such unchaste life with the
King.

5. Of Peter's Successor.
Question. -- But who indeed was Peter's next and immediate Successar?

Answ. Linus a Tuscan (says Platina) for eleven Years, three Months, and
twelve Days; who was succeeded by Cletus a Roman, for twelve Years, one Month,
and eleven Days; after which the Sea was vacant twenty Days, and then came
Clement a Roman, who held it nine Years, two Months, and ten Days. And Binius
says, that Linus was Pope but eleven Years, two Months, and twenty three Days,
and quarrels with Damasus for assigning to Cletus twelve Years, one Month, and
eleven Days. But the difference is not only in point of time of their several
Pontificates (though yet a Days difference, where so great an exactness is
pretended, is enough to discredit all the Relation) but there is as much Cloud
and Debate in the very order of Succession. For Tertullian, Lib. de Praescript.
and St. Hierom on the 25th of Isaiah, place Clement next and immediately after
St. Peter. And Clement himself (if you hearken to the before-recited Epistle in
his Name to St. James) avers that Peter most solemnly conferred that Dignity
upon him; nor does Platina, or Onuphrius forbear to tell us the Circumstances
thereof, so that undoubtedly according to these Authorities he was the next
Successor. But yet Optatus (lib. 2. contr. Parm.) and St. Augustine (Epist.
165.) rank Linus next after Peter, and next not only Cletus, but Anacletus, and
after all these Clement as the fourth (or if you will include St. Peter the
fifth) Iraeneus, lib. 3. cap. 3. tells us that Peter and Paul Constituted Linus
the first (then Peter was not the first) Bishop of Rome; That Anacletus
succeeded him, and that Clemens was the third Bishop of Rome; Onuphrius
marshals them thus -- Linus eleven Years, three Months, and twelve Days;
Clement nine Years, four Months, and twenty six Days, Cletus six Years, five
Months, and three Days. And (after seven Days Vacancy) Anacletns twelve Years,
two Months, and ten Days; and to solve the matter as well as he can, makes the
said Linus only as a suffragan Bishop under Peter, and reckons the said eleven
Years, three Months, and three Days, attributed to Linus to be in Peter's Life
time (who he says was for the most part absent from Rome) save only twenty six
Days, which he survived after Peter, and then was Martyred; during which 26
Days he was not chief Bishop neither, but only a Coadjutor to Clement as he had
been to Peter. For (says he) Clement was the immediate Successor in chief to
Peter, and held the Chair for nine Years, four Months, and twenty six Days, and
then and not before came Cletus, and he sat six Years, five Months, and three
Days as Sovereign Bishop (though for twenty Years and upwards he had been
Chorepiscopus Suffragan Bishop or Coadjutor under Peter and Clement) whose
Successor was Anacletus, etc. You see what pains this Learned Man is at to
render the story Uniform.

But as this is a new Invention, for neither Platina, nor the Ancients mention
a word of suffraganship in the Case, but make Linus as substantial a Pope as
any of the rest; so it agrees not with that account that Bellarmin gives of
that matter; for he says, That Peter indeed left the Episcopal See to Clement;
but when he was dead, Clement out of Humility refused to sit therein, as long
as Linus and Cletus lived, who had been Peter's Coadjutors in the Episcopal
Office; and so actually Linus succeeded Peter, Cletus to Linus, and Clement to
Cletus, tho some Authors, because Clement was appointed Successor, name him
first.

To which I Answer, The Answer to both.
That as the other was but the surmise of Onuphrius, so this is but the Nude
Averment of the Cardinal, and both the one and the other in it self improbable;
for if Peter had just cause to Elect Clement, then Clement could have no just
Cause to reject the Office imposed. If Peter were appointed by our Lord to
Govern all the Churches in the World, no doubt he was fit and enabled to
discharge that Office; And what need he then have two Coadjutors to Rule the
particular Church of Rome? Or why would he take upon himself the Bishopric of
Rome, from whence he was so often to be absent, and thereby give a dangerous
Precedent of NON-RESIDENCY, and trusting to the Care of Delegates in the
Government of the Church? Or if he must have help, would not Paul (at least
after he came to Rome) have been as good a Coadjutor as either Linus or Cletus?
Again, If Peter thought Clement most worthy to succeed him, why was he not
Constituted at least an equal Suffragan Bishop with the other two before? If
Linus and Cletus had been worthy of that Honor, they would no doubt have shown
their humility no less in Reverencing St. Peter's last Will and Ordinance, than
Clement did his in urging Peter's Antecedent Fact of admitting those two his
Assistants; Or why did not Clement declare such his Humility whilst Peter was
alive, that he might have Constituted and Consecrated another Successor? Or why
in his Letter to St. James does he not take notice how, and on what score he
had declined that Office, which Peter so formally conferred upon him? Or in a
word, If Peter did so solemnly invest Clement with the Government of the
Church, and Institute him his Successor by imposition of Hands, and making him
sit down (in spite of his Modesty) in his own Episcopal Chair, and yet after
Peter's Death Linus and Cletus did hold and actually Exercise the same
successively for above twenty Years, does it not follow, That the two first
Bishops of Rome next after St. Peter were unlawful, as having no due Call or
Title, but guilty of Usurpation; from which no pretense of Clement's Humility
can excuse them? For who Ordained them? Or how could they duly become capable
of that Dignity?

The Sixth Question, Whether Peter sat Seven years at Antioch, before he went
to Rome?
Was Peter Bishop of Antioch before he went to Rome?

Answ. Yes, Seven years, says the Pontifical, and so says Platina, and it is the
common Vogue of those that mention his being at Rome: But, No, says Onuphrius,
and is very warm in the point, Ad Initium secundi Anni Imperii Claudii Petrum
Judaea nunquam Excessisse ex Actis Apostolorum and Paeuli Epistola ad Galatas
-- Apertissime constat; idem in Chronico refert Eusebius, and ego alibi multis
Rationibus probavi, etc. That Peter never stirred out of Judea till the
beginning of the second year of the Reign of Claudius, is most certain and
evident from the Acts of the Apostles, and Paul's Epistle to the Galatians:
Eusebius in his Chronicon asserts the same; and I (says he) have proved it
elsewhere by many Reasons. Now in this second year of Claudius, all the Authors
that mention Peter's being at Rome, affirm he arrived there; How then could he
before that have sat seven years as Bishop of Antioch? But from the Testimony
of most Ancient Authors, I (says the said Onuphrius) have settled the Business
thus -- That in the Tenth year after Christ's Passion, The History of Peter,
according to Onuphrius.
(which was still the Second of Claudius, though toward the end of it) St. Peter
after his deliverance out of Prison, having spent a year in Preaching along the
several Countries in his Journey toward Rome, did Arrive at that City on the
Eighteenth of January: From whence to the time of his death was about
Twenty-five years. But four years after, viz. the Seventh of Claudius, the Jews
being banished by an Edict, he was forced to leave Rome, and Returned to
Jerusalem; Agrippa, for fear of whom he fled out of Judea, being now dead:
There he was present at the Apostolical Council, and death of the Blessed
Virgin; from whence, leaving the Apostle James at Jerusalem, he went to
Antioch, and there remained seven years, until the death of Claudius, and
beginning of the Empire of Nero, when with Mark the Evangelist he Returned to
Rome, and Reestablished the decaying Roman Church, appointed Linus and Cletus
his Suffragan-Bishops or Delegates, and Admonished Mark to write his Gospel:
After which, he Traveled almost throughout all Europe, and Returning to Rome
with the Apostle Paul, when Nero was worrying the Christians as Authors of the
great Conflagration that happened there in the last year of his Reign, after he
had Chosen Clement to be Bishop of Rome, was Crucified the 29th of June;
Twenty-four years, five months, and twelve days after he first came to that
City under Claudius.

This Account Onuphrius says he has gathered out of abundance of most Ancient
Authors, whom he cites; not that any one Mortal, Ancient or Modern, before
himself, ever wrote any such thing; but this he supposes may be said, as the
only Expedient to Reconcile their Contradictions.

Yet for all that, Bellarmine is so far from Allowing the same, that with great
pains he undertakes to Refute it; and maintains, That Peter did not remain full
five years after our Lords Ascension in Judaea, before he went to Antioch,
where he was Bishop near Seven Years, and then (and not before) went to Rome.

I shall not undertake here to Umpire the Case between these two Eminent
Authors; But in another Chapter may possibly make it appear, That not only one,
but both of them may be mistaken; In the mean time by this brief state of the
Case, you cannot but see, that there is no one particular of the story clear or
certain, but that the Witnesses every where thwart and trip up each others
Heels, and how hard their most Learned Advocates are forced to labor
colourably to Reconcile them, yet can by no means agree in their Inventions for
that purpose.

From whence it will not be difficult to collect what Judgment we are to make
of the whole Story: For it is no Excuse to say that their Disagreements are but
small, and only in Circumstances; for where there is every where such a
punctual Exactness pretended, as not only to years, but months and days, and
yet all different from, and inconsistent with each other, it is methinks a great
Argument that the Original Testimonies were all forged; or at least, that the
several Authors took up their Stories on Trust, and themselves knew nothing of
the matter.

But to all this, Bellarmine says, 1. That difference touching the Time of any
thing done, Object. 1.
does not weaken the Truth of the thing it self; There are various Opinions how
long it is since the Creation of the World, and touching the time of Christ's
Crucifixion; Shall we therefore conclude that the World was not created, or our
Savior not Crucified?

I Reply, Answer.
That where a thing it self is certain, it is not by a difference of that kind
rendered uncertain; but where a thing it self is doubtful, depending only on
suspected Evidence, the same by Contradictory Circumstances is rendered much
more uncertain and improbable. That the World was Created, That our Savior
Suffered, we have Infallible Witnesses, who in nothing material disagree, but
confirm each others Testimony: Whereas here is no sound Evidence of Peter's
being at Rome, or Bishop there; And they that undertake to tell the Fact, do
with equal Assurance and pretended Punctualness relate Circumstances; and if
they are Deceivers, or deceived in one, they may as well in the other.

2. Object. 2.
As to the various Accounts given about Peter's Successor, the Learned Cardinal
says, That though we should be ignorant who it was that succeeded him, yet we
ought not for that cause to doubt but some body did succeed.

But this Answer comes not home to the purpose; Answer.
For the Question is not so much who did Succeed, as whether Peter did at all
Precede in the particular Bishopric of Rome: Now because the same Witnesses
that tell us of Peter's Preceding, do also testify of his Successors, if one
part of their Testimony be infirm, the whole is weakened.

Lastly, As the Ancients thwart and interfere with each other in this Story of
Peter's being at Rome, so Baronius, one of the most industrious Modern
Advocates for it, contradicts himself, for he says Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. ad
Ann. 69. S. 9.
, Peter died A. C. 69. and yet affirms Idem ad An. 39.
that he came to Antioch A. C. 39. and was Bishop there 7 years, and after that
25 years Bishop of Rome, which must be till the year 71. So that Peter was
Bishop of Rome two years after he was dead.

CHAP. VI.
The Account given of Peter in Scripture, compared with the Roman History;
Whereby the Common Relation of Peter's being at Rome, or Bishop first of
Antioch, and afterward of Rome, appears to be highly Improbable, or rather
altogether False.

THat St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, cannot be proved by Scripture, we have
shown before; To which we may add, that the same is further confessed by
Learned Romanists; By the Scripture it cannot be evinced either that he was
Bishop of Rome, or ever was at Rome at all; says Marsilius Patavinus. Defens.
Pac. part. 2. C. 16.
And then considering the Eclesiastical Histories that affirm it, he does it
after such a fashion, as plainly show he believed them not. Occham, that
Eminent Schoolman, who flourisht about the Year 1328. affirms, Occh. Dial. par.
1. L. 2. Ca 3.
These are in the number of things that neither are contained in Scripture, nor
can be manifestly proved by it alone, viz. That Peter was Bishop of Rome; That
he removed his See from Antioch to Rome; That the Bishops of Rome succeed
Peter; That the Church of Rome has the Primacy, whereof there is no mention in
the Scripture; As likewise there is not, that he [Peter] governed the Church of
Rome, nor any thing touching the Papacy thereof.

This Consideration alone, methinks, should be enough to persuade any man from
Entertaining the same, or any of the Inferences that merely depend thereon, as
matters of Faith; Especially if we further remarque, that the Scripture is not
only silent as to Peter's being at Rome, and Bishop there, but yields not a sew
shrewd and pressing Indications to the contrary; Which it shall be the subject
of this Chapter briefly to sum up.

But because the same will not so clearly appear as to the matter in question,
without being compared with the Roman History; I shall for the assistance of
the Vulgar Reader, first set down a short Chronology (out of S^^tonius, Dio,
and the best Historians of those times) of the Reigns of those Emperors, whom
we shall have occasion to mention; And also of the Years after our Lords
Passion and St. Paul's Conversion, answering thereunto, which will render the
whole dispute very conspicuous and easy to be understood.

Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (...), was born of the Blessed Virgin in
the Forty Second Year of Augustus Caesar, who reigned in all Fifty Six Years,
and Dyed the Nineteenth of August.

Tiberius Succeeding, Reigned Twenty Two Years, Six Months, and Twenty Six
Days, Dying the Sixteenth of March.

It is expressly said by the Evangelist, that in the Fifteenth Year of this
Tiberius, Christ began to be about Thirty Years of his Age. ( Luke. ^. 1.
Compared with Verse 3.) That is, as we may probably understand, was then in his
Thirtieth Year Current, for whereas Tiberius's Fifteenth Year began the
Nineteenth of August, Christ's Thirtieth Year began (according to our common
Reckoning) the Twentyfifth of December following; And so at the beginning of
Tiberius's Reign, he had near completed, but not fully, his Fifteenth year:
Now deduct Fourteen years complete, out of the Fifty-six years of Augustus,
there remains Forty-two. Whence it follows, That we must take our Lord to have
been Born in the Forty-second year current of Augustus, as aforesaid.

In the 19th year of this Tiberius, and in the 34th current of our Lords Age,
He was crucified in the month of March.

I am not ignorant that some place our Saviors Crucifixion in the 33th year of
his Age: And Alstedius is very positive that it was in the 35th. But I follow
the middle and more common Opinion, and which (if I mistake not) the mention of
the several Passovers after his Baptism will justify.

The 20th year of Tiberius began in August The 35th of Christ's Birth in
December following.

And in March after (that is Anno. Dom. 35. and of Tiberius the 20th) was
completed the first year after the Passion, and the second began.

In August, Anno Chr. 35. began the 21th of Tiberius, and in December
following, but still in the second year after the Passion, began the 36th year
of Christ. The exact time when Paul was Converted, the Scripture does not
mention, but it is generally taken to be in the 2d year after the Passion, on
the 25th of January. And indeed, it can scarce be imagined to be in the first
year, since it is nothing likely all those Transactions mentioned in the first
Eight Chapters of the Acts, as between Christ's Ascension, and his Conversion,
should be accomplished in seven or eight months space. But if we take it to be
the second year, then since the particular day is supposed to be the 25th of
January; that is to say five months after the beginning of the 21th year of
Claudius, one month after the Commencement of the 36th year of our Lords
Nativity; and though in the second, yet within two months of the beginning of the
third year from the Passion. We may for avoiding Confusion, taking the
Denomination from the greater part, make the first year Current of Paul's
Conversion, to Answer to the 36th year Current of Christ's Birth, the 21th of
the Reign of Tiberius, and the 3d after the Passion (always remembering their
differing Commencements.) And so the Account will stand as in the Table
following.

Year of Christ. Year of Tiberius. Year of the Passion. Year of Paul's
Conversion. 34 19 1 0. 35 20 2 0.

In this year Peter met with Simon Magus at Samaria, according to Baronius.

36 21 3 1. 37 22 4 2.

The 22th year of Tiberius, ended in Aug. 37. but he lived till the 16th of
March following, which was in the 38th year of our Lord, the 4th year of his
Passion being very near complete, and almost two months after the beginning of
the third year of Paul's Conversion.

Caligula began to Reign the 17th of March, Anno Chr. 38. and the same month
began the fifth year from the Passion. He Reigned three years, ten months, and
eight days.

Of Christ. Of Caligula. Of the Passion. Of Paul's Conv. 38 1 5 3 39 2 6 4

Baronius says Peter now founded the Church of Antioch.

40 3 7 5 41 4 8 6

The third year of Caligula (and 7th after the Passion) ended March, Ao. 41.
but he Reigned afterward ten months and eight days; so he died the 24th of
January, in the 42th year of Christ, the eighth year current of the Passion.

Claudius Reigned 13 years, eight months, and 18 days, beginning the 24th of
Jan, A. C. 42. The very next day began the seventh year of Paul's Conversion,
and in March following began the ninth after the Passion.

Anno Christ. Of Claudius. Of the Passion. Of Paul's Conv. 42 1 9 7. 43 2 10 8.

In this year Peter is supposed to become Bp. of Rome.

44 3 11 9. 45 4 12 10. Herod Agrippa dies.
46 5 13 11. 47 6 14 12. 48 7 15 13. 49 8 16 14. 50 9 17 15.

In this 50th year of Christ, and ninth of Claudius, the Jews were banished
Rome, as Orosius testifies, and Baronius grants.

51 10 18 16. 52 11 19 17. 53 12 20 18. 54 13 21 19. 55 14 22 20.

The 13th year of Claudius ended Jan. 24. A. C. 55. but he lived afterward
eight months and 18 days; so that he died October. 13. 55. in the 22th year after
Christ's Passion, and 20th of Paul's. Conversion.

Then began Nero to Reign, for thirteen years, seven months, and 28 days, his
first, ending the 14th of October, Anno Chr. 56. in the 23th year after the
Passion, and 21th of Paul's Conversion.

Anno Chr. Of Nero, Of the Passion. Of Paul's Conv. 56 1 23 21. 57 2 24 22. 58 3
25 23. 59 4 26 24. 60 5 27 25. 61 6 28 26. 62 7 29 27. 63 8 30 28. 64 9 31 29.
65 10 32 30. 66 11 33 31. 67 12 34 32. 68 13 35 33.

Simon Magus died this year, according to Baronius.

69 14 part 36 34.

Thus Nero's 13th year ended October. 14. 68. but he reigned longer seven months
and 28 days: So that he ridded the World of himself the 10th of June, Ann. Chr.
69. in the 36th year after our Lords Passion, and 34th current of Paul's
Conversion.

Now the most common Story of our Modern Romanists is, That St. Peter went to
Rome in the second year of Claudius, and 10th after the Passion, and continuing
Bishop of that See 25 years, suffered Martyrdom in the 14th year of Nero.

It remains therefore that we weigh such their Pretensions: And as we have
found them too light and void of Proof on their side; so by comparing them with
the Account given of St. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistle to
the Galatians, and other passages of infallible Writ, it will perhaps
satisfactorily appear, not only that Peter was not at Rome in the said second
Year of Claudius, Nor Bishop there 25 Years: But that indeed he was not, nor
could be there at all either before or after.

I think it is not pretended (nor if it were would it serve their turn) that
Peter was ever at Rome before Christ's Crucifixion, but spent his time in or
about Judea, either in his Vocation of a Fisherman, or with the rest of the
Disciples attending the Lord; Nor are we to look for him at Rome after the
death of Nero, for they all affirm he was put to death under that Tyrant, so
that we have only Thirty Six Years to account for, viz. from the Passion to the
End of Nero, that is to say, from the year of Our Lord 34. to the Year 70.

For the First and Second Year after the Lords Death and Resurrection, Peter
not at Rome the first Two Years after the Passion.
it is undeniable that Peter was in or about Judea, first with the rest of the
Apostles on Mount Olivet, beholding our Saviors Ascension, and then returned
to Jerusalem, expecting the Promised Comforter; and when the Holy Ghost
descended upon them, made that excellent Sermon, whereby Three Thousand Souls
were Converted, Acts 2. Healed the Lame man, Acts 3. Whereupon he was
Imprisoned, Act 4. He dreadfully Punishes the Hypocrisy and Lies of Ananias
and Saphira, and wrought many other Miracles till he was again Imprisoned, and
delivered by an Angel, etc. Acts 5. He was also at Jerusalem at the choice of
Deacons, Acts 6. And if his journey when sent with John by the rest of the
Apostles to Samaria, Acts 8. be to be attributed to these Two Years, it is
expressly said, V 25. that he returned to Jerusalem.

In the Year of our Lord 37. Nor in the Third nor Fourth.
(which was the fourth of the Passion) Pilate (as Eusebius, L. 2. C. 2. and
Vspergensis testify) Wrote his Letter to Tiberius concerning Christ, his
Doctrine, Divine Miracles, Death and Resurrection, whereupon that Emperor was
willing to have Christ admitted amongst the Gods of Rome, but was opposed by
the Senate; Now if Peter had been Preaching at Rome, or Bishop there, either
the year before or that time, this could not have been any News to the
Emperor, nor would Pilates Letter have prevailed so much with him touching
Christ, as the Doctrine, or especially the Miracles which Peter would (for
Confirming of the Faith) have done there in his Name; On the contrary, it is
plain from the Subsequent History of the Acts, That Peter was all this time in
or near Jury.

Paul being Converted in the Second Year after Christ's Ascension (as it is
commonly agreed, Nor in the Fifth or Sixth.
and near the end of it as we have showed) in his Journey to Damascus, Acts. 9.
did there immediately Preach the Gospel, and from thence in the bordering
Country of Arabia for three Years time, Gal 1. 16. And upon his return to
Damascus, V 17 and danger of being taken, escapes by a Basket out of a Window,
Acts 9. 24. and 2. Cor. 11. 32. And then goes up to Jerusalem to see Peter (the
Phrase intimates as if that were his known usual place of Residence) and found
him there accordingly; And having staid with him 15 days. Gal. 1. 18. went away
for Tarsus, Acts, 9. 31. this must be at least in the Fourth Year of Paul's
Conversion, (for it is expressly said, after three Years) and consequently in
the Sixth of the Passion.

After this visit of Paul's, Peter not at Rome between the sixth and twelfth
year after the Passion.
and his being sent to Tarsus, we are assured, Acts 9. 31, 32. that the
Churches had rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria; and that
Peter passed throughout all those quarters. How many Years he spent in
Preaching to those Countries is not mentioned; But that (amongst the rest) he
came to Lydda, where healing Eneas that had been Bedrid Eight Years, the same
of that Miracle drew thither the inhabitants of Lydda and Saron, who by Peter's
Preaching were all Converted to the Lord, which argues he bestowed some
considerable time there. Thence he was sent for to Joppa, raised dead Dorcas to
life, and tarried there many days: Some days he staid with Cornelius; And after
all returning to Jerusalem, the Circumcised seemed scandalized at his Preaching
to the Gentiles, whom he satisfies in that point, Acts 11. 2. and continues
there until he was imprisoned by Herod the King, and miraculously delivered,
Acts 12. Which Chapter no man can read (comparing it with the last Verse of the
Chapter foregoing) but he must believe that it was the intent of St. Luke, the
Inspired Penman, to signify that this Imprisonment of Peter and death of Herod
were both in one year, and the latter very suddenly after the former: For Chap.
11. 30. he tells us of Barnabas and Readiness being sent up with Contributions
from Antioch to Jerusalem; then immediately proceeds, Chap. 12. to relate the
killing of James, and this Imprisonment and deliverance of Peter; to which he
forth with subjoyns, That Herod having in vain sought for him, went down to
Caesarea, where assuming Divine Honors, he was eaten of Worms and died; and
then adds, -- But the Word of God grew and multiplied; And Barnabas and Saul
returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their Ministry, etc. Peter
therefore was at Jerusalem in the year, and about the time that King Herod died.

But Herod died in the fourth year of the Reign of Claudius, and 12th after the
Passion; which I thus prove:

First, Josephus Joseph. Antiq. L. 18. Ca. 8.
testifies that this Herod (whom he calls Agrippa) obtained not leave to go to
his Kingdom of Jewry till the second year of Caligula: And the same Author Lib.
19. Ca. 7.
says, that the said Herod died in the seventh year of his Reign. Therefore
since Caligula Reigned in all not full four years, it follows that Herod could
not dye before the fourth year of Claudius, who was Caligula's Successor.

Secondly, This is further confirmed by that Passage, That the Tyrians and
Sidonians (against whom this Herod had conceived a displeasure, and to chastize
whom he went down to Caesaria presently after Peter's deliverance) made Friends
to obtain Peace of him; because (says the Text, Verse. 20.) their Country was
nourished by the Kings; signifying that during the Famine then raging, they had
Provisions from thence: Which Dearth or Famine was that which Agabus the
Prophet had some time before prophesied of at Antioch, of which it is generally
said, Acts 11. 28. That it came to pass in the days of Claudius; but as other
Authors, (particularly Vspergensis) have noted, it was in the fourth year of
Claudius.

Thus I conceive it very plain and certain, that Peter was constantly in and
about Judea till the fourth year of Claudius, (that is, the 12th of the
Passion, and 45th of our Lords Nativity) which not only leaves no room for his
seven years Episcopacy at Antioch, which is supposed to have been before this
time, but also utterly overthrows the Conceit of his Arriving at Rome in the
second year of Claudius; and so, perfectly annuls the credit of their principal
Evidence, and razes the story at the very Foundation; so that we might well
enough spare our pains in searching any further. But we will not stand with
them for a few years mistake, but examine quite thorough, and give them full
measure, heaped up, pressed down and running over.

That Peter was at Jerusalem at the death of the Virgin Mary, Peter not at Rome
between the 12th and 16th years of the Passion.
the Fifth year of Claudius, that is the 13th after his Passion, is attested by
Nicephorus (L. 2. Ca. 21.) but be that as it will, it is certain he was there in
the 16th year of the Passion, at the Assembly of the Apostles and Brethren
mentioned Acts 15. and made a Speech there, as appears V. 7. of that Chapter.
Now to prove that this Synod was held at this time, viz. the 16th year of the
Passion, Read Galatians 2. 1. Then Fourteen years after I went up again to
Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took with me Titus also, etc. By which and the
subsequent Context, it seems evident to me, that Paul thereby means his
coming to this Council, and not any other time of his repairing to Jerusalem,
and so does St. Hierom understand it, which being 14 years after St. Paul's
Conversion, falls out to be in the year of our Lord 49. and the Eighth of
Claudius.

I forget not that St. Hierom and diverse others that follow him, date these 14
years not from Paul's Conversion, but from his first Journey to Jerusalem three
years after, and so place this Synod Anno Dom. 51. or rather as they should say
52. in the 10th or 11th of Claudius, which thought it seems to favor our
Cause, as proving Peter to continue so much the longer at Jerusalem or the
neighboring parts of Asia, yet since my Aim in these Researches is solely the
discovery of Truth, I cannot admit thereof: Because in the Ninth year of
Claudius it was as Orosius Oros. L. 7. C. 6.
witnesses, That the Jews were all banished Rome; And at that time Paul was at
Athens, as Vspergensis In Claud. 7. Ca. 24.
writes; and it appears likewise by the History of the Acts; for Paul
departing from the Council after a tedious Journey to Antioch, Syria, through
Cilicia and many other Regions, came to Athens and thence to Corinth, where he
met with Aquila and Priscilla, who (says the Text) were lately (just then,
some Versions render it) Come from Italy, because Claudius had commanded that
all Jews should depart from Rome; Which shows that this Council must be held
some considerable time before this Decree of Claudius, that is, before the 9th
of his Reign.

If it be inquired where Peter was from the time of his delivery out of Prison
in the fourth year of Claudius, until this Synod in the Eighth year of his
Reign? I answer, That as the Gests or Actions of St. Paul (after Herod's death)
amongst the Gentiles are described, in the 13th and 14th Chapters of the Acts,
so during that time, it seems clearly intimated, that Peter was Laboring
amongst the Jews either at Jerusalem, or those dispersed in the neighboring
Territories of Asia, to whom he afterward directed his Epistle; for so says
St. Paul, speaking of his entertainment amongst the Apostles at this Council or
coming up to Jerusalem 14 years after his Conversion, Gal 2. 7. When they saw
That the Gospel over the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel
over the Circumcision was to Peter, for he that was mighty by Peter in the
Apostleship of the Circumcision, etc.

And in this interval I humbly conceive it was (tho not specified in the Acts)
that Peter was at Antioch, when Paul reproved him to the Face, mentioned Gal. 2
since it could not well be at any time before, as appears by the precedent
discourse; but that it was before the said Council of the Apostles at
Jerusalem, seems very probable, because if it had been afterward, viz. when
the matter had been so solemnly determined that Circumcision was not necessary,
Peter could not have had any scruple of eating with the Gentile Believers, nor
fear of offending them in that point, that came from James. Thus until the 16th
year of the Passion, Eighth of Claudius, Peter came not within One Thousand
Miles of Rome.

In the Ninth of Claudius all Jews were Banished Rome (as is proved before)
therefore then Peter could not be there. Peter not at Rome before the 12th of
Claudius.
Nor was, nor had he been there in the 12th of Claudius, for then Paul wrote
his Epistle to the Romans, and undoubtedly if Peter had been the Founder or
Bishop of that Church then, or at any time before, Paul would in so large a
letter have taken some occasion to recommend his Pains, and to exhort them to
continue in the Doctrine of the Prince of the Apostles; but on the contrary,
tho he concludes with particular Salutes to 24 Persons by name (besides several
Households) and diverse of them Women, yet he does not so much as mention Peter:
Now if Peter had been Bishop there, and sovereign Head of the Apostles, that
omission of paying his respects to him, whilst he did it to so many others of
inferior condition, would have been not only a Soloecism in Civility, but a
failure in Duty.

But how does it appear that this Epistle was wrote at this time? -- Thus, Chapter
15. 28. Paul uses this discourse -- Having now no more place in these parts,
(that is, about Antioch, whence this Epistle is dated) and having a great
desire these many years to come unto you, whenever I take my Journey into
Spain, I will come to you; but now I go into Jerusalem, etc. so that it is
evident this was wrote upon his Journey sometime going to Jerusalem; we must
therefore consider at what time especially this was, for we read of Paul's
going thither five several times, the first in the Ninth, the second in the
Twelfth, the third in the 15th, the fourth in the 18th, and the fifth in the
21th Chapter of the Acts; But it could be in none of the first three Journeys,
for he had not then met with Timothy, whom he found not till a good while after
his return from the Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 16. 1. but at the writing of this
Epistle, Timothy was with him, for he sends Salutations from him, Chapter 16. 21.
Nor seems it to be the fourth time, mentioned Acts 18th, for V. 1. ere Paul
returned to Jerusalem it is said that he departed from Corinth, and Priscilla
and Aquila were then at Rome, for thither he sends salutations to them. It
remains therefore that this Epistle was written just before Paul's last coming
up to Jerusalem; which agrees with what is said, Acts 19. 20. compared with the
before-cited Text, Romans 15. 23. And such his last Journey thither was in the
12th of Claudius.

For being there taken, Faelix was then Governor Acts 23. 24. who as Josephus
Lib. ^0. C. 5.
witnesses, was not made President of Judea, till the 11th of Claudius; And by
Tertullus's Oration to him, accusing Paul, we may gather that he had then for
some time, a year at least, been in that command; so that it must be about the
12th of Claudius: Which further appears, for that it is said, Paul had been two
years a Prisoner when Portius Festus came to be Governor instead of Faelix,
who was sent thither by Nero, as soon as he came to the Empire; wherefore since
Claudius died in his 14th year, and Festus came presently after, and Paul had
been then two years a Prisoner, it follows that such his last coming to
Jerusalem and the writing of this Epistle must be in or about the 12th year of
Claudius, the 20th of the Passion, and of our Lords Birth 53. And consequently
at that time for the Reasons aforesaid, we may justly believe Peter was not at,
nor Bishop of Rome. Nay St. Ambrose upon the Epistle to the Romans, says, that
he had read in certain Ancient Books that at the sending of this Epistle,
Narcissus (to whose family salutation is sent) was the senior, Bishop, or Elder
of the Congregation at Rome.

Again, Peter had not been at Rome the 24th Year after the Passion.
Peter neither was nor had been Bishop of Rome in the second year of Nero (the
24th of the Passion and 57th of the Incarnation) for then Paul came thither, as
is testified by Eusebius, Vrspergensis, and others; at whose arrival, St. Luke
who was then with him, says, Acts 28. 15. The Brethren hearing of us, came
forth to meet us, etc. But we hear not a word of Peter's either coming or
sending to Paul, which undoubtedly, if he had been Bishop there, he would have
done; nor would St. Luke have neglected to record it. But the third day after,
Paul sending for the chief of the Jews, and reasoning with them about the
Faith, they answered him thus, -- We will hear what thou do think, for
touching this Sect [the Christians] it is every where spoken against; and when
at a day appointed, Paul had preached unto them, the Jews fell at variance
about it, for some Believed, and some Believed not; All which shows that the
Jews at Rome had heard very little of Christ before Paul's arrival, which could
not have been, if Peter (the peculiar Apostle of the Circumcision) had then, or
for a matter of fourteen years ever since the second of Claudius, or indeed for
any time before, been at Rome and Bishop there.

In the Third and Fourth years of Nero (two whole years, Peter not at Rome in
the third or fourth year of Nero.
says the Text, Acts 28. 30.) Paul continued a Prisoner at large at Rome after
his coming thither: Now that Peter was not in any of that space there, we
rationally conclude, not only because Nicephorus, L 2. Ca. 3. says, That
during all that time St. Paul lived by the labor of his Hands; whereas if
Peter had been there in his Pontifical Dignity, he would certainly have caused
him to be better provided for; but especially for that in the several Epistles
written by Paul from thence in that time partly, and partly perhaps some time
after, (for how much longer he continued at Rome than after the said two years
elapsed, we have no certain account) he no where makes mention of Peter; which
if Peter had been looked upon as Sovereign of the Church, and his being Bishop
of such a Place, a matter of so great Importance, could never have been;
especially since Paul had often very just occasion to have taken notice
thereof; As in that to the Galatians, where Paul being enforced to assert the
Authority of his Doctrine and Apostleship, which some sought to impair, speaks
much of the former acquaintance between him and Peter, but not a word of seeing
him at this time; when Peter's Testimony, by subscription or otherwise, would
readily have satisfied those Opposers; or Paul instead of all the Arguments he
makes use of, might have said no more then this, Here is Peter the Prince of
the Apostles, Bishop of this City, (which he has chosen to be the fountain of
Eclesiastical Jurisdiction and infallible Judge of Controversies to the Worlds
end) who does at this instant own and allow my Apostleship, and give me the
right hand of Fellowship.

Nay, Paul in these Epistles does not only omit to mention Peter, but uses
Words that in effect deny his being then at Rome; As in that to the Colossians
(which must be Written about this time, because therein mention is made of
Demas, as being then with Paul, who afterward forsook him, as appears in the
second of Timothy) having told them that Aristarchus his Fellow Prisoner, and
Marcus, Sisters Son to Barnabas, and Jesus called Justus (who are of the
Circumcision) saluted them, Colos. 4. 10. and 11. He adds, These only are my
fellow-Helpers (which I understand, of those of the Circumcision, to whom he
had just before restrained his speech, for presently he mentions Epaphras, Luke
and Demas, who possibly might be Greeks) unto the Kingdom of God, who have been
a Comfort unto me. To Philemon he sends Salutations from the same Persons, and
calls them again his Fellow Laborers. Now was Peter (supposing too that he
long before, and at that time, was Bishop of Rome) Inferior to these? Was he
not worthy to be Named? Were the Salutations, the Benedictions of the Apostles
not to be expected? At my first Defense (I take it to be before Nero at this
time we are Treating of) says the same Apostle, No man stood with me, but all
men forsook me, 2 Timothy 4. 16. Can we imagine with any kind of sobriety that
Peter was then at Rome?

Whether St. Paul departed from Rome immediately after the said two years of
his being a Prisoner at large, Peter not at Rome during the rest of Nero's
Reign.
is not specified in Scripture; but it is reasonable to believe, that in that
space having so well Planted the Gospel there, he might as soon as opportunity
would admit, Travel into other Parts to disseminate the same glad Tidings, and
especially in Spain, which Country, it appears, Romans 15. 24. he had long
before designed to Visit; some Authors say that not only he, but St. Peter too,
was in our Britain, which I take to be as true as that Peter was Bishop of
Rome: But very plain it is, that Paul did again return to Rome, and was there
not long before his Death; for in his second Epistle to Timothy he Writes -- I
am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand, etc. Chapter
4. 6. Now as it appears both by the Subscription and Circumstances, that this
Epistle was Dated from Rome, when Paul was brought (that is in danger, or ready
shortly after to be brought) before Nero the second time; so it is agreed that
Paul suffered near the End of Nero's Reign; but at that time Peter was not at
Rome, for Paul very Mournfully complains, V. 10. Demas has forsaken me, having
loved this present World, and is departed into Thessalonica, Crescens to
Galatia, Titus into Dalmatia, only Luke is with me -- Therefore do thy
diligence to corie shortly unto me, and bring Mark with thee, for he is
profitable unto me for the Ministry. If only Luke were with him at Rome, then
Peter was not there; nor do we hear a syllable of his two pretended Suffragans,
Linus and Cletus: If Peter had been there at that time, what need of such
earnest sending so far as Ephesus for Timothy? Nor had Peter been at Rome in
any of the Intermediate Years after Paul's first Arrival, as may be Collected
from that Passage in Tacitus, where Relating how Nero endeavored to cast the
Odium of Burning of Rome (which happened near the end of his Reign) upon the
Christians; he takes notice that then or about that time, that Sect had began
to Revive again, or increase more than for some years before; which may well be
understood in this sense, That the Christians, who during Paul's absence, had
somewhat declined, did now at his return begin to Re-flourish and Multiply: But
if Peter in that Ten years space, or thereabouts of Paul's Absence, had been at
Rome exercising his Episcopacy, there could have been no place-for that
Observation of the Christian Religions REVIVING (which supposes a Decay for
some years before) at that Particular Juncture.

CHAP VII.
Objections answered, and one Argument added, That we cannot, without great
Dishonor to St. Peter, imagine him to have been Bishop of Rome, as is
pretended.

TO avoid this plain deduction from Holy Scripture, Bellarmines Scheme of St.
Peter's Travels.
Cardinal Bellarmin is forced to use a great deal of Pains and Art, and thus at
last he performs it, at Five or Six Motions, as follows.

1. He says, That Peter after our Lords Passion remained almost, but not full
five years in Judea, in which time Paul paid him his first visit, Gal. 1.

2. That then he removed to Antioch, and was Bishop there for near seven years,
but during that* time traveled into and Preached through the Neighboring
Provinces.

3. That in the seventh year of his Episcopacy at Antioch, he returned to
Jerusalem, and was there Imprisoned.

4. That being there miraculously released, he the same year (which was the
second of Claudius) came to Rome, and there fixed his Seat, which he held 25
years, viz. till his Martyrdom.

5. Yet for all that, within seven years returned back to Jerusalem upon a
Decree that Claudius set forth, commanding all Jews to depart from Rome,
mentioned Acts 18. 2. and so came to be present at Jerusalem, when Paul from
Antioch went up thither, and the Council of the Apostles, Acts 15. was held
there.

6. But after the death of Claudius repaired again to Rome, where in the second
year of Nero, Paul arrived, and in the 14th year of Nero they were both put to
Death.

To all which I Answer.

1. As the old Astronomers were forced to invent various Epicycles and feigned
motions of the Planets to solve the Phoenomina, Answ.
without regard whether they were true, or false, that is, had any real
existence in Nature or not, provided they would but serve a turn to support
their Hypothesis; so I must crave leave to say, The Learned Cardinal carries
the blessed Apostle St. Peter 15 or 1600 miles back and forwards, to and fro at
his own pleasure, merely to render their notion of his being at Rome possible;
But by what Authority, on what proof does he do this? There is not the least
intimation in Scripture but that Peter remained in or near Jerusalem as much to
the time of the Council, as for the first five years; there is not a syllable
of his going unto, coming back from Rome, or return thither again; and if it
were true, what reason can be immagined why St. Luke should omit it in the Acts
of the Apostles, falling within the compass of his Story; nay it is plain that
he was at Jerusalem a considerable time before that Council was held; for Acts
15. 1. it is said, Those that troubled the Church of Antioch went down from
Judaea, and V. 24. it is said by the Apostles (whereof Peter was one) in their
Joint Letter, Certain men that went out from Us.

2. Touching Peter's being Bishop of Antioch, we have spoken before ( Chap. 3.)
and shall here only add, That Bellarmin himself in this same Chapter says,
Peter should have left a most Pernicious Example of a Christian Pastor, if he
had at once Retained two particular and proper Bishoprics (which yet it seems
Onuphrius thought no disparagement) but would it not be an Example equally
pernicious, if Retaining but one, he should very seldom or never Reside there?
For I conceive Non-Residency as bad as Pluralities; and indeed the chief reason
against Pluralities, is because they are thought to Imply Non-Residency: But I
think it will Unavoidably follow, that Peter must be generally Non-Resident, if
being stated Bishop either of Antioch or Rome, he Traveled so many other
Provinces during the same time, and yet every other while was found at
Jerusalem.

3. That Peter upon the Decree of Claudius, That the Jews should depart from
Rome, did fly thence and so came to Jerusalem, as it were Accidentally, to that
Council, Acts 15. is like the rest, asserted Gratis. And as the same did
neither suit with the Zeal and Christian Fortitude of Peter, so to Abandon his
flock; so I conceive it may manifestly be proved to be false from the Acts of
the Apostles; where we Read, That Paul and Barnabas immediately after that
Council, returned to Antioch, staid there some time; That afterward Paul took
a Journey into Syria and Cilicia, and thence to Derbe and Lystra, and having
Traveled through Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia and Troas, came into Macedonia (where
Phillip was cast into Prison) thence he passed to Amphipolis and Apollonia, to
Thessailonica, Beraea, and as far as Athens, Acts 15, 16, and 17. And after all
these tedious Perigrinations (which must require and take up a very
considerable time) when he came to Corinth, he found there Aquila and
Priscilla, who LATELY (or as the Syriac Version has it, eo ipso tempore, just
then) were come out of Italy, upon that Edict of Claudius, so that the said
Edict must be after the Council, and consequently could be no ground for Peter's
being then at Jerusalem.

4. If Peter were supreme Governor of the Church, and had before that Council
at Jerusalem been seven years Bishop of Antioch, and for as many years and at
that present time, been Bishop of Rome, both Cities of the Gentiles, and yet
not without considerable numbers of Jews therein; it is strange, he had not
before determined that Question, touching the Circumcision of the Gentiles; or
it might have been a sufficient Argument for Paul and Barnabas to have said,
Peter the Quondam Bishop of this City, and now of Rome, Christ's Vicar and
Prince of the Apostles, Taught and Practiced otherwise.

5. It Is most improbable, which Bellarmine here asserts, viz. That in one and
the same year Peter should be Bishop of Antioch, Imprisoned at Jerusalem, and
yet also in that very Year come to Rome and make himself Bishop there; Let any
Judicious Person but consider the great distance of those several places, and
the inconveniences of Traveling in those days, and that there appears not the
least ground for such his Posting to and fro, and he will be apt to suspect it
altogether Romantic, or a story fitter for the Legend, than an Article of
Faith. Object. 2.


To that of Paul's not saluting Peter in his Epistle to the Romans, the Cardinal
says two things; First, That the same St. Paul Writing to the Ephesians,
mentions not St. John; nor James in the Epistle to the Hebrews, yet they were
Bishops of those Churches. Secondly, That when Paul Wrote that Epistle, Peter
was not yet returned to Rome from the Apostolical Synod.

To which I Answer.

1. That the Cardinal has not proved, Answer.
that either John or James were ever Bishops of those respective places in a
strict and proper sense; St. John was never that I know of, reckoned Bishop of
Ephesus, nor could be so without displacing of Timothy, who, according to the
Current Testimony of Antiquity, was by Paul constituted Bishop there; Nor does
it appear that the Epistle to the Hebrews was wrote to those at Jerusalem; Nor
lastly was St. James then alive; so that there is no Parity.

2. As for Peter's not being Returned as yet to Rome, Aquila and Priscilla were
got back, for he sends greeting to them; Together with whom Bellarmine affirms,
Peter was expelled, and why not Peter, the Bishop of the place, as soon as
they? We find Paul had a firm or longing Resolution to go to Rome as soon as
possible, Romans 1. 13. and Chapter 15. 22. and 23. But sure Peter, if he had been
Bishop there, would much rather have been Intent on that Journey.

3. Tho Peter had been Absent, yet if he had been peculiar Bishop of that
Church, it is not Credible, that Paul would not at all have taken notice of him;
for that Episcopacy of Peter there, would not have been a foreign, nor any of
the least Causes fit to be mentioned, of his giving thanks on the Romans
behalf, as Chapter 1. 8. or in their Praises, as Chapter 16. 19. Paul doubtless would
have prayed no less for Peter's prosperous return, then he does for his own
happy Journey; And advised them too, as well for to pray for the Restitution of
Peter, as for his own presence amongst them, Chapter y 15. 30. at least in that
Admonition, Chapter 16. 18. where he mentions the Doctrine they had Learnt, how
seasonably might he have made the same Commemoration, as else where he uses of
himself on a like occasion, 2 Timothy 3. 14. Continue in what you have Learnt,
knowing from whom you have learnt them, to wit, from Peter the only Rock under
Christ of the Church. It Is plain it is usual with St. Paul, to lay hold on all
occasions of naming with honor the faithful Ministers of those Churches to
whom he wrote, whether they were present or absent: As, 1 Cor. 16. 15. Ephesians.
6. 21. Phil. 2. 19. Coloss. 4. 9, 12, and 13. for this tended much to the
Edification of the Churches. And why should he not much more have done the same
here, where he had so Eminent Occasion for it, to have given Attestation to
Peter's Supreme and Pastoral Office, and the wonderful Happiness and Privilege
of the Romans in being under his peculiar Conduct.

The Cardinal urges further, Object. 3.
That nothing can be concluded from Authority Negatively.

I Reply, Answ.
Our Arguments before recited are not only drawn from Authority Negatively, but
also from the less to the greater; Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, and in
several others from thence, at several times, mentions others less to be
remembered; therefore he would not have been silent of Peter, if he had been at
Rome. It Is also from the Genus to the Species, in the places cited from Colos.
and Tim. for if none but such and such were there, it undeniably follows Peter
was not there.

Bellarmin would persuade us that Paul, Obj. 4.
Coloss. 4. 11. speaks only of his own Domestics; or such as were his proper
menial Servants, and in the 2d of Tim. 4. of such as were to stand his friends
to Nero.

It does not appear, Answ.
nor is it probable, that Aristarchus, whom he calls his fellow Prisoner, and
Marcus, and Justus, and Luke, whom he styles the Beloved Physician, were Paul's
Domestics or Servants, (the good holy humble Apostle did not keep so great a
Retinue, as an Author that Theologiz'd in Purple, and vy'd dignity with Kings
might be apt to imagine) nor does he speak only of them, but of all his fellow
helpers in the Gospel, and therefore ought not to omit Peter; And in Timothy he
speaks of such as ought to have strengthened him, 2 Timothy 4. 17. in which office
of Love Peter would not have been wanting, nor do we read, nor is it likely
that Paul ever desired any Intercessors with Nero.

Lastly, Object. 5.
The Cardinal says, that at that time when Paul came to Rome, and when he wrote
these Epistles, Peter perhaps was not at Rome, for tho he had there fixed his
Seat, he was yet very often absent.

If they could once solidly prove, Answ.
that ever he was Present, we would grant that he might be often absent. But if
his work as an Apostle did call him so frequently into other parts, why would
he undertake to be the proper Bishop there? If Peter were absent, would not
Paul in such distress have mentioned and bewailed it? Or at least how came it
to pass, that he never mentions Linus and Cletus the two pretended
Suffragan-Bishops? In fine, Peter it seems was four or five and twenty years
Bishop of Rome, but never there when the Scripture has occasion to mention
either him, or the Believers in that City; nor could Paul ever meet him there,
till just they came to be put to death; and that too is uncertain.

Thus I have not only proved by a Deduction, seriatim, that it is not credible,
that ever Peter De facto was at Rome, but also answered all the Objections that
I have met with, made thereunto. I shall conclude this Chapter with this
observation, That we ought not, for that Reverence we bear to St. Peter's
memory, imagine that he was seven years Bishop of Antioch, and four or five and
Twenty years of Rome, both Cities of the Gentiles; It Is a Reproach to St.
Peter, to fancy him Bishop of Rome.
Because it appears, Gal. 2. 7. first, that Peter was the Apostle of the
Circumcision, that is, that the Jews were more especially committed to him as
his Charge and Cure, Concredited, or left to his Trust (so the word in the
Original imports) as the Gentiles were to Paul; and it must be our Blessed
Savior who Commissioned both, and respectively appointed them those Provinces,
2dly, That both of them till that time had diligently and with great success
labored in such their several Provinces, Peter amongst the Jews, and Paul
amongst the Gentiles V. 8. 3dly, That now by mutual consent, a Covenant and
Agreement was entered into, between James, Peter, and John, on the one part, and
Paul and Barnabas on the other, That the latter should go unto, that is, Preach
the Gospel to the Gentiles, and the former (as before, so for the future) to
those of the Circumcision. And this was either at the Assembly of the Apostles,
Acts 15. or at least (if they were two distinct meetings) 14 years after Paul's
Conversion, so that Peter according to their Reckoning must then be, and for
some years had been Bishop of Rome (besides his seven years Bishopric at
Antioch) and what reason then had there been to mention only his Pains with the
Circumcision, and to put the same in Balance with Paul's toward the
Uncircumcision? If Peter had Preached so long at Antioch and Rome, had he not
many Seals of his Ministry amongst the Gentiles? How many Thousands might we
suppose Converted by his Victory there over Simon Magus, which if ever
Transacted, was before this time? And why then do we hear nothing thereof, but
rather Intimations to the contrary, viz. That Peter, besides his Preaching to
Cornelius (upon an Extraordinary Occasion) and some few others, had then made
no great Progress amongst the Gentiles, but chiefly had exerted his Talent
amongst the Jews; so that his success with the Latter, is compared with Paul's
amongst the Former. Which to me is a Convincing Argument, That St. Peter at
that time, had neither been Bishop of Antioch nor Rome, nor ever at the latter
City; which must be (reckon how you can) at least, several years after the
second of Claudius; and consequently does utterly overthrow the Roman Account.

Now the Question will be, Whether Peter, after this Compact, either Continued
or Undertook to be Bishop of the Gentiles at Rome or not? If he did, He not
only contradicted his particular Commission which our Lord had given him to be
the Apostle of the Circumcision, and neglected the Jews, who were so
Concredited to his proper Charge; but also Violated his late solemn Agreement.
On the other side, If at the time of this Agreement, he either were not Bishop
of Rome, or then left it; It follows, that he continued not Bishop of Rome four
or five and twenty years, as with great Confidence and small Reason is
pretended.

Again, It Is nothing likely, if Peter had been then Bishop of Rome, or designed
ever to go and fix his Seat there at any time afterward, that he would have
entered into such an Agreement. -- Ay but, says Bellarmin, those words [that
they should go to the Circumcision] are to be qualified, and understood not
Absolutely, but Comparatively; as much as to say, They should Chiefly or
Principally Preach to the Jews, and in like manner Paul and Barnabas to the
Gentiles. Be it so! We ask no more, for even then this shows either that he was
not then Bishop of Rome, or must be taken as a Relinquishment of his Roman
Diocese, and transferring the Title and Cure thereof to Paul; for if he were
the stated Bishop of Rome, the chief City of the Gentiles, how could he promise
to bestow his Chief Pains on the Jews? Or having so promised, principally to
Attend the Jews, how could he continue the proper Bishop of Rome, and presently
after Resort back thither, and spend almost all the rest of his days amongst
the Gentiles? Was not this immediately to Violate that solemn Compact?

Moreover, If Peter were seven years Bishop of Antioch, and afterward 25 years
of Rome, He must in all be 32 years in Syria and Italy, undertaking the Charge
and Cure of the Gentiles in those Provinces. And if his Martyrdom was, as
Baronius Computes, Anno Chr. 69. The said two and thirty years being deducted,
brings us back to the year of Christ 37. but two or three after Christ's
Crucifixion, so that in all he could spend but three years at most amongst the
Jews; And why then is he so Emphatically styled, The Apostle of the
Circumcision?

Wherefore since this Roman Pretense does by its Unavoidable Consequences, cast
a Reproach on St. Peter, as if he had deserted that Charge, which God had
committed unto him, as if he had Notoriously Violated that Solemn Agreement
which himself had voluntarily and on just considerations entered into; since it
represents him not only as deserting the station of an Apostle, by becoming a
Bishop in a strict sense; but also as giving a most dangerous President of
removing from a lesser to a greater Bishopric, and at the same time sets him
forth, to be for the most part Non-Resident in both his Diocesses. (All which
are things unworthy to be Believed, Imagined or Suggested, of that Blessed
Apostle) I cannot without being Injurious to his happy Memory admit (but
rather look upon my self bound in Conscience and Honor to Oppose) this
Groundless Story, as it appears to me, of his being Bishop of Rome, etc.

CHAP. VIII.
The Commonness of an Opinion no certain Argument of its Truth; Parallel
Instances given of things very generally, and long Believed and Delivered by
Historians, yet afterward found to be False; The means and steps whereby this
Notion of Peter's being Bishop of Rome seems to have been promoted; The
Conclusion.

I know nothing else considerable, that remains to be taken notice of in this
Enquiry, save only one Grand Prejudice or Objection, which the Gentlemen of the
Roman Communion do much Triumph in, viz. That it is enough to satisfy any
modest Man, in Peter's being at Rome and Bishop of that City, That the same has
generally been received, taken for granted for severals Ages, and by abundance
of Worthy Credible Writers, whom Bellarmine Ennumerates; and Affirms, It was
never disputed by any that he knows of, until one William, John Wickliff's
Master (this must be about the year 1350. tho I cannot find Wickliff ever had
any such Master) did first of all raise some scruples about it: And how was it
possible that such a General Conceit should so long have possessed Men's minds,
if the matter of Fact at bottom had not been real and undoubted?

To which is Answered:

1. That common Fame has long since been branded for none of the best
Evidences; We have seen what Important Pretensions are bottomed on this
supposed Action of St. Peter, and therefore ought to expect more Convincing
Proofs of that Fact, than Vulgar Rumors or Public Credulity, more easily
Inveigled to swallow Fables then Verities.

2. Men of the best Letters, cannot always give a certain Account of the Rise
and Progress of all false Opinions. Error is the Child of Night, Nursed in the
Dark by Ignorance, Superstition or Self-Interest: And when well-grown and gaily
Dressed, it comes abroad into the World; it is too often Courted and Embraced as
the Legitimate Offspring of Truth. Mere Fables, raised by some one
Inconsiderable Author, do not seldom obtain wonderfully in the World, and for a
long time deceive not only the Mobile, but even the Learned, loath to Incur a
Popular Odium, or the Brand of Singularity; and sometimes afraid of displeasing
those that promote or get by the Imposture, are content to let it pass.

We have every where Instances of this kind: As at home, Geoffery of Monmouth,
from the Name Britannia, to add (as he thought) a Reputation of Antiquity to
his Countrymen, divulges a story of Brute the Trojan, and presently our common
Chronicles became swelled with a long Catalogue of his Successors, and how many
years each of them Reigned; which was generally received, till some of our more
Judicious Historians examined it to the bottom, and think they have
sufficiently proved it altogether Fabulous.

So the stories of King Arthur, and his Knights of the Round Table; so in
France those of the Palladine Roland, and his wonderful Chivalry, found room
not only amongst the Poets and Romancers, but with several Historians, which
now are but the Proverb and Diversion of every Peasant.

Or to take a more Remarkable Example, The story of Pope Joan and Pope Peter
Compared.
The Gentlemen of the Roman Church take it ill to be Urged with the story of
Pope Joan, and Droll it as the Absurdest of Fables (how justly I am not now to
dispute) but it is certain, the same is Recorded by a multitude of Historians,
and for about 700 years (for so long it was from the time of her supposed
Papacy Anno. Chr. 855.
to Luther) or at least for about 500 years (for Marianus Scotus, the first
that Wrote Publicly of her, whose Writings are extant, flourished in the 11th
Century, and none that I ever heard of, pretended to Contradict it, till after
Luthers time) It passed Uncontrolled throughout Christendom, and was Related
(to my knowledge) by above 30 Credible Authors of their own Communion. But
about the year 1595. One Florimond de Raemond, a French Counselor at
Bordeaux, undertook in an Elaborate Treatise, to Refute the whole story: But by
what Arguments? That no Authors living at the same time with this pretended
Papess, are found to attest it; Nor any till Marianus Scotus, 200 years after
her; That the rest of the Authors (tho Numerous) blindly followed him, and
sucked in his Error; That the several Relators agree not in their Tale; That
the latter Writers had Invented several Circumstances [but he cannot charge
them with Corrupting of Books, nor Forging of Authors] to render it more
Plausible; That the whole thing and its several parts, are not Probable, etc.

Now there is not one of these Topics, but will serve as well, nay much
better, to Impugn the story of St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome; for as the
latter tends exceedingly to the Advancement of that See, and the former to its
Dishonor; so considering what an Ascendent its Bishops had got over the
Christian World, it is much more probable that a fiction in their Favor should
be promoted; than that the other (if indeed it were a fiction) from which no
Advantage could possibly be hoped to be derived to the Relators, should for a
series of so many years pass Current, and without Opposition.

For my own part, I must Ingenuously avow (without presuming to determine
Dogmatically either way) that having Read Erreur Populaire on the one side, and
our I earned Coke on the other (nay I will add Blondellus his Posthume Book on
that Subject, which seems to favor their Opinion who deny there was any such
Papess) I cannot find any more Reason to believe there ever was a Pope Peter,
than I do that there might be a Pope Joan.

3. As to the Authority of the Fathers (besides those Counterfeits already
discovered, which are Unworthy of that Venerable Nam:) there is not One so much
as alleged, who Wrote within one hundred years and upwards, after the
supposed time of Peter's death, that mentions his being or dying at Rome.
Afterward Justin Martyr, who flourisht about the year of our Lord, 170. and
Tertullian, 219. are Cited for it, but as it is well known and confessed by
Learned Romanists, that there are now abroad several Counterfeit Books in the
Names of the Antieuts; so wherever they do in their Genuine Works, seem to
Intimate St. Peter's being at Rome, it is most Probable they might take the same
on Trust from Papias or Common Fame; and looking on it as an indifferent thing,
thought not themselves concerned, nor the matter worth while, strictly to
Enquire into the bottom of that Opinion; and so might be therein mistaken, as
in other matters of Fact, happening not very long before their own times; For
the same Tertullian Tert. L. Contr. Judaeos.
who is therein followed by Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. L. 1. Stromat.
and by Lactantius Lact. Instit. L. 4. C. 4.
says, That our Lord Christ suffered in the 15th year of Tiberius, and the 30th
of his own Age: As on the contrary, Irenaeus Iren. L. 2. Ca. 39.
contends, That Christ Preached almost to 50 Years of Age, and suffered under
Claudius; For each of which Opinions, Ancient Tradition is by them Alleged,
yet are they both contrary to the Evangelists and all sound History; which yet
Reflects no further dishonor on those Holy Fathers, than that they were Men,
Capable of being mistaken, and were Unwarily deceived by Relying too much on
pretended Traditions.

As far therefore as I can perceive, the Opinion of ^t Peter's having been at
Rome, began first to be Industriously and commonly Advanced, about or soon
after the Reign of Constantine: For Eusebius ( who survived to Write the Life
of that great Emperor) speaking of Nero, tells us, Eusebius. L. 2. Ca. 25.
This Enemy of God set up himself to the Destruction of the Apostles, for they
Write, That Paul was Beheaded and Peter Crucified by him at Rome. And that
which makes for the Credit of the story is, that it is COMMONLY REPORTED, that
there be Churchyards unto this day bearing the Name of Peter and Paul. In like
manner Gaius, a Roman and an Ecclesiaastical Person, and after Zepherinus
Bishop of Rome, Writing unto Proclus Chief of the Cataphrygian Heretics, says
thus, -- I am able to show the Banners of the Apostles, for if thou will walk
into the Vatican, or the Ostiensian-way, thou will find there Victorious
Banners, of such as have founded this Church. And that they were both Crowned
with Martyrdom at the same time, Dionisius Bishop of Corinth declares in his
Epistle to the Romans, in these Words, -- And you Observing so goodly an
Admonition, have Coupled in one the Building of the Roman and Corinthian
Churches, performed by Peter and Paul, for they both Instructed us when they
Planted our Church of Corinth. -- Thus Eusebius.

From whose Words it is Observable, That he does not at all assert Peter's being
Bishop of Rome, nor positively that he was ever there, but only tells us that
they Write; that is, it is Written by some body or other, but says not by whom,
That Peter and Paul were both put to Death by Nero at Rome; which yet it seems
he looked up but as an Hearsay and Doubtful, and therefore to Confirm it, adds,
That it makes for the Credit thereof, that it was commonly Reported, that there
were to his time Burial-places that wore the Names of Peter and Paul. [As if
after so many Books forged in Peter's Name, a false Tomb might not two or three
hundred years after his Death be assigned to him]

As to what he Cites from Gaius, who he says was a Roman, and succeeded
Zepherinus, the Words Import nothing of Peter's being Bishop of Rome, but seem
intended to prove that the Church of Rome was founded by some of the Apostles,
whose Monuments were to be seen in the Vatican, and Ostiensian-Way. But as in
the Catalogue of Popes, there is no such Person as Gaius found to succeed
Zepherinus; so we heard before from a Decretal Epistle, that it was Pope
Cornelius that removed the Bodies of Peter and Paul from the Catatombae to the
Vatican and Ostiensian-way. Now this Cornelius became Bishop of Rome (as
appears by their own Chronologists) 51 years in time, and the sixth Bishop in
Order, after Zepherinus; How then could Zepherinus Successor (the words plainly
imply his next Successor) talk of their Monuments being there in his time?

The other Witness Cited by Eusebius, is Dionisius of Corinth (who besides that
he is the same Man who (as Eusebius elsewhere tells us) did in his own
Lifetime, complain that his Writings were abused and added to) his words as
here Related seem to signify, that (as there was very early a kind of Vanity or
Emulation in Churches and Persons, which prompted them to boast of those that
Converted them, which is reproved by Paul in that Text -- I am of Paul, and I
of Apollos, and I of Cephas, etc. so) this Bishop of Corinth, would have his
Church of Corinth, to be Planted both by Peter and Paul; and therefore to be
the more nearly Related to the Church of Rome, whom he supposed (and perhaps
the Romans might give it out so) to have the same Founders, every Country
almost in process of time (such is the Natural Itch of Ambition and Vainglory
in Man) pretending to have been Converted by some Apostle or Illustrious Name,
though often times the Preaching of the Gospel amongst them was (like it self)
by very mean, and as to Outward Glory or Fame, Contemptible Instruments.

But from this Testimony of Eusebius, we may Rationally Collect, That in his
time Peter's being at Rome, was but a dark kind of business, provable only by
Reports, and such odd Testimonies of a few Obscure Authors, that have as little
Weight as Clearness.

But how then came the same afterward to be so generally Entertained and
Believed, Object.
and several of the Fathers to call Rome St. Peter's Chair?

To this may be Answered, Answer.
That the Bishops of Rome, after Constantine had raised them to a high degree
of Wealth and Reputation, puffed up with Ambition from their presiding over the
Imperial City, began to aspire above their Brethren; and first Claimed a
Primacy and Right of Receiving Appeals from all parts; not Jure Divino, or as
Successors to St. Peter, but as Granted to them by Councils; and to that
purpose forged two Canons on the Famous Nicene Council, as is mentioned before;
but finding themselves Cut short and Baulkt therein by the sagacity of the
Council of Carthage, they cast about to derive a Supremacy over all other
Churches from an higher Title; and Observing Peter to have been one of the most
Eminent Apostles, and some Words to have been spoken to him by our Savior,
that might Colourably be wrested to Intimate as if he had some kind of
Superiority over, or greater Privilege than the rest, they would have it
believed, That he was the Founder of their Church, and though sometimes they
joined Paul with him, because the Scriptures gave such Illustrious Testimonies
of his pains there, yet for the most part Peter (without the least Countenance
from, but rather against the Tenor of Scripture) had the greater Vogue and
Preference; and knowing the Mobile are easy to be deceived with Names and
Titles, and apt to frame Idaeas of things past, from what appeared at present,
they gave out, That he was Bishop of Rome. To this purpose they pressed all the
Fragments of Antiquity into the Service: Papias's Conjecture was made an
Authentic proof; and this saying of Eusebius and his hear-says, must pass for
Undoubted Evidence. Yet not therewith Content, abundance of other Writings were
Counterfeited under Ancient Venerable Names (as I made appear before) and thus
in short time the story might gain Credit. And Whenever any of the Fathers
(though Unwarily deceived by a Spurious Tradition, or the Common Vogue, not
thinking it perhaps a matter much worth Enquiring into, as not dreaming what
strange Inferences would thence be made in after times) spoke thereof in a
style Accommodated to Vulgar Opinion, and called Rome St. Peter's Chair, or her
Bishop, Peter's Successor, this was filed as a fresh Testimony of the Truth and
Certainty of the matter of Fact.

Having once gained this point, that it was believed, That Peter Preached at
Rome, which they called his being Bishop there: They proceeded further, to
pretend, That not only Peter had a Sovereign Power conferred upon him, but that
the same was derived to them as his Successors. And so -- Thou art Peter -- I
will give thee the Keys -- I have Prayed for thee -- Here are two Swords, etc.
became sufficient Arguments, both that Peter was Prince of the Apostles, Vicar
of Christ, and Chief Governor of the Universal Church: And that he being so
Dignified and Bishop of Rome, all the succeeding Bishops of that See, being his
Successors, must be Invested with the same Authority: And consequently, That
the Church of Rome was the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches, and is
Infallible, and the only Catholic Church; That the Pope has a direct
Sovereignty over all the World in Spirituals, and indirect, in Ordine ad
Spiritualia, etc.

All which being Closely and Vigorously, though Gradually pursued in Ignorant
tures, and especially after the Roman Bishops, by the favor of P^^cas the
Traitor, had gained the Title of Universal, and an Ascendent over a great part
of the Christian World; when every thing tending to the Honor and Advantage of
that See, met with Encouragement, and the Roman Bishops only were Capable of
bestowing Preferments, and all were Snibb'd and Crushed that durst offer any
thing that displeased them, it is no wonder if for many Ages scarce any (at
least whose Writings yet remain, for we know who had then the keeping of all
Libraries) durst openly controvert or deny St. Peter's being at Rome and Bishop
there; Since this was a Blow at the Root, and struck effectually at the Popes
Supremacy, Infallibility and other Pompous Claims, which are all founded on
that Pretense.

Touching which, what need I say more? But briefly sum up the state of the
whole matter: If St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, or so much as ever there, be
not provable by Scripture, nor any other Convincing Arguments; but whatever can
be said for it, is easily Answered, and rendered not so much as Probable; If
the Witnesses of the story are at Open Wars and Contradictions in the
Circumstances, yet all pretending to a most punctual Exactness; and the
Learned and most Subtle Advocates of the Party Sweat in vain, to Invent even
so much as Colors to Reconcile them; If from Scripture and History, and a due
Comparison of all Circumstances, it is improbable to the highest Degree, That
ever Peter was at Rome, much more that he was Bishop thereof: If the story
depend on Counterfeit Authors, or such as justly are of little Credit, and
abundance of shameful Forgeries have been invented and made use of to support
it; If it be Derogatory to the Honor of St. Peter's Memory to assert it: In
fine, If it be no difficult task to apprehend and show by what Methods and
Degrees it might be advanced to popular Credit, and for what Ends: If I say,
all this be made appear (and how far this brief Disquisition may be
satisfactory that way* is left to the Judicious Unbigotted Peruser, and
Posterity, to Determine) I conceive the old Outcry of Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; The No^^e of St. Peter's Chair and Peter's Successors, will henceforth
abate so newhat of it is Influences; or indeed signify very little, unless it be
to Expose their Confidence that Use it.

However* If any shall still be Amused and Prevailed upon by those Empty Sounds
and Vnravell'd Charms, I may perhaps admire their Faith, or rather pity their
Weak Credulity, but must crave leave to say, That till my Reason is better
satisfied (which with the Uttermost Diligence and Impartiality, I have
endeavored) It shall have no Room in my Creed. And so, Reader! Farewell.

FINIS.

