Liberty of Conscience ASSERTED, OR A Looking-Glass FOR PERSECUTORS; Being a
plain Deduction from Scripture-History OF THE Original Grounds and Pretenses
FOR PERSECUTION.

The METHODS taken to put the same in Execution.

Together with the sad Consequences thereof: Or, The Reward that attends
Persecuting-Spirits.

LONDON, Printed and sold by R. Janaway in Queens-Head-Alley, in
Paternoster Row, 1687.

A PREFACE to the READER.
Christian Reader,
PErsecution for Religion is almost as old as the World; The first Murder
under the Sun, being committed on that account, when Cain assassinated his
righteous Brother Abel, merely because he worshipped God better than himself;
and ever since the Enmity has continued: And when it will please Almighty
Wisdom to put a final Period to such Practices throughout the World, we are not
able to determine.

But since merciful Providence has vouchsafed so to dispose the Royal Heart of
our Gracious Sovereign, as to give a Stop, and we hope, total Abolition
thereunto, in the Land of our Nativity; and to open a Door to the Oppressed,
that they may both peaceably worship their Creator, according to the best of
their Light; and freely remonstrate the Evils of the Persecuting Spirit, to
those who lately were so entirely possessed therewith; that even to complain of
those Severities we unjustly suffered, was made a new Crime. It must certainly
be our Duty to improve this Opportunity as far as we can, to the common
Interest of Christianity.

Not in the least to reflect upon, or upbraid any for past Miscarriages; much
less to stir up any Heart-burnings, or motions toward Revenge or Animosities;
but only to convince such as have had any hand in rigid Persecutions against
their Neighbors, merely on the Score of a Conscientious Dissent in Matters of
Religion, of the Evil of such Proceedings; and to caution all others for the
future, against the like Violences.

To advance these good and wholesome Ends, is the design and purport of the
following Treatise; which in a plain familiar Style, endeavors to give the
World a true Prospect (altogether deduced from Holy Writ) of the Original
Source, and several grounds from whence Persecution has in all Ages arose, and
been propagated amongst Men. The Means, Methods, and Pretenses, whereby the
same has been carried on and palliated: As likewise the sad Consequences
thereof in the heavy Judgments, righteously inflicted by Almighty God, (even in
this World,) on those that have been guilty of such Outrages.

In short, As the natural Man views his own Vissage and all the Lineaments of
his Countenance in a common Glass, so every Murdering Cain, or Oppressive
Pharaoh, or Envious Haman, or Blasphemous Rabshekah, or Raging Samballat, or
Bloody Herod, or Treacherous Judas, and all and every their Successors, may in
this Portraiture, (drawn to the Life by the Holy Ghost, in the Inspired
Writings,) behold represented the true Character of themselves, their Motives,
Designs, Words, Actings, and (without sincere Repentance,) of their final Doom
and Destruction too.

That the divine Blessing may so far accompany this Mean, but well intended
Work, as to render it instrumental to bring some that have been Concerned in
this Kind, to an hearty Acknowledgment of their Crimes: And to make Persecution
for Conscience, an Abhorrence to all that profess to call on the Name of the
Blessed JESUS, who is both the Prince of Peace, the Fountain of Love, the grand
Examplar of Meekness, and Author of all Consolation,

Shall be the Prayer of the Publisher, H. C.

Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning, etc.
Romans XV. 3, 4.

These things happened to them for Examples: and they were written for our
Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come, 1 Cor. X. 11.


THE Holy Scriptures being written and continued for the Learning and
Admonition of those who should live in future Ages; especially, of those upon
whom the ends of the World are come. It does highly concern every one (who
believes the things therein written, to be Truth and Verity,) to be instructing
themselves in the Matters which these divine Records do contain; to the end,
that they may learn and be admonished thereby, to follow the good Examples of
Christ himself, and of the eminent Saints therein mentioned; be of such a
Spirit as they were of; walk, and do as they did, that it may be well with them
in the latter end: And to the intent that they may take heed of being found in
the Spirit and Practices of some others who lived in those days, and were of a
contrary Temper to the former, and did otherwise than they did; and so
consequently, escape the direful Effects, which in those days fell upon some of
these latter ones; and that all such may be assured, they shall feel at the
last day.

One grand thing therefore written, and here and there to be found scattered in
those divine Records, worthy observation, and to be seriously considered by all
Men, (tho I fear, least observed, or flightly thought on by most,) as that
which is a Matter of no small moment and concern to them; for the warning and
awakening of some, comfort and quiet of others, Is this, viz. The great
Opposition between the Two Seeds of the Serpent and the Woman, the World and
Christ; those who are born after the Flesh, and those who are born after the
Spirit; those who are yet of the World, and those who are called out of the
World; the wicked of the World, and the Saints of the most High God. No sooner
were Men born from above, and evidenced the same by their Works, but wicked Men
not yet born again, were ready to devour them; as the Prophet Isaiah says,
Chap. 59.15. He who departs from evil, makes himself a prey. No sooner
depart from Evil, but the Teeth of the wicked were edged against them.

The Evidences of which, the Scripture has abundantly delivered down to after
Ages: It testifies, not only of the Enmity, Envy, Malice, and bitterness which
was rooted, seated, and predominated in the Breasts of Men, whilst in the
Flesh, yet Children of the wicked One in those Ages, against them who were born
of the Spirit, Subjects of the King of Kings, followers of God and Christ, yea,
against Holiness it self, against the Laws of Christ, and his Government; their
Hearts said as Pharaoh's did, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, that I should obey
him? And as Christ in a Parable, intimates the Hearts of the Jews to be,
saying, Luke 19. in these words, His Citizens hated him, and said, We will not
have this Man to rule over us. v. 14. Nor will we endure any of his Subjects.
But also of the very Methods and Ways wherein they expressed this Enmity and
bitterness of Spirit that was so fixed in them, both by Word and Deed: Yea,
moreover, the very Causes from whence all the former did spring; as also the
sad Effects which was like to follow, or be the reward of such Spirits and
Doings.

The critical observation of all which, when well searched out, might be that
no small use in all Ages to all Men; for there is no New Thing under the Sun,
says Solomon, Eccles. 1.9.

Of these in their order: And first of the Evidences and Instances which the
Scripture has given and ^oted; Of the First, (to wit,) That the seated Enmity
in the Hearts of the wicked, and their bitterness against God himself, Christ,
his Followers, the Saints of God, the Laws of God, Holiness it self, and the
Light thereof; the Light which did shine in Christ himself, the Saints and
followers of Christ; which Enmity the Holy Ghost did foretell, Genesis 3.15.
should arise between the Seed of the Serpent and the Seed of the Woman; and
accordingly it soon appeared, when Cain from that Principle, slew his Brother
Abel, Genesis 4.8. The Prophet Habakuk, in his time, noted, Chap. 1.13. That the
wicked devoured the Man that was more righteous than he. The Apostle also
asserts, that in those days also, 'twas so in the general, Gal. 4.29. As he who
was born after the Flesh, persecuted him who was born after the Spirit; so
(says he there,) it is now, that is, in those days: By which they then did
evidence the highest Heart-Enmity imaginable.

And this Heart-Enmity, the Holy Ghost has throughout the Old and New
Testament frequently, in especial manner observed. No sooner had the Enemies of
the Jews, in Nehemiahs days, Nehem. 2. received Intelligence, that Nehemiah was
come with Authority to build the Walls of Jerusalem, v. 8.9. But it is said, v.
10. That it grieved them exceedingly, that there was come a Man to seek the
welfare of the Children of Israel; their envious Hearts here boiled within
them of it; when there was one good Prophet in Israel, Micaiah by name, wicked
Ahab said of him, 1 Kings 22.8. I hate him. Such was his seated Enmity against
him there, that he could not, in that time, forbear openly to declare it upon
the very naming of him. The Psalmist also testifies, that in his time it was
so; The wicked in wrath, or (as the Margent has it,) with un intestine hatred,
(says he,) hates me, Ps. 55. v. 3. And Psalm. 64.4. He complains of the
numerousness of these two, in these words, They who hate me without a Cause,
are more than the Hairs of my Head. Of which Enmity also, the Prophet Amos
takes notice in the general in his days; They hate (says he,) rebuke in the
Gate, and they abhor him who speaks uprightly, Amos 5.10. They there could
not endure Verbal Rebuke, nor the convincing Life of an upright Man, their
Hearts abhorred them both. So afterward, in New Testament days, they testified
their fixed Enmity, Hatred and Rancour, which was seated in their Minds against
Christ himself, and against all who did own Him or his Laws: As Christ in the
Parable before mentioned, Luke 19. did hint that the Jews did, when he there
said of the Noble Man, v. 14. His Citizens hated him; and downrightly tells him
by their Messenger there, We will not have this Man to reign over us; there
they declared their Heart-hatred against him and his Government in the general,
and consequently against all who owned him, and submitted themselves to his
Laws; they hated the Light which shone in him, them, and it; as Christ himself
expressly said, John 3. That they hated the Light; v. 19.20. Light is come into
the World, (says he there,) and Men love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds were evil; for every one that does evil hates the Light, lest his
Deeds should be discovered: And this Christ told his unbelieving Brethren, John
7.7. The World cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it.
Nay, their hatred of Christ was so evident and well known, that Pilate himself
had taken notice of it, Mark 15.13. it is said of him there, That he knew, that
the Chief Priests had delivered Christ to be Crucified for Envy. Of which the
Hearts of the unbelieving Jews were full; which also Christ did beforehand
inform his Disciples of, that they might be prepared to meet with the Effects
thereof, John 15.18, 19. in these words, If the World hate you, ye know that it
hated me first, before it hated you, etc. I have chosen you out of the World,
therefore the World hates you; here they hated Christ and others also, because
they followed him, and bore his image; yea, further, says Christ there, v. 24.
of the same Chap. Now have they both seen, and hated both me and my Father:
Again, John 17.14. he said of his Discipes, The world has hated them, because
they are not of the world, etc. Thus did Christ, again, and again, inculcate
this, which afterward they found true, as the Scripture also has noted, Acts
5.17, 18. it is said, That the High Priests, and those who were with him, rose
up, and were filled with Indignation or Envy, and laid their hands on the
Apostles. The like Spirit the Jews discovered, Act. 13. when they there saw the
multitude, v. 45. They were filled with Envy, and spoke against those things
which were spoken by Paul; their Hearts here were full of Envy and Hatred both
against the Apostles and their Doctrine: Again, Act. 17. it is said, That the
Jews, who believed not, being moved with Envy, took unto them certain lewd
Fellows of the baser sort, and made an uprore, v. 5. And Paul does acknowledge
of himself, Acts 26. That he, when he was yet an unbeliever, was also exceeding
mad against the followers of Christ, v. 9. I verily thought with my self, that
I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus; and in v. 11. Being
exceeding mad against them, I persecuted them to strange Cities. And herein was
verified that which Christ had said, John 16.1.2, 3. That some should think
that they did God good service, in killing his Followers. So far did Paul's
blind Zeal then transport him, That it filled his heart with madness against
them. So far were some of the Jews carried in this Enmity, That when Judas
repented, and told them that he had betrayed Innocent Blood, they say, what is
that to us? (tho they rejoiced, and had given him Money to do it, Mark 14.10,
11.) and they afterward put Christ to death, Mat. 27.34, 35, etc. Yea, most
desperately did they say, (when Pilate acquitted himself of that Innocent
Blood,) His Blood be upon Us and our Children, v. 24.25. of the same Chap. Thus
has the Holy Ghost recorded this Enmity, that was naturally seated and fixed
in the Hearts of the Sons of Men, and evidenced by them in those days.

2dly. As to the various Ways and Methods these invidious Ones walked in and
took, toward and against the Saints, against Christ himself and his Followers;
Or how these wicked Ones did in those Ages of the World, express this their
seated Enmity, Hatred, and Bitterness against them; or, which way it did
evidence it self to be in them: The Scripture has also plainly taken notice
of; some of which were as follows.

First, They were studious and diligent by all means imaginable, to defame and
disgrace the Saints before Christ was manifest in the Flesh, and afterward to
defame and disgrace Him and his Followers, and to render their Persons and
Doctrins base and contemptible in the Eyes and Opinions of others, especially
of the Greek Ones, thereby to prevent the spreading of the Gospel, and to stir
up the Minds of others to be evilly affected against the Saints, Christ
himself, and his Followers, yea, and against the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
Rules of Holiness it self.

For the effecting of which, They speak evil of them in the general, and in
their ordinary Discourse, and sometimes, by charging and accusing them in
particular, with great Crimes and Enormities which they could not prove: And
first in the general in their ordinary Discourse, as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
5.19, 20. of the wicked there, Their Tongue frames deceit; thou sit and
speak against thy Brother, thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son: Again,
Psalm. 64.2, 3, 4. They whet their Tongues like a Sword, bend their bow to shoot
their Arrows, even bitter Words, that they might shoot in secret at the
perfect, etc. They thus endeavored to wound them in their Reputations, and to
bring them into contempt amongst the Vulgar, who had heard their Speeches of
this dealing; the Psalmist complains before God, Psalm. 94.3. Lord, how long
(says he,) shall the wicked triumph, shall they utter and speak hard things.
The Holy Ghost in the New Testament too, takes notice hereof, Act. 28. The Jews
there acknowledged to Paul, that 'twas ordinary for them to speak against the
followers of Christ, in these words, v. 22. This Sect we know, is every where
spoken against; they were reproached as a Sect, and their Doctrine derided in
the common Discourse among the unbelieving Jews, every where, in those days.

What kind of Speeches these were, (as to many of them) the Sceipture does also
in particular record, as in that of Mat. 11.18, 19. John came neither eating or
drinking, and they said he has a Devil. The Son of Man came eating and
drinking, and they said, behold, a Man gluttenous, a Wine-bibber, a friend of
Publicans and Sinners. Eat or not eat, they still speak evil of them, and all
to prevent others from having any good Opinion of them or their Doctrins; so,
when they perceived that the People began to be amazed at what Christ had done,
Mat. 12.23. The Pharisees hearing thereof, v. 24. said of Christ, This Fellow
does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; this they did,
that none should value him upon the account of the Miracles he did: Again, The
Pharisees, Mat. 27. gave him no better a Title than the Deceiver; We remember
(said they there,) v. 62 and 63. That the Deceiver said, whilst he was yet
alive, etc. So John the 7th, when some had said, He is a good Man, v. 12.
others said, Nay, but he deceives the People; yea, his own Countrymen, Mat.
13. tho they there were astonished at Christ's Wisdom and his mighty Works; v.
54. yet, the same Persons, in the following verses, endeavor to lessen him, and
what he said and did; Is not this (say they,) the Carpenters Son? is not his
Mother called Mary, etc. And they were offended in him, v. 57. So did they
usually speak contemptuously of him, as in Luke 23.2. We found this fellow
perverting the Nation, etc. And John 9.29. As for this Fellow, we know not from
whence he is; yea, they endeavored to insinuate this Persuasion into the
People, in the 16th verse of the same Chap. that Christ was not of God; some of
the Pharisees there said, This Man is not of God, because he keeps not the
Sabbath: And further, he having cured the blind Man afterward, in the same
Chap. and they could not deny it; they in v. 24. said, Give God the glory, this
Man is a sinner; And again, John 10.20. Many of them said, he has a Devil, he
is mad, why hear ye him? In like manner, John 7, when they perceived that the
Officers had Christ in admiration, v. 46. and had said there, Never Man spoke
like this Man; the Pharisees, in the next verses, answered them, saying, Are ye
also deceived; have any of the Rulers believed on him; But this People who know
not the Law, are accursed: And v. 52. they said unto Nichodemus, Art thou also
of Galilee? In all those Expressions of theirs, they did endeavor to insinuate
this into the Peoples Minds, that Christ was so contemptible a Person, and all
that he did was so little to be regarded, that no Ruler or Pharisee, Men of any
Note, did account him worthy to be believed, or had in any esteem; and that
none but ignorant and accursed People, would value him, or any thing he did;
and thereby, they hoped to engage the People to slight him, and his Doctrine
too. After the same manner, did they frequently speak concerning the Apostles
and their Doctrine, to disgrace them and it amongst the People; Acts 13. The
Jews there, had no sooner perceived that the People began to flock together to
hear the Gospel, v. 44. But they were filled with Envy, and spoke against those
things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming. In the
following verses, again, Act. 19. it is said, When he had preached the Word for
some time, v. 8. Diverse were hardened and believed not, but spoke evil of that
Way before the multitude, v. 9. By which means, doubtless, they did stir up the
Minds of Men against the Apostles and their Doctrins; for it is said, Act. 14.2.
That the unbelieving Jews did stir up the Gentiles, and made their minds evilly
affected against the Brethren; and v. 19. They persuaded the people, and having
stoned Paul, etc. And again, Act. 17.13. They there stirred up the People; this
must needs be by representing them as ill Men, and their Doctrine as evil, in
the Ears of the People. There were certain Philosophers, Act. 18. who (when
Paul had disputed with the Jews,) took this way too, v. 17. said they of Paul
there, What will this babbler (or base Fellow) say? othersome said, He seems
to be a setter forth of strange gods: And again, Act. 22. Having nothing in
particular to charge him with, they in v. 22. (that they might engage the
Magistrates and People against him, by a loud Out cry against him as a
Monster,) they are said there, To lift up their voices, and say away with such
a Fellow from the Earth: for it is not fit that he should live. And to speak
evil of all such who owned Christ, was (it seems,) a common thing among them;
for Paul's Countrymen said to him, Act. 28.22. As concerning this Sect, we know
that every where it is spoken against: And Peter also hints this, 1 Pet. 3.16.
when he advises the Christian there, to have a good Conscience, he subjoined
this, That whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed, who did falsely accuse your good Conversation in Christ; so Christ's
words implies, Mat. 5. when he said v. 11. Blessed ye, when Men shall revile
you, etc. and shall say all manner of evil against you, for my sake. Thus the
Scripture declare fully, that wicked Men did express their Heart-Enmity against
the Saints, Christ himself, and his Followers, by defaming and disgracing of
them and their Doctrine; thereby to bring them into Contempt, and evil Esteem
amongst the People, and render their Doctrine of no force.

And 2dly, These wicked Ones, Unbelievers, (that they might seem unto all Men
to be very just and righteous in all that which they did, and that they did
require nothing but the due execution of the Law upon those whom they
persecuted,) did not rest in a speaking evil of the Saints in the general, as
before, but proceeded further (and that without any sense of Honesty or
Religion,) to render them highly Criminal, (tho most unjustly and falsely,) by
accusing and charging of them as guilty of the most heinous Crimes; as Enemies
to Kings, Governors and Government, as Rebels, Traitors, Seditious, Factious,
breakers of the Kings Laws, and the Law of God too; breakers of the Peace,
Deceivers, Ring leaders of Heresies, and such like, which they could never
prove; and this they did usually in those days, before Magistrates and among
the People; and not only so, but they did use many Artifices to insinuate into
the Peoples Minds, and also into the Rulers, to persuade them fully to believe,
that those Accused Ones were really guilty of those things their Persecutors
then charged them with, and thereby both Magistrates and People were the easier
drawn to assist the Persecutors; all which, the same Scripture also has fully
noted: As in John 18. when Christ there had been brought by them before Pilate,
and he had asked them, What Accusation they had against him, v. 29. They said
unto him, v. 30. If he were not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered him
up to thee; No doubt, they would have been thought by Pilate and those present,
to have been so just, (tho they could prove nothing against Christ,) that they
must believe them barely upon their confident saying so, without more ado; and
that Pilate ought not to think otherwise, when they had brought Christ before
him, but that he must be a Malefactor, and not Innocent. The Psalmist in his
days, complains, Psalm. 38. in general, They (says he there,) who seek my hurt,
speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit all the day long, v. 12. And Psalm.
31.13. I have heard the Slanders of many, etc. Particular instances hereof are
noted throughout the divine Records, as in Exodus 1. The King of Egypt there
(having a mind to prevent the Israelites growth, and to suppress them,) v. 9.
he suggests this against them, as if they had Rebellious and Traiterous
Principles in them, v. 10. in these words, Come, let us deal wisely with them,
lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there fall out any War, they
join also unto our Enemies, and fight against us, etc. So did that wicked King
Ahab, 1 Kings 18. (when his own great wickedness, mentioned 1 Kings 16.30, 31,
etc. had procured the sore Famine, prophesied of by Elijah, Chap. 17.1.) he
having sought Elijah every where to kill him, v. 10. upon sight of him, he
presently charged him for being the Troubler of Israel; in these words, v. 17.
Art thou he who troubles Israel? this was a most unjust Charge, as Elijah then
and there told him, in the next verse, in these words, I have not troubled
Israel; but thou and thy Fathers House, in that ye have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord, etc. The Enemies of the Jews, in Ezra's time, did so
against them, in Ezra 4. They there wrote Accusations against them; the
Chancellor and some other Great Ones, wrote to the King in these words, v. 12.
and so on, Be it known unto the King, That if this City be builded, and the
Walls-set up again, then they will not pay Tole, Tribute and Custom; and so
thou shall endamage the Revenues of the Kings; know that this City is a
Rebellious City, and hurtful to Kings and Provinces, and that they have moved
Seditions within the same of old time: Here were these charged to be a
Rebellious, Seditious, and disloyal People; by which suggestion, (tho never so
false,) they got Authority to stay the Work, v. 21. In like manner, did they in
Nehemiahs time, Nehem. 2. when he came with Authority from the King to rebuild
Jerusalem, v. 8.9, 10. Sanballat and others having heard on it, v. 19. they said
to them, What is the thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the King? Here
they presently suggested a Design of Rebellion; tho, what they were about at
that time, they did by the Kings own Authority: And again, Sanballat, Chap. 6.
sent to Nehemiah a Letter, in these words, v. 5.6, 7. It is reported amongst
the Heathens, and Gashum says, thou and the Jews think to rebel; for which
cause thou buildest the Wall, that thou may be their King, according to these
words; and thou have appointed Prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying,
a King in Judah; than all which, there was nothing more untrue, as Nehemiah did
tell him, v. 8. said he there, There is no such thing done as thou said, but
thou fainest them out of thine own heart: Heinous desperate Enmity he had in
his Breast against Mordicai, put him upon taking this Course against him, and
against all the Jews, the easier to bring about their destruction; he accuses
the Jews before the King, Hester 3. in these words, v. 8. and 9. There is a
certain People scattered abroad, etc. and their Laws are diverse from all
people, neither keep they the Kings Laws; That it is not for the Kings profit
to suffer them; Let it be written, that they may be destroyed; By which
Suggestion and false Charge, he procured a Decree to destroy them, in the next
verses. Thus also did the Presidents and Princes in Daniels time; their Enmity
was so great against Daniel, That (having on purpose, Dan. 4.4, 5. and
following verses, procured a Law in the matter of his God, they not being able
otherwise to accuse him, and prove any fault against him,) they go to the King,
in v. 13. and charge Daniel, in these words, in the presence of the King,
Daniel, (said they,) regards not thee, O King, nor the Decree which thou have
signed, etc. Here did they insinuate, that he was a Contemner of the King, and
of his Decrees; when as in truth it was nothing so, but only a due regard to
the true God, on whom he was bound to call. The Jews likewise, who believed not
in Christ, in his time and afterward, trod in the same Steps; they charged
Christ himself with such Crimes. Luke 23.2. They began to accuse him before
Pilate, saying, We found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to
give Tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ, a King; and in v. 5.
He stirred up the people, teaching throughout all Jury, and v. 10. The chief
Priests and Scribes stood up, and vehemently accused him; Here this most holy
and just One, came under an Accusation of being guilty of Treason, Sedition,
and of being notoriously Criminal, and was vehemently accused too; that they
might vent their Envy and Malice against him, with the greatest show of
Justice; for they were tender of their own Reputation in that, as appeared,
when Christ had said unto them, John 10.32. Many good Works I have showed you,
etc. for which of these Works do you stone me? They in the next verse answered
him, in these words, For a good Work we stone thee not, but for Blasphemy, and
because thou being a Man, make thy self a God. They would not be thought to
shed Innocent Blood, which made them to storm at the Apostles afterward; when
they had preached Christ as the Just One, whom the unbelieving Jews had
Crucified, Act. 5 Did not we (say they,) v. 28. charge you, that you should not
teach in this Name, and behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, and
intend to bring this Man's Blood on us; tho they were really guilty on it, and
doubtless conscious to themselves on it too, yet would not they have others
conceive such a thought of them. So dealt they with Stephen, Act. 6. when they
could not resist the Spirit and Wisdom, by which he spoke, v. 10. they then in
the next verse, charge him with speaking of Blasphemy, which also was
notoriously false; for there the Scripture says, That they suborned Men who
said so of him; the same way did the Southsayers take too, Act. 16. when Paul
there had cast out the evil Spirit, v. 18. They v. 19. caught Paul and Sylas,
and brought them to the Magistrates; and in the next verses, they charged them,
in these words, These Men being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our City, and
teach Customs which are not lawful for us to receive, neither observe, being
Romans; all which the Magistrates and People presently believing to be true,
without any further enquiry, fell upon Paul, etc. verses 22, 23. So did the
unbelieving Jews with Jason, and certain Brethren, Act. 17. when they had
brought them to the Rulers, v 6. they in the same verses, and v. 7. charge them
as guilty of Treason, breach of Laws, and disturbance of the Peace too, in
these words, These have turned the world upside down, etc. these do all
contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, saying, That there is another King Jesus;
Here did they make false construction of their Doctrine; they preached Jesus to
be the Christ, a King; therefore would they force it to intend against Caesar:
And again, Act. 18. did they so with Paul; the Jews there v. 12. made an
Insurrection, with one accord, against Paul, and brought him to the
Judgment Seat; and there they charge him, in these words, v. 13. This Fellow
persuaded Men to worship God contrary to Law; and again, In the Temple they
laid hold on him, Act. 21.27, 28. They cried out, Men of Israel help, this is
the Man who teaches all Men every where, against the People, and the Law, and
this Place, and brought Greeks into the Temple and polluted this holy place; at
which the People were presently moved, easily believed all the Charge; and they
took Paul, v. 30. and would have killed him, as in the following verses, although
no part of the Accusation was true: And again, Act. 24. The High Priest and
Elders took Tertullus an Orator, with them, v. 2. that they might charge Paul
more effectually, and with more facility get the Governors Ear; and when they
were there before the Governor, they, by their Orator, loaded Paul with the
guilt of great Crimes, v. 5, 6. in these words, We have found this Man a
pestilent Fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the
world, and a Ringleader of the Sect of Nazarens, who also has gone about to
profane the Temple; a great Charge without any color of Truth, as Paul
afterward in his Defense declared, and said also, Neither can they prove the
things whereof they now accuse me, v. 12, 13. But this, (said he,) I confess,
after the way they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing
all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets; and this indeed was
his only Crime, for which they so persecuted him. They yet further pursued him
before Festus, Act. 25. The Jews there stood round about Paul, and laid many
and grievous Complaints against him, which they could not prove, v. 7. And Paul
answered, v. 8. neither (said he,) against the Law of the Jews, neither against
the Temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended in any thing at all; yet
his Innocence could not excuse him from their violent Persecuting of him,
because of the Heart-Enmity they had against him. Thus has the Scripture
noted, That the Enemies of good Men, and Goodness it self, in the Ages of the
World, did follow the Steps one of another, in manifesting their Heart-Enmity
against them and it, by charging them with many and notorious Crimes every
where; to the end, that the Enemies own Proceedings might seem to be just, and
only a Legal Persecution of Malefactors, not a malicious pursuit of Innocents;
and that they might bring Christ and good Men, into the ill Opinion both of the
People, and of the Magistrates, the easier to prevail with them to assist in
the Persecution.

3dly. A third way that these envious Ones were found in, and which these
divine Records have also observed, was, That they watched and sought for
Advantages to take hold of something, whereof to accuse Christ and the Saints;
yea, they did frequently tempt them to speak, by asking ensnaring Questions,
and ordering of others so to do, in order to the framing of an Accusation
against them; and did often times wrest their Words too: As the Prophet Isaiah
complaining, saying, 29.20. All who watch for iniquity are cut off, who make a
Man an offender for a word, and lays a snare for him who reproves in the
gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught. Therefore the Prophet Amos
advises, That the prudent should keep silent in such an evil time, Chap. 5.12,
13. And the Psalmist resolved so to do, in his time, Psalm. 39.1. (says he
there,) I will keep my mouth with a Bridle, while the wicked is before me; so
well acquainted was he with the usual way of the wicked in this matter. Thus
did they do with Daniel, because the King had advanced him above the Presidents
and Princes, Dan. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. They sought occasion against him, in the
matters of the Kingdom, but they found none; fain would they have accused him,
could they have found any Matter which they sought for. The Psalmist in his
days, too, found these Attempts made upon him, Psalm. 38.12. (says he,) They
also who seek my life, lay snares for me, and they imagine deceits all the day
long; and in Psalm. 119.69. The proud has forged a lie against me; again, in
Psalm. 56. v. 5, 6. Every day they wrest my words; all their thoughts against me
for evil, they mark my steps, when they wait for my Soul; thus they commonly
did every day, (says he); After the same manner did the unbelieving Jews and
Gentiles deal with Christ and his Followers, in those days, Mat. 12.10. they
there tempted Christ, There was a man who had his hand withered, and they asked
Christ, saying, is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? that they might accuse
him; here they waited, and by a question tempts Christ to speak, that they
might catch something of Matter of Accusation: Again, the Priests and Elders,
as he was teaching, Mat. 21.23. said, By what authority do thou these things?
and who gave thee this authority? Here doubtless, they hoped for an answer,
which they might have interpreted, to have carried in it some affront to
Magistrates and Government, whereof they might have accused him, wherefore
Christ refused to give them any direct answer: And more expressly it is said in
the next Chap. v. 15. That the Scribes and Pharisees went and took counsel how
they might entangle him in his talk; and in order hereto, they in the next
verse, sent out some to him, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, etc.
neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the persons of men;
tell us therefore, what think thou, is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar
or not? Here, no doubt, they expected some words from him, our of which they
might have picked some Treason; which, by their way of Addressing themselves to
him, they thought they might have drawn him too; which wicked Design of theirs,
Christ well perceived, as it is said, v. 18. by him, Why tempt ye me, etc. Then
Christ bid them give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, v. 21, 22. Again,
Luke 6.7. The Scribes and Pharisees watched him whether he would heal on the
Sabbath day, that they might find an accusation against him; yea, they are
said, Luke 11.53. To have urged him vehemently, and to have provoked him to
speak many things, laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of
his mouth, that they might accuse him; so uncessant were they in their pursuit
of Christ, whom they hated and would have destroyed. And further, the
Evangelist Luke, Chap. 20. says, They watched him, and sent forth spies, who
should fain themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that
so they might deliver him into the power and authority of the Governor, v. 20.
Here they thought surely, that Christ would be more free to talk with just Men,
and speak that to them, which he would forbear to do before others, that so
they might ensnare him, by insinuating Dissemblers, and thereupon accuse him;
yet again, did they set upon him, John 8.3. They set before him a Woman taken
in Adultery, and said to him, v. 5. Moses said, that such should be stoned, but
what say thou? This they said, (as in the next verse,) tempting him, that
they might have to accuse him; which Christ also perceived, as in the following
verses. So far also does the Scripture take notice of this Way, which those
wicked and invidious Ones in those days took, to express their Heart-hatred
against the Saints, and against Christ himself.

4thly. Another Way and Method wherein they proceeded against the Saints,
Christ and his Followers, and against the Truth, to suppress them and it, and
stop their growth, was this, They called Councils, consulted together, devised,
plotted and contrived Mischief against them in secret, and how they might
effect their Ends, as the Scripture has Recorded; King Pharaoh, Exodus 1. when
he had perceived the Israelites to increase, and he had a mind to prevent their
growth, v. 9. he consulted with his People, and said, Come, let us deal wisely
with them, lest they multiply, etc. v. 10. then in the following verses, they
put Burdens on them heavier and heavier; but when that would not do, he
devised to slay the Male Children, and charged the Midwives so to do; and
charged also his People to cast the Sons of the Hebrews into the River. So did
their Enemies in Nehemiahs days, Chap. 4. when they had heard that the Walls
were built, they contrived always to prevent their further progress; First,
they mock them, saying, What do these feeble Jews do? will they fortify
themselves, v. 1, 2. but when they saw that would not do, it is said, v. 7, 8.
That they were then very wroth, and conspired all of them together, to come and
fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder the work; although what the Jews did, was
by Authority from the King. In like manner did they in Ezra's days, Chap. 4.
When the Adversaries of Jadah, etc. had heard that they builded the Temple, v.
1. they v. 2. came and pretended that they would build with them; this was
their first Plot to weaken their hands in their Building; but when that would
not do, they contrived, in the 4th and 5th verses, and hired Counselors
against them, to frustrate their Progress all the days of Cyrus; and
afterward, v. 8. the Chancellor and Scribe, and the rest, consulted and wrote
to the King a Charge against them of high Nature, as in the following verses,
which effected their Design, and staid the Work, v. 21. so industrious were
those in their Consults and Contrivances, to hinder that Work which they hated.
Haman plotted the ruin of all the Jews, because Mordicay did not bow to to him;
he devised a course in his Breast, and accordingly proceeded Esther, Chap. 3.
Of such doings, the Psalmist in his days complained to God, Psalm. 35.7. Without
cause (says he there,) they have hid from me their net in a pit, which without
cause they have dug for my Soul; and in the 15th verse, The abjects gathered
themselves together, and I knew it not; and v. 19, 20. They hate me without a
cause: for they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them
who are quiet in the Land; the Psalmist had taken special notice, that wicked
Men in his days, did usually contrive evil against such who were innocent and
peaceable in the Land: And Psalm. 38. he said, That they also who sought his
life, did lay snares for him, and they did imagine deceits all the day, v. 12.
Again, Psalm. 31.13. Fear (said he,) was on every side, whilst they took Counsel
together against me, they devised to take away my life; and so (said he,) they
did against others too. Psalm. 94.21. They gathered themselves together against
the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent Blood; thus did they in
that day, consult how they might take away the Life of them whom they hated,
and how they might do it with the greatest ease, secrecy, and security to
themselves they could. The Psalmist yet further spreads this before God, Psalm.
83. Be not still, O God, (says he,) v. 1. Why, what is the matter? Why, says
he, in the next verses, Lo, thine Enemies make a tumult, and they have taken
crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones; they
have said, Come, lets cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel
be no more in remembrance, for they have consulted together with one consent;
they are confederate against thee. It Is noted too, that the Presidents and
Princes in Daniels time, did take the same way with him, Dan. 6. When they saw
the King had advanced him over them, verses 1, 2, 3. they in the next verses,
because they could not find occasion against him in the Matters of the Kingdom,
which they had sought to do; they consulted and contrived to ensnare him in the
Matter of his God, v. 5. and accordingly, they, in the next verses, pursued the
thing they had contrived, procured a Law in that Matter, and convicted him
thereupon. After the same manner did the unbelieving Jews, and the Gentiles
too, in those days, contrive against Christ and his Followers, as it is
written, Mat. 12. when Christ had, v. 13. healed the withered Hand, The
Pharisees, in the next verse, went out, and held a Council against him, how
they might destroy him; again, after Christ had spoken to them in a Parable,
Mat. 22. They in v. 15. went and took counsel, how they might entangle him; and
afterward, in the next verses, they pursued their Contrivances; so Mat. 26.
Then assembled together the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders of
the people, unto the Palace of the High Priest; and consulted that they might
take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him, in verses 3 and 4. The like Counsel they
took again, Mat. 27.1. to put him to death. Here the chief Men amongst the
Jews, were frequently in taking counsel how they might have destroyed this
innocent and just One; such was their Heart-hatred of him. Nay, when he had
raised Lazarus, and the Fact was so evident that they could not deny it, John
11.44, 45. Then gathered the chief Priests and the Pharisees a Council; and
said, what do we! if we let him thus alone, all Men will believe on him, v. 47,
48. to prevent which, they were most industriously engaged. They did the like
afterward to the Apostles; when these had preached Christ, Acts 5. They were
cut to the heart, and they took counsel to slay the Apostles, v. 33. Yea, when
Paul had given over to persecute the Saints, and had preached Christ, Acts 9.
The fews, v. 23. took counsel to kill him too: And more than forty, Acts 23.
had conspired together, and bound themselves under a Curse not to eat or drink
till they had killed him, v. 12, 13. and these had agreed with the chief
Priests and Elders, how they should have effected this Murder, v. 14, 15. Thus
has the Scripture declared and set forth, the several Consults, Contrivances,
Plots, and wicked Devices, that these wicked envidious Ones in those Ages of
the World, had made and designed against Christ, good and peaceable Men,
according to that in Psalm. 2. They took counsel against the Lord and his
Anointed, etc. v. 2. etc.

5thly. A fifth Way that those envious Ones, Unbelievers, etc. did take, in
those days, to express their Enmity against Gods People, Christ and his
Followers, was this, They did procure, and Enact Laws and Decrees Civil and
Ecclesiastical, on purpose both to ensnare, punish and destroy them: And to
deter others from owning and following of them or their Doctrins; and under
color of such Laws or Decrees, they did proceed to accuse them as
disobedient, and so punish them thereupon; as the Psalmist, Psalm. 94.
intimated, that they did in his days; Shall the Throne of Iniquity (says he,)
v. 20. have fellowship with thee: who frame mischief by a Law? And what they
did upon these Laws, is expressed in the next verse, in these words, They
gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn
innocent blood: The Holy Ghost takes notice on it here, that although they seemed
to do it by a Legal Process, yet 'twas the Righteous, 'twas innocent Blood,
they condemned thereby, as Jezebel the Wife of Ahab, did with innocent Naboth,
1 Kings 21. when she had seen Ahab discontent about the Vineyard, v. 5, 6. she
resolved to dispatch Naboth out of the way, and that by color of Law too; as
it is said there, v. 7. she said to Ahab, Do thou not govern the Kingdom of
Israel? Let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the Vineyard of Naboth, etc.
In order to which, she v. 8. wrote Letters in Ahabs name, and sealed it with
his Seal, and sent the same to the Elders and the Nobles of the City, where
Naboth dwelt; and by that Letter, in the next verses, directs them to proceed
against him in a Judicial way, but to set up false Witnesses against him; to
which the Nobles and Elders (reasoning themselves secure, having the Kings
Commandment for it,) did comply, tho the way was desperately wicked; they set
up Witnesses, Sons of Belial against him, judged, condemned and executed him,
in the 11, 12, and following verses. The Enemies of the Jews did, by false
suggestions against them, procure a Decree from the King to stop their work of
Building, in Ezra 4. Nebucadnezar the King, having set up an Image, Dan. 3.1.
and in the following verses, Decreed, That all who heard the sound of the
Cornet, etc. should fall down and worship him, and that such who did not,
should be cast into the fiery Furnace; upon this, the Caldeans, v. 8. accused
the Jews, and v. 12. they said, These Men, O King, regard not thee, they serve
not thy gods; upon which the King in great fury sent for them, v. 13. and v.
19. in greater wrath commanded the Execution of them, according to that Law;
which in the following verses they performed: Here was a wicked Law or Decree,
and upon this they condemned those innocent and peaceable Men. And thus they
dealt with Daniel himself too, in those days; The Presidents and Princes (who
had hated him,) having sought occasion against him in the matters of the
Kingdom, and found none; could not hit him upon any Law in that respect; such
was his Faithfulness, and so good a Subject was he, Dan. 6.4, 5. They contrived
a Law or Decree, on purpose, in the Matter of his God, that upon this they
might ruin him; it is said, v. 7. That all the Presidents of the Kingdom, and
the Governors, and the Princes, the Counselors and the Captains, had consulted
together to establish a Royal Statute, to make a firm Decree, That whosoever
shall ask, etc. and in the next verses, they obtain a Confirmation thereof by
the King, upon which they, v. 11. and so onward, prosecuted Daniel for praying
to the true God, and cast him into the Den of Lions, (tho the Kings Heart was
to deliver him); thus did they there frame this Law, and yet it confirmed upon
this sole Design, that they might take Daniel in the Matter of his God, and so
dispatch him. So did Haman also with the Jews in Mordicays days, when he had
resolved to have destroyed both Mordieai and the Jews, he applied himself to
the King for a Decree to destroy them, which he obtained, and accordingly
proceeded upon it till he was prevented, Esther 4.6, 8, and following verses.
After the same manner the Jews themselves did in Christ's time, under pretense
of Law, they persecuted Jesus himself unto death, they brought him before
Pilate the Judge, in open Court, and there charged him, and prosecuted him in a
pretended regular way, Luke 23. Yea, and that they might terrify others from
confessing and owning of him in the World at that time, they made or agreed an
Ecclesiastical Law too, That if any did confess him, they should be
Excommunicated; as it is expressly said, John 9.22. in these words, That the Jews
had already agreed, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, that he
should be put out of the Synagogue; of which Law the Jews at that time stood in
great fear, as is plain by the Parents of the blind Man, there spoken of in
this Chap. they answered so shyly when the question was asked them concerning
their Son, for fear of this Law of Excommunication, which they did afterward
actually put in Execution against their Son when he owned Christ, v. 34. And
it is expressly said, John 7. That many said, he is a good man, v. 12. Howbeit,
no man spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews, v. 13. And again, John 12. v.
42. it is said, Among the chief Rulers also many believed on him, but because of
the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God; of
which Law and the execution thereof, Christ had told his Disciples, Before, Jo.
16. verse, they will put you out of their Synagogues, they will execute those
Laws they have contrived on purpose to prevent men's confessing of me. Thus does
the Scripture Records evidence, that the wicked Ones in those Ages, did take
this Course also to prevent and deter Men from owning God, and Christ, and his
Laws.

6thly. Yet a sixth Way wherein they did evidence their Enmity against God and
Christ, against the Saints and followers of Christ, was this, That when they
otherwise could not, in a Legal Way, make out any of the Accusations and
Charges they had brought against them; and being resolved to take them, they
then did suborn, and set up false Witnesses, Men of Belial, to swear against
them, and affirm even whatever they had suggested to them; to whom the
Magistrates in those days, did easily give credit too, as the Scripture
declared; That the Elders and Nobles, by Jezebels means, did in the case of
Naboth, 1 Kings 21. when Jezebel there had written to them in the Kings Name,
and under his Seal, (tho without his knowledge,) v. 8. and therein directed
them, v. 9, and 10. to set up Naboth on high among the People, and to set up
false witnesses; They, in v. 11, 12, 13. accordingly set up Naboth; and it is
said there, There came in two men, children of Belial, and witnessed against
him, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the King; which they the Elders and
Nobles, soon gave credit too, for they presently carried him out and stoned
him; here they shed innocent Blood, by false suborned Witnesses, as they were
commanded to do; tho they knew it to be a desperate wicked thing so to do. The
Psalmist in his days, complained of such dealings, Psalm. 119.69. and said
there, The proud has forged a lie against me; and in Psalm. 35.11. he said,
False witnesses did arise up, they laid to my charge things which I knew not.
After the same manner did the unbelieving Jews deal with Jesus Christ himself,
and with his Disciples, in their days; as the Scripture also affirms, Mat.
26. it is said there, v. 59. That the chief Priests and Elders, and all the
Council, sought false witnesses against Jesus to put him to death; and v. 60,
and 61. At last came two false witnesses, and said, This Fellow said, etc. Thus
the Holy Ghost takes notice, that the Chief Priests, Elders and Council, were
principally engaged in this wickedness too; such was their Heart Enmity against
him, that they could not bear with his being on the Earth; therefore they
regarded not what wicked Course they took to send him hence. So did the
Libertines and others, in the case of Stephen, Act. 6. When they were not able
to resist his wisdom, etc. v. 10. They then, in the next verses, suborned men,
who said, We have heard him speak Blasphemies, etc. and afterward, v. 12, and
13. they set up those false witnesses before the Council against him. This
Charge they had framed against him, and endeavored to prove, (tho by false
Witnesses, by Perjury,) that they might seem to be just, and to persecute him
in a Legal manner, according to Moses Law, and so put him to death; for in the
next verses, They stir up the Elders and Scribes, and People, (who were forward
enough of themselves against him,) and took him, brought him before the
Council; where they produced their suborned Men, who said of him, That this man
ceased not to speak blasphemous words against the holy Place and the Law, etc.
So far has these divine Records taken notice of this Way and Procedure of
these wicked persecuting and invidious Men, in those Ages of the World.

7thly. And that the wicked Enemies of God, of Jesus Christ, and of his People
and Laws, in those days, might carry their Matters the more plausible, and
obtain an Opinion in Magistrates of their own Loyalty; and that they might get
the greater countenance to their Proceedings, and awe and engage other inferior
Magistrates and Officers, (contrary to their own Inclinations and Judgments,)
to assist them in their revengeful Acts, they were found in this seventh Method
or crafty Course. They did mostly pretend themselves to be special Friends to
the Kings and Governors, and Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, in those days, in
all they did this way; and that Governors, Government and Laws, were much
concerned in all that they alleged against those Persons whom they had
accused; and that therefore only, were they so zealous against them in those
Matters; although in truth, 'twas only proceeding from their own envious and
revengeful Hearts within them; Examples and Instances of which the Scripture
has also Recorded. In Ezra's days, when the Adversaries of the Jews being
vexed at them, Ezra 4.1, 2, etc. the Chancellor and others wrote to the King
against them, v. 6. and amongst other things, they in their Letter acquaints
him, that they were building that rebellious and bad City, etc. and in v. 13.
they interrest the King in these words, which they suggested, Be it known unto
the King, That if this City be built, etc. then will they not pay Tole, Tribute
and Custom, and so thou shall endamage the Revenue of the Kings; and v. 13.
Now, said they, because we have maintenance, etc. it is not meet for us to see
the Kings dishonor, therefore have we sent, and certified the King; here they
pretended, that the Kings dishonor and the loss he was like to bear, was that
they were concerned about, and that therefore the King was concerned to prevent
it; when all this proceeded only from their Heart-Enmity against the Jews, as
such, as it is said in v. 1. and v. 5. of the same 4th of Ezra. In like manner
did Sanballat and other their Enemies, in Nehemiahs days; when they had
understood, Chap. 2. that Nehemiah had come with Authority to build the City,
they were sorely grieved, v. 10. It grieved them exceedingly that there was
come a Man to seek the welfare of the Children of Israel; their Heart-Enmity
against the Jews, made the Favor that the King showed to them, to be Grief to
those; and contrary to true Loyalty, they endeavor to oppose what these were
doing by Commission from the King; as in v. 19. They said to them, will ye
rebel against the King? thus they suggested, that they would rebel against the
King, although they knew the King did allow what the Jews did in that matter; so
again, the same Sanballat, in a Letter sent by his Servants to Nehemiah, Chap.
6. told Nehemiah thus, v. 5, 6, 7. It is reported, etc. that thou and the Jews
think to rebel, for which cause thou buildest the Wall, that thou may be
their King, etc. and shall it be reported to the King according to these words;
thus these Men's hatred of the Jews, made them suggest these things against
them, wherein the King must be concerned; although, what the Jews did then, was by
the Kings own Commission, which Loyal Subjects should have encouraged. Haman
afterward took the same way against Mordicai and the Jews, Esther 3. he being
full of wrath against Mordicai, because he did not bow before him, v. 5. he
(the better to compass his revengeful Design, and being a great Favorite of
the King,) presently interrests the King in the matter, and like a very Loyal
Subject, tells the King, v. 8. thus, There are a certain people, etc. and their
Laws are diverse from all people; and what then? O neither keep they the Kings
Laws; and in the next words, Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer
them; let it be written that they be destroyed, v. 9. here he seemed to be
greatly concerned for the King in this matter, as a very Loyal Man; but the
Holy Ghost has there set forth, that he did this only to effect what his
malicious Heart had resolved so to do, in revenge against Mordicai, even to
destroy him and all the Jews, who were a peaceable and profitable People. So
when the Enemies of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, would have destroyed them,
Dan. 3. they presently there, v. 12. concerns the King therewith, in these
words, There are certain Jews, etc. These men, O King, have not regarded thee,
they serve not thy God, etc. which enraged the King presently; by which they
had their End in the next verses: Here these Men pretended to the King, that
these Jews, in affront to the King, would not worship the Image; when their
Enemies knew the contrary, that they were good Subjects, only in that matter
could not actually obey. And so dealt the Presidents and Princes with Daniel
himself, whom they hated, because the King had advanced him above them, Dan. 6.
their design was to destroy him; and the better to effect it, they presently
concern the King and the Law in the matter, for both which, they seemed to be
zealous; and having, on purpose to take him, procured a Law or Decree to have
been made; they v. 13. said thus to the King, Daniel who is of the captivity,
etc. regards not thee, O King, nor the Decree which thou have signed, etc.
Here they did insinuate that the King was concerned in Honor, to vindicate his
Authority and Law against Daniel, as a despiser of both; although they very well
knew 'twas duty to God, not disloyalty to the King that made him to pray to
God, contrary to that Decree; of which also the King himself was so sensible,
that it is said of him, v. 14. He was sore displeased with himself, and set his
heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labored till the going down of the Sun
to deliver him; to which these pretenders to Loyalty, (having their hearts set
to destroy Daniel,) would not yield, their love to the King would not bring
them to stoop to his desire, because it contradicted their design; but now they
press the King with the Law, and show their zeal for the punishment of
Offenders against the Law, v. 15. as if the King had not power to discharge the
Offenders; that their Heart-Enmity against Daniel, and their purpose to destroy
him, not the Kings Honor nor true zeal for Justice, made these Men thus warm
against Daniel, is here very evident. Thus did the unbelieving Jews, and other
Enemies of Jesus Christ and of his Followers, in after Ages, against Christ
himself and his Apostles, in those days, Luke 23. They there out of a design to
destroy Christ, accused him as an Enemy to Caesar, interrests Caesar in the
matter, that they might seem to persecute Christ, rather from Loyalty than
secret Hatred and Enmity they carried against him; as in v. 2. they said, We
found this Fellow, etc. forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar, saying, That he
himself is a King; by this they designed, as an expedient, the easier to get
Pilate to pass Judgment against him, as is evident, John 19 ^r when they there
perceived that Pilate was willing to release Christ, and probably would have
done it; in v. 12. The Jews cried out, If thou let this Man go, thou art not
Caesar's friend: for whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar;
upon which words, it is said in the next verse, That Pilate brought him out;
here was great concernedness for Caesar seemingly, yet Envy was the motive, and
Christ's Life the design only, which Pilate very well knew, for he found no
fault in him; and its expressly said so, That he knew that the Priests had
delivered him up for envy, Mark 15.10. Tho this very thing did so awe Pilate,
(as they designed it should,) against his inclination and judgment, that he
delivered this Just One into their hands to be Crucified. After the same manner
did they with the Apostles and Disciples of Christ afterward, in Act. 7. it is
said there, v. 5. That the Jews who believed not, moved with envy, took some
base Fellows with them, and laid hold on Jason and some others, v. 6. and
brought them before the Rulers, and there immediately they interrest Caesar and
his Laws in the business, v. 7. and say, These do all contrary to the Decrees
of Caesar, saying, that there is another King Jesus: So again, Act. 18. The
Jews there made an insurrection against Paul, and brought him before the
Judgment Seat, v. 12, and 13. they charge him with breach of their
Ecclesiastical Laws, saying there, This Fellow persuadeth men to worship God
contrary to the Law, or established mode; by which, no doubt, they engaged many
readily to assist them in their persecuting of him; tho Galio drove them from
the Judgment Seat, and would not meddle in those Laws, verses 15, 16. Thus does
the Scripture note, that the Enemies of the Saints and of the Truth it self, in
those Ages, did walk in this Path also, in order to the effecting of their
envious and revengeful Purposes.

8thly. But when this Method neither did do the Work so effectually as they
designed, then they proceeded against them in an eighth Way, that was, They did
in most places stir up base Fellows, and all sorts of People; and together with
them, did they tumultuously take hold of them hale them to Prison and before
Magistrates, and oftentimes contrary to all Laws and Justice, Order and Peace,
beat them, banish them, and hastily stone them, and go about to kill them; as
the Psalmist said of them, in his days, Psalm. 53.4. in these words, Who eats
up my people as they eat Bread; of which doings Jesus foretold and acquainted
his Disciples, that they were to bear a share in, Mat. 10. They will (says he
there,) deliver you up to the Council, and they will scourge you in their
Synagogues; and ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my sake,
etc. v. 17, 18. Nay, Christ himself escaped not such rude and illegal Dealings,
as it is taken notice of, Luke 4.28, 29. in these words, They were filled with
wrath, and rose up and thrust him out of the City, and laid him to the brow of
the hill, whereon the City was built, that they might cast him down headlong;
and Luke 22. The multitude, with the chief Priests and Captains of the Temple
and Elders, came to take him, v. 47. with swords and staves, as against a
Thief, as Christ said, v. 52. and these, in this tumultuous manner, led him to
the High Priests house, v. 54. and v. 63, and 64. They mock him and smote him,
having blindfolded him, they stroke him on the face, saying, Prophecy who it
is who smote thee; and in v. 1. of the next Chap. it is again said, That the
whole multitude arose and led him to Pilate: Here the common Rabble, as well as
the great Ones, hurried him about, mock and beat him in a tumultuous and an
illegal manner. So did the Enemies of the Jews before, in Nehemiahs days,
conspire to do; Nehem. 4. when they had observed, that all their other Attempts
for hindering their Building would not do, (the Jews having the Kings Authority
with them,) Sanballat and others here being very wroth, v. 7. did conspire all
of them together to come to fight against Jerusalem to hinder it; such was
their Enmity against the Jews here, for building by the Kings Authority, that
how Loyal soever they otherways pretended to be, yet here did they agree most
rebelliously and wickedly, to hinder the Building by fighting against them.
They readily obeyed the King in Ezra's time, when his command was to cause the
Work to cease; but now when they were by the Kings command to build, they would
disobey, and in an hostile and rebellious manner hinder it. The like did the
persecuting Jews themselves, in the Apostles days too, in Act. 4. As the
Apostles spoke unto the people, the Priests, and the Captain of the Temple, and
the Sadduces came upon them, v. 1. and being that they taught, etc. they laid
hands on them, and put them into hold, v. 2, and 3. so again, Act. 5. when they
had understood that the Apostles had done Miracles, etc. v. 15, 16. The High
Priest rose up and all those who were with him, (which is the Sect of the
Sadduces,) and were filled with indignation, v. 17. and in the following
verses, They laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them into common Prison.
Stephen was so illegally and riotously handled, Act. 6. when the Libertines and
others had disputed with him, and not able to resist the spirit and wisdom by
which he spoke, v. 9, 10. They, in v. 12. (to confute him.) stirred up the
People, and the Elders, and the Scribes, and came upon him, caught and brought
him to the Council; and again, in the next Chap. it is said, v. 54. that when
they had heard what Stephen said, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed
on him with their teeth; and in v. 57. and so onward, That they ran upon him
with one accord, and cast him out of the City and stoned him. It is recorded
also of Saul, Acts 8. v. 3. That he made havoc of the Church, entering into
every house, and haleing men and women, committing them to Prison; which he,
after his Conversion, did confess, Act. 22. in these words, v. 5, 6. I
persecuted this way to the death, binding and delivering into Prison, both men
and women, I went unto Damascus to bring them which were there bound unto
Jerusalem, to be punished; and in v. 19. said he to the Lord, I imprisoned and
beat in every Synagogue, them who believed on thee. Thus did others deal with
Paul himself, when he became a preacher of Christ, and with Sylas, Act. 16.
Paul having cast out the Spirit of Divination out of the Damsel, v. 18. her
masters, v. 19, 20. caught Paul and Sylas, drew them into the Marketplace to
the Rulers, and brought them to the Magistrates, and there accused them for
Troublers of the City; upon which, The multitude rose up together against them,
and the Magistrates commanded to beat them, and when they had laid many stripes
upon them, they cast them into Prison, v. 22, 23. All which Proceedings were
illegal, violent and tumultuous, and ought not to have been done to them; as
Paul himself told them, v. 35, and 36. (when the Magistrates had sent to
discharge them,) in these words, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being
Romans, and have cast us into Prison, and now do they thrust us out privily?
nay verily, let them come themselves and fetch us out; and in the next verse,
The Magistrates feared when they heard that they were Romans, and they came and
be sought them to go out. Even so did the unbelieving Jews, Act. 13. upon their
observation that multitudes did hear the Word, were filled with envy, and spoke
against those things which were spoken by Paul, etc. v. 45. and upon their
second speaking, v. 46. and so on, The Jews v. 50. stirred up the devout and
honorable Women, and the chief Men of the City, and raised Persecution against
Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts; here, when
contradicting and blasphemy would not do, they stir up a Tumult, and by illegal
and violent means drive them away: And this course they did uncessantly follow,
Act. 14. v. 2. it is Recorded in these words, That the unbelieving Jews stirred
up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the Brethren; and
v. 5. as the effect on it, it is said, That when there was an assault made, both
of the Gentiles and of the Jews, with their Rulers, to use them despitefully
and to stone them, they fled; and v. 19. They pursued them, came where they
were, and having persuaded the People, and stoned Paul, drew him out of the
City, etc. Thus did they here, most unjustly, riotously and illegally,
persecute Paul and others, stirred up the People every where so to do: Again,
they did walk in the same Steps in Act. 17. it is said of them thus, in v. 5.
They being moved with envy, took to themselves certain lewd Fellows of the
baser sort, and gathered a Company, and set the whole City in an uprore, and
assaulted the house of Jason; and v. 6. They drew him to the Magistrate; here
these made great Riots, dealt rudely, illegally and violently with Christ and
the Saints, when by Law they could not effect their Purposes: And again, v. 13.
of the same Chap. They pursued Paul to Barea, and stirred up the people there
too. And in Act. 18. The Jews there made an insurrection with one accord
against Paul, and drew him to the Judgment Seat, v. 12. and when Galio refused
to meddle with the matter, because there was no matter of wrong that he was
charged with, or wickedness, verses 14, 15, 16. They then took Sosthenes, the
chief Ruler of the Synagogue, and beat him before the Judgment Seat; such
Outrages as these did they then commit. The like riotous, illegal and
tumultuous Ways, did the Silver-Smiths take against Paul, Acts 19. when they
saw that their Craft was like to be set at naught, if People believed Diana to
be no Goddess, v. 24. and so on, they were full of wrath, v. 28. and the whole
City was filled with confusion, and having caught Gaius and others, v. 29. they
rushed with one accord into the Theater; they were in a great Tumult and Riot
in the City, in the next verses, which whole Proceeding was illegal, as the
Town Clerk afterward told them, in these words, v, 36, 37. and so on, Ye ought
to be quiet and to do nothing easily, for ye have brought hither these Men who
are neither robbers of Churches, nor yet blasphemers of your Goddess;
wherefore, if the craftsmen have any matter against any man, the Law is open,
etc. let them implead one another; if it be concerning other matters, it shall
be determined in a lawful Assembly, for we are in danger of being called in
question for this days uprore, etc. This course was not allowable here, among
the Heathens themselves. The Jews again dealt so with Paul, Acts 21.27, 28.
They stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him, and cried out, Men of
Israel help, this is the man, etc. upon which cry, all the City was moved, in
the next verses, and the people ran together, and they took Paul and drew him
out of the Temple, and went about to kill him, till the Captain came, whom when
they saw, they left of beating of him; yea, more than forty conspired
together, and resolved to kill him, Act. 23.12. Thus has the Holy Ghost taken
notice of this Practice of the wicked Enemies of God and his People, in those
days, and that it was very common, in those days: The Apostle James intimated
in the 2d. Chap. of his Epistle, v. 6, and 7. says he there, Do not rich men
oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment Seats? do not they blaspheme that
worthy Name by which ye are called? These Interrogations, implies an
Affirmation, that they did so, used so to do.

Neither here did their Envy and Enmity against the Saints in Old Testament
times, nor against Christ and his Followers, in the New, end and proceed no
further; no, they were never satisfied while any of those remained alive upon
the Earth; like those Act. 22.22. who cried out against Paul, in these words,
Away with such a Fellow from the Earth, for it is not fit he should live; right
or wrong, let him be taken off the Earth: They therefore persecuted them to the
death; that did they design, that did they pursue by all the beforementioned
ways: Nay, such was their bitter Enmity, that if the Magistrate at any time,
seemed to be willing to acquit any of them because of their Innocence, they
cried out upon him, away with him, and told Herod he was no Friend to Caesar,
if he let him go; and that rather then Jesus should be acquitted, they desired
a most notorious Criminal should be saved, even Barabbas, who for Sedition and
Murder in the City, was cast into Prison; they preferred the most vile Men to
that most innocent and unblamable One. Further instances of this too, the same
divine Records has delivered down; as the Apostle James said in the general,
Cap. 5.6. of rich Men, Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not
resist you. So said the Psalmist, Psalm. 37. The wicked has drawn out the
sword, v. 14. to slay such as be of an upright Conversation: And again, in
Psalm. 44.22. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted as
Sheep for the slaughter: And more particularly, Genesis 4. Cain there having
brought an Offering, and Abel another to the Lord, and the Lord respecting
Abels and not Cains, v. 3, 4, 5. Cain, v. 8. upon this very account, rose up
against him, and slew him. In like manner did Joseph's Brethren intend to do
with him, Genesis 37. they perceiving that their Father loved him more than he did
them, envyed him, or hated him, v. 3, and 4. and in v. 18. Seeing him afar of,
they conspired against him to slay him; and v. 20. said, Come now, let us slay
him, and cast him into some pit, etc. Nothing less than his Life would satisfy
some of them at least; such was their Envy against their innocent Brother, in
that day. Jezebel, Ahabs Wife, after Elijah had caused the Prophets of Baal to
be slain, 1 Kings 18. she Chap. 19. understanding the matter by the King, sent
a Messenger to Elijah, in v. 2. saying, So let the gods do, and more also; if I
make not thy life as the life of one of them, by to morrow about this time;
such was her hatred of him, that nothing but his Life was desired by her; but
he fled. So Hamans fiery Enmity against Mordicai, could be no way quenched, but
by his Life, and the Life of all the Jews, Hester 9.5, 6. when Mordicai would
not bow, and give Haman reverence to him, he was full of wrath, and thought
scorn to lay hands on Mordicai alone, but he and all the Jews must be destroyed
together; which he pursued in the following verses. After the same manner did
they pursue Christ himself to the death, John 18. and because the Jews
themselves could not proceed so far as to put him to death by their Law, (as
themselves confessed v. 31.) they therefore brought him before Pilate to be
judged, that they might by pretense of that Authority put him to death, which
afterward they did, (tho so just a One as he was, and by Pilate declared so to
be,) as is in the next Chap. recorded; yea, when Pilate would have released
him, because of his Innocence, Luke 23.14, 15. the Jews cried out, v. 21.
Crucify him, Crucify him; right or wrong they must have his life; this was in
their hearts to have, as appears further, v. 22, 23. The Scribes and Pharisees
having beforehand, Mat. 12.14. taken counsel how they might destroy him. Christ
did forewarn his Disciples and Followers, and intimated unto them, that they
should be so dealt with too, Mat. 10. The Brother (says he there, in v. 21.)
shall deliver up the Brother to death, and the Father the Child, and the
Children shall rise up against their Parents, and put them to death; according
to which they frequently did in those days, as the Scripture does evidence.
When Christ had raised up Lazarus, John 11.43, 44. The chief Priests, in Chap.
12. v. 10, 11. consulted, that they might put Lazarus also to death, because
that by reason of him many of the Jews believed on Jesus; So Acts 5. because
the Apostles had preached Christ before the Council there, they presently
consulted to slay them, v. 33. The same Spirit was Saul of, Act. 8.1. he there
consented to the death of Stephen; and Act. 9.1. its said of him, That he yet
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord; which
he himself acknowledged he had done, Act. 22. v. 4. in these words, I
persecuted this way to the death; so dealt he and others with Stephen, upon his
preaching of Christ, Act. 7. They ran upon him with one accord, and cast him
out of the City, and stoned him, v. 57, 58. Herod the King, Act. 12. stretched
forth his hand to vex certain of the Church, v. 1. and v. 2. he kills James
with the sword; yea, there were more than forty of the Jews, who bound
themselves in a curse not to eat or drink till they had killed Paul, v. 12, 13.
of which they acquainted the chief Priests and Elders, and directed them into a
way to effect it too, in the next verses: And again, Act. 25. The chief Priests
and chief of the Jews designed to kill him, and in order to it, they desired
the favor of Festus to send for Paul to Jerusalem, v. 2. and v. 3. it is said,
That there were liars in wait in the way to kill him; thus did they pursue
their very Lives by all their former Methods. For which doings, the Apostle
complained, in his First Epist. to the Thessalonians, of the Jews, Chap. 2. v.
14, 15. thus, The Jews who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophet,
and have persecuted us, etc. Thus has the Scripture also taken notice, that
their Enmity was such, that by way of revenge, nothing less would serve them
than the very Lives of the Saints and Servants of God, yea, of Christ himself;
in those days, they could not rest till they had taken them off the Earth.

Then Thirdly, As the Holy Ghost has by Scripture Records, shown the bitter
Enmity that was seated in the Hearts of the wicked, in those days, against the
Saints and Holiness it self; and the several Methods those Men then took, to
express or evidence their Enmity against them and it, for their suppression and
to hinder the growth of Holiness; so also has the same Spirit deluded down to
after Age, many of the Grounds and Causes of such their Enmity against, and
hatred of them, and which put them upon Persecuting the one and Opposing the
other.

The First and Original Cause why they did persecute at that rate in those
days, was from that irreconcilable Enmity which they brought into the World
with them against God, against Christ who came forth from him, against his Laws
and Government, as is said, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God,
cannot be subject to him; they cannot endure any thing of the Spirit whilst
they are in the Flesh, in the same State in which they came into the World;
they cannot bear with the Light which shines in the Law of God, because their
Works are Works of Darkness; and hence came their Hearts to be at enmity and
hatred against the Saints and Servants of God, such who owned God and his Laws,
and subjected themselves to him and it, or did preach up Subjection to the
same; and so consequently, to persecute their Persons, and oppose and obstruct
the spreading of the Truth, by all the ways they could; as the Psalmist impli'd
they did, when he spoke in Psalm. 2. thus, Why do the heathen rage, and the
people imagine vain things? The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take council together against the Lord and against his Anointed; saying,
Let us break their Bands, and cast their Cords from us, etc. they could not
bear them, they would not be bound by them, v. 1, 2. Here their Enmity against
God, and Christ and his Laws, put them upon imagining, taking council how to
ease themselves of the good Men of God and Christ; and as a consequent, how to
ease themselves of all those who did submit to those Laws of God and walk with
him; as the Psalmist again did clearly assert, Psalm. 83. in these words, v. 2.
Thine enemies make a Tumult, and they who hate thee lift up the head, v. 2.
what follows, why, v. 3. they have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
consulted against thy hidden ones; and v. 4. they said, Come and lets cut them
off from being a Nation; here first they hate God himself, and then consult to
destroy his People. To this cause does the Psalmist reduce it in those days,
Psalm. 44.22. For thy sake (says he there,) are we killed all the day long, we
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter; it was for Gods sake they hated him,
and must needs kill his whom they could reach. Jeremiah spoke after the like
manner, Chap. 15. v. 15. he prays thus, Revenge me of my Persecutors, etc. and
uses this as the Argument, Know, (says he,) that for thy sake have I suffered
rebuke; it was for his faithfulness to God. So Christ told his Disciples, Mat.
10. That they should be brought before Governors and Kings but for his name
sake, v. 8 they hated Christ, so punished his Followers; and again, v. 22. Ye
shall be hated of all men for my name sake; their hatred of Christ is assigned
here, as the cause of their hatred against his Followers; as Christ further
hinted to the Jews in the Parable he spoke to them, Luke 19. concerning a Noble
Man, v. 12. where in v. 14. it is said, That the Citizens hated him, and sent
forth a Messenger after him, saying, We will not have this Man to reign over
us. The unbelieving Jews would have none of his Government, 'twas too strict
for them; they hate him, and from thence 'twas that they could not endure such
who either preached him up as Lord, or his Laws as that by which they ought to
be ruled, or did submit themselves to him or it; and they persecuted them as
intolerable, used all means to hindier the publication of his Laws, or him as
Lord and Savior, and to hinder others submission to him and it; for which
Christ pronounced against them, Mat. 23.13. in these words, Woe to you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men;
for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them who are entering to go
in: They from their hatred to Christ would not be subject to him and his Laws
themselves, nor would they suffer others to be subject, but did oppose and
persecute them, and contradict and blaspheme the Doctrine, persuading People to
subjection to him; and because the Light which shone in his Life and Doctrine,
and in his Followers, did discover and reprove their wicked Natures and Deeds
of Darkness, it could not be born with; as Christ told his unbelieving
Brethren, John 7. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates, v. 7. Why?
Because (said he,) I testify of it, that their works are evil: Again, John
3.19, 20. Light is come into the world, but men love darkness rather than
light. Why? Because their deeds are evil, for every one who does evil, hates
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, or discovered. Thus has the
Scripture assigned this to be the Original, or one main Cause of the wicked
Ones Enmity against, and persecuting of the Saints, and their high opposition
against the Light of the Gospel and true Holiness it self.

2dly. It did arise from this, That the Saints, the called of God, did evidence
themselves to have been changed from what they were by Nature, and by Practice
too; they owned and loved what formerly they had hated; they had declared
themselves not to be of the World, could not run with the same excess of Riot
with others, as they had done, do as formerly they did; but their Lives and
Works did contradict and reprove the Lives of their Persecutors. Now this they
could not bear, therefore did they hate them, and brake out against them in
those various Methods and Ways before noted; as the Scripture says, He who
does evil, hates the light, John 3.20. No sooner did Saul (whom they had so
much loved formerly,) leave his persecuting of the Saints, and being changed,
did evidence the same by joining with them, and in preaching up what his Heart
had been against; but the Jews hated him, and studied to kill him, Act. 9.19,
20, and so on; and that it would be so, Christ had told his before, John 15. If
(says he there, v. 19.) ye were of the world, the world would love his own;
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore does the world hate you: Here did he intimate to them, that no sooner
should they evidence by their good Life, that they are called out of the World,
and off from the evil Courses thereof, but the World hated them upon that very
account, and thereupon persecuted them; as it is written Habak. 1.13. in those
days, That the wicked devoured the man who was more righteous than he: And it is
expressly said, Genesis 4.5. That Cain was angry with his Brother Abel, because the
Sacrifice Abel offered, was accepted and not his, and he, in v. 8. slew him;
although the reason given of his Non-acceptance was, because he did not well, v.
7. and his Brother did; as the Holy Ghost does affirm in these words, 1 John
3.12. Not as Cain was of that wicked one, and slew his Brother; and wherefore
slew he him? because his own Works were evil and his Brothers righteous; upon
which account the Saints are exhorted, in the next verse, not to marvail, tho
the World do hate them. When Elijah had but evidenced his Change, by reproving
King Ahaziah for his sending to the God of Eckron, to enquire if he should
recover, 2 Kings 1. v. 2, 3, 4. the King was so enraged against him, that he v.
9. sent a Captain, with his fifty to fetch him, and the Captain and his men
were destroyed by fire from Heaven; yet he sent another, and tho he was
destroyed, sent a third, in the next verses; such was his bitterness against
Elijah for this cause only. So said the Psalmist also, Psalm. 38.19 and so on,
They who hate me are multiplied, etc. They also who render evil for good are
mine Adversaries, because I follow the thing which good is; there is the cause
why wicked Men are adversaries to good Men, only because they are good now, and
not such as formerly they were. So again, Psalm. 37.12. The wicked (says the
Psalmist,) plotteth against the just; and v. 14. They have drawn out the sword
to slay such as be of an upright Conversation. So said Amos too, Chap. 5.10.
They hate him who reproves in the gate, they abhor him who speaks uprightly,
and v. 12. They afflict the just; Here the Scripture assigned no other cause,
why these Men did envy, hate and persecute them, but this, that those hated and
persecuted Ones were just, righteous and good, and reproved their Persecutors
for the contrary; this was sufficient to render them obnoxious to the wickedst
hatred and scorn. Herod in those days, committed John to Prison, and would have
put him to death, because John had told him, it was not lawful to marry his
Brother Philips Wife, Mat. 14.3, 4, 5. The Apostle Peter declares this too in
his time, 1. Epist. Chap. 4. speaking of the unconverted Gentiles thoughts of
the converted Ones, because they could not do as they had done, and as the
wicked still did, v. 3, 4. in these words, Wherefore they think it strange,
that ye run not with them into the same access of Riot, speaking evil of you;
Here they speak evilly of the Saints, because they could not be so wicked as
they; they wondered at their change, could no longer think or speak well of
them: So that the Scripture does make it evident, that the wicked unbelieving
Ones did in those days, hate and persecute the Saints as Saints, and only
because they were new Creatures, called out of the World, Men of a good Life,
could not be and do as others did, or do as they themselves sometimes had done;
by which they did reprove the Spirits and Doing of those wicked Persecutors.

3dly. A third cause or ground which the Holy Ghost in Scripture has assigned,
from whence the Envy and persecuting Spirits of wicked Men did arise; that was
the Pride, height of Spirit, and revengeful Nature which was in them: Such was
their Pride, that they would not seek God themselves, nor bear with those who
did, as the Psalmist said, Psalm. 10.4. That the wicked through the pride of his
countenance, will not seek God; and in v. 8. it is said of him, That in the
secret places does he murder the innocent, his eyes are privily set against
the poor; as their Pride here would not permit them to seek God, so it set them
against the Saints, innocent Ones who did seek God. The Psalmist again, Psalm.
119.69. said, The proud have forged a lie against me: And again, Psalm. 123.4.
he says, Our Soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of them who are at
ease, and with the contempt of the proud: Here the Holy Ghost takes notice,
that the Pride of their Hearts did render the Saints the objects of their
Scorn, and put them upon forging of lies against them. This very thing set
Haman into so great hatred against Mordicai, and made him so resolute on
revenge against him and all the Jews, Hester 3. his proud Heart could not bear
with Mordicai, because he did not arise and do him Reverence, as is expressed
v. 5. in these words, When Haman saw that Mordicai bowed not, nor did him
reverence, then was Haman full of wrath; and in the next verse, He thought
scorn to lay hands on Mordicai alone, but sought to destroy all the Jews with
him; such were his revengeful Purposes from the dreadful Pride of his Heart.
Hence it came to pass that the Presidents and Princes in Daniels time, so much
hated him, studied to revenge, and took those courses to execute it upon him;
Dan. 6. He being now advanced by King Darius over all the Presidents and
Princes, v. 1, 2. their proud hearts could not bear it; and this put them upon
seeking occasion against him concerning the Kingdom, v. 4. and finding none; so
good a Subject and innocent. Man was he; they in the next verses resolves to
take him in the matters of his God, procured a Law, and pursued him in the ways
they had devised, till they had gotten him into the Lions Den, tho the King
himself would have saved him. From the like pride of Heart the Libertines and
others, who were disputing with Stephen, Act. 6. and not able v. 9. to resist
the spirit and wisdom by which he spoke, nor able to bear to be silenced by
Stephen; they in the next verses evidenced their Pride and revengeful Spirits,
they confute him by suborning Witnesses, stirring up the People, Elders and
Scribes against him, caught him and carried him before the Council. The like
Spirit did the Jews evidence in those days, in their Behavior toward the Man
who was born blind, John 9. when he had by such convincing Arguments which they
could not resist, proved Christ to be of God, v. 30. and so on: The Pride of
the Pharisees being such, that they could not bear to be put to silence by such
a poor unlearned Man as he was; therefore they v. 34. took this course; they
first say to him, Thou wast altogether born in sin, and do thou teach us? And
they Excommunicated him: Having no better Argument, they confuted him this way,
and revenged upon him after this sort. Thus has the Scripture noted, that the
wicked Ones envy against good Men often did arise from the Pride of their
Hearts and revengeful Nature.

4thly. A fourth cause or ground from whence they so maligned and persecuted
the Saints, Christ himself and his Followers, in those days did arise from
their great ignorance of God himself, of Christ, and of the Saints, in
persecuting of whom they persecuted Christ, as he told Saul, Act. 9.4. As it is
said of Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should let Israel go? I know
not the Lord (said he,) therefore I will not let Israel go; his ignorance of
God here, made him oppress and grieve Gods People still, and pursue them
afterward. So it was with Saul, Act. 9. when Christ had said, Why persecutest
thou me? Saul answered, Who art thou, Lord? v. 4, 5. Here his ignorance of
Jesus was the cause why he persecuted him and his Saints. Christ intimates this
also to be the cause why the Jews hated him and persecuted him to the death;
Luke 23. when they were Crucified of him, he there prays for them in these
words, v. 34 Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Had they
known him (says the Scripture,) they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Their ignorance here was the cause of their persecuting
Acts, and of their malignant Mind against him and his. The Psalmist took it for
granted, that in those days it did proceed from hence, Psalm. 14.4. thus he
said, Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as
they eat bread? Which Saying strongly implies, that had they had knowledge they
would not, they could not have done so. The Apostles also in their time, did
intimate the like, and assigned the Ignorance of the Jews to be the cause of
their malignity against Christ and his, Act. 3. they tell them v. 15. That they
had killed the Prince of life; but v. 17. says to them thus, Now Brethren, I
wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers: And again, Act.
13. said the Apostle to them in v. 27. That they who dwell at Jerusalem, and
their Rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets,
(which are read every Sabbath Day,) they have fulfilled them in condemning him;
and in v. 28. Tho they found not cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate
that he should be slain. Upon the same Foundation of Ignorance, Paul
acknowledges that he went, Act. 26. I verily thought with my self, v. 9. that
I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus. The Jews themselves
John 9. did own their ignorance of Christ, v. 29. (said they,) As for this
Fellow we know not from whence he is; all the undeniable Evidences they had
had, that he was of God, did not enlighten them nor convince them, therefore
they persisted to envy and persecute him; and as to such who professed to own
him, many denied him, Titus 1.16. being unto every good work reprobate, (or
void of Judgment). In like manner the Scripture declared, that afterward they
persecuted and hated good Men upon this account, or from hence, that they knew
not God, Christ, or them, 1 Jo. 3.1. Therefore the world knows us not,
because it knew not him; and as Christ had told his Disciples, John 15.20. If
they persecuted me, they will also persecute you; and in the next verses gives
the reason of it in these words, All these things will they do unto you for my
name sake, because they know not him who sent me: So again, John 16. The time
comes (said Christ there,) v. 2. that whosoever kills you, shall think he
does God good service; the reason of which he gives in the next verse, in these
words, These things will they do, because they have not known the Father, nor
me. From this Root also, doubtless it came to pass, that the Christians in that
Age were called a Sect, Act. 28. and were so much spoken against every where;
as Paul's Countrymen said, v. 2. We desire (said they to him,) to hear of thee
what thou think, for as concerning this Sect, we know that every where it is
spoken against; right or wrong they speak against them and their way, because
they understood them not nor it. Peter in general assigns this as the cause of
Men's speaking evil of many things, 2 Pet. 2.12. Those (says he, speaking there
of wicked Men,) as natural brute Beasts, etc. spoke evil of the things which
they understood not; nay, it is mavelous, that the malice of the Jews against
Christ did so blind them, that when Judas came to them, and acknowledged to
them that he had betrayed innocent Blood, Mat. 27.3, 4. They say, What is that
to us? look thou to that; when they had been the chief Instruments in the
betraying of him, and putting him to death. Thus does the Scripture Records
note this Cause among others, of which Men's envy against Christ himself, and
his Followers in those days, against the Saints of old before his time, and why
they persecuted them.

5thly. A fifth cause or ground yet, which the same Scripture does assign or
declare of these their Spirits and Doings, was from a causeless and carnal Fear
which they had conceived; that if the Saints of old, Jesus Christ and his
Followers, in those days, were suffered amongst them, or if their Doctrine
should have prevailed, then these would grow to big for them, and would
withdraw their subjection from their Rulers, Rebel, usurp Authority, and would
be had in greatest Esteem and Repute by the People, and so derogate from the
Honor, Esteem, Authority and Rule of those who did thus envy and persecute
them; they were ready to think that all Men would believe on Christ, and that
all the World would go after him, if they should have let Him and his Followers
alone, and should not have stopped their course, as they did declare, John
11.48. If we let him thus alone (said they there,) all men will believe on him,
and the Romans shall come and take away both our Place and Nation: And again,
John 12.19. (they said,) Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world
is gone after him; thus did their causeless Jealousy work to Envy and Hatred,
and Persecution. This made the Chief Priests and Scribes so highly displeased,
Mat. 21. when they had seen Christ to have such Esteem among the People, and
the same so evidenced by the multitudes spreading of their Garments, decking
the Ways where he did ride, with Branches, and crying out Hosanna to the Son of
David, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
Highest, v. 8, 9, 15. and upon this, they v. 23. demanded of Christ, by what
authority he did those things? as if he were about to usurp Authority, or at
least that he did it against or without Authority. Particular instances of this
cause or ground too, not a few the Scripture takes notice of, as in Exodus 1.
The King there was (without cause,) jealous that the Jews there would grow too
great and numerous, and Rebel, therefore consulted to prevent their increase by
dealing hardly with them; his Jealousy is expressed v. 9, 10. in these words,
The Children of Israel are more and mightier than we. Come, let us deal wisely
with them lest they multiply, and it come to pass that when there falls out
any War, they join also to our Enemies and fight against us. This causeless
Fear put him upon dealing cruelly with them, in order to prevent their growth,
as in the following verses; upon which account also Joseph's Brethren went, Gen
37. they suspecting by his Dreams, and his Fathers show of love to him, that
Joseph would be greater than they, v. 4. and the 8, and 11. they thereupon are
said there, to hate him, and envy him; and v. 19, 20. of the same Chap. they
consulted to slay him: They could not bear with the thoughts of this, that he
should be greater than they in his Fathers Heart, nor superior unto them in
aftertimes, which they had guessed his Dreams did intimate that he should be;
therefore they hate him, and resolve to prevent the coming thereof to pass, by
taking away of his Life; tho God purposed to advance Joseph to save them alive,
as Joseph afterward told them, Genesis 45.5. This Spirit is taken notice of also
in Joshua from the same ground, in Moses time, Numb. 11.26. When Eldad and
Medad had prophesied in the Camp, the young man presently (thinking Moses was
clouded somewhat by this,) told Moses on it, v. 27. and v. 28. said, My Lord,
Moses forbid them; which Spirit of Envy in Joshua, and the cause on it too Moses
perceived, and blamed him for it, in these words, in the next verses, Enviest
thou for my sake? would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them all; doubtless, Joshua here thought
that none should have the honor of a Spirit of Prophecy but Moses; or if they
had, they should not show it, as being eclipsing to Moses Glory; and this
stirred up this Envy in him. For this cause also did Saul eye and envy David in
that day, and sought his Life; David had gotten far into the opinion of his
Fellow Subjects, through his prudent Behavior in the Kings business; and Saul
feared that he would usurp the Kingdom too doubtless, which he intimated in
these words. 1 Samuel 18. When the Women came after the overthrow of the
Philistines, singing, in v. 6, 7. that Saul had slain his thousands, and David
his ten thousands, he v. 8. was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and
he said, they have ascribed to David his ten thousand, and to me thousand, and
can he have more but the Kingdom? The Effect follows in the next verses; Saul
from that day following eyed David, and resolved and endeavored to kill him;
and Chap. 19.1. He gave order to his Son and Servants to kill him. Yea, he was
also wroth with his Son Jonathan upon the same grounds, for Jonathans sake, 1 Samuel 19. when Jonathan had been excusing David's absence, v. 28, 29. Saul's anger
was kindled against Jonathan, v. 30. and he said unto him, Do not I know that
thou have chosen the Son of Jesse to thine own confusion, etc. and in the next
verse, he said, As long as the Son of Jesse lives upon the ground, thou shall
not be established, nor thy Kingdom; wherefore send and fetch him to me, for he
shall surely die: Here Saul's apprehension that David did eclipse his Glory, and
that the People had too much esteem for David, and that he might prove disloyal
and usurp the Kingdom, and that it could not be sure to him or his Son if David
lived, was the great cause of his envy and malice against David, and his
pursuing of his Life; although David had fully evidenced his Duty and Loyalty to
Saul all along; and eminently in that, when Saul had been twice in the power of
his hands, that he might have slain him, he would not hurt him, not revenge
himself, yea, and rescued him from those with him who would have done it; all
which Saul himself acknowledged, as it is at large 1 Samuel 24.4, 5, 6, 17. Chap.
26.8, 9.10, 11, 25. After the same manner did Herod the King against Christ in
those days, and from the same cause or ground, Mat. 2. He having heard that
Christ was born, and that some had come to him to worship him, v. 1, 2, 3. He
was troubled and all Jerusalem with him: He now began to be jealous, that this
Christ the King of the Jews, might possibly take away his Power or lessen him,
and he thereupon resolves to prevent it; and v. 8. sends to enquire after him,
under pretense that he would worship him, but (as is evident by the Sequel,) it
was that he might kill him; for v. 16. it is said, That when he saw that he was
mocked of the wise men, he was very wrath, and sent forth, and slew all the
Children which were in Bethlehem, and the coasts thereof, from two years old
and upwards, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise
men: Here rather than he would endanger his Honor and Authority, (which he had
causelessly feared if Christ lived,) he (that he might be sure to his Christ,)
shed the innocent Blood of many Children. Upon the same grounds went the Chief
Priests and Pharisees, in John 11.47, 48. in their envy against, and
persecuting of Christ; said they in their Council, What do we do? for this man
does many miracles. If we let him alone all men will believe on him; and the
Romans shall come and take away both our Place and Nation: Here were they
jealous, that if Christ did go on, he would get such Esteem and Honor, that it
would endanger their Honor and Authority too, that they should be lessened
among the People; and this set them at enmity against Christ, and upon
persecuting of him, and using of all means to render Him and his Doctrine
contemptible, and not to be endured. Upon this account too, the Adversaries of
the Jews dealt so with them, Ezra 4. They (hearing that the Jews were building
the Temple, v. 1.) presently in the 12, and 13. and following verses, conceived
a causeless Fear that these would Rebel, withhold the Kings due, and dishonor
the King; and so did they tell the King in these words, The Jews are come unto
Jerusalem building the rebellious and bad City, etc. Be it known unto the King,
That if this City be builded, etc. they will not pay Tole, etc. and its not
meet for us to see the King dishonored; which Letter of theirs begot the like
jealousy in the King, and thereupon he commanded their Work to cease, v. 20,
21. So also it is recorded of the Jews themselves, that they suspected Christ
(because he was called King of the Jews,) that he would grow too great, and
vail their Glory; and therefore did they persecute and hate him; therefore did
they tell Pilate thus, John 19.12. If thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's
Friend; for whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar, and v.
15. when Pilate said to them, Shall I Crucify your King? they answered, We
have no King but Caesar: So did their fear of their own falling into Infamy and
Disgrace amongst the People, cause them also to hinder the preaching of Christ
to be the Messiah, and to have been risen from the Dead, by all the means they
could, and to persecute the Preachers of the Gospel; for they knew well, that
if the People should once believe that indeed he was the Christ, the Son of
God, all those who had had a hand in persecuting and slaying him, would have
been judged murderers of him, (as the Apostle Act. 5. did affirm they were, v.
30.) and so all their Honor and Credit among the People; that this was upon
their Heart, the Holy Ghost in the same Chap. notes, v. 24. it is said, When the
Chief Priests and the Captain of the Temple had heard what the Apostles had
preached, and done in this Name of Jesus, they doubted of them whereto this
would grow; and v. 27, 28. They took them and brought them before the Council;
and the High Priest asked them, saying, Did not we straightly command you, that
you should not teach in this name? and behold, you have filled Jerusalem with
your Doctrine, and intend to bring this man's Blood upon us; of which, tho they
had been guilty of, yet would they not that notice should be taken of that
wickedness, lest they should fall into disesteem amongst the People. Upon this
ground also was it, that Haman hated Mordicai at that rate, and sought his
Life; he thought that Mordicai clouded his Honor, and further feared that
Mordicai might get some favor at Court, because he remained still in the Kings
Gate and would not bow to him; therefore did Hamans jealous Heart work how to
destroy him, as is expressed, Hester 3. it is said there, v. 5. That when Haman
saw that Mordicai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was Haman full of
wrath; and thereupon in the following verses, he attempts both his and his, and
all the Jews destruction: Here the fear of the deminution of his Honor, or
obstructing of the height he aspired too, put him upon hating of Mordicai, and
endeavoring his ruin; as is yet more plain from his own words, Chap. 5. after
he had given an account to his Friends there, throughout the beginning of the
Chapter, of all his Honor and Favor at Court, and other his Advantages; he v.
13. spoke thus, All this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordicai the Jew
sitting at the Kings Gate; strongly did his Jealousy work within him, lest
Mordicai should be in Favor and check his; that all he had availed him nothing,
therefore makes a Gallows to hang Mordicai on, in the next verse. Thus was this
noted to have been one cause, why Men (wicked Ones,) have hated and persecuted
others, in those Ages of the World.

6thly. A sixth ground of their wrath and violence against good Men and Things
in those days, and of which the Scriptures gives an account, was the blind
Zeal of some, for the Heathenish and Idolatrous Worship; others for that
Religion they were born and bred up in, the Traditions, Ceremonies and Customs
of the Jews, of which they were so tender and so jealous of loosing or
altering, that they could not bear with the appearance of any thing which
looked that way, but presently did fly out into rage and violence against all
Men and Doctrins that seemed to thwart it, or like to disgrace or disparage it;
as it was said of Israel of old, 2 Chronicles. 36. v. 14. That the chief of the
Priests and the Prophets transgressed very much, after all the abominations of
the Heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, etc. and they had habituated
themselves so to do, that this was the effect, v. 15. That when God had sent to
them by his Messengers, because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place; They v. 16. mocked the messengers of God, despised his word,
and misused his Prophets: Their custom to worship in that false way, made them
now not able to bear with a reprroof or persuasion, to return to worship again
after the way which God himself had prescribed; so zealous were they for that
which they had been used to in those days; therefore did they persecute and
misuse the Messengers, whom God had sent to have turned them from their
Heathenish way of worshipping; which also the Psalmist noted in his time, Psalm.
2. He prophesied that which should come to pass in Christ's time, Why (says he
there,) do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of
the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord
and against his Anointed, saying, Lets break their bands assunder, and cast
away their cords from us: When the Lords Anointed should come, he would by his
Laws alter the Jewish ways of worshipping, according to their old Law,
Traditions and Customs, and introduce a new, as the Law of God before did
contradict and forbid the Heathen Worship, which neither the one nor the other
could bear with (while unconverted); therefore would they rage, imagine and take
counsel against God and Christ, how to break their Bands, and to cast away
their Cords; they would none of Christ's Government or Laws; of which also
Christ himself in his days spoke to his Disciples, John 16. v. 2. that this
blind Zeal should put them upon killing of the Opposers thereof; The time
comes (says he there,) that whosoever kills you, will think he does God
good service: Their opinion of their own false Way, should be so strong, that
it should prompt them to destroy any who should preach or practice the
contrary, as for instance it came to pass. Such was Paul's Zeal before his
Conversion, Act. 8. it is said of him, v. 3. That he made havoc of the Church,
entering into every house, and haleing men and women, and committing them to
prison, the cause of which, was his zeal for his Religion, as himself
acknowledged, Act. 22.3, 4. in these words, I was zealous toward God as ye all
at this day; and I persecuted this way unto the death, etc. All this, as the
consequent of his mistaken Zeal, as he said, Acts 26. v. 9. I verily thought
with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus,
which things I also did; and the particulars he named in the next verses; Being
exceeding mad against them, I persecuted them, etc. And again, Gal. 1.13. he
declared it in these words, Ye have heard of my Conversation in times past in
the Jews Religion, that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God and
wasted it; The grounds and reasons stirring him up hereto, was his mistaken
Zeal, as he himself says in the next verse, in these words, And profited in
the Jews Religion above many of mine equals in mine own Nation, being more
exceeding zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers: Here, his blind Zeal, he
verily thought he ought to do as he did, (he having been bred up in the strict
observation of the Law, and of the Jewish Traditions and Customs,) made him so
exceeding mad against all such whose Doctrine or Practice was otherwise; could
not bear with any alteration or turning out of his accustomed way, nor with any
who did walk, profess or teach otherwise; therefore was he so violent in
persecuting of Christians, and in his endeavors to hinder the spreading of the
Gospel, till Christ met with him, and convinced him to purpose of his mistaken
zeal. Another instance of this is noted by Daniel, in his days, Dan. 3. When
the King there had set up an Image, v. 1. and dedicated it, v. 3. and in the
following verses, proclaimed that all should at such times fall down and
worship: And the Caldeans great zeal for this Idolatry put them upon accusing
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, etc. for not worshipping this Image as the
Caldeans did worship; this also set the King into a great rage too against
them, (such was his zeal also); yea, to such a degree too, that when they had
utterly denied to worship the Image, he commanded the Furnace to be heat
seventy times hotter, and they to be cast in, which was executed v. 21. So hot
was he for his Image Worship, that the Non-complyers must die for it. Upon the
like ground also did the Scribes and Pharisees quarrel with Christ and his
Disciples in those days, Mat. 15. Why, say they there to Christ, do thy
Disciples transgress the Traditions of the the Elders? for they wash not their
hands when they eat Bread, v. 2. Their Heat and Fervor for their Religion and
Traditions put them upon this Cavelling, tho Christ had told them, that they by
their Traditions had made void the Law of God; this Tradition and Custom of
theirs is set forth in Mark 7.3, 4. thus, That the Pharisees and the Jews
except they wash their hands often, eat not, holding the Traditions of the
Elders; and when they came from the Market, except they washed they would not
eat; and many other things there be which they have received to hold, as the
washing of Cups and Pots, Brasen-vessels, and of Tables (or Beds). Their Heart
engagedness to these Ways and Traditions received of their Father, made them
quarrel at Christ and his Followers for not observing of them: So again, for
not observing the Sabbath, Mat. 12. they said, Behold, thy Disciples do that
which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day, v. 2. And this put them upon
endeavoring to ensnare Christ by questions, and take counsel against him how
they might destroy him; they could not bear with such who did not as they did
in these matters in those days. The Philosophers were so addicted to their
Idols, Act. 17. that they despised Paul and his Doctrine, and said, v. 14. What
will this babbler say, he seems to be a setter forth of strange gods; and v.
19, 20. they said, May we know what this new Doctrine whereof thou speak is?
For thou bring certain things; we would know therefore what these things
mean. These could not bear with the preaching up the true God; they being
worshipers of Idols, the true God was a strange God to them; and what Paul had
preached were strange things, because contrary to what they had been bred up
in; and their zeal was so hot for their false Worship, that they despised and
persecuted such as offered the true; they took Paul here and carried him before
the highest Court, where they put these questions to him: After the same manner
did the Jews with Paul upon this ground too, Act. 18.11. He having before
preached Jesus Christ to them at Corinth, They here with one accord made an
insurrection against him, and brought him to the Judgment Seat, saying, This
Fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the Law: Here now was the
great ground of their Enmity and Violence against him; they could not bear to
have Men worship God in any other way, than in that which they had usually
worshipped according to the Law and their Traditions, nor bear with any
Persuasions thereunto; such was their blind zeal for that wherein they had been
educated and used to. Their old received Customs were more valued by them than
the Laws of God; tho God was then to be worshipped otherwise, as Christ had
hinted to them; and as the Apostle Paul, Acts 24. there confessed before the
Governor that he did, v. 14. in these words, After the way they call Heresy,
so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things written in the Law and
the Prophets: But because he did dissent from their Traditions and Customs, and
worshipped not as they did, therefore called they his Way Heresy; and they
persecuted him as in the beginning of the Chapter and before, although it was
according to what was written in the Law and the Prophets. So again, Act. 21.
The Jews there, v. 27. stirred up the People, and laid hands on Paul, and v.
28. cried out, this is the man who teaches all men every where against the
People, and the Law, and this Place: This was the great thing which moved them
here; Paul had taught the People to worship God otherwise than according to the
Ceremonies of the Law, the Customs and Traditions of the Jews, wherein they had
been so long conversant; and this they could not bear with. The Admirers of
Diana did so too, Act. 19. when the Silversmith there had (tho upon another
account,) insinuated, that the Apostles did design by their Preaching, to
disgrace and render their Goddess Diana contemptible, v. 24, 25. and so on.
These Adorers of Diana were very wroth upon the hearing on it, and the whole
City was filled with confusion, crying up Diana; O they could not bear with any
thing which they had apprehended to have any tendency to the lessening of their
so much admired Diana, which quickly put them into an unanswerable uprore and
violence against Paul's Companions, whom they had caught, v. 28. and so on, as
the Town Clerk himself had told them, v. 37, 38. and so on. Thus the Scpipture
has taken notice of this Cause also of the Enmity in the Breasts of wicked
Men, and of their persecuting Spirit against the Saints in those days.

7thly. There was yet a seventh cause or rise of the Enmity and persecuting
Practices of these against the Saints, which those divine Records has set down
in it; that was the private Profit and Gain that some Men had by some Religion
then professed, or some other Way then in esteem amongst the People; which Gain
being by Christ or the Apostles, preaching of the truth, abated, or in danger
of being gone; they were set in a rage against the Truth, and against all those
who preached it, or believed and embraced it; they could not bear with the
thoughts of their Gain being taken away; therefore did persecute and endeavor
to destroy the Apostles and others, and used all means to prevent the spreading
of their Doctrins. This very thing put the Silversmiths upon stirring up the
People, who were the great Adorers of Diana, Act. 19. Not their zeal for Diana
so much, as for their Profit: When Paul there had preached in Asia, and turning
People from the worshipping of false gods; the Silversmiths presently
apprehending that this would bring Diana their Goddess, into disesteem, that
People would not worship her any more, and then farewell their Gain; which
matter so troubled them, that it is said thus there, v. 23. That there was no
small stir about this way; and in the next verses, That Demetrius who made the
Silver Shrines to Diana; brought no small gain to the Craftsmen, whom he called
together, and said unto them, Ye know that by this craft we have our wealth;
and Paul has said, They be no gods which are made with hands; so that not only
our craft is in danger, but Diana would be despised; which Saying proved
sufficient to beget an Enmity in the Breasts of the Craftsmen against the
Apostles and that Doctrine, and to set them upon persecuting of them, as in the
following verses they did; for they very well knew; that if once the People did
believe that the Religion and Worship they were found in were not right, Diana
no Goddess; and that all their Zeal in and for that way, was no better than
Vanity; Superstition and Idolatry; then no body would employ them to make
Silver Shrines for Diana any more, and consequently they must take leave of
their old Gain; this now set them into such a flame of Envy and Violence
against the Apostles and their Preaching. From the very same cause were the
Masters of the Damsel, who was possessed with the Spirit of Divination stirred
up against Paul and Sylas, and did persecute them, Act. 16.16. it is there said,
That a certain Damsel possessed with a Spirit of Divination met us, who brought
her master much gain by southsaying, whom Paul, in v. 18. cast out; upon which
her masters, in the next verses, caught Paul and Sylas, and drew them unto the
Rulers unto the Magistrates, saying, These being Jews do exceedingly trouble
our City and teach Customs, etc. Upon which the multitude rose up against them,
and the Magistrates commanded them to be beaten, which they did, and put them
into Prison. The main cause of all these Accusations and Complaints against
them, and of their Imprisonment and Beating, was only the loss of that Gain the
Damsel had brought her Masters; as it is expressly said, v. 19. in these words,
And when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they caught
Paul, etc. Thus has the Scripture also taken notice of this cause too, why
some in those Ages of the World, did hate and persecute the Saints.

8thly. Yet further, these divine Records has taken notice of an eighth cause
or spring from whence ill Men's Spirits were moved against the good, or from
whence many were engaged in persecuting and destroying of them; that was from a
fear of, or desire to please and gratify others; some great Men, or Men of
Power, who were themselves full of Envy and Malice against the Saints, and did
persecute them; and thereby to secure to themselves the good opinion of those
still, tho otherwise against their own judgments and inclinations, and it may
be against convictions too, that in so doing they did not well; as the
Scripture speaks it was in Christ's time, John 12.42. Some great ones there did
believe on Christ; but it is expressly said, That because of the Pharisees they
did not confess him, lest they should have been put out of the Synagogue; and
the reason in the next verse, is given for it further; For ('it is said,) they
loved the praise of Men more than the praise of God: And doubtless, these who
would not loose the praise of Men, did sit and judge with their Fellow Rulers,
when they persecute Christ and his Followers, whatever their own thoughts on it
were; their desire to abide in the good opinion of the Great Ones, and their
fear of being frowned upon by them, put them upon thus doing against such of
whom they had good thoughts: And as the Elders and Nobles dwelling in the City
where Naboth lived, did obey the wicked command of Jezebel, in Ahabs name, 1
Kings 21. They feared no doubt, the displeasing or loosing the Favor of Jezebel
or Ahab; therefore executed that wicked Command against innocent Naboth, as in
v. 8, 9. and following verses; Jezebel there writes in the Kings name and under
his seal, and sent it to these Nobles and Elders, that they should proclaim a
Fast, set Naboth on high, and set two witnesses, Sons of Belial before him,
saying, Thou did blaspheme God and the King; and then to carry him out and
stone him, which the Elders and Nobles readily did, rather than they would run
the hazard of falling into the King or Queens disfavor; although they knew in so
doing, they did shed innocent Blood most unjustly, under the notion of a
judicial Proceeding, v. 12, 13. and no other cause of their execution of this
wicked Commandment can be assigned with any probability. So Herod in his days,
from this very Root did deal so with John the Baptist, Mat. 14. He v. 10. sent
and beheaded John the Baptist in Prison; and the Evangelist there in the former
verses, give this as the cause, or that which put him upon so doing; he having
formerly promised to the Daughter of Herodias, that she should have whatsoever
she should have asked, v. 7. and she v. 8. asking John's head; it is expressly
said v. 9. That the King was very sorry: nevertheless, for the Oaths sake and
them who sat at meat with him, he commanded it to be done: Here Herod's
unwillingness to displease his Company, took away John's life; that did
influence him here to do, what otherwise he would not have done. And again, it
is said of Herod, Act. 12.1. That he stretched forth his hand to vex certain of
the Church, v. 2. He killed James with the sword; and v. 3. because he saw it
pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also; To persecute the
Church was a matter so light to him, that he could do it upon so small a motive
as the pleasing of the Jews, who were fixed in their Enmity against Christ, his
Disciples and Doctrine before, as he well knew. In like manner did Felix with
Paul upon the fame motive, Act. 24.26, 27. Having sent for Paul often; and when
another Governor came in Felix room, he left Paul bound, (tho he knew him to be
innocent,) upon this ground only, as it is expressly said, That Felix willing to
show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound; The pleasing of the persecuting
Jews, was of sufficient force to persuade him to leave Paul bound. So is it
said of Festus himself, Act. 25. Paul having pleaded his own Innocence before
him, Festus to gratify the desire of the Jews, (who had a design to have
killed Paul in the way,) persuadeth Paul not to have stood to his Appeal, but
to go to Jerusalem; the Jews desire and design is expressed in v. 2, and 3. in
these words, The High Priest and the Chief of the Jews informed him against
Paul, and desired favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem,
laying wait in the way to kill him; upon which Festus v. 9 (moved thereto only
upon this account, that he thereby might please the Jews,) would have exposed
Paul to their intended Violence, as it is expressed there in these words, But
Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul and said, Will thou go
up unto Jerusalem. Pilate also under the same Temptation, (being willing to
keep the favor of Caesar, and loath to be accouted Disloyal; the Jews having
urged that Argument,) did deliver up Christ to be Crucified, as is fully
expressed John 19. for he had acknowledged Christ's innocence often, as in Chap.
18. v. 38. in these words, I find in him no fault at all; and in Chap. 19. v.
4. Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in
him; the same words again he said to them, Yea, and v. 12. he sought to release
him; But the Jews then in the next words, crying out, if thou let this man go
thou art not Caesar's friend; which when Pilate had heard, their clamor
prevailed: Here was he touched when nothing else would prevail by Argument of
force, to cause him to deliver up Jesus to be Crucified; this was, he either
for fear of loosing Caesar's favor, being thought no Friend of his, or to please
the Jews, did that which was otherwise against his own judgment and
inclination; for in Mark 15.15. it is said, That he did it to please the
multitude; so that both seemed to be upon his Heart. Thus has the Scripture
also taken notice, that fear of Flattery was often the main cause which put
many Persons upon the unjust and cruel Persecuting of innocent and good Men,
and to assist others therein, when nothing else would have influenced to such
Doings.

In the fourth and last place, the Scripture is not silent neither, in setting
forth the desperateness of such a Spirit of Enmity, and of such persecuting
Practices in those wicked Men, in those Ages of the World. First, In that it
shows, that God himself and Christ did take themselves to be concerned in all
that which was done against his People: And Secondly, It declared the many
direful Threatenings against such Persecutors; as also the sad Effects and
Consequents of such Doings. And First, It sets forth how much God and Christ
reasons themselves concerned therewith, as he was for his People under the
burden laid upon them in Egypt, Exodus 3. God said, v. 7. I have surely seen
the affliction of my people which are in Egypt; and I have heard their cry, by
reason of their Task masters: for I know their sorrow; and in the next verse, I
am come down to deliver them; of which God told Moses again, v. 9. Here is
observed what notice God took on it, and how he was concerned about it. So
again, Psalm. 105. it is said of Israel there by the Psalmist, v. 13, 14, 15.
That when they went from one nation to another, etc. he suffered no man to do
them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not my
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Isaiah records these words, Chap. 63.8,
9. He was their Savior: in all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the
Angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them,
etc. Here were great Expressions of his care and concernedness for them. God
himself by the Prophet Zachariah spoke thus concerning them, Chap. 2. v. 8. He
who touches you, touches the Apple of mine eye; and in v. 9. he says of
their Enemies, Behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, etc. So did Christ
himself declare his concernedness for the Church, when Saul had persecuted
them, Act. 9.1, 2, 3. Christ met him in the way; and in the next verses uttered
these words, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Who art thou, said Saul! I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks:
Here Christ evidenced himself to be nearly concerned for his Saints; and also
he hinted to Saul the danger of persecuting too, It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks.

Then Secondly, The Scripture Records, the many direful Threatenings against
such Persecutors in those days, and declared the many sad Effects and
Consequents of such doing in those Ages of the World. In the general, God said,
Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43. That he will revenge the blood of his servants, and will
render vengeance to the adversaries: And again, Psalm. 7.13. He has ordained
his arrows against the Persecutors. Yea, thus spoke he to his People Israel in
particular, by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 10. O my people, etc. be not afraid of
the Assyrians, he shall smite thee with a rod, v. 24. and in v. 25, and 26. For
yet a little while and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger, in their
destruction; and the Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him, according
to the slaughter of Midian: Yea, and tho their stout Hearts would not take
notice of Gods Hand lifted up against them, Isa. 26. yet God said there, That
they should see and be ashamed for their envy at the people, (or toward my
people); yea, (said he there,) the fire of thine enemies shall devour them, v.
11. Again, Isa. 51. I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, the
dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put
it into the hands of them who afflict thee, who said to thy soul, bow down that
we may go over, etc. v. 22, 23. Here God, tho he did permit his Peoples Enemies
sometimes to lay the Rod on his, yet the Dregs of the Cup the Enemies,
Persecuters themselves are threatened to drink; with which God threatened several
Nations, who had been his Peopls. Isreal's great Enemies and Oppressors, for
their insolent insulting over them, and for all their cruel and severe Dealings
with them, Ezekiel. 25. The Amonites for their saying Aha, Aha, against Gods
Sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was
desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into captivity, v. 3.
and in the next verses, there are Threatenings denounced against them for this
further, and for that That they had claped their hands and rejoiced in heart,
with all their despite against the Land of Israel, v. 6. and in the following
verses Threatenings are denounced against them, and against Moab too in the 8,
9, and following verses; and v. 12. it is said from the Lord, That because Edom
has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and has greatly
offended and revenged himself upon them; therefore did God threaten them sorely
in the next verses; and again, in v. 15. it is said of the Philistines thus,
Because they dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despightful
heart, to destroy for the old hatred; therefore thus says the Lord, I will
stretch forth my hand, etc. in the next verses. God also threatens Titus for
the lifting up her self against Israel; see it at large, Ezekiel. 26. and in Chap.
35. God by the Prophet there says to Mount Seir thus, I am against thee, and I
will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate,
etc. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. and in v. 5. he declares the cause in these words, Because
thou have a perpetual hatred, and have shed the blood of the Children of Israel
by the force of the sword, and in the time of their calamity, etc. and in the
next verses he says, I will prepare thee to blood, and blood shall pursue
thee, etc. So did God threaten the Heathen in general for the same cause, in
Chap. 36. at the beginning; and in Zephan, Chap. 2. did he threaten Moab and
Ammon upon this account, v. 8. I have heard the reproach of Moab, (said he,)
and the revilings of the Children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my
people, and magnified themselves against their borders: therefore as I live,
says the Lord there, v. 9. and so on, Moab shall as Sodom, etc. Nay, God
threatened the Heads of Jacob and Princes of the house of Israel, for their
hating of the good and loving of the evil, and (as the natural consequent
thereof,) their hurting and persecuting of his People, Micah 3.1, 2, 3, 4. And
again he threatens Edom, in Obadiah, v. 9, and 10. for this cause too, in these
words, And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every
one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter: for thy violence against
thy Brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever:
Thus did God in those days, take notice of the abuses done to his, and did
threaten their Persecutors. Yea further, in the days of the New Testament too,
does the Holy Ghost take special notice of these things; Christ himself
pronounced a woe in general to such who should offend his, Mat. 18. said he
there, Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the Sea, v. 6. and in v. 7. he adds a woe to the
world because of offenses, etc. and woe to the man by whom they come; this he
spoke in general, but more particular to the Jews: He in Mat. 23.29, 30.
pronounced Woes against them upon this account, and spoke dreadfully to them,
v. 34, and 37. in these words, I send you Prophets, etc. and some of them ye
shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall you scourge in your Synagogues,
and persecute them from City to City: That upon you may come, all the righteous
blood shed upon the Earth, from righteous Abel, etc. According to which the
Apostle spoke, 1 Thessalonians. 2. of the Jews, he having said to the Thessalonians, v.
14. That they also had suffered like things of their Countrymen, as they have
of the Jews; he v. 15. said of them in these words, Who killed the Lord Jesus
and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and
are contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved: Here were they highly engaged in a persecuting Spirit, and of
opposition of the Gospel of Salvation. But what says the Holy Ghost in the
next words, concerning the Consequents thereof; To fill up their sin always
(says he,) for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. And least any Man
should flatter himself with vain hopes of Escaping, tho he should have
persisted in such a Spirit and Practice; Christ himself has possitively
asserted, that God will avenge it, Luke 18.7, 8. in these words, Shall not God
avenge his own elect, who cry day and night unto him, etc. I tell you, that he
will avenge them speedily: Here or hereafter, vengeanc will overtake the
Enemies and Persecutors of his Elect; and that it is but just in God so to do,
the Apostle intimates 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. and so on in these words, Seeing it is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them who trouble you,
and to you who are troubled rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed, etc.
to take vengeance on them who know not God, etc. v. 9. Their punishment is said
to be then their everlasting destruction, from the Presence of the Lord and the
Glory of his Power: And the righteousness of God is proclaimed in his executing
this vengeance on them, Rev. 16. v. 5, 6. in these words, Thou art righteous, O
Lord, etc. because thou have judged thus: for they have shed the blood of
Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are
worthy. The Scripture has taken notice, that sometimes God did execute
threatened Judgments upon such in this World; so did he with all the Countries
before threatened, for their hatred against, and vengeance and cruelty they took
and exercised upon his People Israel; and Haman himself met with the same evil
he had designed to have executed upon Mordicai. And some times it is reserved to
be punished in the World to come, and shall remain upon them for ever; of which
Judgments unavoidably to come upon them, that envious Spirit they were found
in, was a full evidence, as the Apostle said, Philip. 1.28. to the persecuted
Saints in that day, by way of comfort to them, in these words, And in nothing
terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition,
and to you of salvation, and that of God: And to which also Christ spoke home
unto the Jews, Mat. 25. speaking there, v. 31. and so on, of his coming to
judge the world; he v. 41, 42, and so on, says, Then shall the King say unto
them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels; for I was an hungary and ye gave me no meat, I
was thirsty and ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger and ye took me not in,
naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in prison and ye visited me not; and he
explains his meaning to them in v. 45. In as much (says he,) as ye did it not
to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me; and this direful Word
follows in v. 46. These shall go away into everlasting punishment; whence
they might have easily inferred, that if it should be so sad with those who
gave not Meat, Clothed not, gave not Drink, visited not in Prisons in
Sickness; how much more sad would the Condition of such be who took away their
Meat and Drink, made them Poor and Naked, cast them into Prison, were
instrumental to make them Sick, yea, and take away their Lives too? If a Woe be
pronounced against them who are at ease in Zion, and not grieved for the
Affliction of Joseph, as in Amos 6.1, 2, 3. and so on, what might those expect
who were the Afflicters of Joseph? It was no light thing when God should come
to avenge; for much the Apostle did give them to know in those days, when he
had affirmed Heb. 10.30. these words as that which God had said, Vengeance
belong to me, says the Lord, and I will repay it, etc. He subjoins this in the
next verse, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Therefore God himself by the Prophet David, Psalm. 2. After he had been
Prophesying of the Rage of Princes and People against the Lord and his
Anointed; and had set forth their Vanity and the ineffectualness of their
Attempts against him, in the beginning of the Psalm; he v. 10, 11, 12. advises
them to submit, because of the sad Consequents of their persisting in their
Rage, in these words, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled
but a little, etc. What dreadful Judgments has befallen the Jews, since they
in their rage against Christ, utttered these words, Mat. 27.25. His blood be
upon us and our Children! Thus do these divine Records especially note the
great and seated Enmity which was in the Hearts of wicked Men in those days of
the World, against good Men and Things; and the breakings out thereof in the
several Ways they then took, to prevent the increase of them and it; together
with the Causes or several Grounds from when that Spirit in those days did
arise and took life; as also the dreadful Case of such, the sad Consequents of
being found in such a Spirit and Practices.

And are not these things written (as are other things,) in the Scriptures of
old, for the admonition of those upon whom the ends of the world are come? And
does it not concern all Men to instruct themselves therein, in order to their
own escape from the Errors of these, and so save themselves from the direful
Consequents and Effects depending upon them?

FINIS.

