A Reasonable Account, Why some Pious, Nonconforming Ministers in England judge
it Sinful for them to perform their Ministerial Acts, in public, solemn prayer
by the Prescribed Forms of others.

Wherein several of their Arguments are modestly propounded, opened and
Justified against pretended answers given to them, either by Ireneus Freeman,
or Mr. Falconer, in his book entitled Libertas Ecclesiastica, or others.

The strength also of the several arguments brought by them, for the lawfulness
of forms to be used universally by ministers, in their public ministrations,
is fairly tried.

1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man has received the Gift, even so minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any man
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God, etc. As we believe, so we speak.
Romans 14. 23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
faith: For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Habemus quidem nos etiam in
Ecclesia nostra Agendas, and ordinem in sacris celebrandis servandum; sed nemo
alligatur precibus aut exhortationibus Liturgiae nostrae: proponuntur tantum ut
paradigmata, quibus precum aut exhortationum materia and forma, quoad
substantialia judicantur, non ut iisdem verbis astringantur ministri.
Didoclavii Altar Damasc. p. 613.



Anno 1679.

To the Reader.
WE suppose thee not so much a stranger in our Israel, but that thou know,
that from the 24 of Aug. 1662. very many hundreds of ministers and many of them
(their greatest adversaries being judges) of no invaluable parts, and worth
have not only been removed from the Ecclesiastical livings of which they were
possessed: but also incapacitated to take any other. And very many of them with
their wives and children left to live merely upon the charity of their friends,
who formerly valued their ministry. Had it been for any immoral debauchery, for
any ignorance or negligence of or in their work; they had but been deservedly
dealt with, and had deserved no great pity: but it was because for fear of
sinning against God, they durst not do diverse things, which were made the
terms of their abiding in their station. Possibly, had the like number of any
sort of persons in England, for so many years been debarred of making any
advantage of their education for a livelihood, their complaints would have been
louder then theirs have been. We are not ignorant how much some of our Brethren
(at ease in Zion) have magnified these poor men's portions of alms, during their
begging time. To which we shall only say, That though we shall ever adore
Gods goodness in enlarging the hearts of some, that these good men have been
kept alive, and from a scandalous beggary; yet we are pretty well assured, from
the diligence we observe in those that love thus to talk to heap up parsonages
upon parsonages, and sine cure's and dignities to make one livelihood; that we
do not think, what ever liberty they give their tongues, that any valuable
person amongst them would have been content to have changed lots with the best
of the N. C. or to have been tied up to feed at the Rackstaves they have fed
at. We desire for ever to be thankful both to God, and our most gracious
sovereign, for the liberty we for a little time enjoyed to preach the
Everlasting gospel, though as to maintenance it extended (as all know) no
farther then to beg cum privilegio. Under these circumstances we might
reasonably have expected that our Brethren should have had pity upon us because
the hand of God had touched us. But alas, in stead of it, we have seen
continual reason to cry out with Job, How long will you vex our souls, and
break us in pieces with words? These ten times have you reproached us, and are
not ashamed that you have made your selves strange unto us, why do you
persecute us! and are not satisfied with our flesh? yet had they been our
enemies that had done thus, then we could have born it, but they were not they
that magnified themselves against us. They are men that were our Equals, our
Acquaintance: We took sweet counsel together and went to the house of God in
Company. Had they been some of our Brethren who felt the smart of former times
for adherence to his late Majesty, or using the Liturgy (then prohibited) we
could have born it, though they had mistaken the due objects of their wrath;
there being none of us, that we know of, who hurt them: many of us, who
heartily pitied them, to our utmost served them, to our power relieved them.
But the truth is, these are not the men, from many of these we have found the
measure we meted to them: But they are those whom we thought of our mind and
could heretofore dispense with their consciences to serve God without Liturgy
or Ceremony, and in all things do as we did; if not serve the time to some
degree beyond what we durst dispense with: These mostly are the men, who have
turned themselves into every imaginable form, in which it could be thought they
could abuse their brethren the servants of the same Lord and Master. Some (not
it seems so good at an Argument) think it worth the while to peruse the
pamphlets and sermons, printed during the late troublesome times; and to pick
out Such sentences as any present Nonconformist then used, and to put them
together to represent the N. C. as men seditous, rebellious, ungovernable, etc.
forgetting in the meantime that some Doctors of their own, and in great
request, are far more deeply chargeable then any N. C. we could ever yet hear
of. And forgetting also, the Act of oblivion, which was necessary for every man
of them that in those times was worth any thing, and that to save his life: and
that a Great person (then whom the church had not in his period a greater
friend) was at last found so far to need it, as his friends thought fit to
plead it in bar to some Articles against him. Another comes forth and picks out
some passages, (the product of a Luxuriant wit and fancy) in some N. C. sermons
and writings, these he stretches upon the tenter, and thinks he has made N.
C. ridiculous enough to the world: Forgetting all this while, that there was a
great Prelate (not many years since) out of whose sermons forty times as much
might have been returned them, and improved to a far other advantage to the
dishonor of their way, if this would have done it, or could have been judged a
fair way of dealing. Others gather up all sentences they can find out of the N.
C. of former times, and their business is to represent the N. C. inconsistent
to themselves: men that can never tell what they would have, etc. In the mean
time torgetting how the circumstances are altered; how many things are required
now, not required then: and as to those things which are the same, how
strangely our circumstances are varied: besides that since their times matters
have been argued at a another rate then they were before: and that the present
N C. did never swear into the sense of their forefathers.

Another thinks it the easiest way to abuse them, by feigning dialogues betwixt
Con. and Noncon. there he can make the poor Non. Con. speak as simply as he
desires, and this it seems is a great Trophy. Another complements them not thus
far, but falls upon them with a cartwhip and all the Rhetoric of Billingsgate:
and then writes another book to persuade the world, it is his duty to revile
them. He thinks to kill them with envenomed words, and then to say, He has
done God good service. Most of them make it one ingredient in their sermons and
discourses, That the Non. Con. are a pack of aunces, men whom they have no hope
to convince, that have nothing to say for themselves, but are perfectly
factious, biassed, and prejudiced persons. We refer thee, Reader, but to Dr.
Parkers and some others scripts, and if thou have so much patience, do but
there read with what Moral language (the first of them especially) has treated
persons to whom he is far inferious both in age and learning, but he has
received a deserved answer. The truth is, All these are but serving another
design: who sees not that there is a New mess of Divinity bringing into the
world, which is not like to be well digested, or received indeed while the N.
C. are in any reputation, but we shall leave that to other hands. As to our
present purpose, Reader! If our Adversaries could have satisfied themselves to
have represented us guilty of all manner of errors in our conversation; we
might possibly have trusted our repute to those who every day see us, and know
our way of life: but when this is not enough to them, unless they can also
persuade the world, that we are fools, and have nothing to say for ourselves,
so as it is but a vain thing for their Rabbi-shipps to discourse us. When in
truth, they have said nothing in answer to what has been said by some of us,
which any, but themselves, will call Reason.

-- quis sit iniquae Tam patiens gentis, tam ferreus ut teneatse. This has
made us (who have other work enough to do) to give thee the trouble of these
following sheets. Every one who knows any thing, knows that Six or Seven things
must be done by us, before we can be admited into a capacity to take any
livings, and so bear our share in what they call the Church of England, none of
which we can submit to; not because of scandal only, (though the Duke of
Ormonds domestic chaplain would make the world believe so) but because we
judge every one of them unlawful: and have arguments, which appear very
probable to us, to evince them such. Amongst them this is one, We must
ordinarily perform our ministerial acts in Prayer, by the prescribed forms of
others. We believe that of all things required of us there be many think, we
have least to say for our opinion in this. This is it we have fixed upon, and
have given thee some of those arguments which makes this appear to us very
probably sinful. We have not willingly omitted any thing, any of them has
said in answer to any of them, nor misreported any of them. We make thee our
judge (Reader) whether they have said any thing amounts to an answer. If they
can destroy the probability which these arguments appear to us to have, we
shall then put some of the other Six things in dispute: but till then we need
go no farther. We have been a little the more concerned to do this, because
we have observed, That in the time of his Majesty's most gracious Indulgence,
Some who appeared not before, appeared to justify the lawfulness of all and
Every thing required of us; if it were possible, to persuade the Parliament to
believe, that there is no reason for any indulgence toward us. Amongst others
the Reverend Mr. Falconer, a Norfolk minister (at this nick of time) engaged
himself; with what success, (so far as he has spoken to the point under our
hands) we have examined: and freely leave the judgment to every unbiassed,
understanding Reader, We could have wished so worthy a person, a better
argument, or better time; for it is now that time of the day as to those
things, as a man can promise himself little repute from writing about them:
there being hardly room left for a new wit to crowd in, we have not willingly
balked any thing Mr. Falconer has said (for we had nothing to do with what he
says in justification of our Liturgy) being not yet come so far as to dispute
the lawfulness of these or those forms. We have desired to treat Mr. Falconer
with that honor which we truly have for him, though we be of another mind to
him; and think we have made it appear he has not said enough to make of his
mind, any reasonable person otherwise minded. But, Reader, as to this Read and
judge; and the good Lord lead thee and us into all truth, and bring us all to
one mind and one heart.

A Reasonable Account, why some Pious, Nonconforming ministers in England judge
it Sinful for them to perform their Ministerial Acts, in public, solemn Prayer
by the Prescribed. Forms of others.
CHAP. I.
The Question stated, What is not the Question? What is? No question about the
lawfulness of forms in general, nor forms of a man's composure for his own use,
nor about any good use of forms, nor about the lawfulness of the use of
scriptural forms, nor about short ejaculations: But only concerning the Lawful
use of forms of Prayer composed by fallible men, and prescribed to others, to
be by them ordinarily used, in stated, solemn prayer, whom God has fitted for
the ministry by giving them the Gift of prayer. The negative asserted.

. 1. AMongst all Paralogismes, there is none more unworthy of a Scholar, then,
that which the Logicians call, Ignoratio Elenchi where the Opponent cheats his
adversary, and the hearers, with an argument that seems to conclude against
the question, but indeed does not; nor is there that we know any matter in
controversy, where in dispute, this fallacy has been made more frequent use
of, then in the Question under our present debate. Let us therefore first
truly state our Question, that our adversaries may know what we speak, and
whereof we affirm and not loose their labor in proving what we do not deny,
nor bring arguments no way concluding the thing in Question betwixt us.

. 2 The subject of the Question is, Forms of Prayer dictated or prescribed by
other men, to be ordinarily used in solemn prayer by ministers of the gospel,
furnished by God with the gift of prayer, and having a natural liberty to use
those gifts. The Question is whether the use of them be lawful or no? We deny
it, and say we have arguments which appear to us very probable, whence we
have formed a particular judgment of conscience, that they are Unlawful, that
is, That without sinning against God, we cannot ordinarily use them, in the
discharge of our ministerial Act in solemn prayer.

. 3 Hence appears. That we are not disputing

1 Whether there may be a good and lawful use of Forms of Prayer. We desire
with all thankfulness to God, to own and acknowledge the profitable labors of
those, who have drawn the matter of prayer for more ordinary, and more
extraordinary occasions into Forms; from whence both young scholars, and
private Christians, may be taught the ordinary method, and matter of prayer.
And allow the same use of good Prayer-books, as of good sermon-books, for
Instruction of those that are less knowing. It is only the use of them as our
Prayers is in question betwixt us.

2 Nor do we question, the lawfulness of using all forms of Prayer for our
Prayers; or part of our Prayers. I if there can be found any forms of Prayer,
which either God or Christ, or any in Scripture deriving authority from him,
has commanded to be used, undoubtedly we ought to use it, whether it be under
such an express command or no, we believe it may be used as a part of our
prayer, though we do not think our selves obliged to it. 2 If any minister
distrusting his memory, or invention, shall think fit to compose a prayer, or
more prayers for his own use, we doubt not but he may do it; he serves God
here as God has given him the gift, and we should be loath to condemn him. The
question is only of forms composed for our use by others, and those neither
pretending to the Authority of Christ, or his Apostles.

3 Nor do we question the lawfulness, of any persons using a form of prayer 1
We do believe it lawful for such persons as are to join with others in prayer,
to make use of his words who speaks, which can be but a form to them, did we
say it is lawful? yea, it is Necessary. 2 We do also believe it lawful for him
that ministers in prayer to others, to use the prescribed form of another
composure, if he can do no other, we mean: if he has not the gift of prayer
to which many private Christians have not attained; yea, and many whom the
church, in the beginning of Reformation, was forced to use for ministers; and
we should not find any difficulty to allow other ministers also to do the same:
Supposing them immediately hindered by God (which often happens by some diseases
in the head) that at this or that time they cannot use the gift they have. The
Question is only about Ministers, and such as have the Gift, or might have it,
and are not by the hand of God immediately hindered so as they cannot exercise
the gift, which they may do Ordinarily.

4 Neither is the question about short Ejaculations, but solemn, stated Prayer.
We are not so ridiculous, as to think we may not say, Lord have mercy upon
us, or the like, because it is a form. The Question then truly stated is this
whether it be lawful for ministers ordinarily to perform their ministerial
acts in solemn, stated, public Prayer by reading or reciting forms of prayer,
composed by other men in obedience to the commands of superiors?

. 4 From whence it appears, That all arguments brought to prove the
lawfulness of composing forms, or ministers composing them for their own use,
and so using them, or peoples praying by the form of him who ministers, or
Christ commending a form to his disciples, or God prescribing forms of
blessing, or David's or other holy penmen of scripture composing, or proposing,
or using forms, (if it could be proved that they were at first composed, and
commended for constant use, and so used generally) or from the lawfulness of
the using of them by and commending them to such, as had, or have not the gift
of prayer, or the use of short ejaculatory forms. Are perfectly (...) arguments
that proceed ex ignoratione elenchi and cannot conclude the Question. All that
we affirm is this, That our consciences do, from arguments which to us at least
seem highly probable, judge. That it is unlawful for ministers having the gift
of prayer, ordinarily to perform their ministerial acts insolemn, stated,
public Prayer; by reading or reciting forms of prayer composed by other men
confessedly not divinely and immediately inspired, although our superiors do
require this of us. What those arguments are, which to us appear highly
probable in the negative part of this Question, we now come to declare.

CHAP. II.
The first Argument, drawn from the nature of the Gift of Prayer, considered as
a Mean given us by God in reference to the Act natural and proper, therefore
the use not to be omitted. The Propositions opened and proved. The
Insufficiency of six answers given to this Argumemt. A 7th given by Mr.
Falconer examined and found also insufficient. The Assertion freed from diverse
absurd consequences which some would incumber it with. The Argument not
conclusive against the lawfulness of hearing men praying by forms.

. 1. OUr first Argument we thus state,

To omit a mean for the performance of a Religions act given us by God for it,
and being natural and proper, at the command of man when we perform that
Religious action is sinful*

But for a minister having the gift of prayer, ordinarily to perform his
ministerial act in prayer, by reading, or reciting forms of prayer composed by
others confessedly not divinely inspired, is for him to omit a natural and
proper mean given him by God in order to the performance of such Religious act,
and in the omission of it to perform such Religious action; Ergo.

That a man's Gift, or Ability fitly to express his mind unto God in Prayer is
given him from that God, from whom come all spiritual gifts, every good and
perfect gift (as the Apostle speaks) we think will be denied by none who
understands any thing of the Scriptures. Nor that this Ability is given to a
man by God, as a means in order to help him in the performance of the Act, for
to what end else, can any imagine it given? which makes it to bear the Notion
of a Divine Mean, and being so, it must be most Proper, unless men will pretend
to be wises then God, and that it is most Natural, is as obvious: now that such
Gifts must not be neglected, the Apostle is plain, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not
the gift that is in thee A precept extending as well to one ministerial gift as
another. But least any should say, we do not neglect that, the use of which
superiors prohibit: We put in the word Omit, now who so in the performance of
the act does not use This Gift, does most certainly Omit the use of it, and
about the lawfulness of this omission at the command of men is the Question. We
judge this sinful, and that partly from Scripture, partly from Reason.

. 2 We judge so from Scripture, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every man has received
the gift, so minister it one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace
of God* If any man speak, as the oracles of God: if any one minister, etc. The
Apostle is evidently there speaking of gospel ministrations, and giving a Rule
about them, his Rule is this, (...). As every man has received the Gift,
ministering (...), the substantive to that must be (...). This is the same which
the Apostle expresses in a little different phrase. Romans 12. 3. (...). As God
has divided to every one a measure of faith. v. 6. (...). According to the
Grace given to us. The Apostle makes the gift (...), that which we are to
minister, and we are commanded to minister according as we have received it.
Now in administrations, by other men's forms (and prayer is the one half of our
ministry) we neither minister The gift; nor as every one has received the
gift; but as we find in the Book, or in the forms prescribed. A gift indeed we
use, Reading is a gift, but not the gift of prayer.

. 3 But if we had no such express Scripture, The very light of Nature and
Reason, would make this very probably appear to be the will of God to us. 1
Because we use in an act of worship a less proper, less natural, and perfectly
human mean: and in the mean time we omit a more proper, more natural and Divine
mean. 2 Because we cannot use other men's forms, omitting our own gift, but we
must omit a mean given us by God for the act, to use a mean under no Special
divine prescription. And we think it but reasonable, that nothing but a special
divine prescription, should control a general rule, whether written in
Scripture, or approving it self to our Reason. Especially, if it be in matter
of Divine worship, and to be done ordinarily. This is our first Argument,
delivered and opened with as much freedom and plainness, as we are able to
express it in. We have indeed met with Six or Seven answers, but such as we
cannot acquiesce in; we will fairly relate them all, and show why they apear to
us by no means satisfactory.

. 4 Some have gone roundly to work, denying any such gift, as the gift of
prayer; But this is either to deny what is evident to sense: viz. That there
are some persons able fitly to express their minds to God in prayer: or to deny
the Scriptures which say, Ja. 1. 17. That Every good gift and every perfect
gift comes from above, from the father of Lights. Besides, That it stubbeth up
all Liturgies of Prayer by the roots, none it seems having any ability to make
them. But those who have thus answered have been very few and very invaluable.

. 5 Others therefore tell us, That all ministers have not this gift, and it
were unreasonable to presume it in such a clergy as that of England, consisting
of 9, or 10000 persons. To this we answer. If they who answer thus, intend by
all Ministers, all who are ordained by men, or, all those whom the church in
some stress of necessity is forced to make use off in stead of ministers, have
not the gift of prayer, we do agree it: But if they mean that, All those who
are sent of God into the ministry have not the gift of Prayer, we think we
should too much trespass upon the reverence we owe to God, if we should grant,
That he sends any into his work, whom he has not first fitted for all the
parts of it.

2 We do grant, That there may be such a state of the church when for the
present, it cannot be furnished with perfect ministers (by perfect, we mean
such as are tolerably fit for all the parts of their work) Our forefathers
experienced this, both in the beginnings of our Reformation in K. Edw. and in
Qu. Eliz. time, as also did our Forefathers Brethren in other churches: They
were so far from finding persons enough fitted to pray and preach, that were
well affected to a Reformation, that they had much a do to find such persons
enough, that could read; And it is said, the Privilege in our courts of
Judicature which persons guilty of theft (separated from Burglary and other
crimes) have, comes from this defect of former ages: And we do believe that the
Orginal or continuance of Liturgies upon the Reformation, owes it self in a
great measure to this. But we say, These were but Tanquam ministers, better
these then none, their Reading may give the people some instruction. But 3ly
suppose some that must be made use off for, the present necessity of the
church, have not the gift; must they therefore who have it be restrained in the
use of it? We do indeed think, that it will be hard to find nine or ten
thousand scholars in England, furnished with the gift either of praying, or
preaching in any tolerable manner: and one great reason is, Because they have
been so tied to a Liturgy, that they have never applied themselves to the study
of the Scriptures, and their own hearts, as they should: but to tie up all to
the use of such forms, is the ready way, never to have such a number. Therefore
this answer is far from a satisfaction.

. 6 Another has told us, That the same gift may serve for several uses: and he
that uses it to one use, is in some cases excused from using it in another:
especially, if he be hindered by authority. This gift he says, may be used
another way both in the worship of God, and out of it: In the worship of God,
because the same faculty which enableth a man to utter a good prayer to God,
enableth him to make a good exhortation to people; Out of the worship, else
those Laymen who have it, and are no ministers, sin. This is Ireneus Freemans
answer in his book called (...). But certainly this author had forgot whereof
he spoke By the gift of prayer must be understood, An ability in man fitly to
express his mind to God in prayer, in asking things agreeable to his will. Can
this gift, or faculty be used in making good orations and exhortations to the
people? or can any thing be spoken more absurdly then to say, That the gift of
prayer may be put to some other use out of Gods worship, (Surely the author
does not think it lawful to pray to Saints and Angels) But by the Gift of
prayer, he certainly understands nothing but the gift of speaking, or at most
of speaking sense: But surely the gift or ability of working in Brass, and
iron, and wood are differing abilities, or gifts, though at several times they
be exercised by the same person, and proceed from the same reasonable soul. But
distrusting this answer, he has a Fourth.

. 7 That the man sins not, who omiteth a gift, when the using of it would
hinder another: and this he says excuses ministers, that they do not pray
without end, but afford some time for preaching, yea, and for reading too. Yea,
he says, without this most men would be inexcusable if they did not come into
the church and make prayers there: For in that they do not, it is manifest they
use not their gift. He applies it, p. 20. If the laws say, that he who will use
his gift of prayer, shall not use his gift of preaching, but lie in prison or
worse; it is manifest, that it is better to use one of these gifts, then by
using them both, to be suffered in the use of none. Now, good Reader, judge if
it be possible, an ingennous soul should be patient at such Ridiculous
trifling, was there ever any further question then, Whether it be lawful to
omit the use of the gift, when we are performing the Religious act to which the
gift relates? Did ever any say* They were bound to use the Gift of prayer at
all times, or only at all times when they ministered in prayer? 2 Is the gift
of prayer only to be used in temples, that a Layick may not use it in his
family, if he has it? Is not this a learned Medium to prove, That those who
have the gift of prayer, may ordinarily omit the use of the gift of prayer
given them by God, as a mean for it without sin, when they are performing the
act to which it relates: because, When they are not to perform such acts, but
acts of a quite differing species, they may omit it. He says, The exercise of
the gift of Prayer may be omitted when it would hinder the use of the gift of
preaching. He says true, if the hindrance of the exercise of the gift of
preaching proceeds from the irregular, and disorderly use of his gift of
Prayer, by the voluntary act of him who has both gifts: and stands bound to
use both in their order, he may omit such a measure of the use of one, as would
hinder the due use of the other. But certainly he otherwise speaks very
impertinently, and not like a Divine: For in that I am hindered in the exercise
of the gift of preaching by a mere human law, is the fault of others; nor can I
sin in it, if I be free to do it, without such circumstances as are sinful. It
is the sin of others that we are not suffered to do what God has called us to
do, and as he has required us to do it. Now whether such ordinary praying
would not be our sin, is the matter in question? God needs not man's ly for
his glory.

A fifth answer we have met with is, That a minister has a liberty to use his
Gift of Prayer, before his sermon, and in his own private family. This is more
then any thing before said, But, 1 It reaches not the Question, for still he
must Ordinarily perform his ministerial Act in Prayer in the omission of the
Divine mean, given him on purpose for the performance of it: for certainly, He
that uses the prescribed forms of others as often as he publicly ministers,
does it Ordinarily, in his ministerial act. 2 If we look wistly into the law,
we shall find it is but an assumed liberty men take to use their own gift in
prayer before their sermons, and this Bp. Wren and Cosins understood well
enough, and therefore would endure no such thing where they had to do. And this
Mr. Kemp has told us in print, in a sermon (since printed, preached in St.
Mary's in Cambridge) with this brand upon such practice, That it is a Geneva
trick, brought in by John Calvin, and Thomas Cartwright. For his liberty left
him in his family, that is not in his public ministry, besides that we shall
show anon, that granting this Principle, That obedience to superiors in this
case is our duty, we lie at mercy for that too: and both these pretended
liberties may be taken away, when our superiors will please to say, you shall
do so no more.

. 9 For a Sixth Answer, we are slightily told by some, That the Church must
judge, whether her Ministers have such gift of prayer or no? But, 1 Certainly
it were a strange judgment for a church to make, that none of her ministers
have the gift of prayer. 2 Again we freely agree, That the church must judge
whether men have both the Gift of prayer, and preaching too; but we say this
should be, before she trusts them with the public ministry: for in setting
them apart to the ministry, she has passed her judgment, That they have an
ability both to pray and preach, Or else she has dealt very unfaithfully to
her Lord and Master, by ordination declaring, That Christ has sent those whom
he never sent, when she ought first to have proved them. 3 If the church has
found her self mistaken, she ought to confess her error by removing them from
the ministry, who are not fit for it; not to help them, by prescribing them,
what to say.

A late Reverend Author Mr. Falconer in his Libertas Ecclesiastica, p. 120.
has given us another answer, viz. That gifts may be limited, which (he says)
is manifest, because by the will of God bounds and limits were set even to the
use of the extraordinary Gifts of Gods Spirit. 1 Cor. 14. 26, 27, 28, 33. This
is all which that Reverend Author says to this argument, besides what we
showed the weakness of in our reply to the fifth Answer, now, to this we
answer, That the word Limited is a very general term. We will freely grant,
That Limitations may be put and that by present superiors upon the disorderly
and extravagant use of Ministerial gifts, and that is all which is proved by
that text, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 27, 28, 33. The words are these. v. 26. How is it
then (Brethren) that when you come together, every one of you has a Psalm,
has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an interpretation. Let
all things be done to Edifying. v. 27. If any man speak in an unknown tongue
let it be by two, or at most by three, and that by course, and let one
interpret. v. 28. But if there be no interpreter let him keep silence in the
church: and let him speak to himself and to God. v. 33. For God is not the
Author of confusion, but of peace in all the churches of the saints.

Here is indeed a direction given by an infallible Apostle for the exercise of
those extraordinary gifts; A direction whose end was Edification, and this by
the avoiding of Confusion and a reason given: For God is not the author of
Confusion, The Confusion is plainly by the Apostle signified.

1 That several persons who had these extraordinary gifts, would at the same
time be communicating to their Brethren their Psalms, their Doctrines, their
Revelations, their Interpretations, Their gift in languages. 2 That those who
could speak with diverse tongues never regarded to have what they said
interpreted, from whence nothing could proceed for Edification, while many
understood nothing of what was said: and manifest Confusion, several persons
gabling diverse things, at the same time. To the avoiding of which the Apostle
directs.

1 That they should not speak together, but successively, and by course.

2 To avoid undue lengths, That not above Two, or Three at most should speak at
the same time.

3 That if any should speak an unknown language, some one should interpret,
That what was spoken might be understood by all. This is all the Apostle says.
Is there any Noncon. that will not most freely grant all this? 1 That Two or
Three ministers should not pray and preach together to the same auditory, and
if any will be so disorderly the superior ought to restrain them, that there be
no Confusion. 2 That if ministers will protract their discourses to
unreasonable lengths, they may be restrained. 3 That if any be so vain, as
because he can speak Latin, French, Dutch, or any other language, not
generally known to his poeple, he will pray, and preach in such language: The
superiors shall forbid it, and that by authority of this scripture.

But surely, our Reverend Brother is so much of a scholar and a Divine as to
conclude, That because superiors may thus far restrain the notorious, and
evident abuse of gifts; therefore they may as they please limit the use of
them; yea, forbid the use of them ordinarily in the performance of those Acts
to which they relate.

If indeed he could have proved, That the Apostle had sent them a Manuscript of
his own (and we know he had parchments) of Prophesies, Doctrines, Psalms,
Revelations, and commanded them that when they Prophesied, taught, sang, they
should ordinarily use them, and none but them. This had come nearer the
business, (yet not home to it, till the same Infallibility could be asserted
for present superiors, as for the blessed Apostle) as well as the same
constitution of God for them to direct in all matters of worship, and
Ecclesiastical order; which none can deny the Apostles to have been possessed
of: Yet the Apostle knew the mind of his master too well, to send them books to
pray and preach by, but only directs them to such an use of those Gifts with
which God had blessed them, as might be without what all men would cry out off
as confused, clamorous, disorderly, and unreasonable: because the generality of
hearers not understanding them, could not possibly get any good or advantage
from them. Our Reverend Brothers Argument must lie thus.

If the Apostle Paul might in the Church of Corinth direct, that none might
speak in an Unknown tongue, nor Two or Three gabble together, nor any (though
he were able) minister in a language which the people understood not; and the
Corinthians were bound to obey: Then the Church or Churches of the present age,
may command all their ministers when they pray, for three parts of four of
their time so spent, to spend it in praying (omitting any use of their own
gifts) by reading, or reciting the prescribed forms of prayers which they shall
send them: And those ministers are bound to do accordingly. We leave our
Reverend Brother upon second thoughts to judge of the validity of this
consequence, and do believe that it will not justify it self to his own private
thoughts: we cannot (we profess) reconcile it to any degree of Reason. Here is
a manifest arguing from things of one kind, to things of another, and that
quite different. It being one thing, to restrain the abuse of gifts, another
thing to restrain the use and that not as to order of time, and so as to make
the use of them (still established even in every individual act) intelligible,
and of use to the church: but so as it shall be only denied or Suppressed, as
to the far greater Number of those individual acts wherein they should be used.
The upshot therefore of this argument is, Those of our Brethren who will answer
this argument, must bring us some Medium which will conclude.

That it is lawful for ministers of the gospel, having a spiritual gift given
them of God; as a proper mean to help them in the performance of their
Ministerial acts in solemn, public prayer: yet at the command of superiors,
ordinarily to perform those acts, omitting the use of such means, and using the
prescribed forms of others. Which we can by no means agree to.

1 Because of the force of the scriptures before mentioned.

2 Because, we think we should allow men wiser then God, if we should in
practice prefer a mean of mere human invention, before one that is Divine; and
therefore more proper, and (we are sure) more natural.

. 8 We meet with no more (pretended) direct answers to our argument. We are
aware of the endeavors of some, to reduce it to absurdity; with what success,
we shall very shortly examine. They tell us that admitting this Principle,

1 All those Eminent Divines would be condemned, who have used or do before
their Sermons use a form of their own composure, The vanity of this will appear
from our stating the Question.

2 He who preaches must preach ex tempore. This is as idle as the other, we
argue not for praying ex tempore; but only in the use of our own gifts, which
certainly excludes not previous meditation; men may use what of that they
please.

3 We must not use the Lords prayer. Let any one read our question, and see if
it concludes against any such thing.

4 The ministers also must make hymns, and people must not sing by forms. As if
we had not scriptural forms to which we are tied in singing, composed by men
divinely inspired. We think Apochryphal Anthems to be sang in public worship
no more lawful, then Liturgical forms of Prayer. Nor can it be proved, that
Hymn-making, or singing is an ordinary ministerial act: Nor that God has to
any promised the gift of Psalm, or Hymn-making; but it is certain he has
promised the Spirit of prayer, Zech. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26.

5 Nor do they speak any thing more to the purpose, who tell us that according
to our Principle, None must join with others in prayer, for the speakers prayer
is a form to him. The Question is not about him who barely prays, who has
nothing to do but to exercise his grace: but about him who is in prayer to
minister unto others.

6 We have met with some, who have indeavored to encumber this argument with
another absurdity, telling us that according to this Principle, Every minister
who is able to interpret the Hebrew of the old Testament, and the Greek in the
new, is bound to read the scripture according to his own interpretation: and
not the translation received in the Church where he ministers. And indeed of
any thing we ever heard objected, this comes nearest an argument to bring our
Principle to an absurdity; But yet we think it is not sufficient: For, not to
dispute, whether Public Reading of the scriptures be (though a good work and
fit to be used in the Congregation, as Moses was read in the Synagogue)
strictly a ministerial act; we never read Christ saying to his Ministers, Go
and read: so, as for ought we know, The scriptures may in the public
Congregation be read by inferior officers (as is very ordinary, in other
Reformed Churches) we say, not to insist upon this (which yet were a foundation
not to be shaken) we take that Principle which (if we remember right) we have
some where read in Mr. Capel, to be a true Principle, That God never yet had a
church in any place of the world, but he at the first planting of it, and so
after (as there was occasion) stirred up the Rulers, to employ some in making a
true version of the scripture; which persons so employed, God has, upon
experience, been found constantly so to asist, That they have not erred or
mistaken in any point of Doctrine necessarily to be known and believed: and
that it is his will, that particular ministers, and members in such churches in
their ordinary use, and reading of the scriptures, should use such version, or
the version of some other church, which they may find more exact and perfect.
This is so fully proved by experience, and the frequent use which both Christ
and his Apostles made of the Septuagint version (though as full of mistakes as
any other, if compared with the Hebrew) that nothing is to be said against it,
nor need any more be said in answer to this objection. The sum of what is said
is this, That to interpret the body of scripture to be read to people is no
private ministerial act, or gift, nor is any single minister fit to be trusted
with it, nor to enter a dissent to the ordinary version used either in the
church of which he is a member, or some other orthodox church as to a
particular text, but with great modesty and upon weighty grounds.

. 9 We think enough said to justify our argument against all answers we have
met with; and those, who are so ready upon all occasions to send us for
satisfaction to Mr. Hooker and Dr. Sanderson, should do well to tell us in what
Page of either of their works this argument is answered: for we can in neither
of them find an answer to it. Our adversaries may also see, that we do not
neglect to inquire into all their writings for satisfaction: Though it be our
misfortune to find them rarely speaking to the true question, but first making
to themselves a man of straw, then pelting him with arguments, and immoral
language.

. 10 Hence also appears to our weaker Brethren an obvious reason, why some of
us can at a pinch hear other ministers pray in the use of such pescribed forms;
though our selves cannot use them: When we join in prayers with others, we have
nothing to do, (provided the petitions we hear be according to the will of God)
but to say, Amen, exercising our faith, etc. But if we be our selves to
Minister in prayer, either we are mistaken, (which we must first be convinced
of) or besides the exercise of Grace, God requires also, we should use Our
Gifts being the mean he has given us for those acts: Whether he who ministers
acquitteth himself to God or no? Viderit ipse, it is nothing to us let him look
to that. Nor can there be any thing of scruple in the hearing of ministers
praying by the forms of others (provided the matter) of them be good, and
according to the will of God: Unless some should scruple it, as encouraging a
minister in that which they judge sinful. But why may not we think, That he who
does use them, does it in an humble distrust of his own abilities, and thinks
at least that he does agere optimum, do his best? Why must we think our selves
infallible? We dare not judge those who we think have the gift of prayer, but
think not fit to use it in their ordinary service; because their superiors
command the omission of it: but as we do not judge them, so we dare not
practice after their copy. Whether it be sin in them we freely leave to Gods
determination, we are sure it would be sin to us. As we believe, so we speak,
sow must act: but shall freely listen to what any of our Brethren can say to
the taking away of the appearing Probability, both of this argument, or any
other we shall bring. In the mean time we would not be crowed over, as such
dunces who have nothing to say: but are hardened with Prejudice, blinded with
passion, biassed by false Principles, etc. See Dr. Asheton's Ded. Ep. Nor as
merely peevish and Grubstreet Divines, etc. which with abundance more of such
brutish stuf another uses. Till these confident men have let the world know,
That they have given a sufficient answer like scholars to what we say, and that
they are good at something else besides reviling, we are not careful to answer
them.

CHAP. III.
The second argument. The terms opened. What is meant by Attention, Intention,
and Fervency? Both propositions proved. Mr. Freemans answer considered. What
Mr. Falconer has said, in answer to this argument, proved in sufficient. The
Judgment of the Leyden Professors, and the Walachrian classis not duly opposed
to this Argument. Mr. Falconers three reasons why forms should not hinder
devotion answered.

. 1 WE proceed to a second Argument which we thus state,

To use such a mode, in the ordinary performance of our duty in solemn public
prayer, as either from the necessary workings of human nature: or otherwise
upon experience we find, either hindering the Attention of our own, or others
thoughts to the duty: or the Intention and Fervency of our own, or others
Spirits in the performance of the duty, when we can so perform it as neither of
them will be to that degree hindered, is Unlawful:

But for him who has the Gift of prayer, ordinarily to perform his ministerial
Acts in public solemn prayer: is for him to use such a mode in those Acts of
worship as either from the Natural workings of human nature, or from some other
cause scarce avoidable is upon experience found to hinder his own Attention and
also the Attention of others thoughts to the duty, and the Intention and
Fervency of his own, and others spirits in the duty, when in the mean time he
has a natural ability so to perform it as neither of them will (at least to
that degree) be hindered; Ergo*

This we conceive to be what by Mr. Falconer is represented as a second
Objection under the terms, That it is disadvantageous to devotion. We shall
with what candor becomes us toward a person of Mr. Falconers worth and candor,
consider both what he says in answer; And also ex abundanti, what we find to
have been said (to less purpose) by any others; And examine, whether what he or
they have said, amounts to a strict answer, which may free us from the
probability of truth which appears in this argument.

. 2 For the Proposition it is so evident from Scripture, being indeed a branch
of the commandment which our savior calls, The first and great commandment,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all
thy strength: And enforced by so many Scriptures directly requiring Attention
of thoughts, and Fervency of Spirit in all the service of God, (especially in
prayer) That we never met with any bold enough to deny it: For he who denies
it must affirm, That though God has commanded us to love him with all our
heart, soul, and strength: yet, if man commands us not to do it, it is lawful,
though God has commanded us to serve him with the Attention of our thoughts;
and with Fervency of Spirit; and commanding us to pursue this end, has also
enjoined us to use the means most proper for it: yet, If our superior commands
us to use such means as are less proper, we may lawfully do it. Which to us
appears very strange assertions, neither becoming Divines, nor good Christians,
nor indeed rational men: For supposing that there is a God, The light of nature
is enough to show us, He must be served with all our hearts, with the highest
attention of thoughts, and intention, and fervency of Spirit.

. 3 So as all the Question can be, is about the Minor proposition, Whether he
that performs his Ministerial act in Solemn Prayer by the prescribed forms of
others, does not use a mean less accommodate to his own and others Attention of
thoughts, and Intention and Fervency of Spirit: then he who deals with God
immediately, using his tongue to express conceptions first formed in his own
heart? To us it is next to a demonstration that he does, and that upon that
account it is unlawful: to which purpose we desire, That these things may be
wistly considred by any deliberate person.

. 4 Whether it be possible for any person to read any discourse, be it a
Prayer, a sermon, an Oration (what it will) with that degree of Attention of
thoughts, as he must pronounce the same discourse with by heart: if he so
pronounces it as but to speak sense? We do think none will find, or say it is.
The thoughts of man are wild things, and impatient of a long intense abode upon
any object (we speak of the generality of men) but never so busy to break
prison, and wander, as when we are employed in the holy services of God, And
that partly in regard, That God is an insensible metaphysical object: Partly,
Because of that natural aversion from communion with God, which (since the
fall) has been the universal disease of human nature. So that considering how
human nature is stated since the fall, we believe it a thing impossible. We
know it will be said (and that truly) that this argument concludes not against
the ministers use of forms prescribed by others, if he recites them by heart;
but only against his performing his ministerial acts in prayer by reading such
forms. We confess it, and say* That if but this post be gained, much is done.
God would doubtless be served with much less distraction, and divagation of
thoughts, then he ordinarily is on the part even of him that ministers; which
was the Reason, why the Reverend and very learned Author of Altar Damascenum
allowing the use of forms at first, to help those who have not attained the
gift of prayer, in any proportion fit for ministers, would yet have them
enjoined to recite them by heart.

. 5 Secondly, Whether any thing can in reason be imagined more conducive to fix
the thoughts upon the duty, and God in the duty? Then when a minister has
attained, to such a familiarity with the phrase of Scripture, and such a
knowledge in the body of Divinity, That although he will always need a
premeditation of the Greatness, and Majesty of God; his own vileness, and
nothingness; and the weightiness of the duty: yet, he needs not compose his
form syllabically before he comes; but can trust his Affections to thrust out
words, while his eyes may be shut and sent to his heart, (as our Divine Poet
speaks) Or open, and lifted up to heaven and fixed toward the place, where his
heavenly father is; and while his heart is enditing a good matter: And his
tongue employed as the pen of a ready writer* We think this is so evidently
more conducive to the fixation of a man's thoughts, and the commanding their
attention to the duty, That it is impossible for any who will not deny the
workings of a reasonable soul, to be able without a self condemnation to deny
it.

. 6 A third thing which we would have considred is, Whether considering the
infirmity of all our natures, any such attention is to be expected, or hoped
for from people to forms of prayer which they hear a thousand times over, as to
conceived prayer? We lay no great stress upon it, but think it at least an
ingenious observation, That God himself when he would Stir up his peoples
attentions, and affections to what he was doing, tells them, He would do a new
thing. We are sure common experience teaches us, That none gives that
attention to a discourse or story, he has heard an hundred times over, that he
gives to a new discourse or story, (excepting only to the holy scriptures,
for which God has secured an abiding reverence in all pious souls) And this is
owned by Mr. Falconer, giving it in his Epistle as a Reason, why after so many
learned men he wrote upon this subject: Because the humor of this age (he
might have said all ages) is more apt to seek for new books then read old ones.
Whether this be the infirmity of our natures, and if our infirmity, whether our
sinful infirmity or no, are not much material to our present question? Let it
be the one, or the other, if not to be shaken off, and if by a mean which Gods
word forbids not, it may in any measure be helped; certainly considering how
necessary it is to the duty, that mean ought not to be neglected in obedience
to any creature.

. 7 But Attention of thoughts is not all our duty in prayer, Intention of
spirit, and fervency of Affections is also a prime requisite to an acceptable
performance of it. Romans 12. 11. Jam. 5. 16. Yea, It is so necessary as without
it, the soul plainly mocketh God, and deceives it self: now we cannot
apprehend, That either the person ministering, should have the same intention
and fervency in reading the prescribed forms of others, as when his prayer is
first formed in his own heart, or that the people should be so advantaged in
their fervor and intention.

. 8 As to him that ministers. There is a great deal of difference betwixt
words following the Affections, and Affections following words. This is an old
Argument made use of by the learned Author of Altar Damescenum in conceived
prayer. The heart is first inflamed and made apprehensive, of the Greatness and
Majesty of God; the vileness, and sinfulness of its self, etc. And upon the
working of these affections, words are formed in the mind, and then thrust out
at the lips. In the use of the prescribed forms of others, words are first,
which indeed uttered may excite some affection, or in the uttering be attended
by some affection: but there is a great deal of difference, betwixt the
workings of the affections thus commanded, and pressed into the service; or thus
caused, and following words uttered: and the workings of affections first
inflamed, and then commanding our words. It is true, That if a man be to use
prescribed forms, there may be some general previous preparation of the
Affections: but he who will deal truly with his own soul, will find it hard to
keep them up and warm so long, as until he comes to his work. Nor do we think
it possible that the words of another should so well fit our hearts, and be so
expressive of raised Affections as our own. An orator (let him be as much an
Artist as he can) will find it no easy thing to give one of Tullies Orations
(recited by him) such an accent, as he can easily give one whom he himself has
formed. There is something (not so easy to be expressed what) in our own words
to express the Affections of our hearts, and conducive to keep up their warmth
and vigor; which is not in the words of another, which are to the soul (as
Saul's armor to David) we hardly think it possible (we are sure not ordinary)
for a minister to preach a sermon of another with that life and vigor, with
which he can do one formed by himself.

. 9 If the minister reads his forms, there is a manifest impossibility of the
like degree of intention: For it is the soul, which looking through the eye,
directs it so as a man reads true; and so is plainly diverted from its
immediate contemplation of, and fixation upon God.

. 10 But here the author of The Reasonableness of Divine service comes across
us, and tells us for a first answer to this Argument.

P. 30. He that prays without book, especially with Vocal prayer, must needs
look upon the like Prints, and stamps made in the brain, (or whatsoever things
the species are) without which a man can neither think nor speak, they must be
accounted objects; And the legible signs in the book do serve to bring the
inward phantasms more readily in actual view, and to marshal them with less
labor, diversion, or disturbance.

He says well (or what ever things the species are) It is indeed a notion
vulgarly received, That all understanding is by some sensible, or intelligible
species, or prints of things in the brain: But it is very like the author knows
that Philosophers have found it hard to determine, what those effluvia are?
Where they lodge? How the soul works in the use of them? and in these things
the best Philosopher is but a Lover of wisdom, and cannot say it shall die with
him. Suppose a child born blind and deaf, yet it may understand something, but
by what species we cannot tell. To say it is by some connate species
contradicts Philosophy; Acquired it can have none; If we say, it is by
Infused species, we make it an early Enthusiast, and we have better ground by
far to say, That he who prays has such, because the Spirit is promised in
the case, Romans 8. 26. Because we know not what to pray for.

. 11 But supposing what he says, That he who prays Vocally by words first
conceived in his own heart, must first attend to the prints in his brain of the
words which he is about to utter; yet, Surely the Author of this answer might
have considred. 1 That he who reads forms must first attend to the prints in
his book, and then to the prints which are made by the Effluvia from the book
in his brain, before he can speak: so as here is a double act, whereas the
other is but single. 2 Again, The first attention to the prints in our brains,
is necessary according to the order of Nature, our author himself tells us,
without them we can neither speak nor think. 3 Farther, That Attention of the
soul within it self, is an immanent act; but the viewing of a book, and the
prints there, and its excercising it self in the composition of those syllables
and words is not so; not terminated within the soul, not naturally necessary to
the action, nor necessary from any immediate divine precept: But a perfect
unnecessary diversion, and a most certain hindrance of the minds intension:
because it is impossible that any created being should in the same action duly
intend two objects. We remember the schoolmen first supposing what is false,
That when Christ in his last Supper gave his body to his disciples, he did also
offer it up as a Sacrifice to God; start a question, How he could do both these
at the same time with a due intension? They say he could, Quia intentionem
habuit perfectissimam, Because he had a most perfect intension, a Privilege we
hope our Brethren will not challenge for every clergy man. But this is enough
to have said for the Ministers intention.

. 12 The Intension of the people is matter of far more subtle disquisition. The
very learned Author of the book called, Altar Damascenum, p. 1614 has this
expression,

Et puto ego auditores, etc. And I think (says he) that the people do feel
another kind of flame, [or Affection] when the minister goes before them, in
words determined from his affection going before; then from affections
following after words, especially when the hearers are a little wonted to the
prescribed forms.

We do think the same thing, and believe it a notion which will justify it self
to the experience of every pious, deliberate Soul. Possibly it is not so easy
to assign the true reason of this difference, whether it be some secret
sympathy of pious souls? 2 Or some more special assistance of God to, and
influence upon his ministers doing their duty, suggesting to them what to speak
best suited to their peoples souls? Or whether we should lay it upon peoples
infirmity, indisposing them to bend their minds so to forms said over and over?
Which if it be, it is such as human nature is not like to quit it self off. Nor
in our case is it at all necessary to assign the reason, The question being
only about the, Ansit? Whether it be so or no? And we cannot but observe that
the Author of the Reasonableness of Divine service, p. 31. does after some
words confess, That he who himself is in speaking affected, is most like to
affect others, if he be as clear, as rational, and persuasive. The Noncon. will
easily agree, that he is not so likely, if his discourse be irrational,
confused, dark and flat.

. 13 But the same Author offers at a second answer, he had granted both the
Major and Minor proposition: The Major, p. 22 in these words, Every man is
bound to pray with the highest intention of mind and fervency of Spirit, which
can be obtained by lawful means, we dare say no Noncon. will ask him more: The
minor he grants again and again, Sect 7. p. 25, 26, 27. What will he deny then?
nothing remains but the Conclusion. He would fix this intention of mind in
conceived, more then in prescribed forms of prayer, upon some as he thinks
false bottoms. He instanceth in 8.

1 Prejudice against the use of forms. 2 Novelty of words and phrases. 3 The
exercise of gifts with which we are more delighted then the exercise of grace.
4 The Natural delight men have in their own, more then in others Inventions. 5
The scope men have conceived in Prayers for glory and ostentation. 6 The
tumults of bodily Spirits. 7 The bending their minds in Invention. 8 The
straining their bodies by drawing out words.

Now to this we answer, First,

. 14 Either these must be the only causes of greater Intension and fervency of
Spirit in conceived, then in prescribed forms of prayers; or else this is
nothing to the purpose, and only concerns those to whom these alone are the
causes of such greater fervor and intention: But we have before showed, these
are not the only causes; but because the soul is not so much diverted, etc. as
it must be in the use of forms.

. 15 But Secondly, When we have reminded our Reader what we understand by
fervor and intention of soul, we will consider the eight particulars, which the
Author confesses contributary to it. By the souls Attention we mean, Its
immediate contemplation of God, without diversions to other objects. A thing so
necessary, that the soul which does not its utmost toward it, does but mock
God, and cannot be serious with him. A Schoolmaster (if he can discern it) will
not endure the Omission of it, in a boys saying his lesson to him. It is (in
short) for the soul hoc agere, indeed to do what it pretends to do. My heart is
fixed (o God! says David) my heart is fixed. By Intention, and Fervor of
Spirit we understand, That holy zeal and heat which the soul should be in, in
all religious acts required of all Gods servants. Romans 12. 11. Commended in
Apollos, Acts. 18. 15. But especially in Prayer called, crying unto God, A
pouring out of our souls, and hearts before him, A wrestling with him, as in
Jacobs case, Hos. 12. 4. This prayer is that which St. James calls, (...), Jam.
5. 16. Thus Epaphras labored in prayer fervently, Col. 4. 12. We mean nothing
less by it, then the heat of the Brain, or the body about which this Author
trifleth at a strange rate: we mean the heat of the Inward man, which lies in
the intense motions of the affection, of Sorrow in confessing sin, Desires in
putting up petitions, Joy in thanksgivings, etc. The eagerness of the soul to,
and in its work; That which David calls, The souls pressing after God, Jacob, A
not letting God go, The Prophet, A not being quiet, not holding our peace, etc.
The duty required in the first commandment (so far as concerns prayer)
serving God with all our heart, all our soul, all our strength: This being now
every Ministers, yea, every private Christians duty: We say, Whatsoever means
nature it self, reason, or our particular experience, or Gods word dictateth as
proper in order to it; we must not, we can not in Obedience to man's command
barely omit: And whatsoever either Gods word, or nature it self, or reason, or
our Experience shows us will in any degree hinder this: it must be sinful,
let who will require it; as being contrary to our Duty expressly required in
the First and Great commandment. And in many particular Scriptures referrable
unto that.

. 16 This Assertion stands upon that foundation confessed by all Divines,
That the precept requiring the end, does also include the means; which surely
must not be interpreted with an exception, viz. Except superiors forbid the
use of such means, or commands the use of the contrary, etc. The precept
legitimateth the means, if another particular divine precept has not forbidden
them, which it most certainly has not.

. 17 To come then close to our Author, 1 If the Bending of the mind to think
what to ask of God, and how to ask it. 2 If the exercise of gifts at the same
time when grace is to be exercised will conduce to the farther exercise of
grace, and the not exercising them will in any degree hinder such exercise of
grace. 3 If the natural proness which is in man, rather to have his heart
dilate and to be fervent in the use of words first formed in his own heart, do
evince that this fervor does most usually attend conceived Prayers. 4 If the
tumult of bodily Spirits (as he calls it) being first occasioned by the souls
intension upon its work, being raised once will help the fervor of the soul.
nay, 5 If the novelty of words, and phrases will do it (and these are five of
the eight things which himself confesses may cause it) he must show us they
are sinful causes, or he has granted all we contend for.

. 18 If indeed (as that Author would uncharitably enough insinuate) the fervor
of him who prays by conceived prayer, be merely from prejudice against forms,
(though he should have done well to have opened to us that causation, it is
something hard to conceive) or 2 from a sinful end of Vain glory or foolish
ostentati^n, we do wholly condemn it: And for his Eighth particular, to us it
wants an Interpreter, how straining the body by drawing out words should cause
fervency of soul. So as what this Author pretends for an answer to our
arguments, is but a bundle of impertinencies, having no cognation to an answer:
And indeed he who had so justly before granted us both Major and Minor, had
nothing to do; but (like a young Logician) to deny the Conclusion: or to amuse
us what he could with long, and impertinent discourses. But let us further take
notice of some other loose passages in him, and see, whether any thing in them,
or in his distinctions will save him harmless?

. 19 He tells us, This fervency must be obtained by the use of just means.
This is most true, and is not the use of a Gift given us by God for that end, a
just mean? Is it not Natural, Rational, Scriptural? Such a mean as the servants
of God have used? Is not this a just means think we? That which he would have
us to believe is, That though it be our duty to pray with utmost fervor, and
intention of Spirit; and though, in order to this Praying in the use of our own
gifts, be more proper, and effectual: yet, if the Magistrate forbids us the
use of this Mean, it becomes an unlawful mean, and lawful for us to omit it,
though we pray less fervently; therefore he tells us, p. 23.

He that is by the Magistrate forbidden to go to the next church, and therefore
is necessitated to go to one more remote; must needs be more indisposed to
prayer by his long journey (except some men of a temper by themselves) so that
he shall not perform the duty with so high an intention of mind, or fervency of
Spirit, as might probably be experienced in case he came to the church less
wearied, and weather beaten: but yet, such a man may lawfully go to the
farthest church, and pray there though these hindrances of intention, and
fervency be consequent thereupon: because they are necessary, not voluntary; he
wishes the case were otherwise with him, but as the case stands, if he
should go to the next church, contrary to the Magistrates Prohibition, he
should sin and Evil is not to be done that Good may come of it, especially when
a greater evil might come of it, then the good aimed at, as in this Case.

. 20 To all which we answer, God send his church in England better Divines then
this Author. The case is this, The unlawfulness of ministers ordinary use of
forms prescribed by others was indevoured to be proved, because it hindered
intention of mind, and fervency of Spirit. Two things from reason, and by Gods
special command, and determination necessary to every good prayer. He grants
they are both necessary, whence it follows, That he who omitteth any means
given, or allowed him by God being natural, and rational which may help him in
this must needs sin against God whose law commanding, an End, always commands
the use of all proper Means relating to it. He grants this a Mean in it self
lawful, and he must acknowledge it proper and natural, yet he says, It is no
sin to omit it, and so consequently no sin for one to serve God with a lesser
intention and fervency, when we have a natural power to serve him with a
greater intention and fervency. And why none? Because he says, It is necessary
not voluntary. Is it not voluntary? That is strange, he did not put the case of
the Magistrates forcing him to be draged to another place at such a distance,
where his Spirits must be exhausted before he could come. How was it necessary
then? Not naturally, not by coaction; It remains therefore that it must be
necessary by some divine determination. In what leaf of Scripture shall we
find it? He offers no texts but what commands our obedience to Magistrates. But
is there any Scripture requires an obedience to man in all things? Or must
those texts be limited to such things, where we may obey them without
disobeying God. Thus this Author has finely answered, by begging the question
which is, Whether it be lawful to omit the use of a proper Mean given by God,
for the performance of an Act in his worship according to his will? The
Apostles surely determined better. Whether it be better to obey God or man
judge you. To his instance therefore the Answer is easy, If when we may with
equal advantage to our souls go to a nearer church, and to one farther, but yet
not at such a distance as before we come there we shall be spent, our Spirits
exhausted, and we fitter to sleep then to serve God, we think we ought to obey.
But if they will command us to go to a place at such a distance, as we cannot
reach in any time, or without such a wasting and tyring of our Spirits, as when
we come there we shall be unfit for the service of God, we cannot obey. He
trifleth to say, The thing is Inexpedient. It is unlawful, and he is a
fallacious Sophister in Divinity who talks of choosing lesser evils of sin
before greater. There can be no necessity of sinning.

. 21 In his p. 26. he seems to hint a time when a less intention is more
acceptable to God then a greater. That time we would gladly know, for the
Scripture says nothing of it. He tells us, when the Overplus arises from the
gift not from the Grace. This is a strange nick of time, we always thought. The
grace exercised in prayer, lay very much in Gods assistance of us, to keep our
minds attent to our duty, and intent upon and fervent with God in our duty: so
that to us it seems a strange piece of sense, That the overplus of Attention,
Intention, and Fervency should proceed not from the Grace but from the gift: he
goes on and tells us, p. 28.

Seeing the same things are prayed for in the Litany which can be the matter of
the longest conceived prayer, though not in that variety, novelty, and elegancy
of Phrase; if the heat and the intention they speak of proceeded from the
strength of their desire to the things themselves, it would be equal in both
cases: but seeing it is not equal, it must needs proceed from some other cause,
and probably, from some of those assigned.

. 22 He says true, It must either proceed from some different matter, or some
other cause. But, 1 we doubt whether what he says of the Litany be true, We
think it far short of containing the whole matter of ordinary Confession, or
Petitions, or thanksgivings, See what the Commissioners at the Savy (in their
papers since printed) have said to this. But suppose 2 The matter were full, Can
there be nothing else frigidam suffundere, to cool a Christians Spirit. What if
there be a mixture of something else which a Christian cannot in his judgment
allow? In the Popish Missal is much excellent matter, but we should think him
but a lukewarm Protestant that could be fervent in Spirit serving the Lord by
it. It is a great cooling to a Christians Spirit when his mind suggests doubts
to him, Whether this be a way, mode, or method of worship which God will
accept: because never directed by him. Here we instead of stirring up, and
exercising our own gifts, and ministering them; borrow the gifts of others, and
serve God with what costs us nothing but a little lip labor.

. 23 To conclude for this Author we need no more then Mr. Ireneus against Mr.
Freeman.

Every man is bound to pray with the highest intention of mind, and fervency of
Spirit which he can by just means attain.

But he who (having an ability to express his own wants and wants of others to
God in prayer in words first formed in his own heart) does in the exercise of
prayer use the forms of other men, does not pray with the greatest intention of
mind, and fervor of Spirit which can be obtained by just means; Ergo.

This is Mr. Ireneus argument, in his book called The Reasonableness of Divine
service, Let Mr. Freeman answer it, we profess we cannot. The Major is made up
of Mr. Ireneus his own words in the aforesaid book. p. 22.

The Minor is not only said by Mr. Ireneus but proved too.

1 If a man has an antipathy to forms, he says, It is no wonder that he can
have but little intention, and fervor in the use of them. So then he who has
such an infirmity, cannot pray with the like intention or fervor by them. Now
that such an Antipathy is sinful, he has not proved. We suppose he does not
mean Natural Antipathy, That must be necessary and by his own consequence not
sinful. If he means Moral, It is the same with prejudice. The goodness or
badness of which depends upon the efficient cause; If any be therefore
prejudiced against them, because he cannot apprehend it a way of worship
instituted by God, enjoned or practiced by the Apostles or Apostolical church,
Let him demonstrate the sinfulness of this Prejudice, we cannot.

2 Men may be more intent, he says, because of novelty of phrase; Be it so, so
that they be more intent and fervent. If the newness of phrase will contribute
toward it, for ought we know it is a blessed Mean: For surely it is lawful by
Gods law, and if by doing what is not in it self sinful, we can advantage our
selves in doing what is (by a divine precept necessary, he must by his next
tell us, why we may not do it.

3 He says, p. 26. Nature it self is apt to be more intent, and fervent in the
exercise of a Gift then of a grace; and therefore where there is a place for
the exercise of both, there may (probably) be more intention and fervor. But
say we the use of a gift is just no where forbidden by God; but we are
commanded to minister it, to stir it up, not to neglect it, etc. It is natural,
rational, proper, most immediate, Given by God on purpose for the Act to which
it relates.

4 He says, Men are naturally more affected with their own inventions then
with the inventions of others. What need more, What Scripture, what reason
makes the use of our own invention, and words unlawful: So that we think Mr.
Ireneus has fully proved that it is unlawful for him, who himself has an
ability fitly to express his own, and others wants in words unto God in prayer,
ordinarily to use the forms of others: because he allows it our duty to serve
God with the highest attention of thoughts, intention of mind, and fervor of
Spirit which can be attained by lawful means: and he has also given us four,
or five reasons, why we cannot pray with the like attention, and intention by
the prescribed forms of others as by words first formed in our own hearts. Thus
has Mr. Ireneus concluded against Mr. Freeman and left him nothing to do but
to prove.

That if Superiors command men to serve God in prayer with less Attention,
Intention and Fervency, it is lawful; and such prayers may be more acceptable
to God, then such as are put up, with greater Attention, Intention, and Fervor:
which we shall believe, when he has proved, That if the Israelites Superiors
had commanded them, though they had Males in their flocks; yet to offer
females, they might have lawfully done it, and it would have been either as, or
more acceptable. The case is the very same.

. 24 For what the same Author talks more of the heat of the Body, and such as
is caused by obstruction of breath, and drawling out of words. It speaks
nothing but the Eructation of a profane heart more disposed to flout at
Religion, and to take any silly occasion true, or false to reproach the
Professors of it; then to answer a good and solid Argument. And so we have done
with Mr. Freeman believing we have not left him so much as a figeale to cover
the nakedness of his answer.

. 25 Let us now consider what is said against this Argument by Mr. Falconer the
Reverend Author of Libertas Ecclesiastica, who p. 120, 121. thus speaks,

It is further objected that Forms of Prayer, are disadvantages to piety, and
devotion and the Noncon often plead Experience as a Testimony, They are the
cause of much deadness in men's Spirit, and the hinderance of the lively
exercise of Religion. Hear on the other hand others by experience assert the
advantage of set forms to promote Devotion, when attended without prejudice,
and with a Religious design of joining in Gods worship. To discern the truth in
this difference; it may be useful to consult the judgments of such persons, as
are least partial in this case, and yet are able to make a true estimate of
damage, and advantage, and then especially, to consider the evidence of Reason
which may be produced. To which we say,

. 26 The sensus piorum, neither is, nor ever was judged by persons of our
Reverend Brothers sobriety and worth an inconsiderable argument for the truth
of a proposition (especially a practical proposition) not plainly determined in
holy writ, nor can be so judged as to the helps of true devotion: they being
like best to understand the best and truest means, who are most exercised in
the Acts and constant pursuit of the end.

Indeed it is very reasonable in this case, That if the Proposition be not of
that nature as the truth of it is variable, with reference to several
Christians, that the Major part of pious souls, and able should be taken into
judgment, And verily in this case were it possible that all religious souls
having themselves the gift of prayer could be assembled, we think we might
trust the question in issue to their umpirage; as to those (though pious) who
have not attained to this gift, we cannot judge them competent judges of what
they have no experience, but this being not to be hoped for.

. 27 We say, we do not think but the experience of Christians may be different
in the case: and some may find the use of their own gifts more advantageous;
others may possibly find forms more advantageous: it depends much on the degree
of the gift, which every one has not in the same measure. But this we judge,
That every one is bound in the duty of prayer to use that lawful mean, which he
by experience finds most conducive to himself, to keep his thoughts attentive,
his mind intent, his heart and affections fervent: So as one may be under an
obligation not to use forms, another under an obligation for the present to use
them. The obligation here arising from the nature of the thing, as it may be
the best mean to one, and not to another; so he is bound, or not bound. Let not
therefore him that uses them, condemn him that uses them not: nor he that
uses them not condemn him that uses them; And we do not think matters of this
nature fit matter for a superiors command. One minister by experience finds it
best, (as Mr. Herbert says.) In time of prayer to seal up both his eyes,
shutting up the doors at which a wandering soul uses to go out. Another finds
it more expedient to keep his eyes open, and fixed toward heaven: both these
aiming at the same end, and using that Mean, which in their own experience they
find best to keep their thoughts attent, their hearts heavenly: shall the
superiors make a law in this Case, That all ministers should pray with their
Eyes shut; or with their Eyes open; or lifted up to heaven? We do think such a
law would be unjust and he that obeyed it should sin if he found the part
commanded what he could not do, but his heart more would wander and be less
intent, and less fervent. Liberty in this case ought to be allowed, and the
private Christian cannot want it; because he has no liberty to serve God with
a cold, wandering and distracted heart.

. 28 Our Author p. 121. goth on telling us, what the Leyden Professors declare
in their Synopsis. Disp. p, 36. Qu. 33. And the Walachrian classis in
Apollonius his considerations, Controver. Anglic. cap. 7. Qu. 2. We will give
our Reader a full account of what is said in the case by either of them. The
Reverend Professors at Leyden, Disp. 36. Qu. 33. do indeed say,

That they judge forms of Prayer not only lawful, but also very profitable, if
they be pronounced with due attention of mind. Authority without reason
signifies little, let us therefore attend to their reasons, which they thus
deliver us,

1 Because every Christian has not the gift. This does not at all touch the
case as stated by us.

2 Because in great meetings Attention is much helped by usual forms, whence
(say they) God prescribed a form of blessing. Number. 6. 24. Christ used David's
form, Mat. 27. 46. And the disciples had a form from Christ, Lu. 11. 2. But yet,

Sect. 34. They confess it it very profitable, yea, almost necessary; that all
grown Christians, especially pastors, should stir up their gift of praying
publicly without previous forms, that as occasion shall offer it self, they
may pray and give thanks as the holy men in Scripture did.

. 29. The Walachrian classis begin with telling us, That they do easily agree
to the Leyden Doctors, and Dr. Ames his determination in the place by them
there quoted. Cas. l. 4. cap. 17. and Qu. 4. Now in that place that eminent
Casuist thus speaks, Having put the question in general about the lawfulness
of the use of forms of Prayer. He thus answers,

1 It is manifest that it is lawful to use them, Aliquando, sometimes; from the
practice of the saints, which the Scripture commends to us, and the forms of
blessing there used.

2 It is profitable, and necessary, Quibusdam, for some to follow such forms,
though they only read them out of a book.

1 Because some are, Adeorudes, So raw, and imperfect that they cannot fitly
express their minds in any measure.

2 There are others, who though they can do it well enough to serve themselves
in private, yet, if they must pray with others, they want ability to do it, or
a liberty [we suppose he means a natural liberty of speech] to exercise it.

3 There are some, for whom it is profitable, that they may rule their
Meditations, and desires.

3 But none ought to acquiesce in it, but to labor for an ability that he may
pray without this help for which he gives us four reasons.

I Because, while a prescribed form does not follow our affections, but plainly
lead them, he who so Prays does that which is of the Nature of prayer less
perfectly. Observe that.

2 Because in a prescribed form, all those particulars cannot be opened, which
it may concern us to mention to God in prayer.

3 Because God is wont in the time of Prayer, to stir up in our hearts special
Affections, which are often hindered, and extinguished by keeping to a form.

4 Because by this means, a laziness, and fear and sluggishness in the
performance of the duty creeps upon us, so as the form is only customarily,
and formally recited. Thus far that incomparable Casuist Dr. Ames, with whom as
with the Leyden Professors, Apollonius and the rest of the Walachrian Divines
in the first place declare themselves fully to consent. The sum of what they
say is, That praying by forms is a less perfect way of praying, and therefore
not to be rested in, but all ought to labor for an ability to pray without
this help: And surely when they have attained it, then they ought to use it.
But they say, Forms of prayer are not things in themselves unlawful, But may be
used Aliquando, and ab aliquibus, sometimes, and by some persons, which they
expound, when men are so raw that they have not the gift; or not in a measure
fit for public use; or have not a liberty or freedom of speech. We freely
grant all this, but it touches not our question.

. 30 But the Walachrians go on and reject. 1 All such forms as are in their
matter vicious, having any thing illegitemum, impertinens, indecorum. Unlawful,
impertinent, or indecent: And upon this account they in express terms declare
against the forms in our late Common prayerbook. Whether justly or no we
determine not: but surely their authority ought not to have been brought by our
Reverend Brother to countenance the use of those forms.

2 They reject all those forms which by a Tyranny, or violent commands are
imposed upon men's consciences, as parts of worship and absolutely necessary,
etc. 3 Finally, They state the Question only about such a Prescription.

Qua ad ordinem, and decorum cultus divini Ecclesiastica authoritate
commendantur, ut utiles and conducentes iis, vel facultate idonea, vel eam
exercendi liberate destituuntur, etc. That is,

By which they are by Ecclesiastical authority commended as profitable, and
conducive to them, who either want the Gift of Prayer or a liberty to use it,
to express themselves decently; and that by them as by certain means they might
be ruled, in their meditations, desires, words, and actions; and the attention
of the hearers, especially in great meetings of churches may be helped, and
directed; and an uniformity in the exercises of public worship may in all
churches be observed, for avoiding of scandals, and for the greater edification
of churches. We (say they) do think such forms, so used both publicly, and
privately, lawful, and profitable: so that they be read with due attention,
reverence, faith, and Spiritual affection toward God, and zeal; and that not
only in a case of necessity, when a minister wants ability to express himself
in prayer, or in other parts of Divine worship, decently; but when the
Attention of the hearers is to be directed, and helped, and an Uniformity in
the exercises of Gods worship is to be kept for an edification of the church of
God: This they prove.

1 From the confessed lawfulness of singing by a form.

2 Because they conceive, that in the use of such forms all the essentials of
Prayer may be found, and observed.

3 From our Saviors Prescription of a form, in the Lords Prayer, and for the
administering of the Sacraments.

Hence they say. They are approved almost in all Reformed churches.

. 31 Our Question is not, Whether forms of Prayer be lawful or no in
themselves? we have granted them lawful and expedient to be used where the
persons to minister have not the Gift of Prayer, or want a natural liberty to
use it? The Question is only, Whether it be lawful for them to whom God has
given the gift of prayer, and a natural freedom to use it? Whether they may
ordinarily perform the Acts of prayer by the prescribed forms of others? We
think they may not. As a Medium to prove it, we have urged this. That it (at
least in many) hinders attention, intension, and fervency, The great requisites
of prayer. What now do these Reverend Brethren say to this, indeed they say,
We can say by experience, That a prayer holy and lawful as to the matter, may
be read in a form, and offered up to God with an humble sense of our wants,
with a desire and zeal, with holy affections, faith and a religious motion of
the will toward God, as our occasions require. This we think too, but it
touches not the Question, which is not about the thing in any degree; but
about the Magis and Minus. If our Brethren had said* That a prayer may be read
in a form with an equal attention of thoughts, an equal intention and fervor of
Spirit as if uttered from the immediate conceptions of our hearts; they had
then indeed offered their judgment, and experience directly contrary to our
judgment, and experience: But let us hear their Arguments.

. 32 They say, The Scripture (though in a form) may be read with understanding,
humility, reverence, zeal, a religious motion of the will toward God, faith in
him, an application of the word read to our public necessities; and therefore
why may not forms of prayer be so read? We answer, Because their is a vast
difference between the pure words of God* (for which God both has, and ever
will secure a reverence in all religious souls) and forms composed by fallible
men without any such direction from God. Let any Christian experience whether
it be possible for him to read any book of man's making a thousand times, with
that gust, and holy reverence, and with so little tedium as he may so read the
books and chapters of holy Scripture. Sic magnis componere parva solemus? 2
Besides, The due workings of the soul upon God in reading his word, and in
making known our requests unto him, are of a quite differing nature. To read
the Scriptures fervently, and to pour out our souls before God in reading
Scripture, or to wrestle with God in reading, are very uncouth phrases* such as
we find not in our Bibles; But, to pray fervently, to pour out souls in prayer,
to wrestle with God in prayer are scriptural, proper, usual phrases. Nor indeed
is it possible in the case, to say any thing with sense, as to prayers which
are read: For to say, A soul may be as intent upon God, when it must
necessarily at the same time be diverted to look into a book as it might if the
eyes were shut, or fixed: is to say, what every persons Reason will tell him is
impossible.

. 33 And to say, That the Affections may be equally intense, and that the
prayer is as perfect when the Affections are made to follow the words; as when
they do proceed them, and are the causes of them; is what we believe the
experience of all serious and considerate Christians will contradict, and what
as we hear before, Doctor Ames does deny, with whom the Walachrians profess
fully to agree.

. 34 Again, all the Authorities produced put in an [If] if they be produced
with due attention of mind (say the Reverend Professors of Leyden.) So they be
read with attention (say the Walachrians.) Due attention of the mind in this
case, must be equal attentions to what may be given in conceived Prayers: for
in the worship of God the highest attention is our unquestionable duty, and the
mean proper to that, is most unqestionably to be used, and no creature can
control the use of it, and that less proper must be rejected: now in this
sense we think it impossible, that any prayers should be read with Due
attention: that is, with Attention equal to what may be had in praying by
immediately conceived Prayer. And therefore we cannot but observe, That both
the Divines of Leyden, and those also belonging to the Walachrian classis,
speak not a word to justify the lawfulness, or utility of reading Prayers; Ex
libro pronuncientur, say the Walachrians: which indeed, if it be the minister
may (for ought we yet discern) do his work with Equal Attention of thoughts.
For the attention of the hearers, we yet a little doubt it, and think that the
prescribed forms of others, or constant use of the same form, though composed
by the minister himself, will be found so far from being conducive to allure,
or promove peoples attention, that (through the corruption to which we shall
find all our own hearts subjected) they will rather be a Temptation to the
contrary. Which makes us admire, that our Reverend Brethren should so much as
mention it as a due medium in the case.

. 35 It is manifest to us that both the Professors at Leyden, and the
Walachrians, and Dr. Ames also speak rather to the question about the
lawfulness of the use of Forms in general: Then about the lawfulness of
ministers using them; And that all ministers, and ordinarily as well such as
have the gift of prayer in an eminent degree, as such as have not; Therefore
the first Reason which the Professors at Leyden give and Dr. Ames also is;
Because all Christians have not the gift: and the Walachrians in their stating
the question, Profess only to speak to the case, Where men want an ability, or
a liberty to exercise it. Neither can we understand them concerning forms
Universally imposed. The word used by the Walachrians is, Commendantur, nor is
there a word in any of them to justify the lawful use of forms imposed upon all
ministers. They have indeed some expressions which would make one think, They
judged it lawful for some ministers having the gift of prayer, in public to
use the prescribed form of others commended to them sometimes: For the second
Reason given by the Doctors of Leyden is, Because in great meetings, attention
is much helped by usual forms; which the Walachrians also hint: But we cannot
possibly fathom this, and think the contrary is demonstrable.

. 36 The Walachrians also urge some other reasons cursorily. 1 That he who
prays by them may be ruled in his meditations, desires, words, and actions. 2
That uniformity in all churches may be observed, Scandals avoided, The church
edified. Nothing in it self sinful can be done to avoid scandal, nor can
possibly tend to edification: so as, Those kind of arguments have no place,
while we are disputing the lawfulness of the thing. In short, but one of these
will concern all ministers: For doubtless some are able without book to pray,
so as to give no scandal, but to edify the church; and need no book to regutate
their meditations, desires, words and actions: if there be not, we are sure
there is none fit to compose forms to help them: So that all the business is,
That Uniformity may be observed. Uniformity either respects the ordinary
matter of Prayer; or, The words and Syllables used in prayer. For the first,
surely there is no need of forms for that, that indeed is necessary (abating
particular cases) and this is that Uniformity, which the Scottish and English
Divines have so pleaded for, pursuant to an Unity in Doctrine. But it is pretty
to observe, How some late little Authors have laid hold upon this word
Uniformity in the writings of Presbyterians and Congregational Divines, to make
the world believe they were once patrons for that pitiful thing now called
Uniformity, which lies in an oneness of syllables, words and phrases; A thing
which never came into the heart of their God to command, nor of those his
servants to commend or speak a word for: and certainly, If it were at all
necessary would be fully as necessary in preaching; but they must have
something to bespatter poor Nonconformists, Dolus an virtus quis in host
requiret?

What other means of Edification there are (excepting the word, the Reading
that, and the administration of the Sacraments) besides the gifts of Gods
ministers, and people, we do not understand. But Authority apart from the
Reasons they give, signifies little in this case; and therefore our Reverend
Brother does rightly say, That the surest way of Trial is to consider the
Arguments used in the case, In which we freely join issue with him.

. 37 His first argument is, Because God himself prescribed forms of prayer for
the Jewish offerings, and for the Priests blessings; and our Savior taught his
disciples a form. The Argument lies thus,

What God himself prescribed to be ordinarily used in his worship, and what
Christ prescribed to be ordinarily used in worship, that can be no hindrance of
piety and devotion:

But God himself, and Christ has prescribed the forms that are by ministers
now ordinarily to be used in prayer; Ergo.

The minor here is apparently false, If our Brother intended to argue thus, If
those forms which God appointed to be used, and which Christ appointed to be
used, might be lawfully used: Then, Those which men appoint may be used. We
shall deny the Consequence.

The short is this, That forms in themselves are not unlawful from their own
nature. This we freely grant, But we hope, Though God might be allowed a
liberty to direct the images of oxen and Cherubims to be in his temple: and the
people might lawfully worship before them (so be it they worshipped the true
God) yet, Aaron might not of his own head, nor to humor the foolish
Israelites, make a golden calf, though before it they worshipped Jehovah. If it
be said, God had forbidden images in the Second commandment. We say, and under
that general all other mediums, or means and helps of worship, not of divine
prescription: yet, This argument is urged as a huge conclusive Argument; Both
by the Leyden Professors, and the Walachrians, and by Mr. Ball: whenas indeed
it concludes nothing (though it could be proved, that God and Christ did
prescribe forms to be ordinarily used in his worship) But that forms of prayer,
are not things in themselves unlawful; as murder, incest and things against
nature: But such things as God might legitimate, and make lawful by his special
prescript; which, it is more then we know if any one has denied.

For our parts we do believe, That some forms are lawful, In particular, Any
Scriptural forms duly used, nay, That forms made by men are lawful for Some
persons, i. e. For such as have not attained to the gift of prayer: and at Some
times, i. e. When men have not their usual liberty of Spirit, or speech: Nor
will this argument (supposing the Minor true) prove, That forms may be used
without prejudice to devotion, intention, and affections; God secures that to
his own institutions.

. 38 But is the Minor unquestionable, viz. That God, and Christ prescribed
forms of blessing, and Prayer to be syllabically used by ministers or people.
We deny says Mr. Cotton, in his Advertisements upon the discourse of set forms
of prayer, That God in his word has set down any prescript form, in such a
sense as in this Question is intended. The Priests, Number. 6. 22, 23. are indeed
directed to a form of blessing, But that they used that, and no other form does
not appear, It is evident the Apostles used diverse other forms. For the Lords
prayer, we do not think our Savior ever intended it to be used Syllabically:
If he had, we do not think Dr. Causabon would have been put so hard to it, to
make it up out of all the Apostolical writings; picking a sentence here,
another there. Surely had they apprehended it left them for a form of words and
syllables, we should have found some after record of the use of it. 2 Besides
suppose he had so intended it, all that can be concluded is, That Christ may
appoint a Liturgy for his church which surely none denies. 3 Whether supposing
Christ did at that time intend it for a form for his disciples? Whether it were
to last beyond his Resurrection, and the descent of the Holy Ghost, is yet a
farther Question? It is well observed by the learned author of Bonasus
Vapulans, That if he had, it is not likely that he would have left out his own
name, and till that time himself says, His disciples had so asked nothing.
Joh. 16. 44. But were afterward so enjoined to ask, Joh. 14. 13, 14. Joh. 16.
23. We refer the Reader to what Mr. Cotton has farther said to prove, That God
himself never did prescribe to his ministers forms of words to be used, and no
other in their public ministrations. Now by this it is very easy to consider,
How far from any thing of an argument this is in the case.

1 It will not prove it lawful to use any forms, but such as God himself has
prescribed, or such as have been composed by men who were (...), and penmen of
holy writ: so as indeed the same argument would also prove a liberty for men to
make us new Scriptures. All which will follow from the Argument is, That the
use of forms, is not a thing of it self like Blasphemy; or some sin so
intrinssecally evil, as God himself could in no case will it. But we hope,
Though God might command Abraham to sacrifice his Son, and had he done it, he
might have been justified by that special precept: yet, without that it had
been unlawful.

2 It will not prove, That the same forms may or ought to be used ordinarily
and constantly and that syllabically.

3 Much less will it prove, That the use of forms not particularly directed by
God, or parts of holy writ, by reading them, does not prejudice devotion, by
hindering Attention, Intention and Fervor.

. 39 Our Reverend Brothers Second argument is thus by him stated, p. 22 Because
it is generally acknowledged, that the singing of Psalms of Prayer and Praise,
may be advantageously performed by a set form of words: and the holy
Scriptures, are not the less edifying, nor the less applicable to our selves,
because they are contained in set forms of words: and both in reading the
Scriptures and in prayer our hearts ought to be moved toward God, though in
something a different manner. The Argument is this,

What, in singing of Psalms and Reading and Applying the Scriptures, does not
prejudice Devotion; That in Prayer does not prejudice devotion:

But set forms of words does not (as we confess) prejudice Devotion in singing
Psalms of Prayer and Praise; nor in the reading and applying the Scriptures;
Ergo.

The whole argument may be granted, For it concludes nothing against us,
Proceeding ex ignoratione Elenchi, upon a mistake of the Question, which is not
about the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of the use of set forms; But of forms of
words set us by men confessedly not (...) not authorized, and directed by God
to make such forms for general use by any special command. The Minor therefore
should have been laid thus. But set forms of words in singing Psalms of Prayer
and Praise, being no parts of holy writ, nor made by God, or penmen of holy
writ, do not hinder devotion. And if it be so formed we shall deny it, for it
is most certainly false.

. 40 For reading the Scriptures, our Reverend Brother knows, We can both show
him Precepts in Scripture for it, and also Promises made to it; if he can show
us but one precept for reading forms of Prayer, or one promise made to it, he
will then have said something. These precepts, and promises are of that moment
in the case, That they make Reading the Scriptures on Gods part, A sacred
institution; on our part, A necessary duty: And by reason of the promise to be
done in faith. Let our Reverend Brother, (if he can) say as much for forms of
Prayer, made by men in these days.

. 41 The same may be said of the Psalms of prayer and praise which we sing,
They are such forms as God has canonized; and to which in our singing we
conceive our selves limited. Our Brother knows or may know, we are as much
against singing by others set forms; as against Praying, ordinarily, by the set
forms of others. Besides it poseth us to fancy how it is possible, that a whole
Congregation should sing the same thing together, otherwise then by a set form:
The peoples voices, that we know, are no where required in Prayer. And for the
meeter, (which some make an objection) if it be not consonant to the Psalms in
prose, we abhor it; if it be, The words are but the words of Scriptures limited
by measures for the apparent order and decency of the action: singing being
Gods institution, it is not to be doubted, but it may by a careful soul be
performed by such Attention, Intention, and Holy workings of the soul upon God,
as he has directed, and will accept in the action.

. 42 But neither is the Major of our Reverend Brothers argument unquestionable,
for he knows and confesses, That the workings of the soul upon God, and the
motions of the soul toward God in Prayer, are different from its workings and
motions in Reading and Singing. In Reading, and Singing their should be, 1 Some
contemplation and intuition of God. 2 Attention to what we are about. 3 An
exercise of faith, believing what we read, and sing to be truth. But in prayer
is required, A more immediate intuition and contemplation of God. 2 A striving
and wrestling with God, for the obteining what we ask; therefore it is
expressed, By calling upon God, crying to him, pouring out our souls before
him, a wrestling with him, a listing up of our souls, it must be with strong
cries and groans, Heb. 5. 9. Romans 8. 26. Now that this cannot be done in reading
of forms, prescribed by fallible men, or at least not so well done, as when the
soul has nothing to do, but merely to look up to heaven, and thrust out its
own words by which it expresses its own conceptions, is to us next to a
demonstration. Besides there is as we conceive another Act of faith to be
excercised in Prayer then in Reading the word, etc. viz. A particular motion of
the soul devolving itself upon God, and trusting in him for the granting of
what we ask of him. But enough is said to show, That neither is the Major of
our Reverend Brothers Argument unquestionable.

. 43 His third Argument to induce us to believe, that such forms do not hinder
devotion, is in p. 123. laid thus,

Because all the ages of the church from the First centuries have used them as
an advantage to Religion; and it is not at all probable that such excellent,
devout, and religious men as the Fourth and Fifth Centuries abounded with,
should be so stupid, and dull spirited, as not any of them to discern between
the helps and hindrances of devotion, in matters of most ordinary practice:
wherefore though many men's minds may be most pleased, and delighted with a
variey of expression, yet, There is no prejudice to piety from a set form
farther then this is caused by a prejudice against a set form, and by want of a
Religious temper to join in it. The Argument is this,

What all ages of the Christian church; especially such devout and judicious
men as lived in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries judged no hindrance to devotion,
is no hindrance: But all ages of the Christian church, more especially those
devout and Religious men who lived in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries judged
prescribed forms of prayer to be read, no hindrance to devotien; Ergo. The
Major is only proved by, It is not probable (for certainly it was possible,)
The Minor is taken for granted.

. 44 In the first place we cannot but observe, The phrases our Reverend Brother
uses, they used them, as an advantage to Religion. So they might, and yet they
might be a disadvantage to the particular devotion of a great Number: We do
believe that the English Liturgies, established in Ed. 6. and Qu. Eliz. time,
was a great advantage to Religion in the nation in general, so great an
ignorance having prevailed upon the nation in general in the times of Popery,
as few were able to read, much less to compose prayers: But the tying of those
to the use of it whom God had furnished with abilities that they needed it not,
was notwithstanding this, A great disadvantage both to their particular
devotion who had such gifts (and so our Brethren at Francfort judged in Qu.
Mary's time) and the general devotion of the whole church as to future times:
both hindering ministers care to study the Scriptures, and to improve in
spiritual ministerial gifts, and making an engine of perpetual discord from
that time to this; and which has been made use of for to deprive the church of
God of the gifts and abilities of hundreds of able, godly, and painful
ministers: while in the mean time, many have crept into the employment of it
(being by Liturgies and Homilies now made so easy for them) of whom every one
who has any concern for Gods glory, or the churches repute, has cause to
blush and be ashamed.

. 45 But Secondly, we would see it proved, That all the devout and judicious
men, in the five first Centuries, That is for five hundred years after Christ,
either judged, Prescribed forms of prayer to be ordinarily used by all
ministers in their public ministrations advantageous to devotion; or that they
so used them. We often hear of this, But when we call for proof, we can meet
with nothing but Gloria patri, etc. and Sursum corda. Where we desire it may be
observed, That a proof that in that time there were some forms extant, or used
by some, in some particular churches, will not reach the case. We are not
against a form to be composed, proposed and left at liberty, that those may use
it who either have not, or durst not trust to their own gift. We farther know,
That there then might be, and still may be some particular reasons in some
particular churches, which was the cause of the Canon of the Milevitan Council,
in regard of the errors of Pelagius, being in matters of Doctrine ordinarily
falling into ministers Confessions and Petitions: And if in such a stress as
that, There could be proved a temporary imposition of the use of forms of sound
words in prayer, upon ministers who are suspected tainted in matters of
doctrine, we should not oppose it.

. 46 But whom does our Brother call, The church in the fourth and fifth
Centuries, or the three preceding; or how does it appear to him, or can it
appear to us, That they generally so judged of forms of prayer, or so generally
used them as helps to devotion. Certainly our Brother does not call the 22, or
32, or if there were 42 Bishops in the Council of Laodicea (more none speaks
of) the church in that age. Besides, that if there were 42, it is possible that
20 of them might be of another mind, for we know that in councils, the Major
part must carry it, let the excess be never so small. Yet, That Council of
Laodicea says nothing of stated forms of prayer, cap. 18. only orders prayers
to be poured out morning and evening: but that they should be read, or recited
out of a book given, that Council says not. Nor does the Third Council of
Carthage, Can. 23. quoted by our Reverend Brother, p. 106. speak any thing at
all, nay, it plainly hinteth us the quite contrary, viz. That ministers were
wont to compose their own prayers: only in regard it was a time of error,
they required the weaker sort of ministers not to use the prayers they had made
for their use, without first showing them to their more able Brethren. The
whole canon as Caranza gives it, is this,

That none in their prayers should name the Father for the Son, or the Son for
the Father; and when they stood at the Altar, They should direct their Prayers
to the Father: And whatsoever prayers any minister should write for himself, he
should not use them till he had conferred them with his more able Brethren.

Does not this Canon plainly imply, They had no public set forms at that time:
for if they had, there could be no such mistakes as it is made against. This
was about the year 398. For the Milivitan council Anno 402. It does indeed
decree in that overspreading flood of Pelagianism, That the prayers agreed upon
by the Council, should be used in that Province: it does not say no other,
only (...). No others against the faith should be used. It does not follow,
That because set prescribed forms, were advantageous to devotion in that
African Province so tainted in its ministry with Pelagianism; that therefore
they are Universally so, our Reverend Brother is mistaken therefore in saying,
That we hold they were in use for 1300 years upon the account of these Canons:
for we hold no such thing, nor see any pretense for it from these Canons.

. 47 And for the Centuries preceding, we do not think it worth the while for us
to write over again what has been said, almost by all who have wrote
Critically upon the writings of the Ancients, to show the horrible imposture of
the Liturgies said to be made by St. James, St. Mark, St. Andrew, St. Peter,
St. Matthew, Clemens, Dionis. Areop. etc. We only shall say this, That they are
so generally rejected by all sober, and learned Authors both Papists and
Protestants, that we stand amazed to hear our Reverend Brother, so much as
naming them: Let those that are at leisure read, Morneium de Missa, cap. 2.
What a lamentable shift it is to tell us, That they have undergone diverse
alterations. Who altered them? In what things? How does it appear? Those who
know any thing, know it was the interest of the Church of Rome to have a
sottish, ignorant inferior clergy, and that these could not do their work
without Liturgies, and therefore it was their concern, First to have them made,
Then to avouch their original as high as they could. It pleased God in their
have in this business to let them slip into most notorious errors, ascribing
Liturgies to Chrysostom, Basil, etc. Where were prayers for persons not in
being for some hundreds of years after, and Doctrines averred, That all know
the Church never knew, for many years after. Now when the forgery is thus
detected, for any Protestants to tell us, it is true, There are some manifest
interpolations which are of a later date; but the Liturgies are ancient: is
both gratis dictum, a thing can never be proved; and a fair offer at the
destruction of our most convincing argument of the Popish abominable forgery.

. 47 For what Mr. Falconer says about Constantines composing godly prayers for
his soldiers, It is a good argument that the church had then no public
Liturgies: for surely Constantine needed not then have made any, and it had
been a great derogation from the honor of the church. In short our Reverend
Brother might have remembered, That his Majesty's Commissioners at the Savoy
replied to that part of his Majesty's Commission, which required them to
compare the English Liturgy with the Ancient Liturgies of the pure and
primitive church.

That they could not find any authentic record of any Liturgy generally
imposed upon any national church for more then 300 years after Christ, (we
believe they might have said 600) and did upon the point challenge the opposite
Commissioners to justify that which they make their Palmanum Argumentum, Let
but the Indifferent Reader See and Judge of what was answered, though it may
reasonably be presumed, considering the Learning, and interest of their
opponents, that they omitted nothing which could with any truth or modesty be
spoken in the case. All they say is this,

That there were ancient Liturgies in the church is evident, St. Chrysostoms,
St. Basils, and others. And the Greeks tell us of St. James's, much older then
they. And though we find not in all ages whole Liturgies, yet it is certain
there were such in the oldest times, by those parts which are extant. Sursum
Corda, Gloria Patri, Benedicite, Hymnus vere Cherubinus, Vere dignum est and
justum, etc. Dominus Vobiscum, and cum Spiritu tuo. With diverse others, Though
those which are extant may be interpolated, yet such things as are found in
them, all consistent to primitive and Catholic Doctrine, may well be presumed
to have been from the first, especially since we find no original of those
Liturgies from general councils. For answer to this,

We shall refer our reader to the Answer of the Noncon. commissioners p. 76. Of
the account of their proceedings, printed 1661.

. 48 To bring this point to an issue, There was a book published 1662. called,
Asober and temperate discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer,
where chap. 3. 4. The Reader may at Large see what we judge of the Original of
Liturgies, when our Reverend Brother, or any for him has given a strict reply
to those two chapters, then we shall think they have more to say for their
Antiquity, then we have yet seen. In the mean time we do believe, That Gregory
the great (usually said to be the worst of all the Popes that went before him)
under the Protection of Charles the great, was the father of all those that
dwell in these tents; and this eight hundred, or a thousand years after Christ,
An imposed Liturgy unless in a particular Province, for a time, in a particular
case (such as was that of the spreading of Pelagianism) we cannot find. And for
a Liturgy, to be proposed only and left at liberty, we know most reformed
churches have such a one, and we have before declared our judgment for the
reasonableness of it; and he who thinks such an Eminent man as Gregorius,
Magnus, would do nothing which should disadvantage true Devotion, has not (we
think) attentively either read his story, or considered the Acts of the
Governing-part of the church in his time.

. 49 We are not so uncharitably disposed, as not to think there were many
eminently good and judicious men in the fourth and fifth Century, who were able
to judge what was of true advantage or disadvantage to devotion. But this is
that which we say, That the same things are not at all times, nor yet to all
persons advantages; either to public, or private Devotion. We have already
granted forms of prayer advantages to the devotion of particular persons, who,
being to minister before others, have not attained the gift of prayer, i. e. an
ability in that duty fitly to express themselves. 2 To the general devotion of
a church, when her ministers are very many of them tainted with errors in
Doctrine; which was the cause of the Milivitan Canon. We do know that in the
fourth Century there was An Arnobius, A Lactantius, An Athanasius, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Hierom, and very many others; but we also know there was
an Arius, and Pelagius: and that their herecies were of desperate consequence,
and had over spread a great part of the church: yea, had tainted a very great
part of the ministry of it, now it will not follow, That because set forms were
advantages to devotion in such a time, and in such parts of the church for a
time; therefore they will be Universally so. Nor do we think that either in the
fourth or fifth Century, There was generally such knowledge as in the later
ages of the church; nor is it proved, That in those ages, set forms were
generally imposed. The Question is. Whether set forms be advantages or
hindrances of devotion to such whom God has blessed with the gift of prayer;
and to such churches who have such ministers, and are not so tainted with
erroneous opinions in the fundamentals of Religion? And thus we think we have
fully answered whatsoever Mr. Falconer has offered in answer to this Argument.
But because our strict design is not to answer Mr. Falconer, but to show we
have probable Arguments inducing us to believe, That what ever it be to others,
It would be sinful for us ordinarily to perform our ministerial Acts in Prayer
by reading or reciting the prescribed forms of others. We will yet proceed to
add some further Arguments inductive of such a persuasion in us, still
professing, That we do not judge our selves infallible; nor condemn any of our
Brethren, who are of another mind in the case: only as we our selves apprehend
and believe, so we speak, so we act; and not out of any factious humor as we
are rashy judged.

CHAP. IV.
The Third Argument propounded. Both propositions in it proved. The second
commandment forbids all means of worship, not directed in Scripture. Mr.
Freemans answer considered. What the Noncon. grant. His instances answered.
Bishop Jewels opinion and Bishop Davenants against blind obedience. The
Difference between circumstances, and Ceremonies, what circumstances are in the
power of man. Why Forms of Prayer may not be commanded, as well as Time and
place. Acts, rites and means in worship must appear reasonable in themselves to
him who conscientiously obeys.

. I WE thus state our Third Argument.

To use a mean in an Act of worship, which God has neither by the light of
nature directed, nor in his word prescribed (no natural necessity compelling us
so to do) is sinful:

But for us, or any of us to whom God has given the gift of prayer, ordinarily
in prayer to perform our ministerial acts by the prescribed forms of others
read, or recited; were for us (no natural necessity compelling) in Acts of
worship to use means neither of God directed by the light of nature; nor by him
in his word prescribed; Ergo.

The proof of the major proposition depends upon these hypotheses.

1 That divine worship is nothing else but an homage done unto God in
consideration of his excellency. In this we think all are agreed.

2 That it belongs to God alone to prescribe both the Acts, and Means of this
homage: which certainly is the most reasonable thing in the world, That God
should tell us what homage he will have at our hands, and how performed. God
has as much right to appoint the way of his worship, as to be worshipped,
says Dr. Ashton himself, in his Case of persecution. p. 45.

3 God having determined our Acts of worship, has likewise in his word, and by
the light of Nature given us sufficient direction as to the means: Which if it
be true it certainly must be impious to neglect, or despise it, and to omit it,
and use others directed by man would be an implicit owning the wisdom of man as
paramount to, and excelling the wisdom of God.

4 God has also (as we conceive) expressly in his word forbidden the use of any
other mean in his worship, then what either nature shows us, and directs us
as necessary (as we cannot speak a prayer without the use of our tongue) or
what he has prescribed in his word. The first of these needs no proof.

. 2 To prove the Second, we need say no more then this, That it is evident,
That the use of a mean in worship which ought not to be used quite alters the
nature of the worship, and of true, makes it false. To pray to God is an act
of true worship, but if a man in prayer set an image before him as a mean of
worship, it makes it idolatry. So as in worship none can pretend a right to
prescribe a mean, but he that has also a right to prescribe the act.

. 3 For the proof of the third hypothesis, we desire but an instance of any Act
of worship for which we cannot show a sufficient mean, either by the Light of
nature or Scripture directed. As to what is the matter of our present debate,
both the Light of nature shows our own invention a sufficient mean, and
Scripture commands us to minister as we have received the gift.

. 4 But for the last which we think will be most stumbled at, we shall only
mention the second commandment. The sense of which we say is this, Thou shall
worship in no other way, by no other mean or religious rites then what I have
prescribed. The term Graven image is undoubtedly a Generical term and
figuratively put to signify, not only that, but any other mean that has no
more of divine institution then that has. And if this be not the sense of it,
it will be impossible to reduce all the precepts in Scripture relating to the
manner of external worship to the second precept in the Decalogue. To spare
saying over again what has already been said in justification of this, we
refer our Reader to a book of Mr. Cottons called Advertisements upon a
discourse of set forms of Prayer, p. 17, 18, 19, 20, etc.

. 5 The minor proposition stands firm, until our Brethren have showed us
where God has prescribed any such mean. But here again our old Adversary Mr.
Freeman comes across us and tells us, There is a general command for forms of
prayer when they are imposed, for we are enjoined in Scripture to obey our
Rulers in such things as Gods word does not forbid, and such things are forms.
To which we answer,

1 That we can find no precept in Scripture in the terms mentioned by him.

2 The same argument will prove that it is the duty of Priests in popish
countries in baptism to use salt, oil, spittle and cream, Rulers require it,
where has Gods word expressly forbidden the use of them?

3 We do not know what he means by not forbidden, There is an explicit, and
an implicit forbidding. God by determining the Acts of his worship, and
directing sufficient means for the performance of them has we say
consequentially forbidden any other means to be used.

. 6 But he tells us that Both in words and deeds we grant, That a particular
command, or example is not necessary (we suppose he means to justify any acts,
or the use of any mean in the stated worship of God; or else he says nothing
to the matter in question) For we sing Hopkins, and Sternholds Psalms for which
is no particular command. 2 We anoint not with oil though St. James does
command it. Because we meet with this so often we who take our selves to be
ready to give account of our faith to every one that asks us, shall once for
all tell him what we believe, and hold in this great point.

. 7 We believe the Holy Scripture to be a full, and perfect rule; as of
Doctrine, so of worship, both as to the Acts and Means of it: with no other
help then the light of nature directing the application of some common
circumstances, either necessary to all human actions, (as time and place are)
and some common actions and signs signifying no more in sacred then in civil
actions; and this either from nature, or the general, guise, and custom of the
countries wherein the worship is performed. 2 Hence both we and all Protestants
deny a power to any man to institute New ordinances of worship for which there
is in Gods word, no particular precept or example either of Christ or his
Apostles: And certainly, worship being nothing else, But an homage done unto
God in consideration of his excellency, It is every whit as reasonable, That
God should direct both the Acts, and Means, and Rites of his worship; As that
an Earthly Potentate should direct his subjects, or servants the manner of
their addresses to him, or the habits they should appear before him in. Gods
word especially declaring against will worship. 3 Hence we judge, All Acts,
religious Rites, and Means of worship prohibited by God, which either in
express terms, or by first consequences from some Scriptural Propositions are
not in the word of God prescribed, or Commanded.

But natural Reason assuring us, That as all human actions must have some
circumstances: So Religious worship being a human action must have some
appendant circumstances; either such as are necessary to all human actions of
which number are time or place; or necessary for actions of that nature. So we
judge it as reasonable, That a bell or a Trumpet should call people to worship
God; as scholars living in several colleges to a Convocation, or Towns men
living scattered up and down the town to a townhouse or Assembly. We take
Pulpits, and Pewes, and Churches to be as reasonable, as that in the Sessions
the Judge should have a Cushion and a Taller-seat: or the Major in a Guildhal,
or that the Commoners or Aldermen, being to sit two or three hours all that
time should not be put to stand; but have seats and pewes. In this sense it is
true that Dr. Ashton in his case of persecution has told us 48 (after 40
before him) These circumstances must be, and are not determined in Scripture.
We do yield our superiors a great power in determining these Circumstances of
Religious duties, as they are human actions, without which they are neither at
all to be performed, or with no Convenience Nay further, There are some
Circumstances necessary upon the account of Decency, the not observing of which
would make the action appear either from the light of nature, or from the guise
and custom of the country irreverently, brutishly and indecently performed. If
any will come naked, or half naked, or shoulder-naked into a religious
assembly, or pray to God with his hat on; we believe superiors may as well
restrain them; as they may restrain one that should run up and down a market
naked, or one that should refuse to pull off his hat when he speaks to his
Prince. And so for any thing of this nature, where is only a general
application of the rules and customs of places for reverence, order, and
decency in all human actions to religious actions: If two or three will
confusedly be babbling together in a meeting for religion, we believe superiors
may restrain them, as well as he may restrain such a confusion in a Town Hall,
or civil Assembly met for any civil ends.

For these circumstances it is true again that Dr. Ashton says, p. 50. They
must not be left indetermined: But all this reaches not Ceremonies, that is,
Religious rites (be they habits, or gestures, or actions appropriated to
Religious actions) these are quite other things, and must have something of the
generical nature of worship in them: Because of their appropriation to acts of
that nature. We say only, That no creature has power to command those things
in Gods worship. 1 Which are in Gods word either explicitly forbidden, or
implicitly as having something of worship in them. Or 2 Which the superior
acknowledges not in themselves necessary, and the inferior thinks are
forbidden. Those of the first sort being eminently against Piety; Those of the
latter sort, as eminently against Charity. Having thus freely and plainly
opened our minds, Let us now consider our Authors instances, from which he
would make the world believe, That we little value a Divine precept in acts,
rites, or means of Divine worship.

. 8 His first instance is, our Singing Scriptural Psalms in the meeters of
Sternhold and Hopkins, which (in derision) he calls Hopkins and Sternholds
Psalms. And there is he thinks the same reason for ex tempore Hymns, as for
ex tempore Petitions. We have already said enough, and the learned and
judicious Cotton has said more to answer this pitiful Cavil; but that we may
be troubled with it no more. This objection must be either against the matter
of what we sing, or the form of the meeter. 1 The Matter is Scripture; directed
by the Spirit of God, composed by the Penmen of holy writ; we abhor any Singing
of other compositions in public worship. 2 It is plain that singing and by
such forms has been ever used as an ordinance of God, both in the Churches of
Jews and Christians. 3 It is manifest not one of many attains the gift of Hymn
making. It is a known saying, Poeta nascitur. 4 We do not know that God ever
promised his Spirit to teach his people to compose Hymns, but he has promised
to teach us what to pray for. 5 Singing being the joint action of a
congregation, cannot possibly be done but by a set form, without notorious and
eminent confusion. It is more then we know, That in the public congregation
the people are all to pray aloud together. 6 We cannot understand how the
metrical forms used by us in Singing make the Psalms we sing more Hopkins and
Sternholds, then our Bibles are the Translators Bibles.

2 For the meeter, it makes no alteration in sense, only limits the number of
Syllables in a pause for order in Singing. We do see many things in the
ordinary meeter of our English Psalms which do no better fit the English idiom
of our age, Then, with my body I thee worship, fits it to express the honor
which a man ows to his wife: But we see David's sense kept in that meeter (as
the Hebrew sense was much kept, especially in material things, by the 70
interpreters) and therefore we do keep to it. And this we think enough to have
said to show the Vanity of his first instance. We proceed to his second.

. 9 Again (says Mr. Freeman) when they visit the sick, they anoint them not
with oil, yet they shall be so far from producing an instance for such a
visiting from the Scripture, that they shall find the contrary in St. James. If
they say there is not the same Reason for that anointing now which was then: I
reply, Neither is there the same reason now for unpremeditated prayers, (forms
of prayers composed by others he should have said) as was then, for now forms
are commanded by our Rulers, then (according to their opinion) they were not.

. 10 In answer to which we first ask, will our conformable Brethren then, when
they visit the sick anoint them with oil? or have they any Rubric for that?
How dare they omit it? If it were a standing institution of the gospel? They
are yet a peg higher then we thought off, if they also will maintain a power
for superiors to abrogate any gospel institutions. Was it a temporary practice?
What an impertinency is it then to urge it?

. 11 We confess we do not anoint the sick with oil, not only because we do not
know what oil to use, and much depends upon the kind, whether it wrought by a
natural virtue, or by virtue of an institution. But because we learn from Mark.
6. 13. That anointing with oil was annexed to the extraordinary, and miraculous
gift of healing; which gift both reason and experience tells us is now ceased.
So that notwithstanding these two instances, Mr. Freeman may see, we are
consistent enough to our principles. And this we take to be something a better
answer and more particular, then what he supposes we would say, viz. There is
not the same reason now, That is true; but it is further true, That God in his
providence making the miraculous gifts of healing to cease has taken away any
pretended Reason for that practice. Whereas he says; neither is there the same
reason for unpremeditate forms now, because Rulers command the contrary. We
answer, That Mr. Freemans friends think they were then also commanded: But
suppose they had been then commanded, does this make a sufficient Reason for a
practice in Divine worship, that man commands it?

. 12 But because this is so often repeated, as if all the world were drunk with
Hobbism and Parkerism, believing,

That the Superior commanding, not the inferior obeying must answer for the
sin if any be committed by any such obedience.

Let us discourse this point a little, In the first place this must be an
exception to the general rule of Gods word which has told us, The soul that
sins shall die, and the child shall not be punished for the parent; or else
it must be a new gloss; or a thing forgotten by St John when he described sin
to us to be, A transgression of the law. And Thirdly, They should do well to
tell us which way the obliquity of one creatures action should pass to another
creature that he should bear his Brothers sin. Again if the command of
superiors will justify the Inferiors from guilt in their acts of obedience to
their commands, The Command of the Pope will do it for all under his
jurisdiction, and would have done it for us here in England while he was here
without control allowed to be the Head of the church: But our forefathers the
Martyrs were not of this impudent Religion. If they had, they might have saved
their lives. But let us hear what has been the opinion of more valuable, and
ancient Protestants in this case, we will instance in two, both eminent Bishops
of Salisbury: The one at the beginning of the Reformation; The other dying
within a few years last past, Bp Jewel, and Bp Davenant.

. 13 What Bishop Jewel thought, may be read in his Apology against Harding,
chap. 2. Divis. 7.

The subject (says he) is bound to obey his Prince, how be it, not in all
things, but where Gods glory is not touched. These Nobles [he speaks of those
in Scotland] had learned of St. Peter It is better to obey God then man; And of
the Prophet David, It is better to trust in God, then in Princes, for they are
mortal, and shall die. Neither may a Godly Prince take it as any dishonor to
his estate, to see God obeyed before him, for he is not God, but the minister
of God. Leo says, Christ determined, That we should give to God, the things
that are Gods; and to Caesar the things that are Cesars. Verily this is not to
rebel against Caesar but to help him, etc.

. 14 In the next place let us hear Bp Davenant in his excellent commentary on
the Collossians, chap. 2. v. 23.

Ignatius Loyola (says he) the father of the Jesuits in that Epistle of his,
which is read in the Jesuits, College every month warns and commands them
seriously by a blind obedience, absolutely to do whatsoever their superiors
command, not considering whether it be good or profitable, yea or no: for that
(says he) takes away the value and merit of obedience.

It is also the common opinion of the Papists, That there ought to be in
Christians such an humility of mind, that they must not in the least doubt of
those things which are commanded by the Church of Rome; either to be believed,
or done in Religion, or in the worship of God: but we says he notwithstanding
this truly say, That this Blind obedience is not only foolish, but Impious,
and Irreligious.

1 Because we are not bound to obey superiors but in cases wherein they are our
superiors, now as to Doctrines of Faith and Divine worship, God alone is our
superior. If therefore men endeavor to forge new Doctrines of faith, or to
bring in a New worship, they go beyond the bounds of that power, which is
committed to them, and are not in this thing acknowledged to be our superiors.
2 Because the command of an inferior power does not oblige to obedience when
it contradicts the command of a superior power. Asts 4. 19. We must rather
obey God then man. 3 Because no intelligent person will expose himself to the
danger of mortal Sinning, as the school men speak; but whosoever voweth, and
performs absolute subjection, and blind obedience to man, exposes himself to
a manifest hazard; for every man may err, by commanding those things that are
evil.

According to the Doctrine of our new edition of Divines we would gladly
understand, how any man can run a danger either of mortal sin, or venial
either, by doing any thing in obedience to the command of superiors. 4 Because
what is proper to God cannot without great impiety be given to men: But an
absolute dominion over men's souls, and bodies is proper to God alone; To him
the will of man owes an absolute obedience, to him his understanding owes in
all things a prompt assent. But those who require this obedience of us use to
object, That it is not the subjects part to judge of the faith and actions of
their superiors, they seem therefore to recede from their duty when they doubt,
whether the things be true, and lawful which are published and confirmed by the
Authority of those who are set over them. This he answers, Subjects neither
may nor ought with a judgment of Authority to judge of their superiors actions,
but they may and ought to judge of them so far as concerns themselves with a
judgment of Discretion. Aquinas excellently gives the reason of it, Every one
(says he) is bound to examine his own acts according to the knowledge which he
has from God: Whether it be natural, acquired or infused, for he is bound to
act according to Reason, It is (says he) confirmed by the Examples of all
pious men, who although they did not arrogate to themselves a judgment of
Authority upon Magistrates, or Prelates, yet they used their judgment of
Discretion concerning things commanded by them. Thus far that Reverend and very
Learned man.

. 15 This is the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and was wont to be the
Doctrine of the Fathers in the Church of England, and we humbly offer it to the
consideration of our Rulers, whether there can be greater factors for Popery in
England, then those who so boldly assert the duty of Blind Jesuitical
Obedience, and declaim against the Judgment of private, and practical
Discretion: The first is the very foundation of Popery; The latter, the
foundation of the Protestant Religion.

. 16 But to proceed with Mr. Freeman he tells us, The Nonconformists have in
word granted more then he asks. Let us first know what he asks, then see
what they have granted, that which he asks is our concession, That it is
lawful in the worship of God to do somethings not commanded by God. What have
the Nonconformists granted, He instanceth in three things.

1 To command in the circumstances of divine worship, what is generally
commanded in the word of God.

2 To appoint time and place.

3 To appoint such circumstances, without which the worship of God, in the
judgment of common Reason, Must be indecently and disorderly performed; of
which he makes the following improvement, p. 35. Of the Reasonableness of
Divine service.

1 A form of prayer is but a circumstance of Prayer, and I have proved, That if
the Magistrate think them convenient they are in the general commanded. 2 If he
can appoint the time and place, which he thinks most convenient though
otherwise it would be less, he would fain know a reason, why he may not appoint
a form, which he thinks most expedient, though otherwise it would be less
expedient, To appoint to begin at such a time is as really a limitation of the
Spirit, as to appoint a form: For the ordinary reason which they speak of, it
must either be the Reason of the Magistrate, or of the People or both. If they
mean the reason of the people, Then the sense is, That the Magistrate has
power to appoint such things, as the People judge reasonable. We thank them for
nothing: If both, we thank them for as much. If they mean that Reason which is
best without restraining it to any subject, I reply, That Reason in the Idea
does nothing, but as it is somebodies Reason: Except the Magistrate has power
to command what he apprehends agreeable to the best Reason: He must command
what the Subjects apprehend so, or nothing at all; therefore it remains, That
that Reason which must judge what is indecent, must be the Magistrates, and if
he commands such things as be indecent, so they be not otherwise unlawful;
The people must submit. To all which we answer.

. 17 As to the matter of our present debate, There were no great loss in
granting all he says; for the matters pleaded against are not only pleaded as
indecent (though none has power to command any indecent thing in Gods worship)
but as unlawful. But we know he would then say, we must not then use this as a
medium to prove them so, Because they are not commanded. We will therefore
reply more strictly.

. 18 He says, we have granted a power to superiors to command particular
circumstances of Divine worship, which circumstances are generally commanded.
For Example, Reverence and Order are commanded generally as Moral duties, and
especial regard is to be had to them in the worship of God. If any will come to
the public Congregation in the ridiculous habits of moris-dancers, or naked,
The Magistrate may for ought we know command them into a gaol: But what is this
to our Authors purpose? A form of prayer, he says, is but a circumstance, and
that is generally commanded in the Divine precepts for obedience to
Magistrates. We answer that we do indeed make a great difference between a
circumstance, and a Ceremony. The first we say is appendant to an action as an
human action; The latter to a Religious action as a Religious action. But we do
not know that in reference to Divine worship men may appoint whatsoever may
come under the notion of a Circumstance in the Latitude of the term, nor do we
think our Brethren judge all circumstances in worship determinable by creatures.

. 19 There is a Rhetorical notion of a circumstance, and so Circumstances are
usually comprehended in that verse,

Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando.

If this Author thinks, That all Circumstances of Divine worship in this large
notion are determinable by man, he must affirm, That Magistrates may appoint
whom they please to Baptize and administer the Sacraments, That is the Quis.
And that if the Magistrate thinks fit to command men to worship God before an
image, that also becomes lawful, quibus auxiliis, is a circumstance he knows.
There is a Logical notion of a circumstance, and so a circumstance is, Quicquid
rei praeter essentiam adjungitur, Whatsoever is added to the essence of a
thing, and in this sense no ceremony can be a circumstance, for the
Appropriation of it to the Religious action makes it a piece of Homage done to
God; so as it partakes of the general nature of the whole action in which it is
used. We never thought that men might institute or appoint such circumstances,
as wanted nothing but a Divine institution to make them True Divine worship.
Will any say, There was nothing of divine Homage in the High Priests garments
which he might never put on but in his approaches to God? we by Circumstances
understand, Appendants to actions as mere humane actions, such are Time and
Place: and possibly so much of the quomodo, as is natural to restrain an
indecency, and disorder which the light of nature, or the particular custom of
the place shows to be such. These things we believe in their kind required in
the General precepts of Gods word for order and decency, hence it appears.

. 20 The fault was not in us but in his own Reason, That (as he tells us) he
cannot see why the Magistrate may not as well command forms of Prayer, as
determine Time and Places. Are therefore forms of prayer in the general
necessary to the act as human, or as Religious? Or could any one think, That
Gods word should set down a certain rule for times and particular places of
worship for all churches in the world? This is so miserable trifling, as we are
ashamed to make any reply to. But we must follow the Author yet further.

. 21 He would know whose Reason must judge in the case? Whether the Reason of
the Magistrate, or of the people? To which we freely answer, If the question be
about Lawful or Unlawful, Every private Christians Reason must judge as to his
own practice, unless we will turn Papist and vow Blind obedience. If the thing
be confessed both by the superior and the inferior. A thing in it self
indifferent we believe most Noncon. will allow the judgment to their superiors.
If the Author will but consult Bp. Jewels Apology, page 435. He will find him
laughing at the Papists for their obedience in carrying baskets from Palestina
to Damascus, Sitting 7 years together Silent, and watering for 12 months
together a dead tree. Let the author determine whose Reason was to judge in
those cases.

. 22 To make the business short, In all Religious commands there must appear to
the person that obeys some Reason from a divine command; either particularly,
or generally requiring the thing, The mere will, and authority of an another in
these things is not reason enough to justify our obedience. In matters of that
nature we must be very wary of idle, and superfluous actions, To be of no use,
and insignificant, is enough in worship to make a gesture or action sinful,
yea, and an appropriated habit too. There lies no necessity upon the superior
to command any such things, nay, to do it will be a sin unto him, as Gideons
Ephod was a snare to his house, Judge. 8. 27. Precepts in such things must be
for farther use (and evidently so) then to try inferiors obedience. The
lawfulness, or policy of precepts of no farther significancy in things of a
mere civil nature, may be disputed, The Magistrate is the minister of God for
good, Romans 13. 4. But in these matters it is out of question. In matters of
civil nature the Magistrate has unquestionably a far greater power then in
them, yet even in those things he that will not grant, that all commands must
refer to some general, or particular good will be brought to strange
absurdities. But he is a judge of good especially in particular relating to
political concerns, he is judge of the best means of order and policy, and
every particular person is not to be a privy counselor: which warranteth in
such things much of a blind obedience, Besides there are various dispositions
of people, several complexions of Political bodies: for all which it is not
imaginable that God in his word should have set down particular laws, for their
preservation and civil order. Nor has God in his word laid out any general
platforms of civil Government: But in Matters of worship, There is both a
general, and sufficient rule, all the Earth is tied to worship God, and to
worship God by the same acts. Every particular person may and ought to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, so as there being a sufficient rule for
worship in Scripture both for the Acts, and Rites, and Means of it; supposing
time and place by the church determined, or by the Magistrate; either people
following no other rules then the light of nature, and of Scripture shows
them: may so worship God, as neither he will be offended, nor any good man need
be scandalized. It is every individual Christians duty to enquire into the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, and to be acquainted with the laws of
Divine worship; and he cannot do that there in mere obedience to his superior,
which he can neither see the Light of Nature, Reason or Scripture requires of
him: or which his conscience or Reason tells him is idle, superfluous or
ludicrous; and so under such circumstances repugnant to the Divine will,
without an high profanation of the holy name of God. If such things be
commanded, he must patiently suffer, if he does them, he unquestionably sins
against the Lord, who in matters of his external worship has particularly told
him, That he is a Jealous God.

. 23 But our Author goes on telling us, There are particular commands and
examples of forms of prayer in Scripture. David's Psalms are prayers, so Hos.
14. 2. Joel. 2. 10. Acts 4. 24. Luke 11. 2. Though this be sufficiently before
answered, yet in short we again desire our reader to consider,

That if this Author by [ commands] does not mean, That there is some command,
that the church of God, and all the ministers in it, (at least in some National
church) should use ordinarily in their stated Solemn prayer certain forms made
by others; he says nothing to the purpose, we have said again and again, That
we do not think, Forms of Prayer unlawful. That we are not against forms to be
used by some persons, at some times, much less against them as made by any
minister for his own use, and the proposing of a form, which those who will may
use. David made some Psalms which were forms of Prayer, but did he make an Act
of Uniformity too? Again, a great Prophet and Penman of holy writ made forms of
Prayer, Suppose he had enjoined the constant use of them too in all places of
public worship, may therefore men that are no Prophets, no Penmen of
Scripture, no pretenders to such an inspiration do the like? Farther suppose,
That it could be proved, (which it never can) that there were forms of Prayer
composed for, and used in the Jewish church; or that the Lords prayer was
intended for a form of words, and commanded to be ordinarily used for a time,
(yet we never met with any that said, The Apostles might ordinarily use no
other) how does this prove, That it was the will of Christ concerning the
church under the gospel? That because Christ who was the head of the church
enjoined the use of such a form: Therefore any Superior deriving from him may
do the like, and add forty times as much, and enjoin it to all ministers,
after Christ's ascension on high, pouring out the gifts of his Spirit upon all
flesh, who sees not what pitiful inconclusive arguments these are. But our
Author pretends to give some reasons for the Necessity of Imposing forms of
prayer. They are but the Ordinary topics, which all make use of in the case,
we will therefore reserve them for a proper place and go on yet with our other
arguments.

CHAP. V.
The Fourth Argument stated, Because actively to obey in this case is to grant
a principle improveable to suppress the total exercise of the gift of prayer,
in Public meetings, Families, Closets, all places to which the superiors
dominion extends. To say, This is not yet commanded, is in part false as to
prayers before and after sermons: if true, no answer. The Vanity of those that
say though the superior may impose in part, yet not in whole. The Quota pars
not determined, nor determinable from Scripture and Reason. No power in man to
suppress the total exercise of any ministerial gift.

. 1. OUr Fourth Argument we state thus,

To agree a principle, which being agreed, is of sufficient force to restrain
the total exercise of the gift of prayer, is sinful.

But to agree it lawful for ministers ordinarily in their Solema prayers, to
perform their acts of prayer by the prescribed forms of others, were to agree
such a principle; Ergo.

We hope there is none will deny the Major, until he has proved to us, That it
is lawful for man wholly to suppress any ministerial gift, and make it useless
as to its end, yea, and sinful to use it at any time, (which to us appears a
strange task) we shall therefore at present not labor in the establishing of
that, taking it to shine sufficiently in its own light.

. 2 For the Minor we say, All Prayer is either Public in the Congregation, or
Domestic in the family, or Private, or Secret in the Closet. For that which is
made in the Congregation. We are indeed often told, That the minister has a
power left him to pray before and after Sermon. But 1 Suppose he had, yet he
may be restraind we hope by the superiors precept, and if he be, we hope he is
bound to Obey it: For why should it be less lawful for him to ty himself to the
use of forms in the Pulpit, then in the Desk* 2 But it were worth the examining
whether he has such a liberty? Did the late Bishop of Durham, Dr. Cousins
think so? Let any minister in his diocese enquire about that. Did Bishop wren
think so? Does Mr. Kemp think so? Let the Reader read his sermon on this
subject. Does the Act of Parliament say so? But once for all, Let the Reader
judge of this by what he shall find in the Printed account of the proceedings
of the Commissioners of both persuasions, p. 19. He shall find, The
Commissioners on the Bishops side (and they were no less then eleven Bishops,
and nine Doctors of Divinity of which five have since been made Bishops) thus
speaking,

We heartily desire that (according to this Proposal) great care may be taken
to suppress those private conceptions both before and after sermon; least
private opinions be made the matter of prayer in public as has and will be,
if private persons take liberty to make public prayers.

Here is, Heartily desire, and Great care to be taken to suppress private
conceptions both before, and after Sermon. It seems they apprehended, The law
gave no such liberty; and therefore are very heartily desirous, the Executors
of it would take care, yea, and great care too, that none might take it. Let us
therefore hear no more of a liberty (not so much as indulged) and if it were,
no more then indulged for ministers at all to use their ministerial gift in
prayer, There is no such liberty but as assumed.

. 3 So that the public ministerial exercise of this gift is wholly suppressed,
but yet we are told Ministers may in their families use their gifts. This is
indeed true, (notwithstanding any law or canon yet extant) only diverse of
those ministers, who use any family prayer, who are to be too the examples to
the flock, do not think fit to use it but there also limit themselves to the
public book. But the question is, Whether supposing it be lawful to obey
superiors, commanding us to perform our ministerial acts ordinarily in public
solemn prayer by the prescribed forms of others, yea, and necessary too,
supposing hereafter superiors should command men to do the like in their
families, obedience also in that case would not be both lawful, and necessary?
(We have a scriptural instance, of a Magistrates edict reaching to families) We
must profess if we could grant the obligation, and judge it lawful to obey in
the first (which is our present case) we cannot see with what pretense of
Scripture, or Reason we could avoid obedience to a superiors command in the
Second case, and we would gladly learn of our Brethren.

. 4 Nay, supposing a law, of the Latitude of that of Nebuchadnezzar, extensive
to a closet also. That we should no where pray to the God of heaven but in the
use of the church prayers. What should hinder but that it should be lawful,
yea, necessary to yield a ready, active obedience to it? Will any one say, That
it does not follow, That because we are bound to obey Magistrates commands for
worship, in public prayers and public places; therefore we should be bound to
obey the same commands made to extend to private worship and places, such as
houses and closets. We must profess we are of another mind, and not able to
assign any sufficient reason to the contrary, and should be glad to hear any
could teach us. Our dull souls reason thus, Are not Magistrates and Subjects
Relatives, and is not dominion the foundation of the Relation, and Relatives
use to go together; surely look how far the superiors Dominion and right to
that extends, so far obedience will be found a duty. So as the question only
will be, Whether the Magistrate has not a dominion over his subjects in their
private houses and closets? If he has, his commands reach them there, which if
they do if the matter be lawful, (say our Brethren) it is necessary to obey,
and why is not a command as lawful, enjoining the constant use of prescribed
forms there, as in Churches or Temples? Now the Magistrates daily, and
confessedly just punishing enormities in families, closets, bedchambers, are
sufficient instances of the extent of the Magistrates dominion to those private
places, and consequentially evince the duty of obedience supposing a command,
if in a matter wherein the law of God has given him a power to oblige his
subjects. And although it be true, That the Magistrate, cannot take such a
cognizance of what is done in private houses, and closets: yet that signifies
nothing in the case, for our question is, Whether supposing such a command, it
might with a good conscience be obeyed? If it might, then it must be obeyed
(according to our Brethrens principle) then whether the Magistrate knows of
the disobedience or no matters not (yet he may come to the cognizance of it, by
children, by eves-droppers, by confessions, etc.) The soul of the offender how
ever is made guilty, and stands bound over to the Judgment of the great day. So
as we profess we cannot see, but if we might lawfully in obedience to man
perform our ministerial acts in prayer by the prescribed forms of others if the
superior commands, We may lawfully also use nothing else but those forms in
our families and closets. Nay, we must use no other in case of such a command,
so as we cannot do it without implicitly saying, If the Magistrate commands us
to use no other prayers while we live, but the Public, prescribed forms,
either in public, or in private, either before or after sermons, either in our
houses or closets we do judge that it is sinful for us to use any other: though
by this means the gift of prayer, in all the ministers of Christ shall plainly
be suppressed, and made of no use.

. 5 We can by no means be satisfied, with what we hear some say, and think it a
sufficient answer, viz. That though man may impose in part, yet he may not
impose upon the whole use of any ministerial gift, such a command they say
ought not to be obeyed. This appears worse then a figleaf to our consciences.
For, 1 Who shall determine what is the Quota pars? How far he may impose or not
impose? 2 By what rule shall that limitation be made? The word of God directs
him no more to impose upon a part, then upon the whole. Let us but understand
by what rule of Scripture, or Reason he shall limit us to pray by forms in the
Desk, and not in the Pulpit; Though he does go so far, he leaves room for the
use of gifts in families: nay, why may he not command the like in families? He
leaves room yet for the use of gifts in the closet. We know when he go's to
visit the sick he must keep to them, we must wait to hear what other answers
our Brethren shall make to this Argument, we can see no evasion from it.

CHAP. VI.
The Fifth Argument stated from the Equal lawfulness of obeying a command
requiring Ministers ordinarily to preach sermons composed by others. The
unlawfulness of obeying such a command proved. The Proposition argued betwixt
commands for forms of prayer and forms of Sermons. The Vanity of Ireneus
Freemans discoursed, in pretending to show a different reason; Because in
Prayer the Minister speaks in the name of the people, and because all points to
be preached on cannot be comprehended in forms.

. 1 WE proceed to a Fifth Argument,

To agree a principle, which agreed, would allow man also a power when he
pleased to suppress all ministerial gifts in preaching, is sinful.

But to agree it lawful for ministers to obey man, in performing their public
ministerial acts in Solemn prayer by the prescribed forms of others; were to
agree a Principle which once agreed would allow man a power, when he pleased to
suppress all ministerial gifts in preaching; Ergo.

We do know that some of our Brethren here will deny us the Major, and allow
man a power to suppress all preaching, and it has been whispered in some both
Pamphlets and Pulpits, That Preaching in a constituted church is needless, and
serves only to breed Disputes and Schisms. It was indeed necessary at the
first for the first plantation of the gospel, when men were Pagans. But now
they are converted it is not necessary. As if There were not a conversion from
sin to God necessary to salvation, as well as from Paganism to a Christian
Profession. If some of these men had not plowed with a Popish Ass, and a
Socinian Heifer they had never found out this Riddle. Dr. Fuller in his church
history p. 262. tells us, That it was the very Argument the Popish
Abby-lubbers, Monks and Priests used to persuade the Pope to appropriate to
Covents, and Abbeys the tithes belonging to many Parishes: and the Racovian
Catechism de Eccles. c. 11. has it plain enough.

Postquam igitur Doctrina Christi secundum consilium Dei, and patefacta, and
confirmata fuit abunde iis personis quae eam patifecerent, and confirmarent;
nihil amplius loci in Ecclesia relictum.

And the Arminians agree much with them. Episcopius Disput. 28. determines
preaching profitable, but not necessary. But blessed be God the number of these
men in England is not great, all men almost acknowledging Preaching a great
Ordinance of Christ, an ordinance, not only to make men Christians in name and
outwardly, but Christians inwardly and indeed, changing their hearts and
turning them from all sin and lust to serve the living God. It was the
unhappiness of England to have three or four Prelates of great power, who thus
depretiated the greatest ordinance of the gospel: But as they are gone, and ere
this know, whether they in this thing did well or ill? so there are not many
that approve their sayings, or will rise up to call them blessed. We therefore
take it for granted that Preaching may not be suppressed, and are little
affected with a Critial Authors witin distinguishing betwixt Preaching and
Teaching; and essays to prove it is not the ministers duty to Preach, but to
Teach. In short we think that Critic had need himself be taught, before he
either preaches or teaches.

. 2 Our only question is, Whether it be in the power of man to suppress the
gift of preaching, in a minister of the gospel? We think it is not, because of
the frequent commands in Scripture to ministers, To stir up and not to neglect
that gift, and to minister it. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11,
etc. And to us nothing can be more absurd then to fancy, That God should have
given abilities and gifts to men for so great a work as the work of the
ministry; and given them an heart to desire the employment; and the church
should have approved of them as furnished by God for his work, and sent into
it: and after this, it should be in the power of men to suppress the use of
these gifts, and appoint them in stead of it to readsome discourses of others
to the people.

. 3 The only doubt then can be about the Minor Proposition which stands upon
this foundation, That God has given unto man no farther liberty to stifle and
suppress one ministerial gift then another. Nor can any sufficient reason be
given of their farther authority in the one case then the other; and therefore
our wise Reformers (seeing a necessity to make a provision for that most sad
state which our and other Reforming-churches were in, in the beginning of
Reformation, at the same time provided ministers both a book of Homilies, and a
book of Public prayers and Homilies (at first) just proportioned to the Number
of sermons they willed to be preached every year. That was 12 on each month,
Well knowing, That if they had Authority to do the one, they had Authority to
do the other: And those who had need of the one, had an Equal need (if not
greater) of the other. The Doctor Respondent therefore within these few years,
at a Commencement having given the lawfulness of Imposing and using forms of
prayer for his Question, and being pressed by one of our Learned Prelates with
this Argument. That then it was lawful to impose, and use forms of sermons too.
Like a wise man granted the Consequence, and denied the Assumption: And his
hearers thought he answered well (to avoid a public baffle, though he affirmed
a falsehood by denying the Minor) we are sure some of us did, judging the
Consequence by no means to be destroyed by the Art of man.

. 3 Every considerate person will easily understand, That if it be lawful for
man to compose all forms of prayer, and forms of sermons to be used by
ministers, and they may discharge their ministerial office by reading them
both: We shall neither need Grammar-schools nor Universities to breed up men
for the Ministry. Let us but make sure of good School-dames in every Parish to
learn children to read, and every parish will commence a Nursery of very able
and sufficient Clerks, that is, Such as can read Primers, Psalters, and Bibles,
or any other books of reasonable good Prints. If any will tell us that a
Minister has some other work. We answer, we know of no other, But the
administration of the Sacraments, where God himself has made the Form certain,
and the Minister in those ordinances has nothing farther (that we know) to do,
but to add the application of Prayer and Exhortation (the two general acts of
his office) to that particular performance. Let none tell us, That he is to
Convince gainsayers, for that (so far as it is the work of every ordinary
minister) it is by way of plain Scripture, and ministerial reproof: and for
that too, there are books enough in English. So that we are confident, That if
St Paul had thought such kind of Discharge of the ministerial work would have
acquitted Timothy's soul before God, he would never have so called upon him as
he does, 1 Timothy 4. 13. To give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, etc. Nor have told him that
such laborers in the word and Doctrine, were worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy
5. 11. Nor charged him, To prove ministers, (was it whether they could read or
no, think we) Not to lay hands suddenly on any. Nor charged him as, 2 Timothy 1.
6. To stir up the gift of God. Nor called upon him, rightly to divide the word
of truth (it had been divided to his hand) he would never have called upon
Timothy as, 1 Timothy 4. 15. To Meditate on the Scripture, To give himself wholly
to that study, that his profiting might appear to all.

. 4 But we find our old friend, Ireneus Freeman, here again opposing us, not
urging the lawfulness of Magistrates imposing and Ministers using forms of
sermons; but pretending a different Reason betwixt Forms of Prayers, and of
sermons; which indeed may enfeeble our Minor Proposition we have only to
Examine what he says, whether it will amount to what he would have it? For
otherwise the strength of our Argument is evident enough, to every deliberate
Christian. He begins with telling us.

That one would in charity think, That these men were none of the Contrivers,
or Approvers of the Directory: for these lamentable restraints both of sermons,
and Prayers are to be found there.

To which we answer, That, one would in charity also think, That this Author, a
Scholar and Divine, should speak truth: And not abuse his Reader with a known
falsehood. Surely he never read the Directory, or hoped his Readers never would.
Who ever saw one form of prayer, or of a Sermon in the Directory? Who ever
heard any minister tying himself to the words there? Does not the name show the
matter of that book? It only directs the general matter (which forty other
books do) both as to Prayer and preaching (and surely it is a charitable work)
Where does it so much as direct, much less prescribe a form of words, or
command the use of any such thing. Mr. Freemans Readers must take heed they
look with their own eyes; for never were more impudent imposings of that
nature, then some men are now hardy enough to make. But possibly he goes on to
more purpose,

I cannot, says he, conceive them to be so unlearned, as yet to learn why
forms of sermons should not be imposed, as well as forms of Prayer. A man's
mother-wit, may prompt him with two Reasons.

We must confess we are so unlearned, and ready to sit at this Gamaliels feet,
if he can instruct us in the case, and only fear his Mother-wit (as he calls
it) not sufficient to instruct us or any part of the reasonable world in this
point. But let us hear his two Reasons: for any thing of that nature shall be
welcome to us. His first Reason (as he calls it) he thus delivers.

. 5 Because in the Sermon the minister speaks what he thinks is true, if it
appears otherwise, the people may reject it: But in prayer the Minister (in
the name of the people: for he says not I but we) presents desires to God,
which sometimes happen to be quite contrary to the desires of some, yea, of all
the people. It may possibly fall out that the people cannot join with him in
one expression, whereby it comes to pass, That both the Ministers Prayer is a
falsehood, and that the people (being in a praying posture) do make a kind of
Profession, that they say, Amen to those petitions, which their souls
Abominate. Which makes it appear, why there is more Reason that people should
know beforehand what shall be prayed, then what shall be preach: which
foreknowledge is the effect of forms. To all which we answer.

That foreknowledge indeed may be the effect of forms, provided that he who
Reads, reads them true (at which we have more then once heard some very
unhappy) but the Question is, what need there is, That people should aforehand
know, the Words and Syllables by which their minds should be expressed to God:
more then the Words and Syllables by which Gods will should be declared unto
them: both duties must be done in the exercises of Faith, Love, Reverence,
Meekness, Humility, etc. The pretended Reason now produced by this acute Author
is Because in preaching the minister speaks what he thinks to be truth, and
if it be otherwise the people may reject it. It is true, That the Minister in
speaking (if he be not a very wretch) speaks what he thinks to be true, and
that too in a Theological sense; for he is the steward of the mysteries of God
and of stewards it is required that they should be faithful, he is the
Ambassador of Christ, and God entreats by him. 2 Cor. 5. 20. It is as true,
That it is possible that a ministers words may be otherwise. What Remedy has
the people? They may reject them, he says, that is, not believe them. 2 They
may if he goes on complain to the church, who are to say to Archippus, Take
heed to thy Ministry, If yet he will go on in such kind of preaching, they may
and ought to remove him. Is it not the very same case as to Prayer, should not
he who prays petition for such things, as he believes to be according to the
will of God? Suppose he does not, May not the people at the time withold their
Amen? May they not complain of him to the officers of the church? Should not
they admonish him? And if he go's on remove him from his station? What shadow
is here of different Reason? But he says,

In Prayer, the minister speaks in the name of the People, for he says not I
but we.

Pitiful! And when he is preaching does he not speak in the name of God? Is he
not in Christ's stead? 2 Cor. 5. 20. We would have the reader but consider;
Which ought more warily to be done? Is there a fear that the minister in Prayer
should beg of God something which the people would not have him ask? (which
indeed as to many of the people who have no mind to be purged of their lusts,
he does every time he prays as he ought to pray) And is there no fear that in
preaching the Minister should declare something which God would not have him
declare? And is not this full as ordinary and a thousand times greater error:
For it is not the peoples willings that is our Rule in prayer, but Gods will on
the behalf of people. And we think, The same reveiled will of God is the rule
of our preaching too as well as Prayer. And we would fain know, Why the people
may not withold their Amen in Prayer, as well as in Preaching, And their faith
and Assent in hearing? Are not these subtle ratiocinations, for one to Domineer
over his brethren with? He says,

It may sometime so happen that a Prayer may be put up and the people cannot
join in one Petition.

That surely is a rare case: And it may be it is nothing but the error, and
lusts of their hearts hinder them, but that in the same prayer they may join in
every petition, the Prayer for all this may be for things according to the will
of God, and in the name of Christ, which is the ministers rule, not the peoples
sentiments, and lusts. But let us now compare. Is is not possible also, That a
preachment, or Harangue may be made in a pulpit, in which the people cannot
find one entire proposition which they can give assent to? How many discourses
of late years have we had in Pulpits, pretending to prove, Men have a natural
power to things Spiritually good? That we are not justified by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, but by our own works? How many perfect Satyrs,
Raillerys, and Evomitions of the lusts and choler in the Preachers hearts? Such
as people could not assent to one Proposition, nor in hearing exercise the
least Faith, Love, or Reverence; but according to Gods will they have abhorred,
and abominated. But he says,

The people being in a praying posture, do make a profession of assent to the
Petitions which they abominate.

Does their posture do it in prayer, and will not their presence and sitting
still, do the same in hearing? May they show their dissent in preaching by
turning their backs, and departing: and may they not do the same in Prayer (if
they see cause) So as this first pretended Reason signifies just nothing. Nay,
it may be improved to an higher advantage for us. See the Commissioners Account
of their Proceedings, p. 20, 21.

It is known that in Preaching a man has far greater opportunity to vent a
private opinion then in Prayer. It is known de eventu, That it is much more
ordinary. And if you say that in Preaching, The minister speaks not the words
of the Church, but his own, nor unto God but man, and therefore it is a less
matter. We answer, It is as considerable if not much more, from whom he
speaks then to whom: In preaching he speaks as a minister of Christ in his
stead, and name, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. And it is as an higher, so a more Reverend
thing to speak in Gods name to people, Then in the peoples name to God; and to
speak that which we call Gods word, Truth, or Message, Then that which we call
our own desire. We make God a liar, or corrupt his word, if we speak in his
Name a falsehood: we make but our selves liars, if we speak a falsehood to him,
in our own names. The former therefore is the more heinous, and dreadful abuse,
and more to be avoided. We might further add, That if there were any reason in
this Reason it would be of equal force against all conceived Prayers before
others, as well in the Pulpit, as in the Desk, as well in the family, as in the
more public Congregation. Let us now see if Ireneus Freemans Second Reason
has any thing more in it. He gives it us in these words,

. 6 Because the minister in his preaching is to expound, confirm and apply all
the Articles of faith, as occasion shall be which is a work would require many
days, if not years. It would be endless to comprice the substance of all
Sermons in forms. But we pray for the same things continually, and therefore
the Directory saw reason to put down the matter of prayer though not of
sermons. Here the Author forgot he but even now, had told us the Directory had
put many lamentable restraints upon preaching.

Here now we confess is something that has a great show of Reason. Against the
flail of Necessity there is no defense, It must be obeyed, and has no law. If
it be true, as he says, That forms of sermons cannot be made comprehensive of
all we are to preach, he says something. To prove this he assumes.

1 That the minister in preaching is to open, confirm and apply all the
Articles of faith.

2 That the substance of these cannot be comprehended in forms.

The First is granted, but the stress lies upon the Second; and our advantage
is, That no medium will serve him to make it good, But, That they are infinite:
for if they be finite they may doubtless with all their appurtenances of
Explication, Confirmation, and Application be limited by forms. The question is
not whether 12 or 24 forms will comprehend them? But whether, No Number of
forms are comprehensive of them? Are not all the Articles of faith with
plentiful Explication, Confirmation and Application of them, contained in many
books? Suppose now supperiours should command all Ministers, in stead of
studying the Scriptures, and composing discourses of their own, to read some of
these books by portions. The question is, Whether they might lawfully do this
instead of composing sermons themselves, and then preaching them, or of he
should command them, That for three parts of four of their time used to be
spent in sermons of their own, They should do this and leave them at liberty,
for a fourth part, to preach from their own parts, and abilities. Were this
lawful? If he says yes; we are sure that Dr. Ames, Mr. Perkins and all
valuable authors we have met with, have determined the contrary, and do believe
the whole company of Christian hearers would be found of another mind. And
could we think this lawful, We should see no further need of Universities, then
to accomplish a few Gentelmen with some Philology, for which four colleges
might serve in stead of 34. If he says, Such a command were not lawful, nor
could lawfully be complied with, We would understand the Reason why, All
ministers might not in this case lawfully obey? Certainly it must be, because
in doing this, They should contrary to the Apostolical command, Neglect the
gift that is in them, or not stir it up, nor rightly divide the word of God:
instead of showing themselves workmen that need not be ashamed, they should
show themselves no workmen at all. If such a thing might not be lawfully
commanded what can be the reason, but, Because man who has no power but what
he deriveth from God, can have no power to suppress and smother those
ministerial gifts with which the most wise God has immediately furnished his
ministers with as means in order to their ministerial acts, and by their
having, or not having of which the Church must judge, whether God has called,
or not called them to the ministry? We do here allow our superiors both in
church and state a great power.

1 In regard that he who desires that office, (...), desires a noble work, and
that a Bishop as the Apostle says, should be blameless, etc. apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, v. 9. and
therefore, v. 10. He must be first proved. We say the church is to prove them,
whether they be indeed sent of God, or merely thrust on by their desire of
gain, or love of pre-eminence? And in this judgment we say, The church acts
in the place of God: and we do think the Christian Magistrate may appoint some
of the church to do this work. 2 In regard all men are fallible, and those
entrusted with this Judgment, may be mistaken in their judgment, and find that
the persons they have sent our are not what they took them for, but blameable
persons, lazy, covetous, unfit to teach, winebibers, strikers, men of ill
report, unsound in the faith: we do allow a judgment to the church in case any
be found such, to say to Archippus, Take heed to thy ministry, to admonish
them, to remove them: and we say the Magistrate may command this from the
church: but still allowing them men fit for their stations; We say, None can
hinder them in the use of their gifts, though they may be restrained in, and
reproved for the abuse, or disorderly use of them. For what the superior does,
he does vice Dei, in the place of God, and God having given his ministers,
gifts as means in order to this work, cannot be presumed to will the omission
of them, whence it must follow, That the commands of the church in such a case
are contrary to the will of God, and to be superseded by, It is better to obey
God then man. The same reason holds against forms of prayer to be imposed upon
all ministers; yet certainly forms of Preaching are as necessary, 1 For
Uniformity. 2 To prevent Heresy. 3 For people to know, and deliberate
beforehand what they should give their assent unto; which are the great
arguments for forms of Prayer, to which we shall hereafter speak particularly.

. 7 Mr. Freeman assumeth in the third place, what is false, viz. That we are
continually to pray for the same things. Certainly we have neither the same
sins at all times to confess, nor the same wants at all times to beg a supply
of, nor the same receipts of mercy at all times to give thanks for; and
therefore forms of prayer will no more fit us then forms of preaching; where
neither have we any new gospel, or doctrine to preach. Witness that known
Ipswich story, Where an eminent son of the church, not being able out of the
Liturgy to fit the case of the man that was goared by an Ox with a thanks
giving was put to it to read, in his case, The office for churching women. We
must profess we tremble at the force of the consequence of this Argument, so
horrid a thing do we look upon it to establish a power in man at his pleasure
to smother, and totally to suppress ministerial gifts, The great means which
God has thought fit immediately to give, and by his word to appoint for
converting, and perfecting souls, and make them wholly useless, That we stand
amazed, that any understanding Christian should agree to it.

. 8 But we hear some saying, That they do not agree to any such power, though
they think, they* shall not sin in obeying such a command: yet they think the
superior sins in commanding. To which we answer, We must grant that there
are many things which the superior cannot command, but he must sin; yet the
people may without sin obey, if they be commanded. And in requital to us for
this concession, we are sure the most wise and sober of our brethren will grant
to us, That there are thousands of other things which can neither lawfully be
commanded, nor obeyed if commanded. The question is in which order of things,
The ordinary discharge of our Ministerial acts in prayer by the prescribed
forms of others is? Or whether in neither of them: but such as may both be
universally commanded and also used? Our Brethren (we believe judge the last)
but for advantage against us, Suppose them in the first order, we think them in
the Second order, Because Prayer is a divine institution Praying and Preaching
are both so, and great means in order to the conversion, edification, and
eternal salvation of souls: and that in order to both of them, God has
furnished his ministers with gifts. Man says, you shall not use that means,
but another mean in the performance of those acts which I judge more
accommodate to this end then your own gift. To say no more, Those who think,
That obedience in this case is not a disobedience to God, seem not to have that
Reverence for God, which we desire that our souls may be possessed of to judge
his wisdom paramount to the wisdom of men.

. 9 When we could relieve our selves by thinking, But there is yet no such
thing required of us, or ordinarily to perform our ministerial acts in
preaching, by reading sermons made to our hands, We find we cannot: because our
consciences tell us we grant the Principle, That it may be done, and if
commanded we are obliged no more to dispute such command, In granting man a
power to suppress, or smother one ministerial gift, we yield him a power for
him to impose upon us as to the other, and oblige our selves to obey. We must
profess, let others think what they please, we cannot but judge, That those who
can swallow this and stumble at a Ceremony, do but strain at a gnat, while
unwarily they swallow a camel. This is more to us, then a thousand surplices,
or rings in marriages. But we have said enough to establish this argument,
which we cannot find any where answered in the All-satisfying Mr. Hooker.

CHAP. VII.
The Sixth Argument Stated and Justified, Whether the precept for ministerial
Vocal prayer, includes not the use of our own gifts? The precept for preaching
ordinarily so interpreted, There is in all languages a difference betwixt the
words that signify to Read, and those by which the Action of Prayer is expressed.

. 1 WE proceed to a Sixth Argument which we thus form,

To pretend to perform an act of Divine worship, and at the same time not to do
it, is sinful:

But for ministers furnished by God with the gift of prayer to perform their
ministerial Acts in prayer, by the prescribed forms of others, is to pretend to
the performance of an act of Divine worship, and at the same time not to do it;
Ergo.

The proposition will be granted, by all who will be so just as to acknowledge,
It is sinful both to mock God, and to deceive our own souls, so as all we have
to prove, is the Assumption, and that depends upon the resolution of this
single question.

Whether the Precepts for Vocal ministerial prayer, does not imply the first
forming of the petitions in our hearts, which we utter with our lips.

Where we desire our Reader to observe, That the question is not about the
precept for Prayer in the general, but about Vocal prayer, when we are to
express the desires of our hearts by the words of our lips, such is all
Ministerial prayer. The case is quite otherwise when we only pray, but do not
minister in prayer. We know Hannah may pray, and her voice not be heard: but we
also know, That a minister in his public ministry must not so pray (as we hope
all will grant) Now we profess we do very much incline to the affirmative part
of the question, That is, we think, wheresoever God has commanded his
ministers in their Public ministry to pray, The meaning is, That they should
first in their own hearts form such petitions as they judge according to the
will of God, both on their own behalf and their peoples, and then to express
such conceptions and desires by their own words: and we are induced thus to
judge from these reasons.

. 2 The whole world almost (the Christian world we mean) thus interprets for
Preaching. No sober Divine (that ever we met with) ever said that a minister of
the gospel could discharge his ministerial office in preaching (no not in one
Individual Act) by reading or reciting another man's sermon. Mr. Perkins and Dr.
Amer (two of our Protestant Casuists) determine the quite contrary, and tell us,
That, To Read or recite another man's sermon is not to preach, and therefore a
late hypercritical son of the church took himself concerned (in a book printed
some few years since) to distinguish between Preaching, and Teaching: and took
upon him to learn us a new lesson, That a Minister is not bound to Preach but
to Teach. And that (if we may believe him) he may do, By reading another
Sermon, or good book, By writing a good book, By setting another to teach, By
living a good life, etc. But none we know off ever affirmed, That to read or
recite another man's Sermon was a lawful discharge of the ministers duty in
Preaching. What is the reason? Because he who does not exercise his own gift in
inventing and composing. Christ has bid us, Go Preach. What then is the
meaning of that? Have not all Divines agreed to interpret it thus? Go stir up
the gift that is in you, Give your selves to the study of the holy Scriptures,
and to Meditation. Compose discourses of Christ and Gospel-doctrines, then
communicate them by your voice to people; opening to them the sense of the
Scriptures, applying the will of God reveiled in them to the consciences of
all, dividing the word of God aright, that you may show your selves workmen
that need not be ashamed. Christ has also bid us Pray, his great Apostle has
commanded, That supplications, prayers, intercessions and givingthanks be made
for all men. How come we to interpret this thus? Go read a form or forms of
words which other men have made for you. We do not so interpret Go preach. It
is true (as we hinted before) there is a praying in the Spirit, which some who
have no mind to consider the force of an argument may object to us; but we are
speaking of Vocal ministerial prayer, and what is the will of God in commands
which relate to that species of prayer: Such prayer alone he can use, who in
that duty ministers unto others; and every one will grant, That there is such
a duty. A whole Congregation must not pray in the Spirit only, without any
voice heard. The Question is, Whether he who in prayer ministers to others,
more fulfilleth the precept of God, concerning ministerial prayer; then he who
reads, or recites only other men's Sermons fulfilleth the precept concerning
Preaching? We think not.

. 3 It is yet a farther question, If he only reads such prayers, Because the
words used in Scripture in all languages to express reading, are quite other
from those used to express our duty in praying, and the action of Reading, and
praying are quite differently expressed to us? Those who know any thing know,
That the Hebrews had a great scarcity of words, the Radical words in their
language, hardly bearing the proportion of a fifth part to those in Greek or
Latin: So as they are forced to make use of the same words to signify
sometimes quite contrary actions: Ordinarily, to signify diverse actions if
they have but the least cognation each to other. So that it is not so easy to
argue from the old Testament upon this Topic. Yet we cannot but observe that
the words used, Hos. 14. 2. Joel 2. 17. is (...). We will not be too confident
of it, but we are not aware of any text in the old Testament, where it
signifies that kind of speech which is but the recitation or repetition of
words formed by others. (...) indeed which is generally used to express
Reading, when it is joined with [upon the Lord] or [upon the name of the Lord]
does sometimes signify the action of prayer. As it never signifys to read
without the addition of, The book of the law, or the law, or some such
substantive following it. Both Pagnine and Buxtorf say, it properly signifyes,
Clamare voce significativa verbis expressis and conceptis; But as we before
said, the execeding penury of words in that language makes it hard to establish
an argument from proper and significant words in it. In the Greek the case is
much plainer, The precepts for prayer are every where expressed there, by
(...), and (...), etc. never by (...) the proper word used to signify reading.
In short, Speaking may be conceived by us as a Generical term, and is either
Mental, or Vocal. The first we call (...). The Second (...) or (...), which is
a speaking to the capacity, and understanding, or sense at least of others, so
as they may know what we say. And this again is twofold. 1 The one is, The
re-forming of words which others have first conceived in their minds, and
committed to writing for us, or which they dictate to us. If they be written
down or printed for us, and we recite them, looking upon the characters in the
books, This we call Reading. Critics tell us, That Legere, est oculis scripta
percurere, quoniam literae oculis legi, id est, collegi videntur. This cannot
be done without the help of our eyes, which gathering up the letters, makes a
representation of them to our understandings, This action the Greeks express by
(...). Or else we Reform words conceived by others and dictated to us, our ears
there gathering up the sounds of them. This in English we call Reciting, or
Repeating. The Latins Recitare, Repetere, from re and cito, or re and Peto. 2
There is a speaking which is the forming of words, which we have first formed
and our selves conceived in our own hearts. Neither Legere, nor repetere, nor
recitare in Latin. Nor (...) or (...) in the Greek, are expressive of this
action. Every one would deride him; that being to express the action of him who
made an argument, or pronounced an Oration, should either in Greek say, (...),
or in Latin Legit orationem. The words express Actions specifically distinct,
so as though we lay a greater stress upon our arguments before mentioned then
upon t is, yet we cannot think this altogether vain and impertinent; we cannot
but make a great question, Whether if we should think to fulfill the command of
God for our duty in Vocal and ministerial prayer, by a reading forms, ready
composed for us: we should not come short of what God requires of us in the
action, and so both mock God and deceive our own souls? we can find neither
precept nor president for such praying.

CHAP. VIII.
The Seventh Argument from the tendency of the principle to level the sacred
office of the ministry to the capacity of the meanest of the people stated, and
proved. The last, from the Unblessed effects of forms universally imposed, Three
bitter effects, or consequents instanced in, proved from experience and Reason.
The conclusion of the Arguments against the lawfulness of prescribed forms, to
be universally imposed or used.

. 1 WE proceed to a Seventh Argument,

That principle, which levelleth the performances of the great and sacred
office of the ministry to the capacity of the meanest of the people, cannot be
a true principle:

But this Principle, That it is lawful for a minister of the gospel, ordinarily
to perform his ministerial acts in prayer by the prescribed forms of others,
levelleth the performances of the great and sacred office of the ministry to
the capacity of the meanest of the people; Ergo. That Principle is not true.

The proposition does but presume the truth of this, That God would never have
erected an office or order of persons in his church to do only that which the
meanest person in the church had a natural ability or power to do. There is
nothing plainer in the whole book of God, then that God has established a
peculiar order of persons to be his ministers, in his name to declare his will
unto his people; and on their behalf to intercede with God in prayer: Now if
they may do the one by forms of sermons made for them, and the other by forms
of prayer also made for them, This is no more then the meanest of their people
could do as well as they: it requires no extraordinary knowledge in the
Scriptures, no study and meditation, etc. The minister of the gospel would
only stand distinguished from the people by imposition of hands upon him. He
would have nothing to do but what any one might do, supposing him under the
same circumstances of ordination. The Apostle Paul needed only have given
Timothy a charge to have found out faithful men: for such as should be (...),
able, they were easy enough to find if this were all the ability requisite. Now
we cannot entertain any such thoughts of God, especially considering, how much
care he has taken in his word, For a double honor for such as labor in the
word and Doctrine; which Divines do interpret of Reverence, and Honor, and
Maintenance: And if that be not the sense of that phrase, yet we are sure that
both of them are by many other Scriptures required for the ministers of the
gospel. Supposing this were lawful, there were no great reason for either. 1
Not for any peculiar maintenance, it were but ordaining so many of the people,
and that charge might be saved: Besides the reasonableness of maintenance,
depends very much upon their separation from worldly businesses that they might
study, and attend to their office, and be fit for their work; but none of this
were needful, if the great acts of their ministerial office might be so
discharged. 2 For Honor and Reverence, God that knows our frame, knew it
would be hard to gain of the world a reverence for those, whom people should
only see their superiors in a notion, or by an inoperative character. We
therefore observe that God himself, when he called any to a place of public
employment, constantly capacitated them to some farther noble and powerful
actions, then others could do; or set upon them some special sensible marks of
his favor, by which rationally an honor, and reverence was gained for them.
Moses is called up to the mount, his face shines so as they were not able to
look upon him. Moses and Aaron are empowred to do miracles. So also the
Prophets, and the latter to soretel future contingencies. The Apostles work
miracles, speak with tongues, etc. and though these extraordinary miraculous
operations be ceased, which were at first to give the gospel credit in the
world: yet he still gives gifts unto men, and that which gains a reverence for
ministers is, when people see them, in gifts and graces, higher by the
shoulders then themselves. There is nothing of such efficacy to destroy the
ministry, and to make the officers and offerings to be a contempt; as to let
the people see or to induce them to believe, that they are no other then what
the meanest of them could offer. And of this every day gives such an ample
experience, That it were idle for us to spend many words in the proof of it.
But this would follow, viz. That God has erected a sort of officers, to do
that which the meanest people might do as will as they; if it be lawful
ordinarily to perform ministerial acts in Prayer and preaching by the
prescribed forms of others: for setting aside the application of those general
acts, there is nothing in the administration of the Sacraments, but any one may
do who has hands and a tongue. This makes it very probable to us, That this
principle is false, and that it is not lawful, etc.

. 2 It were an easy thing to multiply arguments, but we shall only instance in
one thing more, and that is those unblest effects, which are matters of
demonstration to us. We hope the Argument will not be judged improper, both
because our Savior has learned us the Topic, and most of the Arguments
brought for such forms are beholding to this Topic. Besides that we say in
Logic, Talis causa qualis effectus, which it true, where the effects are
natural and any way necessary. Yea, or ordinary. But our Savior has taught us
to conclude what the tree is from the fruits. Math. 7 Let us therefore instance
in some too evident effects of forms of prayer universally imposed, and to be
ordinarily used by ministers.

1 The First is, The filling of the church of God with an ignorant, lazy, and
sottish ministry. This we confess is no necessary consequent. A minister may be
a diligent, painful, holy man that yet in his ministerial prayer, may think fit
to use the prescribed forms of others. Blessed be God we have had, and have
very many that are so. Far be it from us, either to say or think otherwise. But
we say, That the establishing this for universal use, opens a door for such
persons to enter in, and as a deluge overflow the Church. And while such a door
is open, it is not to be expected but they will enter in, and it is evident
many such have ordinarily entered in. Experience tells us, That conscience is
not enough in all to oblige them to their duty, nay, That the very best of men
had need of all the obligations that can be laid upon them, over and above the
bare obligation of conscience arising from the force of the Divine precept. We
have before said, That forms of sermons may every whit as lawfully be imposed,
as forms of prayer. Supposing both, we would fain know, why a minister may not
neglect the use, or stirring up of his own gifts, improving his mind by study
and meditation? nay, if his own lusts so incline him, why he may not spend the
whole week at an alehouse, and be ready too for his work on the Lords day? He
will have no ty upon him to take more pains in his study, and meditations from
the work he has to do: nor from any honor in doing of it well, his work (if
it be merely to read first Prayers, then an Homily) needs no preliminary pains,
and may be done as laudably ex tempore, as upon the longest premeditation:
Whereas if every one were obliged to pray, and preach constantly in person, and
in the exercise of their own gifts, men would have an obligation upon them to
study, and to meditate, and to give up themselves to their proper work, and
would not find so much leisure for markets, and taverns and coffee-houses. Or
were forms of prayer only recommended and left to liberty, men would have some
obligation upon them from honor and repute to Take heed to their ministry.
Besides the Test of ministers upon ordination would be proportionable, none
would be admitted to that sacred office, but such of whose abilities, both for
praying and preaching, a trial would be first made, and those fitter for any
other employments, would (and that justly) be remitted to the prosecution of
them: whereas indeed there is no reason for such a scrutiny, if according to
the Doctrine of one whom we knew (but wonder how he raised it from his text)
That Reading is Preaching and Teaching; he should have added praying too, A
very ordinary Ordinary may judge, An legate ut clericus? But this is but the
first ill effect we thought reasonable to instance in.

. 3 A Second (of no whit inferior evil consequence) is, The loss of ministerial
gifts and abilities as to persons that minister.

That this de facto is, and has proved the effect of forms, is past all
denial; from a Clericus cum libro, came a clericus absque libro non valet ova
duo. Multitudes of instances of this nature are and have been, we have known
some of us persons of honor and quality, by this very thing brought out of
love with prescribed forms, sending for one after another in a sickness, and
finding them not able to pray with them, beyond the office for visitation of
the sick, and the Litany.

. 4 Thus is that Scripture fulfilled, Math. 25. 29. For unto every one that
has shall be given, and he shall have abundance, but from him that has not
shall be taken away, even that which he has.

To every one that has, i. e. That has for his Masters use. That has and
uses them for his Masters service, and honor in the Acts for the performance
of which his Master has given them to him: To him shall be given, and he shall
have more abundance, His gifts shall improve, and grow more, and more: But from
him that has gifts (as the man in that parable had his masters talent) so as
to have them not for his masters use, i. e. so as not to use them in his
masters service, for the performance of those acts to capacitate him for the
performance of which his master has given them: even that which he has shall
be taken away; he shall loose his parts, and gifts.

. 5 Nor is this more then the providence of God does ordinarily make the
punishment of the not using any habits, either wholly acquired, or (though
founded in nature) yet improved by study, and practice whether of more or less
Spiritual tendency. Every days experience teaches us it, The preserving almost
of any gift, or faculty depending upon the use and exercise of it. A knowledge
and skill in writing, or speaking any language, or in the practice of any art
whether liberal, or mechanic, is in a few years lost by disuse of practice. So
as it is not at all to be wondered at, that there should be the same effect of a
disuse of a Spiritual gift, which we naturally do not so much delight in, as in
such which are of a more secular use, and afford us more sensible profit, and
pleasure.

. 6 We do know, That a constant exercise of the gift of prayer, though it be
but in our families, will preserve the gift in a great measure. We say in a
great measure, for wholly it will not, we frequently see, That the minister who
can with great freedom preach to a few in a country-church, is not able to do
so in a great, or learned auditory; through a diffidence, and distrust in
himself. And we believe the same of a minister that is conscientious to use his
own gifts to pray twice a day in his family, if he wholly omits the like
performance in a congregation, and tieth up himself to a form, we much
question, whether after some few years, he would be able, if he set himself to
it to pray otherwise then by a form in the Congregation, we see he that has
used himself to notes cannot preach without them, how able soever he be.

. 7 We do with all humble thankfulness to God, and due honor to the persons
acknowledge, That very many of our brethren in the ministry who do conform,
have not felt this ill effect of their use of forms, but are able to pray pro
re nata, as God offers them occasions, and that to great acceptance, and with
eminent abilities. But as the number of these comparatively is very few, so we
believe that both they, and we are for this preservation of those eminent
gifts, beholding, not only to their constant praying. without prescribed forms
in their families: But also to that liberty of praying by conceived prayer
before and after sermon, which they have assumed, and do assume a liberty no
more then indulged to them, The statute law allows it not. It is sufficiently
known, That diverse late Bishops. (Who may be presumed to have known the law
both of church and state) severely forbad it, suspended diverse for the use of
it. And we do believe, that even to these of our brethren who yet by this means
preserve their emeninent gifts, Seven years experience of tying themselves to
prescribed forms in the pulpit, as well as in the desk, would justify what we
say: and that at the end of them, they would find a decay at least of those
gifts, though all this while nursed up by a more private practice in their
families. Ability to the public exercise of ministerial gifts will (like some
creatures) hardly be kept alive in a confinement to the walls of a private
house.

. 8 Besides that (as we before proved) granting the lawfulness of these
commands as to, and ministers practice in public prayer, and the liberty of
using ministers gifts at all in public prayer, may at any time be knocked down
by the same cudgel. And for the liberty of using gifts in private
Domestickprayer, it will not be able with any modesty to ask farther favor
then that of Polyphemus, to be devoured last: it will but wait for such a
command, as is now with reference to Desk-prayer, and has been lately
throughout some diocesses pressed as to all public Pulpit-prayer, and as we
heard before passionatly wished, That it might be revived, and urged (for they
thought there is already a warrant by law though dormant for it) and then
certainly, all ministerial gifts would quickly sleep their last sleep.

. 9 Besides this, How many are there, while public prescribed forms are
imposed, who will magnify them, they must be the very sword of Goliath none to
them. And this must be taken defide, as matter of faith; because the church
commands them without examining either the comprehensiveness of the matter, or
the decency of the form, or the dueness of the connection of phrases, or the
safety of any expressions, or the fitness of their fashion to the present age
to excite affections: and while they do so, they will think, and do think using
their gifts in their families, while they have a publickbook in the house, like
offering a female, while they have a male in their flock: and accordingly in
hundreds of ministers families there is nothing heard, but the Prayers of the
Church; or if any thing, It must be a form, Conceived-prayers are defamed, the
others have all the repute, and hence it is, That though indeed the loss of
ministerial gifts be not an universal, and necessary effect of ministers
limiting themselves by prescribed forms in some parts of public worship: yet
it is a certain effect as to very many, and is like enough to be as to many
more, as that practice shall gain more repute and authority. But we shall add
no more to our discourse upon this second effect.

. 10 A third if not natural effect, yet, experimented consequence of them (and
that of a very sad and melancholic consideration) is a flood of iniquity which
the universal imposing of them has, for more now then an hundred years caused
in our parts of the world. This, This has been the mother of those bitter
words, with which many, (and those ministers of the gospel) both in pulpits,
and in printed books, have vexed the righteous souls of their brethren, who
have had nothing to reply, but, The Lord rebuke you. Hence the uncharitable and
ungodly representations to superiors of men, of whom the world was not worthy.
Hence the suspensions, and silencings of so many thousands; the imprisonments
and ruins of so many eminent servants of God, with their families: which have
caused so many appeals to the great day, and has made so many thousand cases
depending before the great tribunal betwixt poor ministers, and their families,
and their Ecciesiastical superiors. Hence the separations of Christians in
communion one from another. Upon this most be charged, and at last come most of
the suspensions, silencings, imprisonments, revilings, sufferings of all sorts
of the righteous servants of God even, from the first disturbance upon that
account made at Franckfort by Dr. Cox, (hunting out Mr. Knox) unto this very
day: which (with a thousand evils more which we forbear to mention) had been
all prevented, if Dr. Cox his Spirit, and some others of his age could have
allowed, The ministers of God to have served him in the use of their own gifts:
or at least allowed, That a puhlick Liturgy should have been by authority
proposed, and commended, but left at liberty. We will not say but many of our
forefathers, and brethren, may by their passions have increased the heap of
these sins, we know they have, and excuse them not unless it be a Tanto.
Zipporah, (under her circumstances) might be a little excused, though she threw
the foreskin of the child at her husband, and said, A bloudly husband have thou
been to me.

. 11 We say, That we reflecting upon these bitter effects, and consequents,
which are obvious to every eye, cannot but think it very probable, That a
submission to this practice is not lawful, but the principle false, which must
justify our such submission, viz. That it is lawful for us being ministers of
the gospel, who durst never have entered upon the sacred office of the ministry
if we had not hoped, and the church had not first judged, That we were
furnished with abilities both to pray and preach, to perform our ministerial
acts in prayer, by reading or reciting forms prescribed by others. We cannot
but say, surely if this thing had been pleasing in the sight of God, if our
Brethren that for these many years have done it, had in it done what God would
have had them do, we should not have seen such effects and consequents of it;
and those so far from abating in this long process of time, that we see them
every day more and more increasing. How be it, in this thing we are far from
judging our selves infallible, and therefore do not condemn our brethren, nor
judge them who are otherwise minded to us in this case. But pray God, That if
we be in the mistake, God would reveil it to us. But as we from our hearts
believe, so we speak, so we must practice: and beg no more then a liberty for
us so to do, leaving our Brethren to the latitude of their own consciences. If
we have said enough to evince to the world, we are not such fools, or sons of
Belial, as Dr. Parker, Dr. Ashton and many more in their printed discourses
would persuade our superiors we be; and as we are daily represented from
inconsiderate tongues of them that have the sole privilege of publick-pulpits,
it is all we aim at. And whether we have done that or no? We freely leave to the
judgment of all sober, intelligent and unprejudiced persons. It will be time
enough, when we are convinced by our adversaries, or it be proved by them to
the world, That these arguments are of no force. To examine whether we have not
also probable arguments to persuade us, That the use of significant ceremonies,
Reordination, etc. is not lawful. We shall shut up our mouths, and our
discourse at present with considering in a single chapter, what our Brethrens
arguments are for the lawfulness, or expediency of such prescribed forms to be
universally imposed or used, where we shall have liberty to weigh what contrary
good effects of them are pretended: And whether they will balance these evil
effects and consequents which we have mentioned?

CHAP. IX.
Several Arguments answered brought to prove the lawfulness of set forms by
several Authors. Ireneus Freemans and Mr. Falconers reasons for the lawfulness
or expediency of them considered, and answered.

. 1 BEfore we come to reply to the Arguments alleged against our opinion in
this case, we shall only desire our Reader to consider, That all that which
our Brethren labor for, is but to prove the thing in dispute betwixt us, may
lawfully be commanded, They do not so much as pretend it necessary. This is all
the Reverend Author of Libertas Ecclesiastica pretends to, or indeed any
other who has wrote ought worthy of our notice.

. 2 But to make our work the shorter in answering objections, let us admonish
our Reader wistly to consider, That the matter in question which was to be
proved is this.

That it is lawful for ministers of the gospel, furnished with the gifts of
prayer, ordinarily to perform their ministerial acts in public prayer by the
prescribed forms fothers, and those such, as cannot pretend to any immediate
Divine Inspiration.

. 3 To this purpose they thus argue,

What God has not forbidden is lawful:

But God has not forbidden this to ministers; Ergo.

This is an old soldier of the churches, and has fought many a field, yea,
never was there a Battle fought between a Con. and Noncon. but this commanding
Argument appeared. It has been wounded, and had its head cut off oftener then
ever Hydra's was by Hercules; but how it comes to pass we know it not, like
that monster, it puts up its head again in the next pulpit, or press. Let us
once more try a fall with it.

What God has not forbidden is lawful.

True, what God has not forbidden either Generally or particularly, either
(...) literally, or by direct consequence of Scripture, is lawful: But if our
Brethren by Forbidden mean, Particularly, and Expressly forbidden, or Literally
forbidden, and lay the Proposition thus,

Whatsoever is not in the letter of Scripture, particularly and by name
forbidden, that is lawful. Our Brethren will we trust give us leave to deny the
Proposition; because they agree with us in determining a hundred things to be
sinful, and some of them in a most heinous degree sinful that are not
particularly, and by name forbidden only as they fall as Specials under some
other Generals, or by a first, and just consequence: If they so understand the
Major, we do think, That ministers are in Gods word forbidden plainly enough
forbidden, having abilities to express their own and their peoples minds to God
in public prayers, ordinarily to perform their ministerial acts in prayer, by
only reading, or reciting forms of prayer composed by others, being no Gods,
nor by any plain designation of God appointed to compose such forms for the use
of the church. Forbidden. 1 By the second commandment, as a mean of worship not
instituted by God. 2 Forbidden by all those texts mentioned in justification of
our first argument commanding us, To stir up, not to neglect our ministerial
gifts, but as every man has received the gift so to minister (...) it, etc. 3
Forbidden by all those texts that command us to worship God in the best manner
we can, with all our hearts, all our souls, all our strength; not having a male
in our flocks to offer a female. 4 Forbidden by all those texts that require of
us in prayer the highest attention of thoughts, intention of mind and fervor of
affections. All which we have before justified under our five first arguments:
so as in short, we deny the Minor in that first Argument, and if all do not
think it forbidden in this manner, yet we do, and our consciences must be the
proximate rule of our actions: so as it is at least to us forbidden from Romans
14. 23.

. 4 They object in the second place the form of Blessing, Number. 6. The forms of
Psalms composed by David, The Lords prayer. The Argument is thus, If it were
lawful for Christ's disciples to use the Lords prayer, and for the church to use
the form of blessing directed by God himself, Number. 6. And for the church in
David's time, to use his forms of Psalms: Then it is lawful now for ministers
having the gift of Prayer ordinarily to perform their ministerial acts in
Prayer, by the forms prescribed not immediately by God, but by men, and those
no prophets, nor persons divinely inspired, etc.

But the former was lawful, therefore the latter is also lawful. We deny the
consequence, not only because we do not think, That God ever intended the form
of blessing should syllabically be used so often as the Priest blessed the
people; but only, That the name of the Lord to that sense should be lifted up
upon them Nor that Christ ever intended to enjoin his disciples the
syllabical-use of the Lords prayer. Nor do we read, That either the former
blessing, nor the latter Prayer was so ordinarily used: But we find diverse
forms both of prayer, and blessing used. But also, Because we think no man has
such authority now to prescribe in matters of worship as God, and Christ
unquestionably had; or as David, and other holy Penmen of Scripture had. Which
this argument must suppose, or the consequence must be false. But we have spoke
to this fully before.

. 5 A third Argument is this,

What is matter of mere decency, order, and circumstance in the worship of God,
may be lawfully commanded by Superiors, and lawfully obeyed by Inferiors:

But this is matter of mere decency, order, and circumstance* Ergo.

We deny the Minor, order is not concerned in it, that only respects prius
and posterius; first and last. Nothing can be decent but the contrary must be
indecent, there is no medium participationis in the case. No sober person will
say, it is indecent for ministers having the gift of prayer to pray without the
prescribed forms of others, Circumstances relate to actions as humane actions,
but the prescribed forms of others in prayer, have no such relation to prayer,
it may be performed without them. They must be therefore (if at all
circumstances) appropriated to the action quatenus a religious action, and no
such circumstances we conceive are left to men's liberty to determine, being
properly Ceremonies, or religious rites, which in them have something of homage
to God.

. 6 A Fourth Objection, or Argument is this,

If all the essentials to prayer may be found or observed in the prescribed
forms of others, Then the minister may in his public ministry use them:

But all the essentials to prayer may be found, and observed in the use of the
prescribed forms of others.

To justify this, some tell us, That matter and form are the only essentials
to prayer. Others tell us, Due affections and grace may be equally exercised in
praying by a form. To which we answer, That Prayer may be considered either in
Facto esse, as a composition of words and phrases: so indeed, The essentials
are the same as of all other compounded things, Matter and Form. The due matter
of prayer is, Things agreeable to the will of God: The form in the name of Jesus
Christ. We most freely grant, That both these may be found in a form composed
and prescribed by men. What follows? Therefore this form is a good form, and it
may be used. It is granted, it may lawfully be read for instruction by the
best; it may be used as an help for children, or men that have not yet attained
the gift of prayer, All this is true. But we are considering Prayer not in this
notion, but as an human Action; and say, That a religous action a piece of
homage and worship which his minister in the Congregation puts up to him, To
this action, It is essentially necessary, not only that he confesses sins,
puts up petitions, etc. according to the will of God, and that with a
suitable exercise of Grace, and Sanctified affections, but that. 1 He uses an
audible voice, and this all will grant. 2 Say we, that if he has them, he
uses his own gifts; not other men's. He thus understands his Lord saying to
him, Go and preach, why should he otherwise interpret him, saying to him, Go
and pray? When he has bidden him minister his gifts (...), and according to
the Grace given, so to minister. Romans 12. Besides we have declared both our
judgments as that, and our reasons why we so judge, That he who prays by
reading or reciting the prescribed forms of others, cannot pray with the same
Attention, Intention and fervor, essential things to acceptable prayer.

. 7 But then (says a Reverend person) for a child, or scholar to use a form
which is prescribed by his Father, or Master would be unlawful. Let us turn it
into a form.

What is not unlawful for a child, or scholar (we will add to advantage the
argument, or save our selves labor of more words) or a private person, that
has not attained to the gift of prayer, or such whom the church is enforced to
use in public ministrations for want of persons better qualified to do in
prayer, That is not unlawful for ministers to do ordinarily, to whom God has
given the gift:

But to pray by the prescribed forms of others ordinarily, in private or
public, is not unlawful for children, or grown persons, or such ministers;
Ergo.

The Assumption is granted, but the Proposition is unquestionably false,
sincerity is accepted, not according to what a man has not, but according to
what he has. We do believe many an honest hearted minister in the beginning of
reformation, who never preached, nor yet was able to do it, was accepted of God
in reading good Homilies: But we do not think, That any who were able to preach
otherwise was also accepted. We trust, He that has ten talents must improve
them all, though it had been enough for him that had but one, if he had not
laid it up in a napkin, but improved that for his masters glory, and advantage.
This Argument therefore only proves, That forms of prayer are not in
themselves unlawful to be used, not that they may not be so to some persons
whose circumstances vary. Our question is only about Ministers to whom God
has given the gift, or who only want it through their own default or
negligence.

. 8 But Sixthly, A great Doctor (and that in a public Sermon, as well as
diverse others in their printed discourses) tell us, That there is a command
for Prescribed forms of prayer to be used in the church under the gospel. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 10. 13. A text urged (weakly enough) by the author of the
book called Pulpit conceptions, Popular deceptions, and Mr. Falconer, p. 109.
tells us.

That many have thought that the Apostle had a special eye to the composure of
such forms of prayer, agreeable to what the Baptist, and our Savior prescribed
to their disciples, in commanding Timothy the Governor of the church, That
amongst the things which concerned his behavior in the church of God, Chapter 3.
15. First of all prayers, intercessions, supplications, and giving of thanks,
should be made for all men, etc.

For this he quotes Dr. Hammond in loc. And adds Though the phrase (...) may
either signify, That prayers be put up to God, or that they be composed, in
this place it may well intend both, etc.

It is enough for us that our Reverend Brother justly allows, That (...)
Prayers be made, does not necessarily signify, That church Governors should
make Liturgies for all Ministers, from whence it follows, That this text will
afford no cogent argument for such an institution. Nor will any other text give
relief in the cause, coming in as an auxiliary to this. It is indeed a plain
command for Timothy in his public ministry himself to pray, and to enjoin all
inferior ministers to do the like, but we have produced other, and those
plainer texts enough directing ministers how to perform their ministerial acts,
by ministering their gift according to the grace given, Stiring up, not
neglecting their gift, etc. And because our reverend Brother is a little
critical with the verb (...), we shall only tell him that he knows that (...)
a Poet comes from it, and we know him so much a scholar, as he would judge him
but a miserable poet, That should only read, or recite copies of verses
composed by others. If indeed prayers, intercessions, supplications, and giving
of thanks could not be made for all men unless superiors prescribed, or
ministers used the prescribed forms of others, there were something in this
text: But it is an observable vanity, that when men are possessed of some
singular notion hard to be made out, they fancy every verse almost in Scripture
to be for their purpose. The Doctor saw the word Prayers here, and he fancieth
it must be a Liturgy, or Prayer Book. Just like another who meeting in the
epistle of Peter, with a phrase of Offering up Spiritual Sacrifices to God,
runs away with as much confidence of a new (...) for a Liturgy, though there be
not a word for it near the text. Yea, and in his heat runs down the Puritans
arguments in his way like dirt: But with this discretion, That though it is
like he saw some better forces of theirs standing by, then any which he tried
his skill upon, yet he thought fit rather to pursue the chase of the left wing
of Pigmies, then to stand to hazard a battle with some other men of war that
faced him all the while.

. 9 The Author of the Pulpit conceptions has (he thinks) found out some other
express Scripture. 1 Cor. 1. 10. That you all speak the same thing. Romans 15. 6.
That you may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God. And he is hugely
confident, That the first mentioned text, is not to be forced into a contrary
interpretation. Ridiculous! Is there in that text a word concerning Prayer? Is
that the Theme the Apostle is there treating of? Were the Divisions (for a
Remedy as to which he gives this advice) about Prayer? It not the Apostle both
to the Corinthians, and Romans giving Catholic directions? And will not then
this Argument prove that not only Liturgies: But the same Liturgies verbatim
must be used in all churches to the end of the world? But let us turn this into
an argument, That the Doctor may see we will deny him no just advantage, which
his learning may have upon us, more then we are aware of.

Those who are to speak the same thing, and are with one mouth to glorify God,
may lawfully, or must use set forms of Prayer: But Christians are to speak the
same thing, and with one mouth to glorify God; Ergo.

The Major is to be proved, and when he has proved it, let him consider
whether the same argument will not prove, That in all families, and closets
also the same form must not be used? And whether such another learned Topic,
will not prove, That all ministers must use the same syllables, words and
sentences in preaching? Yea, and in all their more private religious
discourses, Certainly sober persons ever thought that by these expressions, the
Apostle intended only an unity in the matter, and substance of Religion, not
in words, and syllables expressing their conceptions about it, either to God or
men. But to do the Dr. right he lays his Argument from these texts in a little
different form, we will not conceil it from our Readers, Valeat, quantum valere
potest. We are contending for truth not for mastery. His form is this.

That service of God which is consonant to holy Scripture is lawful, The
service of God performed by a prescribed Liturgy is consonant to holy
Scriptures. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans 15. 6 Ergo, It is lawful.

Lawful is a diminitive term, for if those texts prove it, it is necessary: for
it is doubless necessary for Christians with one mouth to glorify God, and to
speak the same thing in the sense of that text. But it may be the Doctor
thought so, and intended to deliver hard arguments in softer words. The Dr.
guesseth right, the Assumption is that we deny. He proves it, by these two
texts thus,

That Service of God whereby we declare, That we are perfectly joined together
in the same mind, and in the same judgment, whereby we all speak the same
thing, and with one mouth glorify God: That service is consonant to the holy
Scripture, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans 15. 6.

But the service of God by a prescribed Liturgy is such; Ergo.

The Major proposition, having its matter necessary, and being as to its form
indefinite, according to our Rule in Logic, must as to its form be reduced to
an Universal, and be rendered thus,

Every service of God whereby we declare, That we are perfectly joined together
in the same mind, and in the same judgment, whereby we do all speak the same
thing, and with one mouth glorify God. Is consonant to Scripture:

But the service of God by a prescribed Liturgy is such; Ergo.

Let us also have liberty to assume upon the foundation laid in the Major
proposition.

But all ministers preaching in the same words, and syllables is a Service of
God whereby they might declare, That they are joined in one mind, and in the
same judgment, whereby they might speak the same thing, and with one mouth
glorify God; therefore. That also were necessary if commanded, or however is
lawful.

Does not every ordinary Reader see the vanity of this Argument? But more
directly, Have we not heard of such maxims as; Bonum ex causis integris, Malum
ex quolibet defectu.

Is it enough to make a piece of Divine worship consonant to the will of God in
Scripture, That one or two texts of Scripture have a general term, or
expression or two (as well applicable to any other pieces of Divine service, as
that in dispute) from which in the appearance of the letter of it, a conclusion
may be drawn, seeming to conclude an act, mode, or mean of worship lawful,
though justified by no particular precepts, or examples: yea, and appearing
contrary to diverse other texts of holy writ? To make an act of worship
consonant to Scripture. It must be such as to the matter of it, and as to the
manner so performed, that it shall not be dissonant to any part of Scripture
either in the Letter, or Reason of it. To conclude then, when this Author has
proved. 1 That the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans 15. 6. is giving a rule strictly
about Acts of worship.

2 That in the sense of those texts Christians cannot speak the same thing, and
glorify God with the same mouth, unless they speak the same words and syllables.

3 That nothing we have said proved this mode, or mean of worship dissonant to
any part of the reveiled mind, and will of God. He will then have set this lame
argument upon its legs again, and may expect a new assault; but till that
time, we surcease from farther labor about it, and leave our Readers to judge
what consequence there is in it. We think it is the first time ever those texts
were otherwise then cursorily, and in loose discourse brought to serve in the
service of prescribed Liturgies generally imposed; and we hope we shall hear of
it no more. We are sure it will not come a volunteer into the service. This is
all we ever heard pretended from Scripture or the reason of Scripture to justify
the lawfulness of an universal impoposing of forms upon ministers, or an
universal use of them (if imposed) by ministers. In the next place they argue
from Reason.

. 10 We remember (in the seventh place) that the Author of a Pamphlet wrote
some years since, called Aaron Bimnucha, argues thus,

That which a man may determine himself unto, To that he may be determined by
his superior.

His reason is evident, because, were it not in it self lawful. he might not
himself choose it, or determine himself to it: Now he should have assumed, But a
minister in the Ordinary performance of his ministerial Acts in public Prayer,
may determine himself to the prescribed forms of men. Had he thus assumed, we
should have denied the Assumption, but he only assuming, That a man may
Lawfully determine himself to the use of forms, has not concluded against our
question. We do grant, That a minister may sometimes determine himself to forms
composed by himself for his own use: but that is nothing at all to the matter
in question. But yet neither can we agree the Major, That a Christian may by
his superior be determined to whatsoever, he has a liberty to determine
himself. A man may in a great measure determine himself to a state of marriage,
or single life, And in case of marriage as to the particular woman which he
will make his wife, he may determine himself. A young man may determine himself,
as to his trade and course of life, whether he will be, a Merchant, or a
Lawyer, or a Scholar; may therefore he be lawfully determined by his superior
in all these things? And by the way, if our Opposites say no; they desert their
Principle. That what is in it self lawful, becomes necessary if it be
commanded. Will they have us restrain our discourse to things in worship?
Surely a minister may lawfully determine himself never to preach without notes;
nor without writing out his Sermon at length, may he therefore (think we) be
lawfully by Superiors determined unto such things? May the Superiors by their
command make it sinful for a minister to preach without notes? Or till he has
written his Sermon Verbatim? An hundred things of this nature might be
instanced in.

. 11 It is worthy of the Readers observation, how the aformentioned author (and
that in the pursuit of this argument) would persuade us to be Papists, acting
contrary to the singular judgment of our own consciences, out of an abounding
Voluntary Humility, and judging, and that as to matters of our particular
practice, upon which our eternity depends, As the miscarriage in them may lay
the soul under the guilt of sin, That the Judgment of superiors is better then
our own. Whence he would infer not only a lawfulness, but a necessity
incumbent upon a reasonable soul which is by its principles obliged to follow
what is best, to obey men that are our superiors contrary to our own opinion,
and Judgment. If that author can but prevail in this, he has but one thing
more to do, (which too, every Romish-priest and Jesuit will help him in) that
is, To evince to men that the Bishop of Rome, in all Spiritual things, is all
Christians superior. And he has done the Popes business as effectually as he
could have done it, had he been hired to it by a Cardinals cap. But both St.
Paul. Col. 2. 23. and Bp Davenant (as before cited on that text have told us,
what kind of Humility this is.

. 12 An eighth Argument used by some is this, The people that join with a
minister in prayer, pray by a form. The ministers prayer is but a form to them
and limitation of them, etc. Therefore the minister may lawfully do it. We have
fully answered this before but in short. 1 The Question is about vocal-prayer,
the people are only required to pray mentally, this is quite another species
of Prayer. In mental-prayer, God only requires the exercise of grace. In
ministerial-vocal-prayer, he also requires the exercise of gifts: And that not
such gifts as remotely, but such as specifically relate to the Act. 2 It is one
thing barely to worship in prayer, Another thing to minister to others in
worshipping. Our question is what is lawful for him that does not only
worship, but ministers in worshipping?

. 13 Ninthly, say some, If a minister in public be suffered to pray by
conceived-prayer, he may vent Blasphemy, Heresy, Nonsense, and how shall the
people say, Amen? This also we have fully before answered. But, 1 This argument
holds equally if not with much more advantage against any other preaching then
by reading, or reciting other men's Sermons. 2 If the minister does vent error,
blasphemy, etc. we hope every one has his Amen, within his own teeth, which he
may withold, if he hear Petitions come out his mouth not according to the will
of God, nor, 3 Is it impossible, that men may do the like by miscalling or
misplacing words in reading, or reciting forms.

. 14 But Tenthly, Forms they tell us are necessary for Uniformity, but we must
first enquire; whether Uniformity be necessary, or at all desirable in the
sense we here take it? Where by it, we understand nothing but an uniformity in
Sentences, Words, and Syllables used in prayer. Unity is indeed a beauteous
thing, whether it be in Affections or Judgment: So is Uniformity, if understood
of a worship of God in the same solemn time, That is on the Sabbath Day, and by
the same specifical Acts of worship, or As to the matter of prayer: Thus far
all sober men are agreed. We all observe the Sabbath, we all on the Sabbath
publicly Read the Word, Pray, Sing, Preach, etc. In our prayers we all Confess
our sins, put up our petitions to God for good things which we or others need
and give God thanks for good things which we or others have received: here now
is a great and beauteous Uniformity, we all speak the same thing, do the same
thing, and on the same day. But how shall it be ever proved, That that pitiful
thing called Uniformity in Words, and Syllables, and Phrases was ever desired
of God, or that it ever came into his, or his Sons heart? Or that it is
acceptable to him? Or that it has more beauty in it then would be in a
Congregation where all men wear the same colored clothes? Or had the very same
lines in their faces, or the same fashioned periwiggs upon their heads. 2. The
Beauty of no end can justify any sinful mean, Gods glory is the noblest end,
the Apostle has told us, That it needs not our ly to promove it. 3 If it be
lawful for men to fancy ends, as fine things, which God never spoke of: It is
no wonder if they can find no means adequate to them, but such as are
justifiable by no Right Reason, or Divine Rule. The Princes of Babylon had an
end to destroy Daniel, they saw that (except in the matter of his God) nothing
was to be found against him: In their opinion therefore it was necessary to
establish an uniformity in prayers, yet not (that we read off) in words, but as
to the object of the Act, All must be commanded to pray only to Darius
(possibly there might be some form limited) but the end was naught, so was the
mean. 4 But suppose Uniformity, syllabicaluniformity Necessary, Lawful,
Beautiful, Desirable, and certainly desirable it is as to Doctrines of Religion
and some particular terms, and phrases, by which they may safely be expressed:
We remember what a difference was made both in the church, and the Doctrine of
it, by (...) and (...) How yet shall forms of prayer help us with it without
forms of Sermons too, and a constant sticking to the use of them, and no other.

. 15 In the next place comes Ireneus Freeman in, and tells us in p. 38. of
his Reasonableness of Divine service, That in case liberty be granted to some
to do that for which they have a gift, it will provoke others who have it not
to imitate them. He adds, If the denial of liberty to some who have the gift,
be to Cut the man fit for the bed: the granting of such a liberty as we desire
would be to Stretch a man fit for the bed. Now seeing both will ly together, he
says, it is more equitable, That the tall man should pull up his legs: then
that the low man should be put to the rack. The question in issue is, Whether
it be lawful universally to impose upon ministers, Forms of Prayer to be
ordinarily used in their public ministrations? Or for ministers, whom God has
furnished with the gift of prayer, to perform their ministerial acts ordinarily
by the use of those forms, though imposed? Yes, says Mr. Freeman, for it is
necessary. Every thing say we which is necessary, eithir is so from nature, or
a supervening command. The first is not pretended, But the Second. It is
necessary, because Magistrates or Superiors command us, and God has commanded
us to obey our Superiors. We say, God has only commanded us to obey our
Superiors in things where in we may obey them, and not sin. Which say we in
this case we cannot. You may says Mr. Freeman, And why? Because it is
necessary, If this Medium be good, It must be made so by some precept of God
particularly relating to this case, not by the general precepts of Gods word to
obey our Superiors, For the thing must first be agreed lawful, before we can
have in it any superior, but God only. Now whether, This use of forms be so
or no, is the matter in question? How then does what he says evince the
necessity of them. 2 All that he says amounts but to a contingent disorder,
which may happen upon a liberty given by some to use their gifts in prayer. But
shall a contingent danger be pleaded in bar to a duty think we? Or shall the
sin of another be sufficient to justify our superior in prohibiting us from
the discharge of what is our duty? 3 For his Similitude, it is more then
ordinarily unlucky, for whereas we say no similitude runs on all four feet,
This is so unhappy, As to halt on all four: for surely in the case as stated by
him, It is not the Magistrate that stretches that confident little fellow he
talks of, or puts him upon the rack. So as the Question is, Whether the
superiors ought to gratify those little persons lusts? Or to give liberty to
those whom God has fitted for their work, to use the means which he has
immediately furnished them with, in order to those specifical performances? But
our author will not yet have done he go's on.

. 16 In case liberty be given to an officer to do something, for which he has
a gift, and the denial of it to another officer of the same society, which has
no such ability, but cannot be spared any more then the former, would make the
weaker officer, contemptible, and useless: Especially if he be the weaker,
only in that case, but far stronger in others: in this case, as he thinks,
the first mentioned liberty ought to be denied to the officer first mentioned.

The Reason lies in this narrow compass, It is necessary to impose forms of
prayer upon all ministers, and they may lawfully be used by all ministers: That
those ministers, who are otherwise useful, and of whom an use must be made, may
not be made contemptible to the people, tho they have not such abilities, and
gift of Prayer.

Every one sees, That the truth of this depends upon diverse Hypotheses.

1 That a man may be a true and perfect minister of Christ, and yet not have
the gift of Prayer. This we deny, Believing God sends none into his work, not
fitted for it.

2 That the church cannot be without such ministers, as are destitute of this
Gift. This we also deny and think, she may better be without them, then
furnished with them.

3 That some ministers praying by forms will make them contemptible, we are apt
to believe this has something of truth in it. But they who urge it, are
concerned to reconcile it with what they ordinarily say, That the greater part
of the people are for forms, only an inconsiderable number of singular
fanatics. If so, surely they will the more reverence such as keep to them.
When these are all proved, it may be seasonable to inquire upon these two
things.

1 Whether it be not the sin of any man to thrust himself into the work of the
ministry, or of superiors to admit him into it, who has not the gift of
prayer? He is not fitted for his work; therefore not called, or sent of God to
it. The gift of prayer is what we question, whether God denies to any, who
will but duly study the Holy Scriptures, their own hearts, and their people as
they ought, The three books which Luther thought sufficient to accomplish a
Divine? A minister that cannot pray, is to us as much nonsense as a workman
that cannot work. Now shall the sins of any rule Superiors conscientious in
their Government, to restrain others in what is either their duty or their
liberty? What kind of Divine is he, who knows not what God is? or under what
name to speak unto him? What sin is? and what is Commanded, and forbidden in
the law of God? What those things are or many of them at least, which aggravate
sin, and make it more exceeding heinous? What men have need off both for their
souls and bodies? And what according to the will of God they may ask? What good
things he or others ought to give thanks for, etc? Or that is not more then
ordinarily versed in the Holy Scriptures? Which knowledge being attained,
surely (if the man can but speak) the gift of prayer is gained, if want of
exercise, and neglect of practice hinders not.

2 Whether men can have the gift of preaching that want the gift of prayer? We
doubt it. The same knowledge being necessary to preaching, that is necessary
unto prayer, and nothing more (as we said before) being necessary unless
frequent exercise.

3 Whether that Church which has twice ten thousand Christians who want not
the gift of Prayer, can but by her own fault want ministers who have that gift?
Considering, That as we judge, The Apostle, Heb. 5. 1. has given us the
perfect notion of a minister in the description of the High Priest, he is but,
a person taken from men, and ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that
he might offer Prayers and Praises, Preach and Administer the holy Sacraments.
If a church has ministers that she has manu errante ordained, which can
neither pray, nor preach: she may clave non errante cast them out, and ordain
those that are not yet ordained, but fitter for the work.

. 17 In short our Hypothesis is, That it is lawful for such, to whom God has
given the gift of prayer, ordinarily to perform their ministerial acts in
prayer by the prescribed forms of others: is not to be overthrown by an
argument drawn from necessity; Because there can be no necessity of sinning.
And whereas all necessity arises either from nature, or the Original will of
God; as the First cannot be pretended, so supposing the thing unlawful, To say
it is necessary in the Second sense, is to blasphem. Neither can there be any
necessity in this case but what sin makes, either the sinful commands of men:
or the sinful laziness of the minister.

. 18 We shall only say this, If it be necessary that some of the places for
public preaching, should be in the power of some who shall have so little of
conscience, as either for a little money, or to make a match, or to gratify a
friend, or to ascertain themselves obsequious servants, will present most
unable, and unworthy persons; And that the Bishop should be under the danger of
A Quare non admisit, If when the Clerk comes, he does not institute him, if he
be but able to turn nine or ten lines of the Thirty nine Articles into Latin,
which a child of eight or nine year old may do? We say, If there be a necessity
of these things there may be a necessity, that not only Forms of Prayer, but
of Sermons too should be made to capacitate these men to do any thing like the
sacred acts of their office. But this is a woeful, sinful necessity, which
nothing but the corruptions of ages, and manners have made, and cannot infer
either the goodness of the end, or any just reason for imposing forms upon all,
nor can infer a farther necessity for forms of Prayer then for forms of
Sermons. He that dreamed of an absolute necessity when he burnt his shins by
the fire, that the chimny should be pulled down, and set farther off, might
with less labor and charge too have removed his legs to a farther distance
from the fire. And we think, That those who dream of an absolute necessity of
forms of prayer for all; because some ministers or that go for ministers, can
do nothing in prayer without, might with less guilt, and reproach to our church
cure that disease, and destroy that necessity, which is but a Chimera made by
their own fancies.

. 19 The Reverend Author of Libertas Ecclesiastica, p. 98. etc. has given us
Four or Five farther Reasons, as he calls them, for forms of prayer, which in
the last place we will consider.

He says, Hereby a fit, true, right, and well ordered way of worship in
addresses to God may be best secured to the church in the public service of
God: that neither God, nor his worship may be dishonored.

There being many easily discernable ways of considerable miscarriage in the
pubiick offices of the church, even by those who err not in the Doctrines of
Religion.

To which we answer. 1 That alone is a fit, true, right and well ordered worship
which God has instituted. Worship is his Homage, and there is all the reason in
the world he should prescribe to his own Homage.

2 That God in the Church should be truly, fitly, rightly, and in due order
worshipped is reasonable, but that it should aforehand be secured, That he
should be so worshipped by ministers, who are but men and may err, is not
possible. Nor will forms secure it, which ministers may if they will be
careless (and many have done it) read falsely and disorderly enough. There is
therefore no security to be had in the case, caution may be used. The Rulers
may say to Archippus, Take heed to thy ministry.

3 We do think, That for twenty years together. The worship of God was truly,
fitly, rightly, and in a well ordered manner performed in hundreds of
congregations in England where no forms of prayer were used and in the eye of
all sober, reasonable men, better, then where they were used; we therefore see
nothing here but a flourish of words.

. 20 His Second reason is, That needful, comprehensive petitions for all common
and ordinary Spiritual and Outward wants of our selves, and others, with fit
thanksgivings, may not in the public supplications of the church be omitted,
which (considering men as they are) can no other way be so well, or at all
assured.

To which we answer, Pudet haec opprobria nobis and dici potuisse, etc. Let it
be spoken to the shame of the church of God in England, and it shall be for a
lamentation in it, if in a church whose territories are so large, there cannot
be found persons enough sufficient, without others prescriptions to them, to
put up full, and comprehensive petitions, not only for common and ordinary,
but for emergent and extraordinary Spiritual and Outward wants of any persons
with fit thanksgivings. But Secondly, If there be not men enough to do this,
yet certainly there are some and very many ministers of all persuasions that
can do it, what need therefore is there farther, Then that such Forms be
composed, extant and left at liberty. Must those be restrained that are able to
perform their duty, because there are others, that either cannot or will not
set themselves to the due performance of it. Besides, That this Argument holds
stronger for forms of Sermons too to be imposed: For those who know how in
preaching to reveil to people the whole counsel of God, most certainly know how
to put up full, and comprehensive petitions for all common and ordinary
Spiritual and Outward wants of themselves and others.

. 21 Mr. Falconers Third Reason is, That the Affections, and hearts of pious,
and Religious men, may be more devout, and better united in their presenting
their Services to God; where they may consider beforehand, what particular
prayers, and thanksgivings they are to offer up, and come the more ready, and
prepared to join in them. This is an advantage of which many are deprived by a
bad temper of mind, sucked in by prejudice, or swallowed down by carelessness.

To which we answer, that in this pretended reason, we can see nothing but
words. Are not we to ask of God for our selves, or others all good things under
such limitations as his word directs, submitting our petitions for temporary
things to the will, and wisdom of God? Needs there any more when we come to
prayer, then a general composure of our Spirits to seek God for all good things
we or others stand in need of? If not, what needs such a particular
foreknowledge of the words and phrases to be used in asking. If the minister
transgresses his Rule and asks what is not according to the will of God, (and
that he may do by reading forms falsely) may not people withold their, Amen?
The Affections and hearts of all good people (though the public prayers be not
by prescribed forms) are united. 1 As to the duty, They all say to God, Thy
face will we seek. 2. As to the matter of the duty, To Confess all sin
Original, Actual, To beg of God whatsoever they or other stand in need of,
which God has promised to give. For the particular phrases, There is no such
need of a foreknowledge, nor will it at all (as we we have proved before)
promove, but rather hinder devotion and affection.

. 22 His Fourth Reason is. That such difficult parts of church-offices as
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, the matter of which requires great
consideration, That they may be aright and clearly expressed, (as both
Conformists, and many Nonconformists acknowledge) and is evident by the many
disputes about them, by men neither of mean parts, nor dangerous designs; may
by a considerate care, in the composing of a form be so framed, That men of
greatest understandings may with readiest assent entertain them, and that they
may be sufficiently vindicated against the the boldest opposers.

We do confess that we have met with some of our Brethren who lay some stress
on this, But we are no more taken with mere words from Noncon. then from other
men. And we cannot understand, What there is in the Administration of the
Sacraments, that makes Forms of Prayer, etc. necessary. For the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, where (if any where) it seems most necessary. What is there
in that Administration, more then?

1 The Sanctification or Consecration of the elements.

2 The Distribution of them, and words used in the distribution.

3 The Application of the General acts of the ministerial office, Prayer and
Exhortation to that particular action.

For the first the Apostle has taught us that Sanctification, or Consecration
is by the word and Prayer. The word is nothing but the words of Institution,
which are in Scripture. The Reading of which declares Christ's separation of
those elements for that use: and our separation of them in his name, for and
during that time, for that ordinance. For other words and forms of
consecration, we know no need of them, no warrant for them, and believe them of
ill original and consequence. Now any one that can read a form, can read the
Scripture.

For the distribution of them, It is no further work then every hand can do,
what words to use, Our Savior has set down, from which we know no need to
vary. In using of them can be no error, in deviating from them indeed there
may.

For the Application of Exhortation and Prayer to that act, surely he that can
Pray and Preach can do that.

The like is to be said of the other Sacrament, so that a Righteous law that
all should keep to the Scriptural-institution is enough, we think in that case:
And wonder at their fancies, That think of such a special need of a form in
those cases, believing no pretense of necessity, but what depends upon a fancy
of a reasonableness to add to the Divine institution in the case of which we
cannot be convinced. For Godfathers and Godmothers and Forms of questions to
be propounded to them, we understand neither necessity, nor use of them: much
less any particular Forms of words (besides those the Scripture gives us) for
Consecration, or to be used in the Distribution of the elements in the Supper.
The points in dispute can this way come into no dispute that we know, nor any
error infused into poeple. It is men's varying from the Institution in this
case, which alone has given advantage to the Envious one to sow tares. If any
minister having the elements of bread and wine before him shall read, I The
words of Institution as delivered (by the Evangelists, or the Apostle Paul)
Then solemnly praying to God, First, That as he had instituted that ordinance,
for the remembrance of Christ, The showing forth of his death, The communion of
his body and blood, etc. So he would at that time bless it to those ends, etc.
Pardoning his peoples want of preparation and accepting them in their desires
to honor him in his own institutions, etc. Or to that purpose. Then giving the
bread, repeating only our Saviors words, with but a small and that necessary
change. Take, eat, This is the body of Christ [in stead of my body] which was
broken for you. And after the cup, repeating only Christ's words, This cup is
the new Testament in the blood of Christ, etc. We would fain know if this man
(concluding all with a prayer, and hymn of thanksgiving) had not duly
administered the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. If he had, what need is there of
forms of words in this case, other then what the holy Scriptures have given us:
For as to the Prayer before and after, as we conceive him a pitiful minister
and very unfit to be trusted with that office, (which often calls him to pray
upon particular emergent occasions, for which a form cannot be made ready) if
he cannot without it apply his petitions, to the particular business in hand,
viz. The administration of the Sacrament: So if he distrusteth himself, he may
compose himself a form of prayer fitted for that purpose. For the
administration of that ordinance is seldom or never so sudden, as to surprice a
minister. So for the other Sacrament, Will any one dare to say, That a lawful
minister, (having water before him) who shall first beg of God, To own and
bless his own institution, To wash away the sin of the person to be baptized
with his own blood, And to grant that it may be born again of water and the
Spirit, etc. Or to the like purpose. And then having had a previous knowledge,
That the parent is a believer i. e. one who either has a true faith, or makes
profession of such true faith: shall take water, and pour, or sprinkle it upon
the child's face, or dip the person in it, saying, J. Baptize thee in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is not truly Baptized? A prayer and
thanksgiving usually concludes the Action. But what need here of a form more
then the Scripture has furnished us with, or directed us to? May one minister
say, J. Baptize thee, etc. Another, Let this person be Baptized, etc. A third,
Be thou Baptized, etc? For our parts we think the difference not so much, as to
require a prescribed form to reconcile: and should not doubt, but the person
were truly Baptized, under any of those variations of words. Water being
poured, or sprinkled on it, and the action declared to be in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We conclude as we said before, That we can see
nothing in either Sacrament but the inventions of men, superadding to the
institutions of the gospel diverse rites, and actions of which Christ never
spoke, which makes any pretense for a need of Forms in the administration of
them. There being nothing to be done in them that requires any special ability
comparable to that which Preaching and Praying according to the various states
of the church, and the particular cases of souls in it does require.

. 23 Mr. Falconers Fifth Reason is thus by himself expressed,

To be an evidence to other churches, and future times after what way and
manner we worship God, and that both the matter and expression of our service
to him is sound and pious, in our general and common worship. And this may be a
full Testimony, That such a church receiving the true faith and expressing a
right way of worship, is both a true, and in its measure a pure and incorrupt
church.

We answer, 1 Where has God required the leaving any such Testimony? 2 If he
had, forms of prayer had not been sufficient without forms of Sermons too. 3
While we declare our selves Christians, and that we worship God according to
his word, we leave a sufficient Testimony, that we are a true church of God. 4
A confession of faith publicly owned, and subscribed unto by all ministers
(which we never opposed) does far better effect this, which may be done,
without making a new act or mode of worship.

. 24 Mr. Falconer at last comes to this argument from example, which yet he
does not lay so much stress upon as to aver, They evince a necessity of Forms,
but he thinks the countenance, the lawfulness, and expediency of them. For what
he says about the Lords prayer, it is answered by us before. In short, It
reaches not the case. There can be no conclusion from Christ's power to the
power of ordinary Governors now in the church: Or from the lawfulness of
Christ's disciples using a Form of prayer, dictated by Christ himself, in that
time before his ascension, and the effusion of the Holy Ghost, to the
lawfulness of ministers in after ages using, a bundle of forms, neither
composed by Christ, nor by his Apostles. Besides the probabilities we have
before offered, that even then when it was first given it was not intended for
a form of words (nor do we ever read of it after so used) but as a more general
direction for the ordinary matter of our prayers.

. 25 As to what Mr. Falconer says further of Scripturalforms, it has had its
answer from us before Chap. 3.. 37, etc. What he farther says of the use of
them in the Christian church, we have answered in that Chap. 3.. 43, 44, 45,
46, 47, 48, 49. In short, We think we may say of this as we say of the Papists
plea for themselves, From Peter's being at Rome. If they could prove, That forms
of prayer were universally imposed upon the whole church, and used by all
ministers in it within 400 years after Christ, and so in the ages downward, it
would not prove either the lawfulness of such general Imposition or use; but
they shall never be able to prove it while they live. Let us therefore leave
inquiring, What those who lived before us did, or thought might lawfully be
done, and enquire what Christ and his Apostles did; or determined lawful to be
done. While we are disputing, about what is lawful and unlawful, Authority, or
practice is a lamentable argument, and will never be insisted on by wise and
understanding men, but for want of such as are better and more cogent. It will
be a very hard thing to justify all those things to be lawful, which were
established by councils of as great antiquity as any they can pretend to for
the establishment of forms of prayer to be universally used. And thus much may
serve for an answer to all we have heard or met with pleaded for the lawfulness
of a general imposition, or use of forms of Prayer in the church. We shall
only say, That our Brethren dealing with those who in their consciences judge
them unlawful. We think were concerned to have proved them necessary. For
certainly if Superiors will think themselves in the least obliged by the Roial
law of love, they ought not with their meat (which they may eat, or let alone)
command to be eaten or not eaten to destroy the souls of their inferiors for
whom Christ died: Either by tempting them to do what in their consciences they
think is sinful: or without necessity laying their souls under a guilt for
disobeying them, if that be true, That whosoever obeys not the command of his
Superior in a lawful thing, sins against God.

CHAP. X.
The Conclusion of the discourse, nothing said against any particular forms. No
judging or condemning of those who judge otherwise in the case. No unlawfulness
concluded to join with those who use pious forms. It is reasonable to propose,
and recommend some forms leaving them at liberty. This the only mean of
Comprehension.

. 1 THat we may not be misunderstood in this discourse, we hope every ingenuous
Reader will easily understand, That we have not levelled any thing in this
discourse against any particular forms or books of Prayers. In the present
question we suppose Forms as good, and perfect as the wit, and piety of men can
make, and dispute their state in worship i. e. Whether they may be
indiscriminatively imposed or lawfully used by such ministers as God has
blessed with the Gift of prayer? We have an equal Reverence for the First
compilers of the English Liturgy, as the later compilers of the Directory,
believing they both did famously in their generations. We only think, The
forms mistaken, in their opinion of the lawfulness of an universal imposing,
or use of them in public worship.

. 2 Nor do we judge our selves infallible in our sententiments in this case,
but as we believe, so we speak, so we must practice. We condemn not our
brethren that judge otherwise and accordingly practice. We trust God will
either to us or them reveil his mind that we shall at length know who are
mistaken. Let not them judge and condemn us, we are in our dissents in the
cases another servants: And that other we take to be our common Lord and
Master Jesus Christ. Let us (...) according to the Apostles precept, strive for
truth, and walk in what we apprehend to be truth, yet walk in love.

. 3 We do not think it unlawful to join with another praying by the use of
forms, provided the matter be good, and pious. We have in such praying nothing
to do but to say, Amen. Whether he who ordinarily does so, does his ministerial
duty? We confess, That we question. But that we may do our duty, though he
fails in his, we do not question. If any Nonconformists amongst the
ministers, or people, judge otherwise, it must be upon some principle foreign
to this discourse; such as that of scandal, etc. Which is not our business here
to argue.

. 4 We do think it not only lawful but Reasonable, That some Forms of Prayer
(or Directions at least) should be proposed, and commended, by the approbation
of our Superiors and left at liberty. That those may use them for some time at
least who have not attained to the gift of prayer, or may distrust themselves,
or not have their usual natural liberty to express themselves in prayer. And
indeed, this is the only medium we can fancy for a just Comprehension, and
restoring to an use in the church of all Valuable Dissenters. We humbly leave
our thoughts in this case, and the Candor of our Spirits to the Judgment of
all, Whether our superiors or Brethren in this famous church.

FINIS.

