A Supplement TO A LITTLE BOOK, ENTITLED, A Reasonable account why some pious
Nonconforming Ministers cannot judge it lawful for them to perform their
Ministerial Acts in public solemn prayer, ordinarily, by the prescribed Forms
of others.

Wherein is examined whatsoever Mr. Falconer in his Book called, Libertas
Ecclesiastica, and Mr. Pelling in a Book called, The Good old way, have said to
prove the ancient use of Forms of Prayers by Ministers.

And it is proved, That neither of the two aforementioned Authors have said any
thing that proves the general use, or imposition of such Forms of Prayer in
any considerable part of the Church, till Pope Gregory's time, which was six
hundred years after Christ; nor in any Church since the Reformation, except
that of England, and (which is uncertain) some in Saxony.

Multa videntur, and dicuntur quae non sunt.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1680.

COURTEOUS READER,
ALthough where the question is about the lawfulness or unlawness of any
action, the pleading of Antiquity be a great impertinency; and if the Plea be
true, it can rise no higher than a presumptive argument; and be so far from a
demonstration, that it is not a good Topic (for there is no prescribing to
error). So that nothing can incline the scale of Conscience, in which every one
is obliged to weigh every Proposition relating to his practice, but his
apprehension of the revealed will of God, either from the letter, or reason of
Holy Writ; yet because every one is not thus spiritually instructed, and it
makes a great noise to hear men talking, That the Church in all ages, all the
Fathers judged otherwise than these men; and if it were true in any case, it
ought highly to oblige all Dissenters again and again to examine those
arguments upon which they have founded their particular practical judgment. I
(who know the world too well to believe all that I read in men's Books) have
thought it reasonable to examine what Mr. Falconer, and one Mr. Pelling, have
said to prove the pretended antiquity of forms of prayer as generally used, or
required to be used by Ministers in their public Ministrations as to Prayer. I
the rather did it, because truly Mr. Falconer has said as much as has been
said on that argument, or as that Cause will bear. The Reader will find Mr.
Pelling has added little but words. I must profess to my Reader, there appears
to me no shadow or pretense of proof of the matter in question, till Pope
Gregory and Boniface's time, more than 600 years after Christ; nor do I believe
any can be made to satisfy any inquisitive man. I leave it to thee to judge,
whether I have not given a reasonable answer to any thing brought by these two,
and showed that they have made no proof that can satisfy the conscience of any
man of any reasonable understanding, and thinks the thing is unlawful; if
indeed it were a thing granted indifferent, these little flourishes might do
something; but the conscience of a good man judging a thing unlawful, from
grounds of Scripture and Reason, cannot be dispossessed of that judgment by any
thing but by Scripture and Reason: and though the general judgment of the
Church might stumble him, if his opinion were contrary; yet that general
judgment must be proved, not merely talked of, and plainly proved too, before it
can have any operation at all. Now whether either of these Authors have done
this, I leave thee to judge. The one of them is very confident, and can speak
nothing of this nature, in a lower style than with questionless, doubtless,
without all doubt. The other, though much more modest, yet possibly has some
freer and smarter expressions in his Pages on this Argument than in any other
part of his Book. But my humor is always to suspect a soft place in that part
of any Book, where I meet with most confidence or passion. Reason is so
beautiful and noble a thing, that it needs not the service of passion, or
paint of confidence. It commends it self to the next rational soul it meets
with, without any such black patch, or footboy at its heels. I will freely
tell thee my opinion about forms of Prayer in public Ministrations, not
imposing upon thee with any such thing, as questionless, and without doubt. I
do believe that forms of Prayer are very ancient; that is, that there were by
some good and pious men forms of Prayer made, both for their own public use,
and for the private instruction of others, and teaching them to pray without
forms. I do think that our Savior Christ made the Lords-Prayer for the
temporary use of his Disciples, not so as to oblige them to use no other, or to
use that Sillabically, but to pray for those things either in those words, or
other words, and that they might for a time use that very form particularly
until his Resurrection and Ascension, after which I believe they were obliged
to a more particular mention of his sacred name. I believe that forms of Prayer
were much more in use before the pouring out of Gods Spirit in the days of
Pentecost, than after; for although the effects of that effusion of the Spirit
were some of them peculiar to the Apostles (such as speaking with Tongues,
Miracles, Healing, etc.) yet from that day to this I believe from Zach. 12. 10.
there has been a more full effusion of the spirit of grace and supplication
upon all, both Ministers and people, than ever was before generally.
Notwithstanding which, in regard that until men come to believe, and be
Christians indeed, they have not the Spirit of God, and even then the Spirit of
God works in them by the use of means, I do believe there were many forms of
Prayer made by good men, teaching beginners in Christianity how to pray, and
what to pray for. I am not difficult to believe that many both Ministers and
people in those days might make use of such forms till their exercise in
Scripture, and in the ways of God, rendered them as to them needless, and turned
what were before helpers, into hindrances of Devotion. But I believe it cannot
be proved that for more than 400 years after Christ, any one Church commanded
her Ministers generally to use such, and no other, in any* part of their
public ministration; though possibly some particular men that had not the gift
of Prayer, or at least feared themselves, or suspected they had it not, might
use some forms made before by themselves or some others. Pope Gregory the Great
(who is commonly called the worst of all that went before him, though the best
of all the Popes that followed him) I believe was the first that commanded the
general use of forms of Prayer by Ministers in their public Ministrations.
Platina says thus of him, What should I speak more of this most holy man? for
all the ordering of the Ecclesiastical Office, especially the old one, was by
him invented and approved.

Haec in Canonem redegit, says Platina. There were some free forms up and
down, and some particular orders in some Churches (none forced;) but he brought
them into a Canon. Platina (who was a later Popes Secretary) says, he came not
to be Pope before 619.

Yet it plainly appears by Pope Gregory's answer to Augustine the Monks
questions which he sent to him out of England, that he did not tie all to the
use of his Missal. It pleases me (says he) that you sollicitously make choice
of what you find in the Church of Rome, or France, or any other Church, which
may best please God, and infuse it into the English Church, which is yet young
in the faith, particularly instructing it in things which you can gather out of
many Churches; for things are not to be loved for places, but places are to be
loved for good things. I therefore out of several Churches pick out what things
are pious, religious and right, and do you accustom your English men's minds to
these things collected in a bundle.

Some years after, by succeeding Popes it was enforced; and by Charles the
Great, about 800, if we may believe Durandus. The Popes were then at such an
height, as they could not expect that they and their Bishops should be quiet,
if they had a Clergy consisting of men of parts and piety; they therefore
suffered any ignorant sottish persons to fill the Ministry, who (so they might
be gratified in their lusts and laziness) would fawn upon the Pope and the
Bishops of those times, and humor their superstition, pride, and luxury, and
grandeur, provided they would humor them in sparing their lusts, and their
pains; the latter of which was eminently done by enjoining all Ministers to use
the same Missal, and laying all Religion in the use of it, and making Preaching
a rare and almost useless thing, or a Lecturing out of Aquinas and Scotus, and
the Legend, and this was the whole trade till the Reformation 1516. Nor can I
think this would have so generally been swallowed by people, but for another
unhappy accident. About this time Latin was the common language of Italy,
France, and Spain, and in that language their Divine service was; but the Goths
and Vandals; and other Barbarians, overran these Countries, and possessed them
for many years, which corrupted the Latin tongue, so that it was understood no
where ordinarily, though the Italian, French and Spanish languages are manifest
Dialects of it; but still the Mass Book was not altered. Thus came in the Latin
service, used in Popery till the Reformation, understood by very few of them
that heard it. So the Papists worshipped they knew not how; and being ignorant,
were very tame.

The Reformation began in Germany 1517; in England not to speak on, till Edward
the Sixths time, 1547; and had a present interruption of five years, after it
had been on foot seven years; then began something more to purpose with Queen
Elizabeth 1558; in France at Geneva it was sooner 1535.

It is true, our first Reformers both in King Edw. 6. and in Q. Eliz. time,
thought fit to compose a Liturgy, or rather to reform what was used in Popery,
leaving out the idolatrous and highly superstitious part of the Mass Book. Yea,
they thought fit to command the universal use of it, under penalties, which may
charitably be interpreted, to prevent a Popish Clergy, or a Clergy newly
reformed from Popery, using their old Mumpsimus. Nor indeed in that face of
things was it reasonable to expect that any number of Ministers should be able
to pray as they ought in public; and if they were not, they might for a time
lawfully use forms. Yet whosoever will read the Book called, The troubles at
Francfort, will find that even then all godly Ministers and people did not judge
it lawful; which much more appeared in the succeeding years of the Reigns of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Chapter I.

In the mean time it must be agreed, many both learned, godly, and worthy
Ministers did thus perform their Ministerial acts in solemn public prayer, and
so do many now, which speaks them to judge it lawful.

The Ministers in Scotland, the Nonconformists in England, all those in
New England judge otherwise; and we believe many hundreds that conform in
England, think it just lawful, not eligible; only a thing may be submitted to,
rather than lay down their Ministry. If this be not as to matter of practice,
the true state of the case as to Forms of Prayer to be universally enjoined or
used, I must confess I do not understand it, and should gladly learn of those
that are wiser. But let us now enquire what is said by Mr. Falconer, or Mr.
Pelling.

THE Summary OF THE SUPPLEMENT TO The Reasonable Account.
SEction 1. The reason of the Supplement. What Mr. Falconer says, little
concerns the Nonconformists in the terms he has expressed it. Sect. 2. There
may be a double sense of Mr. Falconer's assertion of God and Christ appointing
forms of Prayer; in the first they are true, and granted by Nonconformists; in
the second, they are false, and denied by them. Sect. 3. God may make things
necessary by his command, which without it are unlawful. Sect. 4. The only
medium to prove that forms of Prayer made by men are lawful to be used by all
Ministers, propounded, but not proved. Sect. 5. An examination of what Mr.
Falconer has said to prove, that God and Christ appointed forms of Prayer to
be used without variation in Devotion. What he says of the Lords-Prayer
examined. His reasons answered why he thinks our Savior gave it as a form.
They conclude not. Two great presumptions to the contrary. The thing admitted,
nothing proved by it. His instances from the Old Testament examined. Five
Reasons making it probable, that those instances were never intended by God as
Syllabical forms to be used without variation. The practice of the Jews in or
after Christ's time invaluable. Sect 6. An examination of Mr. Falconer's answers
to the Nonconformists proof from Justine Martyr, and Tertullian, that in the
first 300 years after Christ, there were no such Liturgies used by Ministers. A
further proof added from Socrates Scholasticus, extending to more than 400
years after Christ. An answer to Mr. Falconer's pretended proof from Justine
Martyr, Ignatius, Origin, Cyprian; nothing is proved from them as to the first
300 years. Sect. 7. His proof from Constantine's making prayers for his Army,
makes against him signifying that then there was no public Liturgies.
Constantine did nothing but what Nonconformists will allow and practice. Sect.
8. Nonconformists do not grant that forms of Prayer have been of general use by
all Ministers, or imposed upon all, by any Church since the year 1300. Neither
the Canon of the Council of Laodicea, nor that of Carthage proves it, nor that
of the Council at Mela 402, more than as to Ministers of that Province upon a
special cause. Sect. 9. It is doubtful whether there was such a third Council
at Carthage; Justellus says, if there were, they made but 21 Canons; the Canon
quoted is 23, foisted in, being made after. The Canon it self proves there was
then no Liturgy of ordinary use in the Church, variously and fully. Sect. 10.
The Council of Milevis above 400 years after Christ; that Province was overrun
with Pelagians; the eight first Canons transcribed, all against Pelagianism;
those the ground of the Canon; yet that Canon proves nothing, but that if a
Minister made prayers for himself, they must be brought to a Council; and there
approved before he used them. Sect. 11. Yet this proved a sad president. Sect.
12. An examination of what Mr. Falconer says of the Liturgies fathered upon
St. James, St* Mark, and St. Peter. 4. Observations upon what he says. An
account of what my Lord of Morney has fully said to prove them all
supposititious. Sect. 13. What Mr. Falconer says of the Liturgies ascribed to
Ambrose, Basil, Chrysostom, is examined. They are abundantly proved spurious.
It Is in vain to say they have undergone alterations, but yet they were made by
them. If made by them for their own use, not for others; if voluntarily used by
some others, it is nothing to the purpose. A presumption against their being
known in the Church all the time of the Milevitan Council. Sect. 14. It was 300
years after this, before any Church imposed Liturgies, proved from Durandus. It
was the year 600; then Gregory required the use of his; and in the year 800,
when Pope Adrian got Charles the Great by an Edict to enforce the use of it. A
pleasant story after this, about it. Sect. 15. A further strong presumption,
that no further proof can be produced from the proceedings of the Commissioners
about the Liturgy 1662. The story of it. Sect. 16. Mr. Falconer concluded from
the premises to have spoken at too high a rate. A short account of the state of
the Church from 500 and 600 years after Christ, to 1500. The state of the
Church such for a 1000 of those years, as all Protestants judge: many things
unlawful, in that time, believed and used. The purer Church from 600 to 1500,
only in some corners in France, the Principality of Piedmont, some parts of
Bohemia: no Records of Liturgies imposed or used there. Sect. 17. No forms of
Prayer but the Lords-Prayer generally used or imposed (except in the Saxon
Churches) since the Reformation, but in England; not in Switzerland, France,
Scotland. The short History of the English Reformation. The opposition from the
first, to forms imposed for general use. The woeful extremes run into on both
sides. Sect. 18. A Conclusion, challenging any to show that Nonconformists in
this thing differ from the judgment of Divines in the purer or lately Reformed
Churches. Sect. 19. A Postscript concerning the judgment of the Reformed Church
in Holland.
Section I.
ALthough the former part of our Discourse, giving Arguments which appear very
probable to us, and from whence we have formed a practical judgment, That it is
contrary to the will of God, that Ministers of the Gospel to whom God has
given the gift of Prayer, or (if that phrase offends) an ability to express
their and their peoples causes to God in prayer, should perform ordinarily
their Ministerial acts in prayer by the prescribed Forms of other men; an
argument against us from example and humane authority can be of little value:
Yet in regard some of our brethren take advantage from hence invidiously to
represent us as dissenters from the Church for 1300 years, nay from Christ's
time; and there are too many that believe all some men have the confidence to
say; and considering the reverend Author of Libertas Ecclesiastica, tell us,
Page 111, 112. That it must be a rash sentence to condemn Forms of Prayer as
evil and sinful, which were embraced by the ancient Church whiles it retained
its soundness, and before the corruptions and distempers of the Church of Rome
took place, and by the Protestant Churches since their recovery therefrom. And
in the determining of what is expedient or inexpedient, he had need have strong
foundations to erect his high confidence, who will oppose his own judgment,
with some very few persons besides, against the concurrent judgment and
practice of the Church of Christ in so many several ages, and Nations, and
against the determination of God himself under the Old Testament, and our
blessed Savior under the New.

Lest some less judicious person meetingwith this, should think us strange
persons, I have thought it reasonable to review the premises of that Section
upon which this conclusion is raised. I shall only desire the Reader to
consider, that little of this does concern the Dissenters, who are perfectly of
the mind expressed in our former sheets.

1. For they do not condemn Forms of Prayer as evil and unlawful, they do
believe them good in their kind and use; they believe them good to be used for
the instruction of people, and to help them in the acquisition of the gift; and
possibly they do think that John might thus teach his disciples to pray, giving
them Forms, from which they might learn the sum of what they were to ask of
God; and many of them will yield, that the Lords-prayer was by Christ given to
his Disciples for the same purpose, not to be used by them all their lives time
in so many words, but as a Summary of what things they should ask of God, in
what words they pleased.

2. For Devotion: the Nonconformists will grant that men and women, (yea such
as the Church (for want of better) may be forced to use in the Ministry) may
pray by the prescribed Forms of others. They indeed do not think this to be
that prayer which God requires of his Ministers; but they think thus the
Minister and people too may pray mentally; and those who join with another
person ministering in prayer, never do more.

. 2. For what this Author says, -- Which were embraced by the ancient Church,
whiles it retained its soundness, and before the corruptions and distempers of
the Church of Rome took place, and by the Protestant Church since its recovery
therefrom. -- We will by and by examine how far that is true, and upon what
grounds he speaks it.

But what does he mean by the Determination of God himself under the Old
Testament, and our blessed Savior in the New? If it be any thing to the
purpose, it is not easy to understand. Does he mean that either God under the
Old Testament, or our blessed Savior under the New, has determined, that it
is lawful for some particular men, be they Archbishops, or Bishops, or any
other, to compose Forms of Prayer to be used by all Ministers in the Church,
and that it is lawful for them to use them, and to perform their Ministerial
acts in prayer by the use of them? so one would think the words sound; but he
has not spoken a word to prove this. This indeed would determine the business.
Or does he mean that God by prescribing some Forms himself, or inspiring some
Prophets and holy men to do it; or that Christ by prescribing a Form of prayer
to be used by his Disciples, has determined, That Forms of prayer are not like
forms of blasphemy, which God himself cannot make lawful, being in their own
nature evil; but such things as his command may make lawful or necessary. This
none ever denied: The question is, Whether they be not such things as with
reference to some men in some circumstances, nothing but the command of God can
make lawful?

For the same things may be sinful as to some men, which may be lawful, yea and
necessary to others. It is lawful, yea necessary, for those who cannot
otherwise avoid burning with lust, to marry; it may be sinful for others who
are Eunuchs by nature; and lawful for some to make themselves Eunuchs for the
Kingdom of heavens sake; expedient for others for the present necessity (as the
Apostle speaks.) The having, or not having the gift of continence makes the
difference; as in the present case the having, or not having the gift of prayer
does.

. 3. God or Christ's immediate command may make things of this nature necessary,
which have no essential and inseparable evil in them; so that whatever is said
of Gods prescribing Forms of prayer sometimes, and Christ's prescribing a Form,
signifies just nothing; nor can possibly amount to more than this: Therefore
Forms of prayer are not in their own nature considered abstractly from Gods
will revealed in his word, sinful. Or, therefore God may, or Christ may command
us Forms of prayer now to be used in our Ministry; or may commissionate others
to do it. Now all this will be granted. Only the question is, Where it does
appear that God has commissioned any thus? what direction is there in any leaf
of Scripture for Bishops or Churches, or any persons, to compose Forms of
prayer to be ordinarily used by all Ministers?

. 4. I have been amazed, that those who are so zealous in this point, have not
seen that the Reverend Bishop of Norwich has fixed upon the only medium in
nature to prove this assertion, in his Rationale on the Common Prayer, page 8,
9, 10. viz. That God has commissionated some to prescribe a form of the
public Worship. Upon which Hypothesis, what he there says is indisputably
true: That the public Worship of God prescribed by those to whom he has given
commission, is the only true and right public Worship; and all other Forms and
methods offered up instead of that, though never so exactly drawn, are strange
worship, because not commanded. The Nonconformists most freely agree, that
whatsoever Worship is not commanded by God, or whatsoever Worship is offered up
to God instead of that which he has commanded, is strange Worship. Now for any
Forms of prayer used in any Church (setting aside the Scriptural Forms which
may make part of them) neither God, nor Christ, nor any Prophets, or Apostles,
by authority from God, have commanded them. So then the sense of this Reverend
Prelate must be, That God has commissioned the Bishops, Pastors, or chief
Ministers of the Church, to prescribe Forms of Worship, public Worship, and
universally to impose them. Admitting this, we agree, all other praying is
abomination. God has commanded another way of praying, by commissionating
chief Pastors in his name and stead to draw up the only Forms in which
Ministers in public may speak to him in prayer.

This is the Proposition which our Brethren should spend their pains to prove;
and as I said before, I think to be the only Medium on their side; if we could
apprehend this to be true, or it could be so evinced to us, we should never
speak a word more about conceived prayer, or praying by our own gifts. We
should all strike sail to a command of God made out to us. If God or Christ
has commanded us the constant use of any form or forms in his Word, if his
Prophets or Apostles have enjoined us any such, we also agree our selves bound
to use them. But we are not patient of these trifling arguments: If the use of
Forms of prayer, prescribed by God himself, or by Christ, or by the Prophets
and Apostles, either for a time to be used, or to be perpetually used, be
lawful for all; then the use of Forms of prayer, neither made by God, nor by
Christ, nor by his Prophets or Apostles, is also lawful. 2. If Forms of prayer
be lawful, then they are lawful for all under all circumstances. 3. If they be
good for instruction, and may be so lawfully used, then they may be used in
Devotion, etc. 4. If they may be lawfully used even in devotion by some, or
under some circumstances, then they may be lawfully imposed on all under any
circumstances.

. 5. But yet though if it were true, that God by himself immediately, or
Christ, or the Apostles, or Prophets, did prescribe the people of God in the
Old Testament some particular forms, from which they must not vary, nothing
could be concluded in our case; yet for diversion-sake let us examine how well
our Reverend Bishop has proved this: He begins page 99. with Christ's
prescription of the Lords prayer; from whence he says, Isiodor. Hispalensis,
thinks the Church took its pattern for Liturgies. Isiodorus Hispal. lived
more than 600 years after Christ, about the time Liturgies began to be in
common use, and 200 years before they were any thing generally imposed. But the
business is not what the Church in his time did, but upon what ground.

Admit the Lords-prayer was directed by Christ as a Form of prayer; By what
authority did the Church after the effusion of the Spirit, do what Christ did?
By the same authority as I presume they made seven Sacraments, because Christ
made two.

But our Reverend Brother thinks it wonderful manifest, that the Lords-prayer
was delivered as a form. 1. Because of the Text, Luke 11. 2. When you pray,
say. 2. Because of the ground of the Disciples request, Teach us to pray, to
which this is an answer. 3. From the manner of the composure. 4. From the
ancient Churches acknowledging and using it as a form; for which he quoteth
Cyprian, Tertullian, and Gregory.

Our Reverend Brother knows that many great Divines have doubted it, and do
doubt it, some thinking it only a direction for the matter, others for the true
method of Prayer. Nor does any thing our Brother says conclude in the cause;
he knows that Mat. 6 9. it is only (...), Pray on this manner; and whereas he
says that it ia so in the Seventy, Numb. 6. 23. On this manner bless you; yet
those words have been taken for a constant invariable form of blessing, and was
used so by Luther, and at Geneva. Who have taken them so I cannot tell, but I
am sure it cannot be proved that the Priests never varied from that form; and I
do know one or two great Divines that have thought the Priests only tied to the
sense, not to those Numerical words or syllables. Luther and Calvin's use
proves it not, I hope; but yet we think we may lawfully use any form of Gods
prescription: the question is, Whether we may use no other; nor that, with the
least variation.

Our Brother's second argument is yet weaker, The Disciples said, Lord teach us
to pray as John taught his Disciples. What then? was it not an apposite answer
for him to tell them, That now they must call God Father, and pray that his
Name might be sanctified, his Kingdom come, his will be done, etc. unless he
set them a form of words to which they might not add, nor diminish? The
Disciples did not say, Lord tell us what words, and no other, we must use in
prayer.

But thirdly, (says our Brother) our Savior gives in the phrase of prayer;
but does this conclude? so do we sometimes give our Children forms which we
desire not they should use as forms, but directions to speak to the like
purpose. For Cyprian, Tertullian and Gregory, who lived 300, 400, 800 years
after Christ, they were not like to know Christ's intention in this, more than
we; and for their use of it as a form, We do not think it unlawful to use those
entire words and phrases as a part of our prayers, nor indeed any other
Scriptural forms of words that are proper. But on the other side, are they not
two great presumptions that our Savior never intended it as a form, 1. That we
never read in Scripture that it was so used afterward. 2. That the name of
Christ, in whose name (Joh. 16.) we are commanded to pray, is not in it (unless
by implication) as it has been in all prayers of the Church since the
Ascension of Christ; the prayers concluding for the sake of our Lord Jesus
Christ?

To compremise this business, I believe it was as a form given to the
Disciples, being then but children, and not perfectly instructed to the Kingdom
of God; and they might or might not use it as a form, until they should be more
fully instructed and enabled, but not with any obligation upon them, or the
Church after them, necessarily to use those numerical words in that order; nay,
that after Christ's Resurrection it was their duty to add something more to
their prayers, asking plainly and expressly in the name of Jesus Christ: For he
tells them, Joh. 16. 24. Hitherto you have asked nothing in my name; how could
that be true, if they had used the Lords-prayer till then, and the petitions
there had been so put up in the name of Christ, as appears to have been his
will now? verse. 23.

Our Brothers next instance is page 103, 104, 105. from the example of the
Jewish Church; here he tells us, That the Jews did use prayers with their
sacrifices; and had their hours of prayer. These things he proves well from
Lev. 1. 10. Act. 3. 1. and that Aaron was to confess the sins of the people
over the live-goat, Lev. 16. 21. What is all this to the purpose? none doubts
but that Priests and people prayed under the Old Testament as well as the New.
But the question is, Whether by stated forms or no? 2. He tells us there are
evidences in Scripture of such forms, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. The King commanded the
people to praise God with the words of David and Asaph; That is, with such and
such portions of holy writ; do not all men grant that some parts of holy Writ
may be sung in public Worship? The Nonconformists will allow no other; he
instanceth in Joel 2. 17. Hos. 14. 2. Deuteronomy. 21. 8. Deuteronomy. 26. 3, 4, 5, 13, 14.

It is true, in all these Texts there are some short, very short forms of
prayer (as they lie before us they are so.) But 1. can our Reverend Brother
think so short phrases or sentences as some of them are, were ever used as the
only solemn prayer used at that time? 2. Is there any Record that they were
ever syllabically used? 3. Is it said, you shall use these words and no other?
4. Is it not ordinary for us in our Sermons, directing people only to what
sense to pray, in our Sermons to say, Go to God and say, etc. and then give
them a short prayer, which we never intend they should use as a form. 5. Is it
not reasonable to think this was all intended in these passages, when we
consider the length and solemnity of the Prayers recorded in Scripture of
Solomon, Ezra, Daniel, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphat? For the practice of the Jews in
later days,

I shall only say this: 1. That he knows how little credit is to be given to
any testimony of the Rabbis, and what time the earliest writings of theirs
appeared. 2. How ill their practice can be pleaded, who our Savior says
worshipped God vainly, teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of men. 3. That I
observe, Luke 4. 16. that when our Savior at Nazareth went into the Synagogue,
the Clerk did not bring him any Common Prayer Book, but the book of the Prophet
Isaias, which he made use of.

. 6. Let us now leave these pretenses of more ancient proof, and come to
consider what has indeed been the practice of the Church since the Apostles
times; for our Reverend Brother thinks it probable, that while the miraculous
gifts of the Spirit continued, Prayer was performed by them. For the time
succeeding the Apostles, it must be divided into three periods:

1. The first is the purer period of it before the Bishop of Rome got fully
into Saddle; this as to Doctrine held to a great degree for 500 years; but as
to Rites and Ceremonies, scarce half so long, as we shall possibly shortly show.

2. The second is the depraved period of it, which was for a 1000 years as to
Doctrine, 1200 and more as to some matters of Rites and Government.

3. The Reformed period of it, which was from the year 1516, and is yet going
on.

For the first of these Periods we have not so full and clear an evidence of
what was the practice of the Church, as we could desire.

For though it was after the year 600 that the Bishop of Rome got the Title of
Universal Bishop; and some years after that, before the Church of Rome was
furnished with all her present accoutrements, and 1200 before
Transubstantiation was settled: Yet betwixt that and 1500 they had time enough
to burn all the Writings of the Ancients, from which the practice of the
Primitive Church might appear to us; or so to correct them and interpolate,
that we might see little or nothing that could be made use of to show the
Novelties of their Doctrine and practice; yet Bernardus non vidit omnia; some
things escaped their eye or correction, of which our Divines make good use. Let
us see what our Reverend Brother produces for the first 300 years, which all
Divines say was the most pure times of the Church.

It is not our part to prove the Negative; it lies upon our Brethren to prove
that there were forms universally imposed on all Ministers. There might be
forms for instruction; some men might at their pleasure compose forms for their
own devotion and use them; but that the governing part of the Church did in
those years make forms, and require all men to use them, and Ministers and
Christians then generally thought it lawful; this is to be proved: for we will
yet allow a lawful use of forms of prayer for instruction, and in some cases
for devotion, and if they did no more, we agree with them.

Our Reverend Brother has, page 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118. taken notice of
some proofs brought by Divines of our mind, to make it very probable that in
those years there were no such forms made for general use, no such forms
generally used, much less enjoined to all to be by them used.

The first is that of Justine Martyr, who flourished about the year 160, who
says the Minister sent forth prayers (...), our Brethren translate it, [ as
they were able,] this Reverend Author will have the sense to be with all his
might. I do not think that any thing can be infallibly concluded on either side
from it; the words may signify either, or both; and so one thing in one part,
another thing in another part of the same Apology, so as that debate is never
like to be ended.

The next is that of Tertullian, who lived about 200 years after Christ, who
says the Christians did pray Sine monitore quia de pectore, without a monitor,
because from their heart. Our Reverend Brother thinks sine monitore can in no
propriety of speech be understood of a form; and why? because a form must be a
person. And was not that other person who composed the form a person, think we?
and his monitor who prays by his form? nay are there not mute as well as
vocal monitors? May not the bell which calls us to a public assembly, be
called our monitor, because it is no person? Is it so unusual a figure to give
the name of the office of a person to the thing that does that work as
effectually? for his peculiar sense of that Text, I see no need of it, but
leave it to critics. Besides, the words are not cum pectore, but de pectore;
the words of the Christians prayers flowed from the heart, conceived there.

He takes notice of no more brought on our side within the first 300 years. But
I shall mind him of another, and that a shrewd one, the Reader shall find it in
Socrates Scholasticus, Histor. l. 5 cap. 21. in these words, -- (...). Every
where and in all worships of Prayers, there are not two to be found that speak
the same thing. This cannot be understood as to matter, but as to words, which
could not be if they prayed in all Churches by the same forms of words. As to
matter, it is unquestionable false. It is true, Socrates lived in the fifth
Century; but he relates the History of the Centuries before him as well as his
own; what need we any further witness for near 500 years after Christ? Let us
now hear what our Reverend Brother has to say in proof of his assertion.

He produces in the second Century, Ignatius and Justine Martyr; but what say
they? one of them speaks of (...), the other of (...), that is, Common Prayer.
But must the Minister himself needs use a prescribed form, because his Prayer
is common to the people? I wonder how a Minister can in a Congregation make any
other prayers than (...), Common prayers. Surely the term of Commonprayer is
too much an Anglicism to be expressed, especially in Greek in that manner.

In the third Century our Reverend Brother produces Origin and Cyprian. What
say they? Origin says they often said in their prayers, O Almighty God, give
us a part with thy Prophets: and does not many a Minister who uses no form
ordinarily, say in his Prayers, O Lord, forgive us our sins; and, O Lord bring
us to thy everlasting Kingdom. Shall these common Petitions prove a hundred
years hence, that these men prayed by set-forms? For his other passage out of
Origin, I have not the Book to weigh it; but am sure those words, (...), is not
so much as a good Top^ck, much less of a Demonstration of Liturgies.

What says Cyprian? he testifies, That they used to say, Sursum corda, lift
up your hearts; and the people said, Habemus ad Dominum, we lift them up to the
Lord. So many a Minister that prays by no forms, begins his Prayer with Let
us pray. Let us lift up our hearts to the Lord, etc.

This is all the proof this Reverend Author brings for 300 years after Christ;
let any fair Reader judge the force of it, and whether the proofs of the
Negative be not more probable and strong, especially when we are assured by
Socrates 150 years after this, That there were not two to be sound that used
the same words in prayer. And truly what proof he can bring after 300 years, is
not much valuable; for I shall show that in those ages, worser things than
Liturgies were crept into the Rituals of the Church.

. 7. His next instance is that of Constantine, which must be betwixt the year
306 and 324; Eusebius says, That he made godly prayers for the use of his
Soldiers; and Eusebius accounts this a very admirable thing in him. Certainly
if true, so it was. But does not this argue that there was then no public
Liturgy? for certainly if there had, his Chaplains would have used it, as now
our Chaplains do to Regiments and Ships? Eusebius calls these constituted
prayers; But by whom? by Constantine: For whom? for his Soldiers* not for his
Ministers. Does any one think Constantine's Soldiers had generally the gift of
prayer, and were able to express themselves properly to the present case of his
army? This argues that Constantine did not think fit his Legions should be
without all Worship of God; nor did he think forms unlawful for those who could
not pray without them; he therefore wrote down some prayers in a Book, ordered
them to be read to them; and himself sometimes read them, or pronounced them.
What is all this to our purpose? we advise the like to all Householders, who
have not ability of themselves to pray in their families: For Eusebius his
saying this was after the manner of the Church. If it be understood for the
Minister of the Congregation to make prayers for his own Church, it is what we
plead for; if it be meant that he kept a course of prayer in his army as is in
the Church, it proves nothing for forms, unless it could be done no otherwise.

. 8. For what our Reverend Author says next (for I take his Quotations as they
respect order of time, not as they lie in his Book) p. 106. he seems to me as
if he would a little impose upon us: for he tells us* -- That forms of prayer
were of use in the Church about 1300 years since is acknowledged by them who
plead most against them, from Council. Laod. cap. 18. 3 Carthag. c. 23. Council.
Milevit. cap. 12. and that they have continued from that time downward cannot
be denied.

That there were forms of prayer before this, we will not deny; that some
particular persons might use some, we will not deny: But that they were
universally imposed upon any considerable part of the Church for more than 400
years after this, we will deny. Nor do the Canons mentioned prove any such
thing. Let us try if we cannot prove it.

The Council of Laodicea was in the year 364, some say 315. All that this Synod
decreed was, that the same order of Prayers should be used morning and evening;
for (...) does not necessarily signify form; besides, in Liturgies, Mattens
and Evensong use to differ. And Caranza makes the title of the Canon only
concerning daily prayers, and the substance of it, That prayers should be made
in the Church morning and evening; besides, this was a very small part of the
Church; Caranza says there were but 22 Bishops there.

The Council of Carthage rather determines the contrary; for it decrees, That
if any Minister composed any prayers for his own use, he should not use them
till he communicated them with his abler Brethren. So then he might compose
prayers by his own gifts. This was 395.

Indeed the Canon of the Council of Mela is plainly restrictive of Ministers
liberty; but it was made upon a special occasion, upon the woeful prevailing of
the Pelagian Doctrine in that Province, and reached no further. And they in
their Canon plainly set down the reason of it, Lest (Pelagianism being so
rampant there) some phrases through carelessness or ignorance should be put in
contrary to the faith.

. 9. And now we are come to 400 years and more after Christ.

But I must not pass over here what our Reverend Brother says, p. 118, 119,
120, where he tells us, that these Councils did not give the original to set
forms of Prayer, but only established some sanctions about them. We are not
enquiring about the original of forms of prayer, nor do believe that these
Councils gave the original to them; but we are enquiring into the original of
Bishops, or Church Officers commanding the same forms of prayer to be used by
all Ministers subject to their jurisdiction; and commanding Ministers to
perform their Ministerial acts of Prayer, either wholly, or in the greatest
part, not by their own gifts, but by forms which others had made for them; and
we say, the Council of Mela in St. Augustines time was the first record we have
of that, and that but in that Province, and upon a particular occasion.

The third Council of Carthage is mentioned by Caranza, and by Chytraeus, but
it is not to be found in the ancient account of Councils wrote before the year
900 in Greek, and Translated by Dr. Pappas, and printed at Strasburgh, 1621.

Justellus in his African Code has no such Canon as this is. Justellus in his
Notes, Praef* p. 35. will not deny but that there was such a third Council of
Carthage, as Caranza gives us an account of; because Zonaras and Balsamon, and
his own Collection (which was, he says, a most ancient Manuscript of Nic.
Faber) mentions such a Synod, but he says it made but 21 Canons, not 50; and
the other Canons ascribed to that Council, the rest belong to a Council held at
Carthage, 419, in the time of Pope Boniface; which he says is evident from the
Acts of the Synod. For Boniface was not Bishop when Caesarius and Atticus were
Consuls. We are therefore come to the year 419, when it is said, but with no
great certainty, that there was a Council at Carthage, where were 44 Bishops
who made this Canon, That none in their prayers should name the Father for the
Son, nor the Son for the Father. [How could they do that, if the Church had set
them their form?] And when they ministered at the altar, their prayers should be
directed to the Father, [what needed this, if their form were set them?] and
whatsoever prayers any made for himself, he should not use them before he had
communicated them to his more skilful brethren.

I cannot understand sense, if this Canon does not prove, that Ministers were
at this time at liberty publicly to pray by the use of their own gifts; for if
they were tied to a certain form made by others, there was no fear of their
using the name of the Father for the Son, or the name of the Son for the
Father; or that they should not direct their prayers to the Father, that being
the sense of the Church, whose forms they were tied to; to say nothing of the
latter part of the Canon, which apparently gives Ministers liberty to make
prayers for their use, only obliges them to take the advice of their more
experienced brethren (in that erroneous and most dangerous time) before they
publicly used them. So that I conclude, this Canon is a full proof, there were
no stated forms at this time, which was 419 years after Christ, used or
injoined in the African Church. Whereas our Brother says, (very critically)
That transcribing (properly here intended) supposes a form. I answer, the
words are describit sibi in Caranza. Our Author knows that describo, in a
hundred instances might be given him, signifies no more than to write down. Hoc
quam vehementer ad me pertineat in iis quas tibi illi reddent literis
descripsi, says Tully, who did not use to transcribe his Letters out of other
men's copies. Besides, admitting our Brothers criticism, yet the form might be
his own, and he only write a fair, out of a foul copy. What he says further
about the words in the former part of the Canon, from which we conclude no form
was then in use, at least not enjoined, he yields the case, in saying, That
there were various forms then used in that Church, some made by heretics. Then
there was no one form enjoined and used; nor does the Canon say they should use
none but the stated forms appointed by that Church; it only says, That in
their prayers they should not name the Father for the Son, nor the Son for the
Father; and that all prayers (which was the will of Christ) should be directed
to the first person in the Trinity, to the Father.

. 10. Our Author triumphs in the Council of Mela, or Milevis (as he calls it)
that* he says, declared against the use of any other forms than those
established by the Council. It does so indeed, but not then those established
by the Church. That Council considering the state of their Province at that
time, thought fit to order some forms, and seems to tie up the Ministers of
that Province at that time to the use of them, and no other so much is granted:
but whereas our Author says, That we may as well conclude from our Act of
Uniformity, as from these Councils, that they gave the first original to forms
of Prayer, because they are thereby established. We answer,

If in England we had not had the use of forms of Prayer established by the
Canon Law in times of Popery, and by Acts of Parliament in the time of Edw. 6.
and Q. Elizabeth, under favor we think we might have concluded, that the Act
of Uniformity 1662, had given the first original to such an imposition or use.
And till our Author (which he has not yet done) can bring us any Canon of
ancient date that commands such an universal use of forms of Prayer in any
considerable part of the Church, we hope we may conclude, that this was the
original of such commands or usage; and this was in the fifth Century when the
truths in matter of Doctrine, as well as Rites, were in a great measure
corrupred, as I may possibly show hereafter. But for this Council too,

It is true, there was a Council held at Mela 402 years after Christ in the
time of Pope Innocent the first; if we may believe Caranza, Chytraeus, and
others, it was held when Arcadius and Honorius were Emperors. That Province
was (as to the Ministry) unmeasurably tainted with Pelagianism; their eight
first Canons are against his Doctrine; it will not be amiss to give the Reader
the sum of those Canons, from whence he may judge, That it was reasonable, that
until the Church could be purged of that leaven, considering the great
corruption of the Ministers, such a restriction should be put upon the
Ministers of that Province as to their public prayers.

Can. 1. It pleased all the Bishops met together in this Synod to ordain what
things were defined in this Synod, That whosoever shall say that the first man
Adam was made mortal, so as whether he sinned or no, he should die, not because
of the merit of sin, but from a necessity of nature, Let him be Anathema.

Can. 2. It also pleased them, That if any shall deny that young Infants are to
be baptized, or shall say that they are baptized for the remission of sins, but
they draw no such original sin from Adam which should be washed away in the
laver of Baptism, from whence it follows that in them the form of Baptism [
for the remission of sin] is not tru', but false, Let him be Anathema. Because
what the Apostle says can be no otherwise understood, than as the Church has
always understood it: Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the world, and death
by* sin, and so death passed over all men because all had sinned. For by reason
of this rule of faith, little ones who have actually committed no sin, are
therefore truly baptized for the remission of sins, that the filth contracted
by Generation, may be cleansed away by Regeneration.

Can. 3. It also pleased them, etc. That if any one say that the Grace of God
by which we are justified by Jesus Christ our Lord, was only of force for
remission of sins which are committed, and not also for our assistance against
future commissions, he should be Anathema.

Can. 4. If any one shall say, That the grace of God through Jesus Christ does
no further help us against sinning, than as it reveals to us, and opens our
understanding to understand the commandments of God, that we may know what to
desire and to avoid; and that it is no effect of grace to enable us to love,
and to do what we know we ought to do, let him be Anathema. For whereas the
Apostle says, Knowledge puffs up, Charity edifieth, It is impious to believe
that there is a word of the grace of God for that which puffs up, and none
for that which edifieth, both being the gift of God, both to know what we ought
to do, and to love to do it, that through the edifying of love our knowledge may
^t puff us up. As it is written concerning God, That he teaches man knowledge;
so it is also written, Love is from God.

Can. 5. It also pleased them to Decree, That if any shall say that we are
therefore justified by Grace, that we may more easily by Grace fulfill what we
are commanded to do by the power of our own will; although if grace were not
given, though it would not be easy, yet it would be possible to fulfill the
commands of God, let him be Anathema. For our Lord speaks concerning
obedience to Gods commandments, when he says, Without me you can do nothing:
He does not say, Without me you cannot without difficulty do any thing.

Can. 6. It also pleased them, etc. That whereas St. John says, If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; whosoever shall
say this is the sense, That out of humility we ought to say we have no sin, Let
him be Anathema. For it follows, and is added by the Apostle, But if we
confess our sins, he is just and righteous to forgive them, and to purge us
from all iniquity. From whence it is plain, that the Apostle speaks not of
speaking in humility, but speaking in truth. For the Apostle might have said,
If we say we have no sin, we extol our selves, and there is no humility in us.
But he saying, We deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us; he plaine^^
shows, that he who says he has no sin, did not speak truth, but what was
false.

Can. 7. It also pleased them, etc. That whosoever should say that the Saints
in the Lords-Prayer praying, Forgive us our sins, do not speak it for them, for
it is not for them necessary, but for other sinners in the congregation; and
therefore the several Saints do not say, Forgive me my sins, but forgive us our
sins, that the righteous man might be understood not to put up that petition so
much for himself as for others, Let him be Anathema. For St. James was holy and
righteous, when he said, In many things we offend all. Why does he say all, but
that his sentence might agree with that in the Psalm, Enter not into judgment
with thy servant, O Lord, because in thy sight shall no flesh be justified. And
that in Solomon's Prayer* There is none that lives and sins not. And that
in Job, He seals up the head of all men, that every man might know his
infirmity. Upon which holy and righteous Daniel speaking in his Prayer in the
Plural Number says, We have sinned, we have done wickedly, etc. What he
speaks there, he speaks both truly and humbly; and that none might think as
some now do, that he did not speak of his own but of his peoples sins, he
afterward says, When I prayed, and confessed my sins, and the sins of my
people* unto the Lord our God: He would not say, our sins, but my sins, and the
sins of my people, as a Prophet foreseeing, there would be some arise as now,
who would ill understand it.

Can. 8. It also pleased them, etc. That if any should say, That the words of
the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our debts, are only used by the Saints to signify
their humility, not to express a truth, Let him be Anathema. For how can one be
induced in prayer to lie, and that not to men, but to God, with his lips
desiring that his sins might be forgiven him, when in heart he thought he had
no sins to be forgiven?

I have been a little more large in this story, because I am pretty confident
and dare challenge all our adversaries to give us but one proof, that any part
of the Church before this time assembled in any Council, took upon them to
impose Forms of Prayer to be used by all Ministers within their Jurisdiction.
If some men made themselves Forms, and used them, they yet served God in their
Ministry in the use of their own gifts; this signifies just nothing to our
case, who have known diverse worthy men do the like.

We have now the case; here was a Council of worthy men, all relating to the
Province of Numidia, who met at Mela. The occasion of their meeting was the
woeful spreading of the Doctrine of Pelagius, who denied Original Sin, Assisting
Grace; or that justified persons could sin, or need beg the pardon of sin.
Many, if not the greatest part of their Ministers were tainted with these
Opinions. In this distress to stop the diffusing this venom, and that the
people through the error, ignorance, or carelessness of their Ministry, might
not be without any to go before them in public prayers, who could or would put
up due confessions or necessary petitions for them; having first in eight
Canons condemned the Doctrines of Pelagius, they make their twelfth Canon in
these terms:

It also pleased them* etc. That those prayers, or Masses, or Prefaces, or
Commendations, or Impositions of hands, which shall be approved in the Council,
be used of all; and that no other be used in the Church, but what shall be
treated on, and approved in a Synod, lest perhaps something should be composed
contrary to the true faith, either through ignorance or carelessness.

I observe, 1. That this Canon extends to all Ministerial services, not to
prayers only; as to all, they were limited to forms.

2. That it was not to any forms that before this time had been enjoined or
used in this or in any other Church, but such as should first be treated of and
approved in a Synod or Council.

3. That it was done in a case of woeful distress, when the Ministers were known
to be so corrupted in their judgments, that they could neither put up such
confessions, or supplications as they ought, they could not confess original
sin, nor pray for assisting grace, nor for pardon of sins, renewing after
Justification.

4. I observe, this was in the fifth Century; and if we will believe Vossius,
it must be after 505, for he says, Histor. Pelag. l. 1. c. 3. that in that
year ( Chrysostom being in banishment, and near his death) he first spread his
Doctrines. Others make it 402. It must be in the Popedom of Innocent 1. (who
was not Pope 18 months) for Aurelius was President there in the notion of his
Legate.

Take this story in its circumstances, it is far from a justifiable authority to
maintain that it was the judgment of the Church in the purer ages, That forms
of prayer might be lawfully enjoined all Ministers, whether under such
circumstances or no.

Their ends were, that the poor people might have due prayers put up for them,
and be taught the Doctrine of Original sin, the impotency of man's will to what
was spiritually good; the need of assisting grace; that they sin seven times a
day, and had need beg pardon. That original sin might in prayer be confessed,
and the impotency of human nature to that which is truly good, with their daily
renewing sins, that so pardon might be begged for them, and assistance of Divine
grace against them, and unto spiritual duty. How should this end have been
obtained in that corrupted state, but by set-forms of Prayers and Sermons too?
Should they on the sudden have turned out all these Ministers, it is not
probable, they on the sudden could have found enough fitted for the work.
Because in this exigent this Council judged it lawful, shall it therefore be
concluded to b^ the judgment even of those few Bishops in that Council, That it
is lawful for any in any state of a Church to do the like? Besides, what
hindered but that according to this Canon every Minister might compose his own
prayers, and bring them to be approved in a Council.

. 11. The truth is, this proved a sad president; all know how long Peldgius his
Doctrine spread a very great part of the Church, how many Councils assembled
against it. It Is very probable other Churches followed this Canon not in force
of it, for it could oblige none but the Province of Numidia; but as thinking it
lawful: till at length, as the Grandieur of the Romish Bishops required a pack
of ignorant and sottish Ministers, of which there was a remarkable plenty in
the sixth and seventh age, it crept into a custom, and a piece of
Ecclesiastical Common Law. But we shall hereafter show that the practice of the
visible Church after 400 years in Rituals, is not very imitable by those that
will make the word of God a light to their feet; but we must go back a little
to consider what our Author insinuates, p. 105. of the Liturgies which the
Papists have invented, (in all probability) and entitled St. Peter, St. James,
and St. Mark, and St. John too; as also those which they have entitled, St.
Chrysostom, St. Basil, and St. Ambrose to^.

. 12. For the former, our Reverend Brother speaks thus, page 105. And I yield
it most probable (though even Protestant writers herein differ) that the
ancient Roman, Jerusalem and Alexandrian Offices, were called the Liturgies of
St. Peter, St. James, and St. Mark, because of their certain early use in the
Churches where they presided, though it is not certain they were composed by
them; this being mentioned by no ancient writer of the first Centuries. Nor do
I doubt but the Liturgy or Anaphoca of St. John, and that of the twelve
Apostles, are supposititious.

From which I observe, 1. That if during the time that the extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Ghost lasted, the Ministerial Services were by the Apostles
performed by them, it is very absurd to say Peter, James, Mark and John, who
all were possessed of them, prayed by prescribed forms.

2. I observe, our Reverend Brother (I hope unadvisedly) has granted here the
Papists a great point, That Peter was the first Bishop of Rome; for he calls
Rome the Church where he resided (for we know James resided at Jerusalem, Mark
at Alexandria) this is both a liberal and groundless grant -- Magni hoc
mercentur Achivi.

3. Did Saint Peter, James, and Mark, themselves use them? No, says our
Author, that is uncertain; it is false, and our Author yields it, in saying
they ministered by their extraordinary gifts. Now we read of no Liturgy came
down in the days of Pentecost; was it by others that came after them? who, or
how long after? because he says they were of certain early use in those
Churches; how does that appear? does he account 450 years after (when Socrates
tells us there were not two to be found speaking the same things in their
prayers) early?

4. He acknowledges he speaks without proof, and by guess, for he has no
writer in the first Centuries that mentions them.

But seeing this Reverend Author can say no more for them, let us see if
nothing can be said against them: That of St. Mark, and St. Peter, the Papists
(and they know best I believe) make to be both the same; if they be, the
learned Morney has supplied us with enough to say against them.

1. The (...), and the word (...), are found often enough in that Liturgy,
which argues it to be made more than 300 years after St. Peter and St. Mark
were in Heaven, or else there had been no reason for so long a conrest as was
in the Church about those things; St. Peter's and St. Mark's Liturgy had in a
minute determined the business.

2. In that Liturgy are several prayers for Monks and Monasteries, persons and
things never thought of till some hundreds of years after Christ.

3. There is also mention of Temples, Altars, Incensings for remission of sins;
did St. Peter / or St. Mark (think we) know many such things?

4. There are prayers for the Pope, who commenced 800 years after Peter and
Mark, were dead.

5. There is also in St. Mark's prayers for Subdeacons, Readers, Singers; nay
Mark is made to pray that God would save the City of Alexandria for the sake of
his Martyr S Mark. Can our Reverend Brother think these things were of any
early use at Alexandria? how are our judgments oft-times bribed by our passions?

For St. James his Liturgy: 1. How often is the Virgin in it called (...), the
Mother of God; when in the Synod of Ephesus and Chalcedon against Nestorius and
Eutyches, the Fathers had much ado to find one or two places where she was so
called in Origin and Eusebius; yet the latter lived 400 years after Christ.

All know what a stir was 300 years after Christ to get Christ agreed equal
with his Father in essence. This Liturgy, had it been known then, had prevented
all that; for He and his Father are every where called (...). The Hymn called
(...), which was not composed till 400 years after. Here are also prayers for
Monasteries, unknown for more than 300 years after. In it there is a prayer
that we might find grace with confession; a name, and a prayer not known long
after. There is in it mention made of Temples and Altars, (which Christians had
none of for 300 years) of offering incense for remission of sins, etc. not like
St. James his Doctrine. There are in it prayers for the dead, to the Virgin
Mary, which James never made; and the Doxology, Glory be to the Father, etc.
and the Hymn, Glory to God in the highest, etc. are in it too, brought into use
in the Church-Liturgies many hundreds of years after St. James his time. Yet we
must believe that these Liturgies were of early use, and these were but
additions since; though (...) be woven into the best part, Quod volumus facile
credimus. The Reader may read much more in the incomparably learned Lord of
Morney's book de Missa, l, 1. cap. 2. from whence what we have here said is
taken. Nor do I see how it can be avoided but if Peter, Mark and James were the
Authors of these pretended Liturgies, they must be of equal authority with the
Scriptures, as that Noble Lord says. And being things of no better reputation
than they are, though our Reverend Brother has said little for them, yet he
has said a great deal too much for a person of so valuable a judgment, and
learning, and sobriety, to speak.

. 13. We shall come now to hear what he says to the pretended Liturgies of St.
Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, and St. Basil. They all flourishrished above 350
years after Christ; Basil in the year 370, Ambrose about the year 374,
Chrysostom about the year 398; Basil died 379, Chrysostom 407, Ambrose 397;
all these are said to have had Liturgies, or Forms of prayers; and the Papists
can show us the copies of them, they say. But this is nothing to us, unless it
can be proved that they were used by any but themselves, yea and that not
voluntarily (that might be out of some Ministers sense that they had not gifts
fit to pray with) but at the command of some Council, or of these Bishops. But
let us hear what our Author says in Libertas Ecclesiastica, page 106, 107.

There are so many Testimonies, that St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, and St.
Basil, were framers of Liturgses, that I do not see how any can rationally
doubt thereof; but that these Liturgies have undergone diverse alterations is
both apparent, and is very reasonable to be imagined. And he who shall compare
the Greek copy of St. Basil's Liturgy with the Syriack, or its Version, both
which are represented together by Cassander, will find them so vastly different
from each other, that he must either conclude great alterations to have past
upon them, or that they never were originally the same.

This is all that he says of them. That Ambrose, Basil, Chrysostom, and
others, might set themselves in order for reading the Scriptures, and compose
prayers for their personal use, may be true for ought any body can tell. Diverse
Divines that we have known have done the like. That diverse Ministers might out
of a reverence to these persons, and distrusting their own gifts, use the forms
which they had made, may be true too. We have seen Mr. Shutes, Dr. Holdsworths,
and many others forms of prayer which they ordinarily used before their
Sermons. And possibly some out of respect to them may have made use of them;
whether they did what they ought, is the question, That the Liturgies now
extant, and that go under their name, as they now are to be seen, were none of
theirs, is out of question.

Liturgias has ownes falsi postulo, says the most learned Lord of Morney, de
l. Missa, cap. 6. Nor was he a person used to speak rashly. He charge them
all for counterfeits, and sufficiently proves it. He shows that in those
Liturgies there were prayers for the dead, prayers to the Virgin Mary. There is
the Hymn called (...), not known in the Church till more than an hundred years
after their time. In Chrysostom's, the Priest is brought in worshipping the
Crucifix and the Virgin Mary, (all know the worshipping Images came in long
after), Chrysostom and many other Saints are invoked in his Liturgy, who lived
many years after Chrysostom was dead. There is in it a prayer for the Emperor
Alexius, and the Ecumenical Bishop Pope Nicholas, who both lived 700 years
after Chrysostom was dead. It is true, the Papists adoring these Liturgies, we
make use of them against them to prove that the Sacrament was used to be given
in both kinds, and that there were no private Masses; but these pretended
Liturgies were most certainly made many hundreds of years after their times who
are made the Authors. If they were not, the Papists have more to say for their
Holy Water, their Paganish Incensings, and Wax-candles burning at noonday,
their Crossings and Crucifixes, their Invocation of the Virgin Mary and Saints,
than Protestants ever thought they had.

But our Author will allow them to have undergone diverse alterations. We thank
him for that; but how shall it appear to us that they were not entire new
compositions made a thousand years after Christ, that by them the Papists might
justify their Mass Book, their Doctrine and Ceremonies? Or how shall it appear
that any Ministers in Chrysostom's, Ambrose's, or Basil's Diocesses, were
required by them to perform their Ministerial acts in prayer? We challenge any
one to make that good. And the making of forms, of the particular use of them
by those that made them, or the voluntary use of them by other Ministers who
distrusted their own abilities, or the requiring of the use of them in a time
of general corruption of the Ministers, will not prove the lawfulness of the
use of them by all Ministers under no such circumstances.

Besides, the Canon of the Council of Mela, limiting their Ministers to such
prayers as should first be approved in some Synod, is a strong presumption,
that they knew of no Liturgies of St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. James, St. John,
St. Peter, St. Ambrose, St. Basil, St. Chrysostom; for they would then have
named some of them, and restrained their Ministers to the use of them, or some
of them; and not still have ordered the making of more; or rather given their
Ministers liberty to make their prayers themselves, but not to use them till
they had been debated and agreed in some Synod (which I take to be the truest
sense of that Canon) nor needed the Council of Carthage to have ordered their
Ministers to confer about their prayers with their more experienced brethren,
if seven or eight Liturgies had been then known, and so authentic.

. 14. But yet we must find it more than 300 years after this before any Church
or Magistrate took upon them under penalties to command Ministers to minister
not by the use of their own gifts, but by the prescribed forms of others. Let
us but in the case hear Durandus, a Papist high enough, speak, and that in a
book which he called, A Rationale of Divine Offices, l. 5. cap. 2. his words
are these:

Theodosius (who by the way lived 380) entreated Pope Damasus, that some
Ecclesiastical office might be made by some Ecclesiastical Catholic person;
upon which Damasus commanded Saint Hierome who was then in Bethlehem with Paula
Eustochium, and some other Virgins, to abide there and to make a Liturgy for
the Churches, because he was well skilled in Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee, and Latin,
which he obediently did; appointing how much of the Psalms should be read each
day of the week; and ordering the reading of the Gospels and the Epistles out
of the Old and New Testament. [Where note, this is all that most superstitious
Ritualist could find that Saint Hierome did.] It was approved by Pope Damasus,
and made a rule. Gelasius (who was Pope, and lived 400), and Gregory the Great
(who lived 600 years after Christ) added Prayers and Hymns, the Lessons and the
Gospels; Ambrose, Gelasius and Gregory, says he, added the Gradualia, Tractus
Hallelujah, other Doctors of the Church added other parts. Thus far Durandus.

This seems to be much of the truth. Platina in the life of Damasus tells us,
that he first ordered Hierome's Translation to be read in the Churches. That
the Psalms should be read alternalim, part by the Minister, part by the people.
That Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, should be
repeated at the end of every Psalm; and the Confession at the beginning of the
celebration of the Mass was also ordered by him. Now when was this? It was
above 380 years after Christ. Nor have we yet any record of a Liturgy, but an
order by Hierome prescribed for reading the Scripture, and a Confession before
the Sacrament, made by Pope Damasus, and Gloria Pater by him added to every
Psalm. The next Pope to him was Siricius, (that learned man, who in great
passion urged, That Priests might not marry, because the Apostle Paul tells us.
Those that are in the flesh cannot please God.) The next to him was Anastasius,
he (says Platina) ordained the Priests standing up at the Gospel. Innocent the
first succeeded him, who spent his time about preserving the Faith against
Pelagius. I do not find that Sosemus the next Pope added much, but he sent
Faustenus and two Presbyters to the Council of Carthage to let them know they
ought to do nothing without the consent of the Bishop of Rome (says Platina).
Boniface after him did little: the next, which was Coelestinus, ordered David's
Psalms to be sung by turns before the Sacrifice, (so was the Lords Supper now
called). The next Successor Sixtus 1. his superstition evaporated in buildings,
and adorning them. I find not that the four next Successors, Leo, Simplicius,
Hilary or Faelix did any thing as to the Liturgy, nor indeed is much said of
any till we come to Gregory Anno 600; Pamelius says, he made a Lectionary,
directing the order for the Scripture to be read an Antiphonary; directing some
Responds, and an order for administering the Sacraments; but he could command no
further than his own Church: for it was five or six years after this before the
Pope of Rome was set up as Universal Bishop (a title which Gregory refused) by
Phocas, who killing his Master had usurped the Empire. Yet little was done for
almost 200 years after this; the continual stirs caused by the Lombards, giving
the Emperor no rest.

About the year 800, Charles the Great being Emperor, Pope Adrian moves him
to establish a Liturgy by a Civil Edict, and obtained it; and Durandus tells
us that Pope Gregory's Liturgy was it.

To which Charles the Great compelled all Ministers by threatenings and
punishments; and this is the first authority we have for any thing of this
nature: From whence we observe, That the first imposing of a Common Prayer Book
was in favor to Pope Adrian, and began with a persecution.

Nor after this was it glibly swallowed; for Mr. Fox amongst the Protestants,
and Durandus amongst the Papists, tell us a pleasant story of one Eugenius
complaining to Pope Adrian at the imposing of Gregory's Common Prayer Book, (it
should seem he liked some other, possibly that which went about for St.
Ambroses, better) but it seems the complaint ran so high, that some Fathers
just come from a Council met again to decide the matter, spent a night in
prayer (having first laid both the Common Prayer Books, that of Ambrose, and
that of Gregory on St. Peter's Altar) to desire of God by some sign to show
which of those Liturgies he would have universally used. In the morning they
went in and found that of St. Ambrose lying in his place, that of Gregory torn
in pieces, and scattered up and down. From whence they concluded that it was
the will of God that St. Ambrose his Office should lie still, and be used only
in his own Church, Gregory's should be scattered over the world. And thus the
Roman Mass Book (which is one point in which we differ from the Papists) was
confirmed by a miracle too.

He that asked the question, By what Commonprayer book the Fathers prayed that
night when both their books were locked up? Might have remembered that we have
heard of a Liturgy of St. Peter's, only one would think that if he had been
Bishop of Rome he might have been angry to have seen his Liturgy thrown out,
and one brought in patcht up by so many hundred years his Juniors, especially
having so much superstitious stuff in it, which he never owned. It may be it
was for this he caused it to be torn so that night, not enduring such trash
should lie upon his Altar; but then the Fathers were miserably out in their
judgments upon the cause. This is the truth as to the pretended antiquity of
Liturgies, and as to the imposition of them, by Canon Law from 600 to 800; by
Canon and Civil Laws 800 years after Christ.

. 15. In further proof of this, I shall but offer what the Reader may see in
Print, and what I know to be true.

It pleased his most Excellent Majesty to grant his Commission out under the
Broad Seal, dated 25 March, in the 13th year of his Reign, to 12 Bishops, and
to diverse others; requiring them amongst other things -- to advise upon, and
review the Book of Common Prayer; comparing the same with the most ancient
Liturgies which have been used in the Church in the primitive and purest times,
etc. The aforesaid Commissioners did so, and being divided into two Parties:
the party which in some things dissented, made this reply to that passage, (It
is to be found p. 11. of the Printed account of their Proceedings) Prop. 19.

As to that passage in his Majesty's Commission, wherein we are authorized and
required to compare the present Liturgy with the most ancient Liturgies which
have been used in the Church, in the purest, and most Primitive times: We have
in obedience to his Majesty's Commission, made enquiry, but cannot find any
Records of known credit, concerning any entire forms of Liturgies within the
first 300 years, which are confessed to be, as the most Primitive, so the
purest ages of the Church nor any Imposition of Liturgies for some hundreds of
years after. We find indeed some Liturgical - forms fathered upon St. Basil,
St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose; but we have not seen any Copies of them, but such
as give sufficient evidence to us, to conclude them either wholly spurious, or
so interpotlated, that we cannot make a judgment wha in them has any Primitive
authority.

This Proposition was given in with the rest, by these Divines, to the rest of
the Reverend Bishops and Doctors of Divinity, who made the opposite party; and
it was not only signed by Dr. Manton, Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Calamy, and many others,
but by the most Reverend and Learned Dr. Reynolds, at that time Bishop of
Norwich. Here (if ever) the proof should have been produced of Liturgies
generally used, and enjoined in the Church in the purest and most Primitive
times. Let us now see what Reply was made; the Reader shall find it in p. 75.
of the Printed account. It is the 16 Section of the opposite Commissioners
Reply in these words.

Sect. 16. That there were ancient Liturgies in the Church, is evident, St.
Chrysostoms, St. Basils, and others; and the Greeks tell us of St. James, much
elder than they; and we find not in all ages, whole Liturgies; yet it is
certain that there were such in eldest times, by those parts which are extant.
Sursum Corda, etc. Gloria Patri, etc. Benedicte, Hymnus, Cherubinus vere dignum
est and justum, etc. Dominus vobiscum, and cum spiritu tuo, with diverse others.
Though those that are extant may be interpolated, yet such things as are found
in them all, censistent to Catholic and Primitive Doctrine, may well be
presumed to have been from the first, especially since we find no Originals of
those Liturgies from ancient Councils. This is all they say.

What was replied to this, is too large to transcribe, the Reader may read it
in the aforementioned Printed Account of the Proceedings, p. 76, 77, 78, 79,
80, 81, 82, 83. But because every Reader may not have that book at hand, I
shall add a few words.

We know none will deny, but that particular men might even from Christ's time
have by them forms of Prayer, either of their own composure, or other men's; but
that from the beginning all Ministers in any Church were tied to them, that we
deny, nor can it be proved. It cannot be proved, that in the first 400 years
there were any entire forms of Liturgy; that the Ministers might before they
began to pray, say, Sursum Corda, Lift up your hearts; or Dominus Vobiscum, The
Lord be with you; and the people of course say, And with thy Spirit; are far
from proving, that there were any books directing them so to do. It is known
that the Doxology, Glory be to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, was not in any
general use for more than 300 years after Christ; In the whole Answer there is
nothing to prove, that for 500 years after Christ, there were any such forms as
all Ministers in any one Church or Province, were commanded to use, and to
perform their Ministry in prayer by, without varying from it. But the Reader
may at his leisure read much more in the Judicious Reply made by the
Commissioners on the other side. And if more could have been said upon this
argument, for the Antiquity of Liturgies, it is not probable it would have been
omitted by 12 Bishops, and so many learned men besides, several of which have
since that time been made Bishops, and some of them are so at this day.

. 16. Our Reverend Brother talks therefore at a great deal too high a rate,
when he tells us p. 110. of Forms of prayer embraced by the ancient Church,
whiles it retained its soundness, and before the corruptions and distempers of
the Church of Rome took place; if by embraced, he means used generally by all
Ministers, or commanded so to be used -- and of our opposing our judgment
against the concurrent judgment and practice of the Church of Christ, in so
many several Ages and Nations, and against the determination of God himself
under the Old Testament, and our blessed Savior under the New. These words are
not the words of Truth and Soberness, nor do they savor of that spirit of
Truth and Love which we always had thought did dwell in our Brother; For if he
means that the Ministers and Christians of all ages have thought it lawful and
expedient to draw up forms of Prayer, that by them the weaker might be taught
to pray; nay, that those Ministers or People who have not attained that gift,
may use them (still coveting and laboring for that gift) until they have
attained it; none will deny it. But all this is nothing to the purpose; I know
no Nonconformist will deny it, but say, Let them be in the Church, and for that
use still. The Nonconformists in their Debates upon his Majesty's Commission,
would never have tendered some Emendations of our Liturgy to the Bishops, much
less a new Liturgy or form, if they had been of this mind. But if our Reverend
Brother means that they have been in the Church required to be used by all the
Ministers in their public Ministration, in all ages, or in those ages before
the Corruptions, Idolatry and Superstition of the Papists crept in; there is
not the least proof made, either by our Reverend Brother, or any else that we
could ever see, of a word of truth in the assertion.

. 17. Let us now take a view of the State of the Church, from the year 500, to
the year 1500; and see whether the Church was then in such a State, that we may
conclude all lawful that was, during that time, admitted in practice. All
Protestants will deny it, especially from the year 700. But let us examine a
little.

In the 5th Century, they had got Images into Churches at Constanti^nople: The
Image of the Manger (which Chrysostom complains of) and of the Virgin Mary
(says Nicephorus): they had got Altars also ( Augustine, Chrysostom and
Salvian often mention them); they had also got in Candles; using holy Water in
Baptism; they had also got in Unction, and the custom of giving the Lords
Supper to children after Baptism; together with the wearing of a white garment
after that Sacrament. They in many places mingled water with the wine in the
Supper. Exorcisms were also crept in, as Augustine tells us, lib. 20. de Civ.
Dei. Lent also crept in, in this age, as we learn from Augustine, Cyril,
Chrysostom and Maximus. Nicephorus tells us also of abundance of Relics now
in fashion. Monks and Monasteries began in this age to be very thick. The
Doctrine of the Church was miserably invaded by Pelagius. They began in this
age to put only single persons into Ministry in the Latin Church, as we may
learn from the Council of Toledo, from Augustine and Leo. They had now also
brought in many new orders of Ministers, Acolecthi, Exorcists, Subdeacons, etc.

From the year 500, to the year 600, we shall yet find a stranger face of the
Church; the Doctrines of Freewill, Justification by works, Prayers to the dead,
Satisfactions for sin, Purgatory, etc. were in this age preached. In this age
came in the Dedications and Consecrations of Churches; the Consecration of
Wells for Baptism, the Oil and Chrysm; the Consecrations of Altars, Cups,
Corporals; the Mass, offerings for the dead; the seven Letanies, Rogations; the
seven Canonical hours; In short, almost the whole fardel of the Popish
Superstitions.

It is no great charge to any conscientious man, to say he differs in some
things from the Ruling part of the Church 5 or 600 years after Christ, and that
he judges it both inexpedient and unlawful for him to do what they did in 40
particulars. We must now take our leave of the Romish Synagouge, from whose
practices at this time, all Protestants in the world differ in a multitude of
things, both as to Doctrine, Worship and Discipline; we must go seek for the
true Church the next 1000 years in the Valleys of Piedmont, in France, in the
Provinces of Languedec, Provence and Dauphiny, amongst the Albigenses, the poor
people of Lions, and the Waldenses; indeed mostly in the Valleys of Piedmont,
where we shall find them coopt up in the time of Innocent the Third, after St.
Dominick had fired him to engage Simon Montford, with the French Kings leave,
to destroy some hundred thousands of them; those that escaped, went to their
Brethren in the Valleys of Piedmont; some of them, possibly, got into Bohemia,
amongst the Taborites, Piccards, etc. Nor could I ever meet with any that could
give me account of any Liturgies they used, or which were imposed on them, or
by them; nor do I remember that the Piccards, when they came to Luther about
1520, or the Deputies of those of Piedmont, when they came to advise with
Oecolampadius 1530; though they gave him an account of their Faith, Rites, and
Order, yet ever mentioned any thing of Liturgy; yet these two bodies of people
are the only visible Church we can give any account of, retaining any Degrees
of Purity in Doctrine, Worship or Discipline for a thousand years, which is
double the time that the Church kept any degrees of Purity after Christ. We
will freely grant, that after the year 600, the Mass Book was ( Canonically)
imposed by Pope Gregory, and within 200 years more by Charles the Great; and
except in the Valleys of Piedmont, and in Bohemia, the Priests generally both
used that, and after 1200, made their Maker, worshipped Images, prayed for the
Dead, and prayed to Saints, said their Service in Latin. But I hope it is no
prejudice to any Protestant, that he owns no relation to the Church that did so
for a thousand years together, and does so still. And now our Reverend Brother
sees what his concurrent testimony of the Church in all ages comes to, till the
year 1520, or thereabouts; for ten of those fifteen ages we hope our Reverend
Brother agrees with them no better than we; and if he will leave Rome, and
follow the Woman into the Wilderness, where God hid her for 1260 days, he will
find no Liturgy she carried with her, or commanded all her Ministers there to
use.

If our Brother will resolve to abide with the Red Dragon, that has seven
heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns, after he has with his tail drawn down
the third part of the Stars of Heaven; we mean no more than keep his eye only
upon the stately company at Rome, that after the year 600, called themselves
falsely the true Church, the only Catholic Church; we cannnot help it. We
believe, that all along God had his number of hidden ones, within the
challenged Jurisdiction of that Church; but for the visible governing part of
them, we leave them soon after Gregory's time, believing them far more like a
Synagogue of Satan, than a Church of God, whose practice should be any thing of
a law or president to us.

Thus far we have delivered our selves from the vulgar, and indeed no other
than a poor popular prejudice of a dissent from the concurrent judgment of the
Church in all ages. We consent with the five first ages, and for the ten
latter, we also agree with the pure Church of God in Bohemia, and the Valleys
of Piedmont for ought we could ever hear proved, relating to their practice.
For other Churches; no reformed Churches this day in the world, but thinks
twenty things unlawful, which both the Greek and Latin Churches in those ages
practiced.

. 17. We have but one prejudice more to deliver our selves from, and that is
the Judgment of the Reformed Churches since the Reformation. To try which, let
us but again repeat what we say.

We say Forms of Prayer are in themselves good and lawful, Good as means of
Instruction, and lawful to be so used; yea, and also for Devotion, until men
have obtained an ability without them fitly to express their minds to God in
Prayer; or when though they have that gift, yet, through the hand of God, in
some natural inability they are hindered from the use of it.

We say also, that where in a Nation or Church there is a multitude of
Ministers needful, so that it cannot be expected that a sufficient number
should be found so competently qualified as they should be; it is reasonable
there should be forms made, which Ministers may use, or not use, according as
they find their abilities.

But we say it appears to us unlawful for those to use them, to whom God has
given such an ability, for the reasons before mentioned. Now let us see how
much in this we in judgment differ from any Reformed Churches.

The first Reformed Churches were in Germany and Switzerland; whether those to
whom Zuinglius was the head, or the Lutherans, were the first, is hard to say:
They by degrees abolished the Mass: they would have done it at first if they
could. But alas! their people were newly come out of Popery, and they must
drive the pace they would go.

Let our Author, if he can, show us that any of the Churches adhering to
Zuinglius (whose Reformation was the purest) had any such form of Prayers, as
no Ministers might vary from, or was enjoined to use under a penalty. The Liber
Ritualis he speaks of in Bohemia, and the Agenda in the Palatinate, he will
find to be no more than a general Directory and Order, no prescription of words
and phrases. Let any one read Scultetus his Annals Rerun Evangelicarum, he
will find the Agenda of the Churches of Nordlingen, Walshat, Strasburgh,
Zurich; let him see if he can find any thing of a form of Prayer, excepting the
Lords Prayer; nor that imposed, but ordinarily used.

It is true, Luther and his party were a little laxer, and Luther made a
Mass Book, correcting much in the Popish Missal, but leaving in too much, to
the great offense of his Brethren, as may be learned from another place of
Scultetus. I know not but they might impose (for Luther, (though a great man)
yet was too much of a Dictator, and for every one to conform to his humors);
but yet I nowhere have read that he did command his Missal to be read by all
Ministers that adhered to him. And for what he did as to his composition of a
Missal, it was rather judged to cross Carolostadius, and others, and uphold his
notion of the Corporal presence of Christ, than for any other reason. Next to
this was the Reformation of Geneva and England. For Geneva, what Mr. Calvin's
judgment was, I cannot tell (I have not his Epistles by me to examine Mr. F's
Quotation); but however he was but one man, though a great one, it should seem
by the settlement there; if it were his judgment when he wrote to the
Protector, it is like it was altered, or his Colleagues were of another mind,
or he only approved it for a time, in regard of the State of the Church, being
newly crept out of Popery; for in the French Liturgy there is no tying up
Ministers to the use of their forms, though indeed they propose and commend
some forms; it says -- The Minister shall make such prayers as seem good to
him, fitting for the time and matter he is in his Sermon to treat of. In
another place -- The form is according to the discretion of the Minister. -- In
a third place, They use this, or some like it. In a fourth place, He prays
after this manner. What their practice is, I cannot tell.

The work of our Reformation was slow, so as Scotland got the start of us,
though we set out first. Dioclavius tells us, Alt. Damasc. p. 613.

We have indeed in our Church Agenda, and an Order to be observed in our
public Devotion, but none is tied either to the Prayers or Exhortations in our
Liturgy; they are proposed for Examples, etc. In all the 13 years (says he)
that I exercised the Ministry in that Church, I never, neither at Sacrament,
nor in other parts of my Religious Serivce, used either the Prayers or
Exhortations in our book, nor did many more; every one was at liberty; and it
seems child-like to me to do otherwise. In England we used onother method, more
conformable to the Saxon Reformation, than to that of Switzerland, Strasburgh,
France or Scotland, or what was afterward in Holland.

Our Country was wholly Popish, our Priests zealous for them; our common
people so ignorant, that their Priests might have persuaded them, that it was
their duty to eat Hay with an Horse; not an English Bible to be found in the
Nation, until the middle of King Henry 8. Reign. The Reformation went on under
the Conduct of a Popish King till Edward the 6th came to the Crown. Our
Reformers did not think fit at once to abolish all the Popish trash; Though
therefore they first turned much of the Popish Mass Book into English, leaving
out much Idolatrous and Superstitious stuff, yet they left in it too much,
which caused a second Common Prayer Book to be made in the time of Edward the
6. though his whole Reign was but seven years; then came Queen Mary, and
destroyed all; and the zealous Protestants went out of the Nation, fixing some
at Frankfort, some at Basil, etc. At Frankfort the Ministers that first fixed
there, used no prescribed forms in their public worship, till at length Dr.
Cox came amongst them with the Common Prayer book, made in Edw. 6. time, which
made that woeful stir, of which we have an account in the book called, the
Troubles of Frankfort. In short, Dr. Cox got the Magistrate on his side, and
forced the rest away to Geneva, and other places. When Queen Elizabeth came to
the Throne, all know how great a man Dr. Cox proved. By his means, and some of
his stamp, the Common Prayer Book was again revised, and published; all
Ministers enjoined to use it: but what a dissent was from it, both all her
Reign, and after that, all King James his Reign, is too sad a story to repeat.
Whereas had it pleased God so to have moderated the spirits of our Bishops in
the beginning of her Reign, that they had only composed a Liturgy, and left
Ministers to a liberty (as in all other Reformed Churches it is) all had been
quiet. It is very like that the most of the Ministers at that time being very
little practiced in Praying, or in Preaching, would have used, and been
studying to pray without it; and long ere this we might have had flourishing
Church shining in every corner with a Ministry that needed no book to have told
them the words and syllables they must put up their prayers to God in. When, on
the other side, these contests about this thing have carried some few into
great extremes on both sides. Some on one side thinking that there is no true
Prayer, but by the Liturgy, at which they are very devout; but studying to show
all manner of slight and irreverence at other prayers (believing them no true
worship of God), no whole-faced Son of the Church must use any prayer in his
family; no Lady or Gentlewoman any other prayer in her Closet, but this
Common Prayer. It was a great objection against a person of great Honor and
Piety, appearing for Knight of the Shire in his County, though he constantly
attended public prayers, and received the Sacrament as constantly, that he
used fanatic Prayers in his family, that is, his Chaplain there prayed not by
the public forms at all times. This madness (not to say profaneness) by the
way is to us a sufficient argument against our use of any set public forms in
our Devotion; we ought not to nurse up people in these most erroneous
conceptions, to speak no worse of them. If people will adore humane
constitutions at this rate, they must be to us Nehushtan. On the other side,
this madness has run some to that excess, that they will allow no forms to be
lawful of any use, in any time, for any persons; their children must not learn
the Lords Prayer, nor a form of Catechism; none must hear a form, etc. But the
number of these is very small, and their judgment is as invaluable: Forms of
prayer are lawful, useful, many a good man learns to pray by a form, as
Scholars learn to write by their Masters first guidance of them, and holding
their hand: They are useful and lawful for Devotion, for persons that have not
an ability, yea for Ministers in that case. The people always pray by the form
of him that ministers. The Minister does well, if he can do no better; he
conducts the people that they may in faith say, Amen; he guides himself. But if
he have an ability otherwise to do, we cannot think he does his duty; and we
are sure every Minister should have an ability from himself both to pray and
preach. How hard it is to keep out of extremes! I challenge any to show me how
our judgment thus stated and opened, dissents from the Revelation of the Will
of God in Scripture, or of any valuable persons in the Church of God in any age.

. 18. It is an easy thing for men to talk of all the Fathers, and the Church
in all ages; but it is an hard thing for those that talk at this rate, to prove
what they say in any tolerable measure. A man is right in his own cause, until
his neighbor comes and searches him out. When men have worn out their
tongues and pens in writing and speaking vain words, they will be found to have
spoken (...), the words of men puffed up with a desire to prove some unproveable
thing, or with an opinion. We will not say our opinion is infallible, but we
will in sincerity say, it is what we cannot dispossess our selves of, by any
ratiocination within our selves, or with others. Some will say we have a
liberty to use our gifts before Sermons, in our Families, in our Closets; the
Vanity of that is showed: But is not the Administration of the Sacraments a
great piece of our Ministry? what liberty is left us as to that? or by what
rule are we restrained in any part of our Ministry? or how long shall we have
it in any, allowing this principle? We owe no such Idolatrous Reverence to any
Father, or Person, or Church, as to take their judgment against the plainer
letter, or Reason of Scripture, this were to set up one higher than the
highest; no, nor to practice any thing upon the recommendation of men, or in
obedience to them contrary to what our consciences tell us is the Will of God
in Scripture. This were not to set up man above God possibly, but above Gods
Deputy in our souls. All the Reverence we can owe to man in that cause, is to
examine our opinion to the utmost, again and again, to compare things spiritual
with things spiritual: But if after all our Consciences say, It is not lawful
to the utmost we can discern, it is not lawful: Though as to the reality of the
truth of the notion, it is not all one; yet as to our practice, it must be all
one; as if God said from Heaven, It is not lawful for you. But in the present
case, there is no other prejudice appears against us from the judgment of the
Church in former ages, than what was against the whole Protestant Religion
objected by Harding. [It is not probable that God would leave his Church in
Errors a thousand years]. We confess the judgment of what the Papist calls the
Church for a thousand years, is in a great measure against us. But so it was
against many points of the Protestant Religion. Bishop Jewel durst not make
his challenge for more than the first 500 years to them, to show any one point
of their new Creed maintained in. We make the like challenge as to this point
of the lawfulness of forms of prayer to be universally used by Ministers, or
imposed upon them. It certainly robs God of the most natural, proper Calves
of our lips, and makes our lips but Ministers to offer up others sacrifices,
when we have a male in our own flock.

. 20. I shall conclude with the Reformed Church in Holland; I have not seen
their Agenda, but I am assured by a Reverend Divine, Pastor of one of those
Churches in England, that they are not so tied up, but that they have a liberty
in all parts of their public worship, to use their own prayers; and do
accordingly use it. And this I take to be enough to have spoken on this
Argument, until I hear what will be said against any thing here spoken.

WHen I had finished this discourse, I had an intimation given me of something
spoken upon this Argument by one Mr. Pelling, Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of
Somerset, in a book called The good old way. Though I was pretty well
satisfied, that I could find in it nothing new, but words and confidence; yet
for the satisfaction both of my self and my friend, I procured the book in all
haste, and read it with as much greediness, though with no great expectations,
as thinking it a barren subject, out of which little Reason would grow, but
what we before had reapt, and proved nothing but fallacy and falsehood, and for
which little varnish of authority could be procured, but what we had washed off
with a cloth wetted in a very small degree of learning. I read it from the
first to the last line upon this Theme.

I at first observed, that all which he pretended to, was, That forms have been
allowed and used, which may be granted, without the least damage to our cause,
who do not argue all forms unlawful, no nor all forms of prayer unlawful, no
nor the use of forms of prayer unlawful; nor the use of all forms of prayer in
praying unlawful; but the use of forms of prayer for all men, ordinarily, and
that in public solemn prayer. To prove which, he has not said a word; but yet
seeing he will not speak to what he should (if he intended to speak any thing
to the purpose) let us consider what he has spoken to his own purpose.

He will prove he says, p. 49. That set-forms of Divine Service were of use
amongst the Jews. 2. That set forms of Divine Service were of use also amongst
the Primitive Christians. 3. That after our blessed Lords ascension, in that
Interval betwixt the burial of the Synagogue, and the settling of the Christian
Church, set-forms of Divine Service were allowed also, even by the holy
Apostles. Three great undertakings. -- Et quae non viribus istis -- convenient.
But if they were all proved, would no more prove, That it is lawful for all men
ordinarily to perform their Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed forms
of others, than it would prove, that it were lawful, or not lawful, for all
particular men and women, to marry, or not to marry, because marriage was
lawful amongst the Jews, and amongst the Primitive Christians, and in the
interval he talks of; or that it was not lawful for some persons to marry in
all those periods; both which Propositions are true. But let us see how he
proves what he propounds to prove, be it what it will.

And here we might have expected a Scriptural proof for the first and second of
his periods, and the third too (at least the greater part of it) falls within
the time, of which the holy Scripture gives us an account. But alas! of this
we have very little, and what we have of another nature is Apocryphal, and
proves nothing but to such credulous souls as will believe any thing which they
read in any trifling Author.

1. As to his first Period, from the beginning of the world till Christ's time,
I admire at the confidence of the Author, to urge the Jewish worship as a
pattern to Christians, when he knows that Worship and Discipline were the two
things which Christ came to alter; and although he retained Prayer and Praise
(parts of natural worship) and Exhortations, which were all used amongst the
Jews, yet we find no forms of words in Prayer used by the Jews, the retaining
of which he directed: Nor did he use or retain instruments of Music in the
worship of God; nor did the Primitive Christians, for Justin Martyr, Qu. and
Resp. 107. tells us, That they looked upon the use of music as a childish
service of God; and therefore used it not, only plain singing.

2. It lies upon him to prove, that no Priest, or Levite in the Jewish Church,
might use any forms of prayer, or blessing, but those he mentions in their
ordinary public Service; and when he has done that, we will take the same
argument, and prove, That neither the Disciples did, nor any Christians ought
to use any Prayer but the Lords Prayer; because Christ has said, When you
pray, say, or pray after this manner.

3. Admit they did not; this will only prove, either that we must use no other,
or that we may use forms of prayer directed by God himself, or by his holy
Prophets, or other Penmen of Scripture. But it will not prove, that all men
either must use, or may use forms of prayer never prescribed by God, nor by any
men to whom God had given authority to make forms of prayer or praise for his
Church. Surely it is no argument. If we must, or may use a form of prayer or
praise directed by God, or Christ, by David, Asaph, Moses, etc. then we must,
or may use forms of prayer made by Pope Gregory, Pope Boniface, or by St.
Basil, or Chrysostom; and it is impossible but men of learning must see the
inconclusiveness of this Argument, only they must say something, and ad populum
phateras, any thing will serve those that understand not. None that I have met
with will say, that we must in praying, or blessing, use the forms of prayer
and blessing used in Scripture, and no other. So then they only say we may use
them. It is granted, and what wonder is it, if we may use such forms of words
in prayer, as are directed by Christ, and those servants of his whom he
appointed to write the Holy Scriptures for us, which is the rule of all our
Actions, and contain all that we are to believe, to pray for, and to do; though
we judge it yet sinful for all Ministers to tie themselves to forms of prayers
made by men that could never pretend to such an authority to guide the Church
as to what is to be believed, prayed for, or done, but only to rule it, by
seeing the Laws and Ordinances which Christ and his Apostles have given, put in
execution; especially considering, that neither Christ, nor his Apostles, whose
proper offices it was to direct all things of lawful and necessary use in the
Church, ever did any such thing. But after this, Pope Gregory comes up, and he
(forsooth) thinks it fit to enjoin such a thing: Or admit it were Basil or
Chrysostom 200 years before him (which we do not believe), the case is the
same, though not so scandalous. I shall have done with what our Author says,
as to his first period; only minding him, this is shooting at rovers, and will
never hit any mark but that which is in very ignorant and childish persons
heads: It is an arrogating the same power for the Governors of Churches since
Christ's and the Apostles times, to ordain in matters of Worship, which they
had; which is the same argument the Papists bring for their unwritten
Traditions. If I had a mind to discover men's infirmities, I could take notice
of many mistakes of our Author in this Paragraph, but this is not my business.

2. I proceed to his second Period; where he says, That prescript forms of
worship have been established for above these 1200 years last past, no learned
man can deny; he delivers himself in this bold assertion, in safe terms,
Prescript forms of worship: truly that I will not deny. I believe that Christ
and his Apostles ordained, that men should worship God by Prayers, Praises,
Exhortations, and administering the Sacraments; this form of worship, yea, and
that they should Baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
(and were not these forms of worship?) these have been established 1600 years,
he means more, though he either has not worded it well, or had a mind to speak
safely, though he did but deceive his Reader, and say nothing to the purpose.
If he means, That forms of words to be ordinarily used by all Ministers
ordinarily in their public Prayers, were established in the Church, that is,
generally used, or required to be used in the universal Church, or any
considerable part of it these 1200 years, though I for once run the hazard of
my repute for learning with this great Dictator, I shall deny it, yea and
further challenge him and all his friends to prove any such thing before Six
hundred years after Christ, when Popery came in with a full wind and tide. Let
us hear his proof to the contrary of this assertion. He tells us,

That it is now 1312 years since the Council at Laodicea; and then it was
decreed, that the Choristers should sing by book, and that the same prayers
should serve for noon, and for Eveningservice, for every Assembly* nor should
any Prayers be read, but what were received and established, having been
delivered to them by their fore fathers.

Here are three things asserted, 1. That this Council of Laodicea was held in
the year 368. 2. That they made such a Canon. 3. That this is the sense of that
Canon, That all Ministers should use forms of prayer composed by others.

The Scripture tells us in St. John's time, (which was more than two hundred
years before this) the Church of Laodicea was a very lukewarm Church, neither
hot, nor cold, ready to be spued out of Gods mouth, wretched, miserable, poor,
blind, naked, and proud, and ignorant, knowing not her own corruptions, Rev. 3.
15, 16, 17. If such a Church as this did make such a Canon (which concerned
only their own Province) it has nothing in it, either of a just pattern to
imitate, or of a just proof. Chytreus tells us, that there was a Council held
Anno 364; but there is not the least mention of it in the Synodicon, published
by Dr. Pappus out of a M. S. wrote before the year 921. which yet gives us an
account of all Synods and Councils held from the Apostles time, to the 8th
Council held upon the union of Photius and Pope John. Caranza has it, with 59
Canons it should make; He says there were but 22 Bishops at it, of which the
18 Canon Caranza gives thus: De eo quod semper supplicationes Orationum ad
horam novam and vesperam oportet celebrari.

That prayers should be made both at 9 in the morning and evening; but whether
conceived prayers, or by a form, it says not; how Balsamon reports it, I
cannot tell; but it is more than I know, if Caranza is not to be believed as
soon as Balsamon, and the Synodicon published by Dr. Pappas before them both.
Balsamon dyed 1203, his Works came not out till long after, when the Papists
published them, and all Protestants know there is no great credit to be given
to their Editions of any ancient Authors.

The upshot then is this.

1. It is very uncertain whether there were ever such a Council yea or no.

2. If there were, there were but 22 men at it, and it concerned only a part of
Phrygia.

3 It was a Church corrupt enough, and indeed he that reads the pretended
Canons, will find it.

4. This Council, according to Caranza, only decreed Prayers morning and
evening, but did not prescribe words.

5. Balsamon speaks any thing which the late Papists had a mind to, who made
him speak according to the sense of their Father Gregory.

6. However this was 368 years after Christ, when the Church had as to worship
lost her Purity.

His next proof is the Council of Carthage, which he says was 1284 years ago,
that made a Canon, That if any man did compose any prayers, he should not
presume to use them, till he had consulted the most knowing men in the Church.

The intent of which decree (he says) was, That none should have the liberty
to use what forms of prayer he pleased, but that such only should be said, as
had been ratified by due authority and ancient custom.

I do not like dictating. How does this Author know that this Canon was made by
a Council at Carthage 1284 years ago? First, if it were so, it was 396 years
after Christ's time, when as I said before, the Church was corrupted enough in
Rituals. But what will he say if that Council never made any such Canon? I can
show him a good Author to prove it, that is Justellus, who published the
African-Code. In his Preface to it, p. 35. he speaks thus:

Whereas they say, that there was a third Council held at Carthage, when
Caesarius and Atticus were Consuls; I the less refuse it, because Zonaras and
Balsamo attest it, and the Africane Collection mentions it; but they are
mistaken who ascribe 50 Canons to it, there are but 21 which were made by it,
all the rest were made 22 years after, in the time of Pope Boniface, in the
year 419: and this is proved by the words of the 47 Canon; for Boniface was not
Pope when Caesarius and Atticus were Consuls, but was ordained 418 when
Honorius and Theodosius was Consuls.

Now this was Canon 23; so as it was not made before the year 419. But as to
what this Canon says, it is as material, and nothing to this Authors purpose:
but for that I refer my Reader to what I have before said in answer to Mr.
Falconer.

His next proof is from the Canon of the Council of Milevis; as to which, I
have fully spoken before, and only shall add this: That this pretended Canon is
not to be found in the African-Code, published by Justellus, where it ought to
have been, if any such had been made, and not been a temporary constitution.
But for a fuller answer, I refer my Reader to what is before said, having
nothing to add to it. He goes on, and says, It was one great reason, amongst
many others, why public Liturgies were compiled of old, that they might be
Repositories of sound Doctrine, and Preservatives of the Catholic Faith. --
These were Antidotes to keep Christians from being poisoned with erroneous and
rotten Principles, as our English Liturgy is at this day an excellent Amulet
against the infection from Papists, Socinians, Pelagians, and other modern
seducers, and perhaps this is the Grand reason why the Belweathers of faction
hate our Common Prayer Book, etc. As is the man, so is his truth, so is his
spirit. The Papists have had Liturges these 1000 years, by this argument, they
are the most orthodox people; and it would be enquired in England at this day,
whether there be more Socinians, Pelagians and Papists amongst those that adore
the Liturgy, or amongst those who have no kindness for that or any other. Let
but the understanding Reader judge of all the rest he says, by the truth of
this.

In the next place he says, it cannot be denied but Liturgies were in use in
St. Basils and St. Chrysostomes time generally, who were about 380 years after
Christ: and why cannot this be denied? because he says Liturgies are extant
under their names. This learned argument will prove that there were also
Liturgies in St. Marks, St. Peter's, St. James, and St. Andrews time, for there
are Liturgies out also under their names; yet this is all this Author has to
say why no body should deny what he says, as if there were not 100 books
extant under the names of the Ancients, which not only Rivet and Cocus amongst
the Protestants, but Possevine, Sixtus Senensis, Erasmus and Bellarmine amongst
the Papists have denied to be theirs, men all as learned as our Author.

I have before showed that the Liturgies going under their names, could not be
theirs. The noble and learned Lord of Mornay (whom our Author sometimes speaks
highly of), l. 1. de missa, cap. 6. says, Liturgies has omnes falsi postulo. I
charge all these Liturgies as false. In both of them, as was said before, is
the hymn (...) (which came 200 years after into the Church); in both,
Confessors are mentioned, whose names were not known of many years after); in
both, the Virgin Mary is called (...), a term not admitted in common use till
after the Council at Ephesus, 436. In both of them there is Incensing. Many
other reasons the Reader may find in Morney, in the Chapter before quoted, etc.
But faith our Author,

Though we do not think that these are the very same which they used, because
later ages have defaced them, and foisted many heterogeneous things into them,
yet it is Ridiculous to imagine that St. Basil and St. Chrysostom did not
compile any, or that nothing of these was of their composing.

And what if they did compile some? does it therefore follow, that they
required all Ministers in their Diocesses to use them? But the truth is, this
is a ridiculous argument to prove they compiled any, because some go under
their names; and a ridiculous answer to men, proving the forgery of those
pretended Liturgies from the use of terms not known in their Ages, of rites
mentioned in them, which confessedly came not in of hundreds of years after
they were dead; and of Prayers found in them for a Pope and an Emperor that
lived 500 years after they were dead: I say it will appear, to answer all this,
a most silly and ridiculous trifling, to tell us, It is true, some things are
foisted in since, but it is manifest they made Liturgies, and some parts of
those Liturgies. How is it manifest?

Good Reader, observe what possibility of proof there is, that these men made
no such Liturgies; if this will not, it lies upon them to prove they did make
some: They produce Copies, diverse Copies; we peruse them, and find, 1. That no
two of them agree each with other. 2. That the Doctrine in the Copies, is
contrary to the Doctrine of those times. 3. That there is in them Prayers for
men that lived 500 years after they were dead. 4. That there are in them many
rites and modes of worship, not known of hundreds of years after they were both
dead. But yet, says our Author, it is. Ridiculous to think these Fathers did
not make Liturgies, or that nothing of these was of their composing; yea it is
ridiculous to assert any thing in them was of their composing, for what is
there to prove it? Those parts which the Papists, and some Protestants say, are
foisted in, come to us upon the same Tradition that the other parts do. What
one thing is there in any of these Liturgies, which none but Basil or
Chrysostom could be the Author of? If others might be the Authors, and that
500 years after, how does it appear that Basil or Chrysostom must? we are sure
they were no Authors of a great part; what but a foolish fancy can make us
believe they were the Authors of any part of them. But the truth is, this is
the Papists answer. My Lord of Morney quotes Espenceus de missa privata, p. 220.

It was (says the Jesuit) Leo Thuscus that wrote the Scholion of the Priests
communicating alone, he lived in the year 1170, and was Secretary to Emanuel
the Great, Emperor, and Interpreter to Trithemius -- (Did not he make the
whole Liturgy?) and had respect rather to his own times than Chrysostomes? --
Which (says he) I mind you of, not that I think that Missal unworthy of
Chrysostom, or the Greek Church, or do otherwise suspect it, but think it
began and composed by a most holy man, and enlarged by putting in many things,
according to the variety of times.

As much might be said for the Antiquity of the Alcoran, in which are many
things of Primitive truth, though Mahomet has put in a world of fooleries and
wickedness; and doubtless the whole is of no Primitive authority, though there
be much Primitive truth in it.

From hence our Author rises higher, to tell us of St. James, and St. Marks
Liturgies, and Clements Constitutions; for the two first, I have said enough
before. For Clement, choose Reader whether thou will believe the D. of Somersets
Chaplain, or Eusebius and Hierome, who lived above 400 years after Christ, and
knew of no such book as Clements Constitutions; see Eusebius, l. 3. cap. 32.
See also what Morney says of this, l. 1. de missa, p. 46. cap. 2. He that will
believe all in Bibliotheca patrum, has more faith than I have, or any
Protestant can have. But he will at last come to authentic Testimonies, that
will satisfy any indifferent man, p. 56. if compared with the Liturgies (that
is, with the forgeries) aforementioned, that such and such forms were used by
Christians in the first ages; and so that in all probability they were directed
by the Apostles, or Apostolical men. Used is not enough, if he could prove it;
they must be universally used, or required to be universally used. But let us
hear what proof he has.

Cyprian speaks of solemn Offices [solemnibus adimpletis] that must be
understood of customary forms of Prayer -- and why? -- because he elsewhere
has sursum corda, Lift up your hearts. -- We lift them to the Lord. -- In
another place he says -- they prayed for several things continually and
earnestly; and these he says, no doubt, were charitable forms, used in Morning
and Evening-Service. Origin says they used (...), appointed Prayers; Origin
quotes a form of three lines. -- Questionless this was in the Alexandirian
Liturgy Tertullian mentions, Dominica solemnia, and tells us of four parts of
it, Reading the Scripture, Singing of Psalms, Prayers and Adlocutions. These he
will have to be Biddings of Prayer; the Deacons saying, Let us pray; then
telling them what they should pray for. So then, Preaching was no part of the
Sabbathdays Service, which I should rather understand by Allocutiones,
considering that there is a book called Dies Dominica, so abundantly proves it,
and we have such plentiful proof of it from Chrysostom, Justin Martyr, etc.

But a thing never thought on by Christ or his Apostles, Bidding of Prayer,
that (forsooth) must be made one of the parts of the Sabbathservice. Most
ridiculous!

But in all this, good Reader, consider what little of proof there is, besides
the Authors Questionless, and without doubt. Cyprian speaks of solemn things
[Offices he puts in], and are there no solemn things but Prayers made by forms?
He has sursum corda. And do not those who pray by no forms, ordinarily begin
with, Let us lift up our hearts to God.

Cyprian says they pray continually and earnestly, and might they not do so
without a book? Origin says they used Prayers appointed; but does he say the
words they should use in those prayers were also set and appointed them? Origin
recites a form of three lines, and he might for ought we know, or say to the
contrary, both make it and use it: but is it proved that the Church generally
used that form? His interpretation of the Petitions mentioned by Tertullian as
part of the solemn Service of the Sabbath, to be Collects, is a new whimsi of
our Authors, and I think his Exposition of Tertullians sine Monitore is as new
and precacious; for, Tertullian's preces delegatae, they signified all the
prayers which the Congregation put up to God, by their Ministers delegated and
instructed to speak to God in the name of all the people; who upon this
account, by Greg. Naz. is said to have had (...), a kind of Mediatorship
between God and man, he being the peoples mouth unto God: There was then in the
Church-Meetings but one voice heard, (...), says Chrysostom, Homil. 36. in 1
Cor. That is, There ought never to be but one voice in the Church. He that
reads, reads alone, and the Bishop (says he) is in the mean time silent.
He that sings, sings alone; and when all sing together, it is all as one voice,
etc. Our Author, in the last place, spends much Paper upon a quotation from
Justin Martyr. It is too long to transcribe. p. 62. he comes to his Collections
from it.

1. He says the Catechumeni were taught to pray, the congregation of believers
praying with them; he would have them taught to pray by the Deacons,
admonishing them to pray. Admonishing whom? did they think we admonish those
not admitted yet into Church, to pray in the solemn Assembly of the Believers?
Surely the latter; and they told them the general matter of Prayer. This
certainly concludes they had no stated forms of words which they used, and
might use no other. So fair a proof is this.

2. In the next place he collecteth, that the Catechumeni did in a form make
confession of their faith. What is this to the purpose?

3. In the third place he gathers from Justin Martyr, that the Catechumeni were
brought from the water to the congregatiou; and Sermon ended, they went jointly
to prayer. So then they had a Sermon, and prayers after it; but how does it
appear this was by a form of words from which they might not vary?
Questionless, says our Author: it is pretty that he should think his
Questionless should make a good argument. But he has found the form in
Clements Constitutions, a book not heard of 300 years after Clements death, out
of what hole soever it is now come. All he says else, is no more to the
purpose, than that Prayers being ended, they saluted one another with an holy
kiss, they received the Sacrament, and prayed again, and praised God in a
copious and large manner (by their Minister). And these prayers being
concluded, the people jointly cried out, Amen. What proof there is for forms of
prayer, comes out of the forged Constitutions of Clement, and this Authors
strong fancy, not out of Justin Martyr: and our Author p. 62. confesses Justin
Martyr tells us no such things; but yet he says, They did it, (...). The Cyril
he talks of as so ancient, was an Author lived near 500 years after Christ, and
was not like to know so exactly what was done in Justin Martyrs time. Any
writer now would be looked on to give a very uncertain account of what was done
in England Anno 1200. nor would any give much credit to what he should write.

It is a great vanity men have, when they are eager of a thing, to fancy all
they meet with to look that way, if they do but see a word, or a letter or two
of that nature. I knew a Dignitary of our Church, who was strongly conceited
against the Morality of the Sabbath, and therefore was engaged to put another
sense upon the fourth Commandment, or to leave us but Nine Moral Precepts in
the Decalogue. He at last finds in Origin and Epiphanius, a place or two where
Christ was called, The great Sabbath; and presently writes a book about a new
(...), mightily triumphing, That he had found out Gospel in the midst of the
law. The sense of that Commandment was nothing else, but remember to sanctify
the Name of Jesus Christ. When, alas, the old Fathers meant no more, than that
Christ in whom alone is rest for our souls, was typified by the holy day of
rest appointed by the law; and though Christ be our rest, our great rest, yet
he is not a day of rest, which is that which the Commandment only speaks of.
Just so I observe it is in this Controversy.

Some men are so mightily zealous for stated and universally imposed forms of
prayer; that wherever in any of the Ancients they meet with the words
Liturgy, Offices, Common Prayers, Prayers, solemn Services; they presently
think they have a full proof for forms of prayer, composed by others to be used
by all Ministers. When as, alas, there is nothing more weak and ridiculous, and
these arguments speak nothing of reason, but only a fancy disturbed by
unreasonable passion.

A Liturgy signifies nothing but an order of Ministration in holy things, which
may be without one form of prayer, only directing the time, or times when the
Ministers shall pray. Offices, in the ancients, signifies no more than Duties:
The approbation of the term Offices, to forms of prayer to be used at Burials
Christnings, etc. is but a very modern Popish Device to suggest to silly souls,
that Ministers did not do their duties, if they did not use their Missals and
Rituals, etc. and surely Prayers and solemn Services may be without forms, and
so may Common prayers too.

I am the more confirmed in this by what our Author says next, wherein he
undertakes a thing beyond all men* viz. to prove, That in the Apostles times,
and in the interval betwixt the burial of the Jewish Synagogue, and the setting
up of the Christian Church set-forms of Divine Service (he should have said of
Prayers for all Ministers) were allowed also.

Aude aliquid brevibus gyni and carcere dignum; Si vis esse aliquis -- I know
none has undertaken this, neither Dr. Hammond nor Mr. Faulconer; this Notion
is but a Probationer to the world. Let us examine what Arguments he has. 1.
His first proof is from the Apostles going to the Temple to worship and pray,
Acts 2. 46. Acts 3. 2. and (2.) the Apostles justifying themselves, Acts 25. 8.
24. 12. 28. 17. that they had nothing against the temple, or the law: and 3.
the Jews tenaciousness of their Rituals: all which are proved well enough, p.
63, 64. But how will our Author prove that the Jewish Ministers in their
Temple-service used any prescribed forms of prayer which others had made for
them, and enjoined them, who were no inspired Prophets, or Penmen of holy Writ?
He has not yet proved this.

Or how will he prove that the Apostles themselves in the Temples or Synagogues
ministered at any time by such forms: we will prove they sometimes preached
there, but it lies upon our Author to prove they read prayers, for that we find
not; and we grant they may hear prayers that are forms, if the matter be good.
It is a sign of an ill cause, or a weak Disputant, to pack on proof where none
needed, but bring none where all the pinch and stress lay. Our Author here
takes it for granted, what is most notoriously false, That the Apostles
constantly attended the Jewish Service both in the Temple and Synagognes, only
met together in other places, for the Sacrament, and such service as they could
not join with the Jews in; but that is not to our purpose, nor yet to examine
how well by his Dial he has rectified the Sun, translating (...), Acts 2. 46.
in the house, not from house to house, nor at home (as Beza).

But he is not satisfied that in the Christian Assemblies, in the Apostles
times there were no manner of forms. Who says there were not? There was a form
of sound Doctrine (which the Apostle tells us of), there were Psalms, Hymns,
and spiritual Songs in forms, they are the three titles of David's Psalms; we
have nothing to do with any thing but forms of prayer, made by some particular
Ministers, or Church Officers, to be used by all other Ministers.

He comes a little to the point, p. 67. His first pretended proof, is what
diverse have touched upon before him, 1 Timothy 2. 12. we grant him from that Text,

1. That the several sorts of prayers are there mentioned. 2. That these
several duties were to be done, prayers of these several sorts to be made (for
offices observed, that term seems to suggest something else not in the Text).
But whereas he goes on, and tells us in the third place, p 68. That it is as
clear, that the whole Church of Christ has conceived, and taken it for granted
in all ages, that the Apostle in this place did intend to fix a rule of
Devotion, and did order a Platform and Model to be observed in all public
Services, and especially at the celebration of the holy Communion; if he means
a platform of words and phrases not to be varied from; It is so far from being
clear, that no proof can be brought of it, nor do (as himself confesses) the
Apostles words enforce any such belief, nor his following quotations out of
Chrysostom, Ambrose, or Augustine prove the least of it. All rests upon the
practice of the Church since, for which indeed much may be said, after 600
years after Christ, but nothing of any weight or moment before that time. And
for the Churches judgment in Pope Gregory's time as to Rituals, it is a very
ill proof of what was done in the Apostles time in all Protestants judgments.

Our Author goes on still, and will not say it is demonstrable; but he tells us
it seems very probable, that the Apostles themselves did in their ordinary
Ministrations observe forms of prayer, notwithstanding those extraordinary
assistances of the spirit which they were blessed with* Strange! the Apostles!
what men that received not their Ministry of men, nor by men, but immediately
from Christ (then he must give them their forms)! men that has those
extraordinary effusions of the spirit! Surely there is (...) some Divine thing
in prescribed forms; or those that speak thus, must use the same Art with us,
to persuade us to their Lure, that Romulus used with his silly Romans; who to
persuade them to accept his Laws, made them believe that he had them from the
Goddess Ageria; Well, but our Author does not believe they used a book, (we
thank him for that (the Parchments that St. Paul left at Troas, then shall not
rise up in judgment against us, though his Cloak may), nor does he think they
tied themselves to words, (but this they must, if they used forms of words);
all that he will assert, that they used a certain method, and the matter and
substance of their ordinary services, was for the most part the same. We thank
him for nothing; then Nonconformists use forms of prayer, as well as
Conformists; we shall never need examine his reasons, when we grant the thing;
for if they be strong, it is but to confirm what none doubts; if weak, it
would be but to expose an Author, whose book seems to be calculated for his
reputation.

Thus far I have examined all the pretended proof from Antiquity, rather ex
abundanti, and to satisfy some peoples curiosity, than for any other reason.
And in the close let me give my Reader a caution against this kind of arguing,
which I doubt not but will appear very reasonable.

1. The Reader must know, that Printing has not been known in the world yet
200 years; before that time, all was in Manuscripts.

2. The most of the Manuscripts were in Papists hands* and from them it is that
the Copies came which were printed; indeed, the Bible was in the Jews hands (as
to the Old Testament) we were infinitely acurate in preserving the purity of
it, keeping account both of the numbers of lines in pages, and how often the
same letter was used in each line; the New Testament was in the hands of the
Greek Churches as well as the Papists, so that they could not well deprave that.

3. That as the Church was debauching in some rituals before 300 years after
Christ was expired; so ever since 600 it has been debauched, much in Doctrine,
more in matters of Worship, Rites, Ceremonies and Government.

4. That from the year 600, to 1516, the generality of all ancient Manuscripts
being in their hands, and that Church all along growing worse and worse, more
sottishly idolatrous, superstitious and ignorant (as to the generality of their
Ministers), they made it their business to put out, and put in to the Writings
of the ancients what they pleased, to forge Writings to be theirs, which were
not so, and suppress others that were so, which is evident from the Writings of
Papists, as well as Protestants. Sixtus Senensis, Possevine, Bellarmine, were
all Papists; so was Erasmus. Rivet and Cocus were Protestants, they have all
books extant to teach us to distinguish betwixt the true Writings of the
Ancients, and those pretended to be theirs, but not so. And there is no doubt,
but it was through mere carelessness, if they left a word or line in the
ancients, against any point of Doctrine, any way of Worship, any Rite or
Ceremony, in credit at Rome, or used in their Church.

5. From them came Justin Martyr, Ignatius, Clement, Tertullian, Ambrose,
Augustine; in short, all the Writings of the Fathers we have, (except possibly
some two or three of the Greek Fathers); yet the most famous and common
Editions of them, are all Popish, and come out to us with their puttings out,
and puttings in what they pleased.

6. From hence will appear, what little credit is to be given to any thing, in
any of the books published under their names, any further than it is agreeable
with the Scripture, and bottomed there.

7. Allow me the Editions of the Fathers and Councils, which the Papists have
let us have, I hardly know one Doctrine of Popery, or one Idolatrous or
Superstitious Practice, Rite or Ceremony at Rome, but I will bring as good
proof for, as either Mr. Faulconer or Mr. Pelling have brought for the
Antiquity of forms of prayer generally used.

8. From hence it follows, that those who lay such stress on this point of
Antiquity in the case, are but doing the Papists work, laying a foundation for
the Papists to build all their abominable Doctrines, Idolatries, and Practices
upon, and he is half a Papist that is resolved to believe all those things true
which may be found in the ancient Writings, as we have them. We have so much
charity for those great and holy men, as to believe they never wrote any such
things, though some Popish Monks and Friars have fathered them upon them.

9. If any will yet believe what they find in their Works, as we now have them,
he stands obliged not to do it rashly, but to read, 1. what both Papists and
Protestants have wrote, as to that book of theirs out of which the Quotation
is. 2. Then to consider what was the signification of the words, Liturgy,
Merit, Offices, and an 100 more in that age; and whether we have not put a new
sense upon them, not known in their times. 3. To consider how far in the
judgment of Protestants the Church was corrupted in the times when those
Fathers wrote.

10. This I take to be a tedious work; the Prophet, Isa. 8. 20. has taught me
a nearer and safer course: To the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Does any say,
but how will you know the sense of the Scriptures? I answer from my own
conscience and reason, comparing things spiritual, with things spiritual, and
hearing the judgments of others, before I determine. Will they say, but you may
be deceived? it is true, so might the Fathers: but in things necessary, if I
use prayer, I have a promise, The Spirit shall lead you into all truth. I am
sure I can from Scripture be as certain of the Will of God in any case, as I
can be, that any one leaf of the Fathers were ever written by them; and if it
were, I am sure they were fallible men as well as I, and in many things did
err. The pressing and laying so much stress as men do (some men) on authority
and antiquity, is in truth nothing but a mighty facturing for Popery, and it is
impossible but learned men must understand so much. Besides, not one, often,
who talks so much of the Fathers, and antiquity, regards what Edition he
quotes, or makes use of; and all know, that where there is one of the Ancients
to be got, so much as of Erasmus his Edition (who was a Papist* but seems
just and honest), there are ten of filthy and most corrupt Popish Editions,
where the Reader can safely trust nothing. And thus much shall serve for Mr.
Pelling, for I am not concerned as to what he says for the English Liturgy,
let it be as fine a thing as it will; if it be unlawful for me to use any in my
Ministration in prayer, it is most certainly unlawful for me to use that, and
at that boundary I stick, till better reason than I have yet met with, removes
me from it.

FINIS.
For the Reverend his very Worthy Friend, etc.
SIR,
YOU must think me either very regardless of the Obligations you have laid on
me, or (which I had rather choose) very inconcerned in the New Argument for
Forms of Prayer, from Matthew. 26. 44. that I should put you to the trouble of a
second Letter to mind me, not to overlook it, and particularly to give you my
thoughts upon it. Indeed* Sir, the Argumentation from it savours fo little of a
Scholar, or a rational man, that I did not think you in earnest. But calling to
mind, that the Gentlemen we have to do with, think they have a conclusive
argument in the case, from the ^ Apostles (...) command that prayers should be
made for all men, 1 Timothy 2 (which surely may be made by each Minister for his
Congregation* and shall not need be prescribed in a book); and what your self
told me, that you heard a late Bishop of Bath and Wells say, That it was very
probable that the (...), the Parchments left at Troas, which St. Paul took such
care Timothy should bring, were the Church-prayers, or Liturgy, forgetting (as
you well note) that there St. Paul prayed some time without them. I began to
assume some more deliberate thoughts of that Text, Mat. 26. especially reading
what you write, that you had once met with it in Print, and had often heard it
in Sermons and Conferences. For Sermons, men nowadays use more Rhetoric than
Logic; but, methinks, in Prints and Conferences they should be more Logical.
Let me therefore consider the Text, Mat. 26. 44. (...); we translate it [saying
the same words]; so says Mark* 14. 39. Luke mentions but one prayer. Now,
Sir, how (...) can be translated the same words, judge you; it must be the same
word (if any thing) and we know, though our Saviors prayer were very short,
yet there was more than one or two words in it. But, Sir, this Topic speaks
either a very great ignorance, or a wilful design, to lead others to mistake in
those that use it: (...) does not signify always a syllabical word, but the
thing, or matter, which some words signify, and other words may signify too.
The Leper is said Mar. 1. 45. (...), we translate it, to blaze abroad the
matter, and that very truly. Christ is said to preach the word to the people,
Mar. 2. 2. that is, the matter of the Gospel, for no doubt he did not always
use the same syllabical words: so Mark 4. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Matthew. 13.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23. where word signifies, the matter of the Gospel, though in
diversified words, it were easy to produce an 100 Texts. The truth is, it is
an Hebraeism, (...) answering to their (...), which signifies matter, or
things, as often as syllabical words; and those who know not this, are very
ignorant of the Dialect of the Hebrew, or the Greek Tongue. Christ went and
prayed, saying the same thing, that is, to the same sense, the same matter: and
this must be the sense, for we shall find that Christ did not use the same
syllabical words the first time, Mat. 26. 39. The words are,

O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not
as I will, but as thou will.

V. 42. He went away the second time, an^ prayed, saying, O my father, if this
cup may not pass from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

V. 44. He prayed the third time, saying the same words.

Mark 14. 36. He said, Abba Father, all things are possible unto thee, take
away this cup from me: nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou will. V.
39. He prayed, and spoke the same words.

Luke 22. 42. Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done.

It is agreed on all hands by the Evangelists, that our Savior at this time
prayed but three times; Luke mentions but one, Mark mentions two, Matthew
mentions three. Here are four forms; how is it possible that he should then use
the same syllabical words twice, and yet use all the forms as they lie before
us? In earnest, the Argument from this Text is such a trifle, as I am ashamed
to examine it, lest some should think me as simple as they that use it; for it
is as much idleness to pelt a Puppet, as to make it. Those who argue from this
Topic, must be acquainted little with the Hebrew, or the Greek, or with the
Scripture; and those that think it militates against my Position, must have as
little acquaintance, either with it, or with common sense, choose they whether.
My Hypothesis is,

That it is unlawful for Ministers whom God has furnished with the gift of
Prayer, ordinarily to perform their ministerial Acts in public solemn prayer,
by the prescribed forms of others.

No (must they say) Christ did it: Say they so? who made these forms for him, I
wonder? who denies but that a person furnished with the gift of prayer, may
pray by a form composed in his own heart? who says forms of prayer are sinful
in that degree as blasphemy, so that God himself cannot legitimate them? who
says, that when we are to pray for one and the same thing, we may not use the
same words which we have before conceived in our own hearts? Now what does this
Text prove more? If it could be proved that our Savior did use the same words
syllabically two or three times, which it is plain he did not; if he did not
pray six times instead of three (which are all the Evangelists mention), yet I
hope he made use of words conceived by himself; and I do not read that he left
any order, that his Disciples, or the Church should afterward use these very
words, and no other in a state of affliction; if he had, surely we ought to
have had no other Collect for sick and afflicted persons; and by his varying
four times (or three times), he taught us that we may lawfully vary our words,
and yet (...), pray to the same sense, and make the same to be the matter of
our Petitions. So that those who triumph in this Argument, do not only triumph
before the Victory (which the Proverb makes absurd), but they triumph in the
thing by which they are conquered; which yet if it be rightly done, is but
ingenuous; for we ought to rejoice when Truth (to which all rational souls are
debtors) prevails. By which (Reverend Sir) you may see I am very well pleased
at the news* that my little book shall be answered. I do not think it worthy of
a man to be afraid of an Answer; and profess to you rom my heart, that I should
be glad to see an ingenuous answer, to which I should not be able to make a
reply satisfactory to my self, or any reasonable persons. I will assure you it
would go a great way to deliver me from the name of a Dissenter: But for a
Minister of Christ, to be made a mere Minister of men, to read, or say in his
Ministerial Acts only what men would have them, is what I am so far from
thinking lawful, that I cannot entertain a thought of it with that patience I
ordinarily use in causes which appear to me of a lighter nature: This is my
present apprehension of this matter. I seek for Truth, and not for Masteries,
and shall therefore rejoice if any can inform me better; but you see it must be
with better arguments than these, though this be as good an argument, I must
needs say, as that from Hosea 14. Take unto you words, and say, etc. and many
others. But I have enlarged too much upon so inconcludent an argument, unless
(as I hope) it will conclude that I am,

Your most affectionate Brother and Servant,


