THE HISTORY OF Conformity: Or a PROOF of the MISCHIEF OF IMPOSITIONS, FROM THE
EXPERIENCE Of more than One Hundred Years.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, and R. Roberts, 1681.

To the READER by way of INTRODUCTION.
Christian Reader!
WHAT was in a great measure proved before the Committee of Parliament in the
year 1666, that London was burned by the treachery of Papists, and has withal
been suspected a long time by our wise and discerning Patriots, that a Plot was
by them laid to subvert the Government of the Nation, and introduce the Popish
Religion, has been so fully proved by a variety of Evidence before the
greatest Courts of Judicature in England, since the first discovery of the late
Hellish Plot, and that with this advantage (to convince us of the Villainy and
danger of that party), That they had upon it grafted a design for the hastening
of the other to assassinate his most Sacred Majesty, and several eminent Peers,
and by a Popish army to massacre all Protestants, as none can deny it with any
degree of modesty. And if any had any inclinations to it, the murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, and Assassination of Mr. Arnold, the manifold lies,
perjuries, subornations, which have been proved against them, the device of the
Meal-tub Plot, etc. to spoil the credit of the manifold proofs against them,
have been such convictions as none has been able to outface, unless such as
have dreamed of a liberty, yea and a merit too, for, and in doing any thing for
the reputation of the Catholic Church, as they nickname the Synagogue of Rome.
It is as evident that the design of the Popish faction was to have cast the
Odium of these actions upon the Protestants. The Odium of Sir Edmondbury
Godfreys death should have been cast upon Debauches of that Religion, had it
not been unluckily discovered that he was murdered within the Walls of
Sommerset House. But that of the Kings Death (could they have effected it)
should have been thrown on the Presbyterians, (a name under which of late they
have comprehended all Dissenters.) This should have engaged our credulous and
furious men to have helped them to have destroyed the Dissenters, while they
should have got their Catholic Army in a capacity at last to have destroyed
them also. This restless party having had this long in their design, no doubt
wonderfully influenced some to procure such a settlement of Religion upon his
Majesty's Restoration as should produce Dissenters enough; nor is it
reasonable to think that all the latter severe Acts against Dissenters were not
the fruits of their counsels, considering how conducive they were to make a
great number of Protestants willing for their own ease to have had an Universal
Toleration, which (though nothing is or can be more contrary to Popish
Principles) would admirably have served their design, giving an undisturbed
liberty to their Priests and Jesuits (who can never have an abode in any place
without contriving the ruin of those they call Heretics) in our own bowels to
have contrived our ruin. Or if this failed (as indeed it did) yet they knew
that this way they should employ all our Courts of Judicature against
Protestants, so as they should not look after them; and besides, raise a mighty
odium and prejudice in the hearts of Protestants one against another, so as
whatever Villainy they should have effected, it would have been easy to have
charged it upon Dissenters, and there had been a party of Protestants in name
ready prepared to give credit to it. It is now evident to all who will not
wilfully shut their eyes, how near they were to have accomplished their design.
But God in infinite mercy has prevented the accomplishment. After all this one
would reasonably think that there should not be one Protestant in England, who
should not think it high time for our Superiors to unite all Protestants. A
thing the more easy and reasonable, because it is apparent that it may be done
without the least offense to God, or scandal to the generality of Reformed
Churches; and by the abatement only of some things which being abated, we shall
be much more like all Reformed Churches, than we are.

But against this some make a mighty outcry, (out of what design God knows)
For it is a little mysterious, that those men who all along have been great
pleaders for a reconciliation betwixt us and the Church of Rome, and the true
Disciples of those Bishops, who to prevent the offense of that Church, took
upon them in the time of King Charles the first to expunge passage out of the
Common Prayer Book, and to bring us as near as possible to them, erected
Altars, brought in Tapers, and twenty things more; should, now that they see
the effect of those endeavors for, and favors to Papists, not be willing for
the reconciling of all Protestants to abate those things which themselves own
no where specially commanded by God; and this too at a time when the Popish
bloody Knives are at all our Throats.

Especially considering that the true cause of retaining our Ceremonies at the
first, and forming our Common Prayer Book in the method it is, was originally a
desire so far to commend our Worship to the Papists (whose Religion lies all in
Ceremonies and Set-forms) that they might be proselyted to us; and the effects
we have seen after an hundred years and upwards, is but the hardening of
Papists, and the alienating infinite numbers of Protestants from us.

I am aware that a late Author in his Book called, The Unreasonableness of
Separation, has given us an account of three other reasons of the first
Imposition of the Ceremonies upon the Reformation. 1. A due reverence to
Antiquity. 2. To manifest the justice and equity of the Reformation, by letting
the Papists see we did not break communion with them for things merely
indifferent. 3. To show our consent with other Protestant Churches. But he had
better have said nothing. For will some say, How have we reverenced Antiquity
in retaining three of their ceremonies, and leaving out twenty more of greater
antiquity (if we may believe the Books we have) than the Surplice and kneeling
at the Sacrament, two of the three we have retained can pretend unto? Besides
that, all the account we have of antiquity is from Books Printed within 200
years (for Printing is very little older), from Manuscripts, which if they bear
date three hundred years after Christ, must be 1100 years old when they were
Printed. If we stretch antiquity to 600 years after Christ, they must be 800
years old, and all that time generally kept in the hands of the known depravers
of all Books that ever came in their hands where was any thing not for the
purposes of their Church. Now what reverence is due to any such worm-eaten
Records of antiquity, let any men of sense judge.

His second reason is as invalid; for what need was there of our keeping two or
three Ceremonies to testify we did not differ from them for mere matters of
indifferency, when so many Books, so many Disputations, testified we differed
from them because of their Idolatry in many things, and their Doctrine of
Justification by Works, etc. The last is yet of all the most weak; for how did
we by it show our consent with other Protestant Churches? In the year 1552
which was the last of King Edward; in the year 1558, which was the first of
Queen Elizabeth, there were no Protestant Churches but the Luther an Churches,
the Suitzerland Churches, and that of Geneva, besides some in Germany, which
followed the Reformation of Suitzerland and Geneva. In retaining these
Ceremonies we showed a dissent to the Reformed Churches in Suitzerland, and at
Geneva, and all those who followed their order, and showed our consent only
with the Lutheran Churches so imperfectly reformed, that in the Synod at Do^rt
the Messengers of all Reformed Churches there met, made a difficulty to afford
them the name of Protestants, though I think the name Protestant better agreed
to them than that of Evangelici, which was the name the Reformed were known by
for the ten first years after the Reformation began. Besides, that for Kneeling
at the Sacrament, the Saxon Churches retain it upon their peculiar notion,
wherein they differ from all other Reformed Churches, viz. The Corporeal
Presence of Christ in and with that Ordinance.

For the retaining of some Ceremonies in the Saxon Churches, a double account
is to be given. Luther and Ambsdorfius were great Zealots for them, partly to
quiet the people, who had so lately been Papists; and it may be partly in
opposition to Zuinglius, and specicially to Carolostadius, who had made himself
the Author of abolishing some, during Luther's absence, when he was hid for
fear of a Decree at Worms. Melancthon (a very learned man) being of a more so^t
ductile spirit, with Justus Jonas, and some others, took Luther's part.
Carolostadius was run down; both Zuinglius and Carolostadius saw that the
retaining any of the Popish Ceremonies would have no desired effect, but rather
scandalize their friends, and harden the Papists; and the taking them away
afterward, would be called a Refining upon a Refining; they therefore, though
they bare with much some few years, yet took the first opportunity to throw
them all out where they had to do. The case was much the same with us in
England; our Ceremonies were retained upon no such pretenses as were before
expressed. There was no Reverence in it showed to antiquity. No consent showed
with the most or best Reformed Churches at that time. But our best and most
eminent Ministers had been Papists, used their Missal, practiced all their
Ceremonies. At that time to have receded from the Papists in all things fit to
have been receded from, might have been oddly looked upon by the people. Besides
that the people in times of Popery were much strangers to any thing of Religion
but Ceremonies, and hearing Mass; hence (as may be seen in the first Edition of
the Common Prayer) many things were put in, which were left out by the Bishops
in the 2d Edn. of it in K. Edw. time. And had it pleased God after Q. Mary's
time to have continued us such Bishops as Cranmer, Hooper, Latimer, Coverdale,
etc. there is little doubt but these Controversies had long since been at an
end. But our Bishops many of them were such moderate men as could abide here
all Queen Mary's time; others of them were such as indeed had been beyond Sea,
but very zealous there to keep up the Book, in the framing of which themselves
had an hand (amongst these was Dr. Cox), the same reason held as in K. Edw. the
6. time, for humouring the people; thus the Ceremonies came at first to be
established. For the Forms of Prayer, there was not the same reason for
establishing some Forms at present in that state of the Church; there could
scarce have been any Praying or Preaching without some Forms both of Prayers
and Sermons; there were twenty reading Ministers for one who had any competent
abilities either to Pray or Preach. But the reason was the very same for the
establishing so many of the Old Forms, and keeping Methods agreeing to none of
any Reformed Church. I offer it to any knowing persons to judge whether
(whatever be said by some) this was not the true reason of the first
establishment; and they were no invaluable reasons for the continuance of them
for some few years until people were brought off more from their old
Superstitions. I find that in most places of Germany at first, the Reformation
was gradual, some Ceremonies and Superstitious usages were cast out one year,
some the next, some several years after the Gospel was first Preached in those
places.

But why these should be continued after twenty years, when it was seen that
the continuance of them had no effect to bring in Papists, but gave a great
scandal to, and made a great division amongst Protestants and when people were
further enlightened, and their first heats for their old ways of worship were
abated, is a much greater mystery; yet we shall find that in the 25, 26, 27
years of Queen Elizabeth, there was a more severe urging these things than ever
before. I am loath to think any rancor against those at that time called
Puritans, was the Original cause; but do believe that an employment for those
who managed the Ecclesiastical Courts, without using their power against the
Papists, or Moral Debauchees, might be no little argument in the cause, and a
design driven by the Papists and Atheists in the Nation to that purpose.

Such Considerations as these could never affect an English Parliament so as to
make a first establishment of them. But the succeeding Parliaments and Princes
found them in possession (that we say is nine parts of a Law) and some Zealots
in the Church strained their wits to make them appear lawful, and so within the
power of the Superior, and for many of them several good: men had not then
light enough to discern their unlawfulness. ^^ as there were very few that
wrote to purpose on that argument (Dr. Ames was almost the only man in his
age.) Indeed the Ceremonies, the reading the Old Translation of the Scripture,
and the Apocryphal Books, the Subscription, That there was nothing in the
Common Prayer Book, and Book of Ordaining Priests and Deacons, but what was
agreeable to Gods Word, were an hundred year since argued against as unlawful,
as I could prove by several writings of the Nonconformists of those times (I
have seen an ancient Manuscript of them big enough for a just folio), some
things were not then practiced, non required to be put in ure, though they were
in the Queens Injunctions, etc. (some of them at least.) In all the cases of
Nonconformists in Queen Elizabeth's time, I find not a Minister complaining for
being enforced to receive, or to administer the Sacrament to people kneeling; I
find nothing of any suffering for not bowing at the name of Jesus, not ralling
in the Communion Table, not setting it Altarwise, not reading the second
service at it, with many more such things which were brought into practice by
Archbishop Laud, Bishop Wren, and others. One great pretense of keeping up many
of these things, was to avoid the scandal of the Papists, and to entice them to
our Religion, etc.

We have now seen the effects of this in the experience of an hundred years,
which have been too sad to particularize; it were easy to make a Book of Acts
and Monuments twice as big as Mr. Foxes, with the sufferings of holy and good
men, upon these accounts in that time. What manner of persons the Dissenters
are, the experience of twenty years since his Majesty's Restoration, has
sufficiently informed the world. What have the most fiery of their adversaries
to object against them except in the matters of their God? What kind of friend
the Popish party has been, has been also made sufficiently evident. I humbly
leave it to the judgment of his Most Excellent Maejesty and his Parliament,
whether seeing (confessedly) it may be without offense to the Divine Majesty,
The taking away of those things which alone make the Partition Wall betwixt
Protestants and Protestants, be not as politic as pious, considering the
History of Conformity from the first unto this very day, which might possibly
have appeared more reasonable if I would have inserted the lamentable stories
of the sufferings of good men on this account, (of which I have a plenty) but I
had rather they should be forgotten, most of the Authors of them before this
time have given up their account, and know whether they did good or evil; and
if any be alive, I hope all good men will say, Father forgive them, for they
knew not what they did. Only let it be the Religious care of our Superiors to
prevent any further complaints of this nature in our Streets, for the Lord most
certainly hears the cries of the Innocent and oppressed.

The History of Conformity: or a Proof of the Mischief of Impositions, from the
experience of an Hundred years.
THE notion of Conformity with us in England, has always signified a
compliance with, and obedience to such commands of Superiors in matters of
Doctrine, Worship, and Government of the Church, as are no where expressly
originated in the Word of God, but supposed to be there left to liberty; and
being neither there commanded, nor forbidden, are presumed to be matter of
Superiors just commands.

The power of Superiors to command in things which the parties commanded do
agree indifferent, was never yet disputed by the generality of Nonconformists.
But there being many things which Superiors call indifferent, which the
Inferiors verily believe to be unlawful, the difference has chiefly been about
these, and still is so to this day.

Upon the Reformation of this Nation from Popery in the days of K. Edw. the
6th, in the year 1552, (which was 6 Edw. 6th) there were Articles of Faith
agreed on; and in the 2. and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 1. and 5. and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 1. two
Acts were made referring to two Common-Prayer-Books made in the short Reign of
that excellent Prince.

It must be known, that before this time in the time of K. Hen. 8. there were
great foundations for Reformation laid, in the suppression of Monasteries,
taking away the Popes Supremacy destruction of Appeals to Rome, Printing the
Bible in English; but there was no Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, or
Discipline. For the Doctrine, it appears to have been Popish by the six
Articles; the first of which yet was so penned, as though it established a
corporal presence of Christ in the Supper, yet it seemed to leave it
indefinite, whether in the Popish or Lutheran sense, which possibly gave
Archbishop Cranmer (who as well as Latimer and other good men at that time were
Lutherans) a latitude to be an agent in Lamberts condemnation. The other five
articles against giving the Cup to the Laity, and for Private Masses, and
Monkish Vows, Auricular Confession, and Priests Marriages, were perfectly
Popish. So as in that time no Nonconformist appeared, but as to Doctrine, of
which Lambert the Martyr was one, and so were all those that suffered upon the
account of the six Articles, together with multitudes who fled into other
Countries to avoid that Persecution.

The Worship of those days was the Mass, only some parts of it were in English.
The Government of the Church was also in the same method; for though three Acts
had been made to authorize K. H. 8. to call together 32 persons to make a Book
of new Canons; yet for ought appears to us, it was not done. And possibly a
due consideration, that several of our greatest Reformers were Lutherans at
first, may satisfy us as to the first establishment of our Liturgy in the
method it was, and retaining of some Ceremonies; the Saxon Churches having
before reformed in that method, keeping as much as they could both of the Old
Prayers and Ceremonies. And it is very likely that when after Queen Mary's time
the Reformation came to be re-setled, some of those who had a great hand in it,
were possessed of the Lutheran Principles, as to the Corporal Presence, Forms
and Ceremonies, or at least had a very great Reverence for Cranmer, Latimer and
others (who were then dead as Martyrs), and chose to fix things according to
their sentiments in these matters, without so due weighing things as the matter
required, or having not so early a prospect of the evils which experience has
since let us see following thereupon.

In the first Parliament of King Edw. 6. the first Statute tells us, that
before that time (in the times of Popery) they had several Forms, one used at
Sarum, another at Bangor, etc. and the whole Ministry of the Nation were just
come out of Popery, and neither fit to Pray nor Preach, which was the reason
both of that establishment, and also of the Book of Homilies, and of the
Original cause of that Imposition on the Ministry, not to preach without
license. For the truth is, hardly one of an hundred of the Priests newly
proselyted from Popery, were fit to Preach at all, which made our Rulers
restrain Preaching only to such as should be licensed. Besides, that there was
just reason to fear that those Priests but for such a Law, and such a Book,
would have returned to their former Mass-service. To prevent which, the Book
was provided, 2, 3 Edw. 6. and corrected 3, 4 Edw. 6. And all Ministers
enjoined by Statute to read those Prayers, and all the people to bear them.
There was before that time no Nonconformist to direct the Act against, only
Papists.

But upon the second Edition of the Common Prayer there appeared a considerable
party, who opposed themselves to it. Three years before, Bishop Hooper and Mr.
Rogers had declared themselves against some Rites and Ceremonies But the last
year of Edw. 6. was the first time we read of any opposition to the Common
Prayer, and the contest was quickly at an end by the coming in of Q. Mary.

The business of Church Government as to the rules of it, was left by King
Edward undetermined; for he died before he had given his Royal sanction to that
Systeme of Ecclesiastical Laws which was drawn up by Archbishop Cranmer and
others, by virtue of his Commission directed to them in the fifth year of his
Reign.

In all his time no Subscription was required by Statute or Canon (that I can
find) established by his authority under the broad Seal, either to the Articles
of Faith, or to the Book of Common Prayer, etc. nor do I read of one Minister
silenced, or suspended upon any such account, or any people vexed for
Nonconformity.

Our prudent Reformers knowing they had to do with a people who were Papists
the other day, in their first Common Prayer Book varied as little as they could
from the Popish Missal, and kept as many of the Ceremonies as they conceived
were consistent with any degree of Reformation. In the second
Common Prayer Book they varied more; but yet we are assured by Dr. Fuller in
his Church History, Lib. 7. that the party now disaffected to the Liturgy
became very considerable. This was in the very beginning of the Reformation,
Anno 1553.

Queen Mary succeeding, put an end to all these contests in England for the
whole time of her Reign, which was but five years. To avoid her Persecution,
multitudes fled beyond the Seas, fixing some at Basil, some at Geneva, some at
Strasburgh, some at Embden, some at Francfort, and other places.

We have no account, that I know, how those governed themselves as to Religious
matters, who fixed at any of those places, save only at Francfort and Geneva;
those at Geneva followed the Order of that Church, so did those at Francfort,
using the order at Geneva from June 27, 1554, to Mar. 13. 1555, when Dr. Cox
(one of those who had compiled our English Common Prayer Book, and was mightily
in love with his own labors) came over with a new party from England, and by
his arts got admission into the Church at Francfort, and brought in the English
Book amongst them; nor did this satisfy him, but he must also turn out their
Pastor Mr. Knox, and that not from his charge only, See the Troubles at
Francfort, p. 44, 45.
but out of Francfort, procuring him (by some of his party) to be accused to
the Senate for a Sermon he had two years before Preached in Bucking hamshire
here in England, in which he had some passages reflecting upon the Emperor of
Germany as an Idolater, etc. which made some of the Senate advise him to leave
the City, because the Imperial Court was then at Ausburgh; and if this
malicious party had carried an accusation against him thither, and the Emperor
should require the City to deliver him as a Traitor to him, they could not
refuse him. Which made Mr. Knox and a considerable party of that Church remove
to Geneva. This was the first fruits of the conformable men's kindness to poor
Dissenters, though at that time they were both parties voluntary Exiles in a
strange Land for the common Cause of Religion. So that Dr. Cox, who was
afterward Bishop of Ely; and Horn, who was afterward made Bishop of
Winchester; were left in possession of that Church, and there performed their
Devotions by the English Common Prayer Book, which at that time had had but the
establishment of one year before it was thrown out for the Mass in England.

Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown Three years after this, in the year 1558.
Upon which, the banished from all parts returned, both those who had fled from
King Hen 8. persecution, for the Six Articles, who if any of them returned
before, were driven back again; and those who fled from Queen Mary's
persecution, from 1553. to 1558. These (if we may believe Bishop Bancroft and
Dr. Fuller) having beyond Sea sucked in the Protestant principles for Worship
as well as Discipline, were the Fathers of Nonconformity in England. But these
were either many more than I could ever find registered, or else under both
persecutions multitudes must lie hid in England. And indeed some make the cause
of the different apprehensions in Protestants at that time to lie here; That
those most favorable to Conformity, and promoters of it, were such as had
never been abroad, but during both those persecutions, weathered the storm in
England; and the Nonconformists, such as had been abroad, and seen the Worship,
Order and Discipline of the Churches in Suitzerland, and Germany, and at
Geneva. But this is not Universally true; for both Dr. Cox. and Mr. Horn were
at Francfurt, yet high en ough for our Conformity, both during their abode
there, and after their return into England.

In the first year of Queen Elizabeth several Acts passed, which revived the
Reformation, Uniting the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown, Repealing
Queen Mary's Act of Repeal, and reviving several Statutes for the Reformation
made in the time of Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. establishing Uniformity of Prayers. And
it is to be noted, that these Acts passed without the assent of one Bishop:
there were at this time but Fourteen present, and they were all Papists, and
notorious Dissenters from all Acts of this nature. This by the way may let my
Reader understand the Popish design of a party amongst us, for whom it is not
enough that the Clergy be owned as one of the Three Estates of the Realm (of
which the King is the Head) but they will also have them to be one of the Three
States in Parliament; which if they be, no Law can be of force that wants the
consent of some of them. So that if that notion were yielded, all our Acts for
Reformation must be concluded Nullities.

It was the second year of the Queen before we had a set of Protestant Bishops.
It was her Majesty's interest at that time, so to govern her self, as to caray
an equal hand to all Protestants; accordingly she filled up the Bishoprics,
partly with men that during the late persecutions had staid in England; partly
of such as had fled beyond the Seas.

1. Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury -- he had lived a private life in
England. These, if no more, had been Exiles.
2. Edward Grindall, Bishop of London. 3. Robert Horn, Bishop of Winchester.
4. Richard Cox, Bishop of Ely. 5. Edward Sands, Bishop of Worcester. 6. John
Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury. 7. Tho. Beatham, B of Coventry and Litchfield. 8.
John Parkhurst, Bishop of Norwish.
Whether these had been beyond Sea, during the persecution, I cannot tell.
9. Rowland Mecreek, Bishop of Bangor, 10. Nicholas Bullingham, Bishop of
Lincoln. 11. Thomas Young, Bishop of St. David's. 12. Richard Davyes, Bishop of
Asaph. 13. Gilbert Barclay, Bishop of Bath and Wells. 14. Edmond Guest, Bishop
of Rochester. 15. William Alley Bishop of Exeter. 16. Edmond Seamler, Bishop of
Peterborough. 17. Richard Cheyney, Bishop of Gloucester. 18. Thomas Young,
Archbishop of York. 19. James Pilkington, Bishop of Durham. 20. John Best,
Bishop of Carlisle. 21. George Downham, Bishop of Chester.

The other Bishoprics were either detained in the Queens hands, or held in
Commendam. These men were all of them Conformists, but some of them knew the
heart of Sufferers for their consciences toward God, for themselves had been
such; indeed they generally had been so, though in different degrees. This
temper of these Bishops gave that party much quiet for several years, who could
not agree to the Liturgy and Ceremonies. I find a very large Petition presented
by multitudes to the Queen, Anno. 1561. which was the Third year of her Reign,
in Three or Four Sheets M. S. where they complain of insufficient and
scandalous Ministers, of Pluralists, and Non-residents, and Lawyers being
Ministers, but I find not the least complaint of any suspended, deprived, etc.

Yet even at the first I find Mr. Coverdale refusing to be restored to his
Bishopric of Exeter, and Reverend Gilpen refusing the Bishopric of Carlisle.

But no Subscription was yet required to any thing, by any Legal Authority; nor
was the use of all the Common Prayer Book, or an exact observance of the
Ceremonies, generally urged. This kept all in quiet some years: the people
enjoyed the labors of their godly Ministers: the Ministers at that time
scrupled not to use some parts of the Common Prayer: the Bishops did not exact
their use of the more offensive parts of it, nor of the Ceremonies: some
particular Officials were a little busy; and some few, very few men were
sufferers by them: but the body of the Nonconforming Ministers and people were
much quiet, until not only Archbishop Parker was dead, but Bishop Grindall
also, who succeeded him in that, who died about 1583. about the 25th of the
Queen.

In the year 1583. Dr. John Whitgift came to be Archbishop of Canterbury.

The first I read of, as to Subscriptions and Nonconformity, was when the
Subscription to the 39. Articles, which were made by the Convocation 1562. but
not confirmed by Parliament until the year 1572. (which was the 13th Eliz.) and
then only required to be subscribed by such as were to be admitted to Livings:
and; that no further than so far as concerned matters of Faith and the Doctrine
of the Sacraments, was exacted from all Ministers.

After the agreement in them by the Convocation, 1562. several Bishops without
any Authority from Parliament, imposed a Subscription to the whole number of
them upon all Ministers in their Diocesces; the refusal of which caused the
sufferings of seveaal particular men. John Fox being required to Subscribe,
pulled out his Greek Testament, and plainly told the Archbishop, he would
Subscribe to nothing but that; but yet such was the gravity of the man, such
his Eminency for his service to the Church, that he was let alone.

The famous Laurence Humfry, and Anthony Gilby, and some others appeared
Nanconformists.

Betwixt 1563. and 1583. also (especially in the latter part of that time) the
Bishops began to press a Subscription to Two Articles more, the one to
acknowledge the Queens Supremacy: that none denied, or as good as none: the
other was, that the Common Prayer Book, the Books of Homilies, and the Book of
ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contained in them nothing contrary to
the Word of God. To this day there is no Book of Canons confirmed by Parliament
that requires any such thing: but I cannot find that there was any Canon about
these things, that had King Edward's, or Queen Elizabeth's assent notified under
the Broad Seal, so as it could pretend to any Legal establishment.

But the Bishops of that Age were adventuring to establish these things upon
their own Authority, directly contrary to the Statute 25. Henry 8. which
restrained them from putting any Canons in use, to be made after that time,
unless they first had the Kings Assent.

The Oath of Supremacy was indeed established by Act 1st. Eliz. but a
Subscription was not. The use of the Common Prayer was commanded by an Act 1st
Eliz. but a Subscription, that that there was nothing in it, nor in the
Homilies, nor in the Book of Ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contrary to
the Word of God, under a penalty of suspension or Deprivation, was not. And the
question so often put to them by the Bishops, Will you use that which you will
not subscribe to, that it contains nothing repugnant to Gods word? is easily
answered: There was a great part of the Book (viz. the Rubricks) that were not
to be used in God's Worship. Nor did they use it all, but some part of it,
which was not offensive to them and other good people.

But although many suffered upon this new imposition after Whitgift came to be a
considerable figure in the Church; yet the great shock was after that he came
(upon the death of Grindal) to be Archbishop of Canterbury, which was about
the year 1583. and the first considerable Nonconformity of Ministers in England
is to be dated from this time.

Some separation there was before this time: For Bishop Bancroft in his
Dangerous Positions tells us, That within the ten or eleven first years of the
Queens reign, many of the people separated, meeting in woods and fields. But
their numbers were not valuable, nor their persons much considerable; they were
generally as sheep without a Shepherd, few or no Ministers being amongst them,
at least of any note or authority, to give them any great name or repute.

The Author of the Book entitled, The unlawful practices of the Prelates,
which was wrote about that time, tells us, That as to Protestant Dissenters,
the Queen had a most peaceable Government for the first twenty four years of
her reign. Toward some particular good men, some hard dealings were showed
here and there, by the instigation of some ignorant and half Popish persons,
for lack of judgment and knowledge.

That which possibly gave occasion to this activity of the Bishops, were two
sorts of Dissenters which they observed amongst the Ministers.

Some who only dissented as to the Common Prayer Book and Ceremonies, of which
number were Mr. Field, Mr. Wilcox, Mr. Standon, Mr. Boxham, Mr. Saintcloe, Mr.
Clare, Mr. Edmonds. Others that were also for the Reformation of Discipline,
amongst whom were Mr. Clark, Mr. Travers, Mr. Barber, Mr. Gardner, Mr. Chestou,
Mr. Crook, Mr. Egerton, who were all betrayed by one Mr. Johnson who was wont
to meet with them, and many of them most miserably treated in the High
Commission upon it.

A great noise was made of the election of a Presbytery at Wandsworth in Surry,
the meaning of which was no more than this. The Queens and the Bishops Orders
extending no further to the trial and fitness of Communicants, than if they
could say the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments (all which
might be done by one so ignorant, that no Minister who regarded what he did,
could administer the Lords Supper unto) some Ministers did agree of a stricter
examination, and the people made choice of ten or eleven persons to be present
at that action. Possibly it had been less exposed to scandal, if instead of
them, two or three Ministers had so joined, and the end as well obtained; but
surely this was a far lesser evil, than the admitting of all to the Sacrament
that could but rehearse the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments; there
was nothing in this action, but any pious Ministers who are the stewards of the
mysteries of God, might answer with a safe conscience; for of Stewards it is
required that they should be faithful, says the Apostle; and I believe any
Bishop would have judged his Steward unfaithful, if he had dealt out his
Master's goods contrary to his Master's order. The Ministers Master's order is
plain enough, that the holy Sacrament belongs not either to ignorant or
scandalous persons. All the Churches of God in all Ages agree this, our own
Church in her principles agrees it; yet in practice, all Ministers were tied
to give the Sacrament (as in times of Popery) to all such as could but rehearse
the Creed, the Pater Noster, and the Ten Commandments; and confessed in Lent;
those eminent persons who were commissionated by Edw. 6. to draw up a new body
of Ecclesiastical Laws (though that excellent Prince lived not long enough to
set his Hand and Seal to it, so as what they had done had no legal force) had
expressly determined, Tit. de Sacramentis, Cap. 5.

We will have none admitted to the Table of the Lord, until in the Church he
has made profession of his faith.

What should good Ministers do in this case? they could act but precariously;
it seems at Wandsworth in Surry, there was a people that voluntarily submitted
to this; what harm was this to the Bishops?

But the truth is, this business of discipline came into very little debate
before 1584. after that Subscription had been so fatally imposed.

In several Diocesses I perceive there were some circumstantial variations in
the forms of Subscriptions. To let my Reader therefore know what it was, I will
give it him as it lies in the 36th Canon, 1603. when it first received any
thing like a legal confirmation, which was at least 25. or 26. years after it
was first devised, and full 30. years after it was so rigorously pressed.

1. Art. That the Queens Majesty, under God, is the^ Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other her Highnesses Dominions, and Territories, as well in
all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; and that no
foreign Prince, Person, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, or Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual, within her Majesty's Realms, Dominions or Countries.

2. Art. That he allows the Book of Articles, agreed on by the Archbishops
and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in the Convocation holden
at London, 1562. and that he acknowledges All and Every the Articles therein,
being in number 39. besides the Ratification, to be agreeable to the Word of
God.

3. Art. That the Book of Common Prayer, and of ordering Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may
lawfully be used. and that he himself will use the form in the said Book,
prescribed in public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and no other.

This Engine was first formed by the Archbishop Whitgift, and was one of those
16. Proposals he offered to the Queen, for the settling of the Church (a Copy of
which in M. S. with two Answers to them, I have read,) some little difference
there was in the Archbishops form: His first Article was,

1. Art. That the Authority which is given her Majesty, in Causes
Ecclesiastical, by the Laws of the Land, is lawful, and according to the Word
of God.

The Second Article was his Third, andran thus:

2. Art. That he allowed the Book of Articles of Religion, agreed on by the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London 1562. and set forth by her Majesty's Authority,
and that he agrees the Articles therein contained, to be agreeable to the Word
of God.

3. Art. (Which was the Archbishops Second) was word for word the same.

This Motion of the Archbishops put the Queen upon adding force to the
Imposition, which indeed had been by some Bishops began before, but now in most
Diocesses it was rigorously pressed. The issue of this is told us by the Author
of the unlawful practices of Prelates in these words:

Whatsoever was required in Civil Causes, either that concerned her Majesty; or
the State, was by the Ministers embraced wholly and freely In Ecclesiastical
Causes also, whatsoever concerned Doctrine, or otherwise, was expressly required
by Statute for Subscription. Thus far at the first all men with protestation
offered, but to yield to this thing, so strange and new, without any Law in
streighter sort than ever was required. That all things were agreeable to Gods
Word, and not against it; not only tolerable but allowable, both in the Book
of Common Prayer, and in the Book of ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
This was refused, diverse of the Ministers were suspended, multitudes were
thrust out

How many godly, able, painful Ministers were outed all over England, I cannot
tell, but ex ungue Leonem, I have seen a M. S. which gives an account of the
names of Sixty odd in Suffolk, Twenty one in Lincolnshire, Sixty four in
Norfolk, Thirty eight in Essex; which though they seem comparatively few, yet
are a great many when we consider that in Essex, at that time, there was an
account given of 163. Ministers that never Preached, only read Prayers and
Homilies, and 85. more, Pluralists, Non residents, or persons most notoriously
debaucht.

This was the first fruit of that Archbishops preferment, and a fair offer at
the rooting out of the reformed Religion as soon as planted, which never did,
nor ever will live and flourish in any place, under the conduct of an ignorant,
debauched, unpreaching Ministry; such a Ministry, much better serving Popish
than Protestant purposes.

What the Ministers that were suspended, or deprived did, to prevent their
misery; or to get this severity a little mitigated and allayed at this time, in
the years 1583, 1584, 1585. I shall inform the world from the worthy Author of
the Book aforementioned, wrote at that very time, and often quoted by Bishop
Bancroft.

His words are these:

The Cause was general, means were made, Ministers presented Doubts,
Protestations, Supplications; they were repulsed, reviled, threatened; the
Ministers did endure, sustained with a good Conscience; but their miserable
flocks were subject to all disorders, spoils, havoc: Good men mourned, evil
men prevailed, License possessed all places, nothing was reserved whole to
civil and modest life. These things Gentlemen of all sorts took to heart, they
lamented their own estate, and the estate of the people, they pitied their
Ministers, their Wives and Children; Gods Cause moved them, the honor of the
Gospel drew them, yea the safety of her Majesty in these dangerous times
compelled them, their own Offices of Justice, which by the word was so well
aided, and which without it they could not steer in a storm of so great
confusion, drew them to sue in all humble sort to the Archbishop, testifying
the wholesome Doctrine, together with the honest life of their Pastors,
declaring the breaches, waste and wrecks of their Country, the present evil,
the dangers to come; finally craving, that in regard of the souls of the
people, and their own, he would accept such a Subscription as the Law expressly
appointed [13. Eliz. c. 12.] and restore the poor men both to their Preaching
and Livings. This second means prevailed with him [Archbishbp Whitgift] no more
than the first. The third was attempted.

This refuge was to the Honorable Senate of her Majesty's Privy Council. There
it was in like manner sought, and declared, the proceedings before used with
the Archbishop. The inconveniency by this new dealing sprang up in the Church
and Commonwealth, was showed, and witnessed by Subscribed Hands. These
supplications, with Letters of favor were sent to the Archbishop, in the
behalf of Preachers; did he yet any thing relent? surely no, nay, I would he
had not been more indurate. Six or Eight months were thus spent, the Country
devoid of Preaching, the calamities of some Shires increased, testimonies,
informations, multiplied. At the length, such were the complaints, that her
Majesty's most Honorable Council dealt very feelingly in the case

Lest any should traduce that Book as giving a false account, I could out of a
MS. in my hands, fill a competent Volume with Copies of Supplications of this
nature. It shall suffice to give an instance or two. 1. Of the Ministers
Applications to Archbishop Whitgift. 2. The peoples, and several Gentlemen's
applications and supplications to the Archbishop; then 3. To the Council.
Letters from Noblemen and Privy-Councellors to the Archbishop, etc.

That of the Ministers of the Diocese of Ely, is one of the shortest, I shall
therefore transcribe that for a specimen of Applications to the Archbishop.

Whereas two Canonical Admonitions upon our obedience, are already past (most
R^verend Father in God) and suspension ready to proceed against us for not
subscribing to some things we know not, and others that we greatly doubt of: We
having received good hope upon our own knowledge of your Lordships wonted hatred
of sin, and love of true Religion and godliness, are bold to offer our humble
supplication unto you, as well to show our obedience to all superiority over us
in the Lord, as also to crave your Lordships lawful favor for larger space of
time to be granted to us, considering how carefully we have used our Ministry
to the building of the Church, endeavoring with all our hearts to keep the
good peace thereof, which we daily pray for: Wherefore if it shall please your
Lordship to deal so graciously with us, as either to free us from all
subscriptions, saving to her Majesty's authority, and the Articles of the
Christian Religion, which the Law requires; or to give us so long time, as
diverse Treatises may be perused by us, that either we may be satisfied in our
persuasions to subscribe, or (if there be no remedy) quietly to give place to
the peace of the Church. In the mean time we judge them not that have
subscribed, as we desire not to be judged in this our staying. Thus if it shall
please Almighty God to move your Lordship to take compassion on our troubled
consciences, that we may feel our burden lighter by your good favor, we shall
praise God for the same, and show our thank fullness to your Lordship, which we
pray God to preserve and keep to the good and benefit of his Church, and to
your own comfort.

12. March 1583. Your Graces most humble, Robert Garret Bowter. Martin. Henry
Dickenson. Mat. Chapman. Edw. Brain. Christopher Jackson. Thomas Brain.



Many Supplications of this nature were in that and in the two following years
presented to the Archbishop, to particular Bishops of Diocesses, etc. which I
forbear to transcribe, the matter being much the same.

These not finding their due effect, the Gentlemen of several Counties
petitioned the Archbishop. I could insert several Copies; I shall only insert
that of the Gentlemen in Cambridgshire to the Archbishop, bearing date the 26.
of April, 1583.

May it please your Lordship, that under your good favor we whose (...)en ^^y
be acceptable suitors on the behalf of diverse godly Ministers with in this
County of Cambridg, whose names are set down in a schedule herewith sent unto
you, concerning the manner of subscribing to the articles lately published, the
execution whereof toward our Ministers, we fear would be to the displacing of
them, as some are already; whereby we think great inconvenience must follow in
these parts, by reason that both the sufficiency and good conversation of these
already placed, with the good success and blessing on their labors, is
evidently known unto us, and we are persuaded that they continue their places
by bond in conscience, for that hitherto we have not heard of any
contentiousness in Religion, or disquietness and disorder in any of them or
their people: Wherefore although in your wise and fatherly care, your desire is to
make choice of a good supply if these fail; yet if it should seem good unto
your Wisdom, we should acknowledge our selves much bound unto your Lordship in
the continuance of these men, being known unto us already; the other hereafter
to come being unknown what they shall be; and so much the rather, because of
the bare Livings which some of them have, whereby it is to be feared it will be
no easy matter to place sufficient men in their stead. Thus trusting, and
nothing doubting but that they may find your honorable favor so far forth as
you may grant, not contrary to the Law of this Realm; and most humbly
beseeching, that we may enjoy them in their rooms as long as any others in
other places, whereof we and they hope so much the more, for that it pleased
God once to make your Lordship a special member in this County for a time,
whereby as you gave and bestowed a great cause of love, so you reaped much good
will; which as it remains in us and them to stand you in any stead to our
powers, so we trust that we and they shall find this latter fruit of it, to our
great comfort and benefit: and thus we humbly take our leave.

Your Graces assured, John Cutts. Fr. Hind. John Hutton. Fitzralph Chamblein.
Thomas Wendy. Thomas Chickly. Anthony Cage.



Some others there were of this nature; but it seemed ^^^h by what followed,
and also by what the Author of the Book aforementioned says, that the
Archbishops ear was deaf to all Supplications of this nature, and has resolved
to carry his Subscription through.

The poor Ministers in this distress, together also with the Gentlemen of
several Counties, and the people of several places, addressed themselves by
Petition to the Queen, and to particular Lords of the Council, then to the
Queen and the whole Council. Particularly, Dunmow in Essex sent a Supplication
to my Lord Rich. The Parishioners of Aldermary in London, to the Earl of
Leicester. The Ministers of the Diocese of Peterborough, to another Lord. Many
addressed to the whole Council, viz. The Gentlemen of Norfolk, the Ministers in
Norfolk, the Ministers of Essex, the Ministers of Lincolnshire. Essex,
Oxfordshire, the Isle of Ely, and many other Counties and places. I have by me
all the Copies; I shall only transcribe that of the Ministers of Lincolnshire.

The Supplication of the Ministers of Lincolnshire to the Lords of the Council.
Forasmuch (Right Honorable) as the Lord of heaven and earth has substituted
your Honors next under her Majesty, to procure passage to his Gospel, beauty
to his Church, and glory to his Kingdom; in which business of the Lord, to the
great joy of all those which pray heartily for the peace of Jerusalem, hitherto
you have happily proceeded: We whose names are underwritten, whom the same Lord
has in mercy placed over some of his people here in Lincolnshire, as Pastors
and Preachers to feed them with the word of truth, do humbly beseech your
Honors to regard the pitiful and woeful estate of our Congregations and people
in these parts, which being destitute of our Ministry by the means of a
Subscription generally and strictly urged now of late by the Bishops Officers,
do mourn and lament. It is well known to all your Lordships, that an absolute
Subscription is required throughout the whole Province of Canterbury to three
Articles. The first concerning her Majesty's Supreme Authority. The second to
the Book of Common Prayer, with that of consecrating Bishops, and ordering
Priests and Deacons. The third concerning the Book of Articles. As touching the
first, we offer our sevles to a full Subscription, as always heretofore we have
done; as also to the Articles of Religion [I presume here must be meant, as in
the rest generally is expressed, so far as they concern matters of Faith, and the
Doctrine of the Sacraments,] and cannot be accepted herein, without an absolute
Subscribing to the other, unto which we dare not condescend, being as yet many
of us not fully acquainted with the Book of confecrating Bishops, and ordering
Priests and Deacons; and all of us unresolved, and unsatisfied in our
Consciences, in many points of the Common Prayer. May it please your Lordships
also, favorably to consider, that in refusing an absolute Subscription, we do
it not out of any arrogance, or singularity, but only for that we have no
sufficient resolution, which we have earnestly desired of some doubts, about
diverse weighty matters, and points in the same Book; which requests of ours,
since we could not obtain, we desired, that at the least in our Subscription, we
might make exceptions of the things whereof we doubted, which they have utterly
denied us, for which causes (Right Honorable!) we fearing to Subscribe so
absolutely as we were urged, we are all suspended from executing the function
of our Ministry amongst our people, to the great danger of their souls, and
danger of losing the fruit of our former poor labors, which we have by Gods
Grace employed upon them: wherefore we humbly crave of your Honors (our Cause
being, as we are persuaded, the Lords own Cause, and his Churches) that it may
be considered: And that since we can neither be impeached of false Doctrine,
nor of contempt of her Majesty's Laws, nor of refusing of the exercising of the
Book of Common Prayer in our charges, nor of breeding contention and sedition
in the Church: And again, that Papists, her Majesty's enemies, with Atheists,
to the corrupting of Religion in Doctrine and Manners, do daily multiply and
increase, we may be restored to our flocks and people, in such sort, as with
all peace of Conscience we may go forward with the Lords Work in building up
his house in several places.

Thomas Fulkeck. Hugh Tuke. John Daniel. Richard Allen. Anthony Hunt. Reinold
Grome. Thomas Tripler. Shepherd. Henry Nelson. Mat. Tomson. Thomas Bradly.
Joseph Gibson. James Worship. Charles Bingam. John Munning. Humfrid Travers.
John Pryer. John Summerscales. John Wintle. Richard Holdsworth. Richard Kellet.


These are enough for specimens of several sorts of Supplications. There were
others more particularly directed to the Queen, and to some great persons, all
much to the same sense.

This last means had some little effect: of which the Author of the Book called
The unlawful practices of Prelates, gives us this account, c. 4.

Hence became the subscription to be somewhat more tolerable, and further time
was granted unto diverse in diverse Countries, and retaining that which pertained
to the Civil State, and in the Ecclesiastical that which concerned doctrine,
with protestation to use the Book of Common Prayer, the Archbishop suffered
himself to be entreated to require no more of many. To this many were drawn:
the peace of the Church, the compassion of their flocks, the weariness of
turmoils, brought many to it, that yet did it, some with tears, some with so
great heaviness of conscience long after, as they were never quiet till their
dying day. So great a desire of unity was in sundry men that stood herein.
Others satisfying themselves with a protestation of an holy and godly
resolution by the Archbishop, and other of the Bishops, in certain points (as
they supposed) by the example of certain learned men in the like case, did not
refuse to subscribe, as the Ministers of Sussex, and such like. Again, some
other special men were admitted in diverse places with more favor, as the
Ministers of Leicestershire, Buckinghamshire, and somt other places, and some
such others (chiefly such whose authority would have brought discredit to their
too too severe proceedings) without any subscription at all.

Hence, of the multitude that held out, at first seemed not so great (tho in
truth in respect of the men, and the times, they were too too many) and their
subscription laid with their sundry exceptions in a manner no subscription at
all. But with the credit of these, showing only the subscriptions in one paper,
and retaining their Protestation in another, many were drawn also as unawares
birds into the net, by the chirping of birds first taken. From the color of
these last forms of subscriptions, sprang bruits, as tho all things were well
in the Orders and Liturgy of the Church of England; all things subscribed unto;
that all had yielded; that whosoever mouths were open, had subscribed. But how
far these differ frow that which was at first tendered, I suppose no man is
ignorant. As again, how little difference there is between the latter, and that
which all men did freely and frankly offer at the first. Nothing that did
pertain to her Excellent Majesty was struck at; nothing that concerned
doctrine, or the substance of our faith. Nothing that in the Statutes was set
down touching Subscription.

The most that was excepted against at first, and that generally, were the
Ceremonies, The reading the Apocryphal Books, The ill translation of the
Scriptures used, The Rubricks, Very many things in the Book of ordaining
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and several passages in the prayers. The number
was not many, who refused to use a set-form of prayer to be constantly used in
their Ministry.

It was but twenty five years since the whole Nation came out of Popery, where
they knew nothing else; and it could not be expected that in that time should
be a discovery of all that was truly blameable in Worship, or Government of the
Church. Yet there were some that in those days refused this. Bishop Bancroft in
his Dangerous Positions, p. 84 tells us, that Mr. Field in a Letter to Mr.
Asker, 14. Ap. 1585. tells him:

I preach every Sabbath Day, (if no other that comes by chance does supply the
place) having nothing to do at all with the former Book of Common Prayer, etc.
This was the first division of godly Ministers into such as were purely
Nonconformists. 2. Conforming Nonconformists. The latter were the greater
number, who had subscribed to use the Common Prayer, but not to read it fully
and in all parts; and this with protestations, that their subscriptions should
not oblige them to do any thing contrary to the word of God, etc. there were
several forms of it.

Twenty Ministers of the Diocese of Chichester thus subscribed, with exception
to all the Rubricks, the Book of Ordination, and I know not how many
limitations.

Here the great and infinite wisdom of God was seen, governing the failers of
his servants to his own wise ends and glory. By this means a preaching Ministry
was preserved in England, which had the Bishop kept to his first severity, and
all the Ministers that at first refused, absolutely persisted in their refusal,
had before the Reformation was 28. years old, been destroyed throughout
England, at least the greatest part of it.

But (says our Savior) He that will save his life shall lose it. Very many of
these good men were afterward suspended, deprived, indicted, imprisoned,
wearied out of their lives by troubles in the High Commission; though not for
not subscribing (for which was no Law) yet for not wearing the Surplice, not
using the Cross in Baptism, not keeping Holydays, not reading all the Prayers,
or some such like things. Thus was our state from 1583. till 1603. when King
James came to the Crown.

Hitherto I have showed my Reader the first Impositions in England, and the
woeful mischief wrought by them, not only to multitudes of particular Families,
but to the interest of the Gospel and Reformation in general.

I shall now proceed to a second period, which will take up the whole time of
King James his Reign, from 1603. to 1625. Whitgift was in the beginning
Archbishop, and Bancroft Bishop of London. Their Writings sufficiently testify
how zealous both of them were against Nonconformists. The Convocation this year
established the three Articles (which 20 years before had made such a
confusion) by a Canon; it is their 36 Canon: which Canons were confirmed by
King James, but never since brought to a Parliament, or confirmed by them. I am
not concerned to enquire how valid they are as Laws obligatory to the subject,
till confirmed by Parliament (that belongs to Lawyers to argue, and depends
upon the Kings Prerogative, and the terms used in the Act of 25 Hen. 8.) I am
only concerned to note how Conformity improved upon these Canons, and also what
the effect of these new Impositions was.

For the first, let the Canons themselves speak. Subscription to the three
Articles was now enjoined by Canon 36. Bowing at the name of Jesus was enjoined
Can 18. Bidding of prayer, by another Canon, with a multitude of other things
too long to be here recited; for which I refer my Reader to the Book of Canons.

This makes it evident, that the Conference at Hampton Court, this year, was
not in the name of all Nonconformists, but only the personal Act of 3 or 4 men
Noncon.
The first fruit of this was a Petition with a thousand Ministers hands,
presentad to the King 1603, 4. says Dr. Fuller. Indeed Dr. Fuller says, the
hands were but 750. I believe he takes his intelligence from the abridgment of
that Book, which the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese, delivered to his Majesty, 5.
December, 1604. I find them there mentioned to be 752. out of 23. Counties. Dr.
Fuller says, 25. which are but half the Counties of England and Wales, hardly
so much. Their numbers are thus countd.

Oxfordshire 9. Stafordshire 14. Dorsetshire 17. Nottinghamshire 20. Surry 21.
Norfolk 28. Wiltshire 31. Buckinghamshire 33. Sussex 47. Leicestershire 57.
Essex 57. Cheshire 12. Bedsordshire 16. Somersetshire 17. Darbyshire 20.
Lancashire 21. Kent 23. London 30. Lincolnshire 33. Warwickshire 44. Devon and
Cornwall 51. Northampton 57. Suffolk 72.

These make 752: Here are none reckoned of any County in Wales, nor any of
Yorkshire, Barkshire, and many others. I know no reason any has to doubt, but
that there were a 1000. hands to this Petition; the Petitioners in the body of
their Petition say, they were more than a thousand, and they would not have
told a Lie to a King, which so little labor as counting them would have proved
to be such.

But the matter of the Petition is very considerable, to let my Reader know
both to what height Impositions were grown 77. years since, and what
Oppositions they met with from our forefathers. Dr. Fuller in his
Church History assures us, he has got the true Copy, I will therefore
transcribe it from him, as I find it in the 10th Book, p. 22.

Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign!
Seeing it has pleased the Divine Majesty, to the great comfort of all good
Christians, to advance your Highness, according to your just Title, to the
peaceable Government of this Church, and Commonwealth of England: We, the
Ministers of the Gospel in this Land, neither as factious men, affecting a
popular parity in the Church, nor as Schismatics, aiming at the dissolution of
the State Ecclesiastical, but as the faithful Servants of Christ, and loyal
Subjects to your Majesty, desiring, and longing for a Redress of diverse abuses
of the Church, could do no less in our obedience to God, service to your
Majesty, love to his Church, than acquaint your Majesty with our particular
griefs, for as your Princely Pen writes t^ The King, as a good Physician, must
first know what peccant humors his Patient naturally is most subject unto,
before he can begin his Cure: And although diverse of us that s^^ for
Reformation, Subscribe to the Book, some upon Protestation, some upon
Exposition given them, some with Condition, rather than the Church should have
been deprived of their labor and Ministry; yet now we to the number of more
than a thousand of your Majesty's Subjects and Ministers, all groaning as under
a common burden of humane Rites and Ceremonies do with one joint consent humble
our selves at your Majesty's feet, to be cased and relieved in this behalf. Our
humble suit then unto your Majesty is, that these offenses following, some of
them may be removed, some amended, some qualified.

1. In the Church Service, That the Cross in Baptism, Interrogatories ministered
to Infants, Confirmation (as superfluous) may be taken away, Baptism not to be
administered by Women, and so explained. The Cap and Surplice not urged. That
Examination may go before the Communion. That it may be administered with a
Sermon. That diverse terms of Priests, Absolution, and some others used, with
the Ring in Marriage, and other such like in the Book, might be corrected. The
longsomeness of Service abridged. Church-songs and Music moderated to better
edification. That the Lords day be not profaned. The rest upon Holidays not so
strictly urged. That there may be an Uniformity of Doctrine prescribed, No
Popish opinion any more taught or defended. No Ministers charged to teach the
people to bow at the Name of Jesus. That the Canonical Scriptures only be read
in the Church.

2. Concerning Church Ministers: That none hereafter be admited into the
Ministry but able and sufficient men, and those to preach diligently, and
especially upon the Lords day. That such as be already entered, and cannot
Preach, may either be removed, and some charitable course taken for their
relief, or else to be forced according to the value of their Livings to
maintain Preachers. That non-Residency be not permitted. That King Edwards
Statute for the lawfulness of Ministers Marriages may be revived. That
Ministers be not urged to subscribe, but according to the Law, to the Articles
of Religion, and the Kings Supremacy only.

3. For Church Livings, and Maintenance: That Bishops leave their Commendams,
some holding Prebends, some Parsonages, some Vicarages with their Bishoprics.
That double beneficed men be not suffered to hold, some two, some three
Benefices with Cure, and some two three or four Dignities besides. That
Impropriations annexed to Bishoprics and Colleges, be demised only to
Preachers incumbent, for the old Rent. That the Impropriations of Laymens fees
may be charged with a sixth or seventh part of the worth to the maintenance of
the ^reaching Ministers.

4. For Church Discipline: That the Discipline and Excommunication may be
administered according to Christ's Institution, or at the least that enormities
may be redressed, as namely, That Excommunication come not forth under the
names of Chancellors, Lay-persons, Officials, etc. That men be not
Excommunicated for trifles, twelve penny matters, That none be Ecommunicated
without consent of his Pastor. That the Officers be not suffered to extort
unreasonable fees. That none having Jurisdiction or Registers places, put out
the same to farm. That diverse Popish Canons as for restraint of Marriage at
certain times be reversed. That the longsomeness of Suits in Ecclesiastical
Courts which hang sometimes 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 years, may be restrained. That the
Oath ex Officio, by which men are forced to accuse themselves, be more
sparingly used. That Licenses for Marriage without Banes asked, be more
cautiously granted.

These with such other abuses yet remaining, and practiced in the Church of
England, we are able to show to be not agreeable to the Scriptures, if it shall
please your Highness further to hear us, or more at large to be informed, or by
conference amongst the Learned to be resolved. And yet we doubt not but that
your Majesty without further process, of whose Christian judgment we have
received so good a taste already, is able of your self to judge of the equity of
this cause; God we trust has appointed your Highness our Physician to heal
these diseases; and we say with Mordecai to Esther, Who knows but you are
come to the Kingdom for such a time? Thus your Majesty shall do that which we
are persuaded shall be acceptable to God, honorable to your Majesty in all
succeeding ages, profitable to his Church, which shall be thereby increased,
comfortable to your Ministers, which shall be no more suspended, silenced,
disgraced, imprisoned for men's traditions; and prejudicial unto none, but those
who seek their own credit, quiet and profit in the world. Thus with all dutiful
submission referring our selves to your Majesty's Pleasure for your Gracious
answer, as God shall direct you, We most humbly recommend your Highness to the
Divine Majesty, whom we beseech for Christ his sake to do herein what shall be
for his glory, the good of his Church, and your endless comfort.

Your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the Ministers of the Gospel, who desire
not a disorderly Innovation, but a due and Godly Reformation.


How his Majesty resented this Petition, is variously reported. But sure it is
(says Fuller) it ran the Gantlop through all the Prelatical party, every one
giving it a lash, some with their Pens, more with their tongues, and the dumb
Ministers as they term it found their speech most vocal against it.

How many the number of those was who joined in this, and several other
Petitions at the same time, and were suspended, deprived, imprisoned, etc. I
cannot tell; but a great division arose, which held during the Archbishop
Bancrofts time. Bishop Abbot who succeeded him in the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, was much calmer. Several Books were wrote at this time against the
Nonconformist, by Mr. Hutton, Mr. Rogers, Dr. Lovel, and Dr. Spark, (who had
himself been a Dissenter); but in the year 1607, and 1608, they were learnedly
answered by a Book of three parts, called, A Defense of the Ministers Reasons
for refusal of Subscription. The first part was concerning the holy Scriptures;
the ill Translation of several Texts. The second concerning the Holy Scriptures
and Apocrypha. The third was about kneeling at the Sacrament. Several able
Ministers left the Nation, many others with their Families were undone in it.

Thus Conformity stood till the time of King Charles the First; some Bishops
being more, some less rigid in pressing the Canons. But when Archbishop Laud
came to be Archbishop of Canterbury, (who succeeded Abbot) he made a new
Edition of Impositions, to which he required Conformity, saying second Service
at the Table, setting that at the East end of the Church Altarwise, commanding
the Communion. Table to be railed in, and all people to come up thither to
receive the Communion kneeling; enforcing the bowing at the Name of Jesus.
Forbidding Lectures, and Afternoon-Sermons. Pressing the Book of Sports on the
Lords day. Not injoining but commending bowing toward the East End, etc. and
twenty more things.

What havoc hese things made, is yet within the memory of many; and what
disturbance Bishop Wren made in Suffolk, and other places, as several other
Bishops that were his Creatures did in other Diocesses, many alive know;
multitudes of Ministers were again deprived and suspended. Many undone in the
High Commission. At last in the Convocation 1640, an Oath with etc. was
devised, which had perfected the business in rooting out all Puritan Preachers,
had not a Parliament came and spoiled that design.

Scarce any is ignorant what numbers of Godly Ministers and people left the
Nation upon this account, betwixt 1630. and 1640. so many as to make one of the
noblest Colonies at this day in the world (that, I mean, of New England)
besides those who fled into Holland and Ireland. Many staid at home, and were
miserably treated by Courts. Some lived privately, others in some quiet parts
of the Nation kept their Station.

How little the Conformable Interest gained by this (though that Party ruined
multitudes of godly people and their Families) quickly appeared in the year
1641. when the Parliament began to espouse their Cause, and give them liberty.
The number of Ministers, favoring Nonconformity, presently appeared far
greater than ever before; so as their adversaries had a little satisfied their
lusts, and malice, but not in the least promoved their Cause. The people were
more embittered against them, and more enamoured upon painful godly Ministers.
And the Bishops restraint of Preaching, did but inflame people with the desire
of it. Several Noblemen and Worthy Gentlemen in all parts of England began to
be awakened, as may appear by many of their excellent Speeches in the beginning
of the Parliament 1641. They plainly saw, that through these extravagant
actings, We lost many of our Eminent Ministers, multitudes of our most sober
people were removed into other Countries. The Trade of the Nation was altered,
much of it carried elsewhere; the people in many places turned ignorant brutes
for want of Preaching; many turned Papists, many Doctrines of Popery were
Published, Colleges were fixed for Romish Priests, and Nuns fixed, etc. a Plot
laid by them against the King and Nation; they judged it high time to put an
end to those practices, which had caused those disorders; and had this
advantage to do it, because their Conformity, whether old or new, had no
further Statutable Authority, than was given it by the Act of Conformity, 1
Eliz. and the Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 12. about the Articles of Faith.

Upon his Majesty's happy Restoration, Anno 1660. all promised themselves a
freedom from these evils which had troubled the Church very near 70. years,
from the 13 Eliz. to the year 1640. though indeed in no great degree from the
13th to the 25th of Eliz. but for about 19. years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
and the whole time of King James his Reign (which was 21. years), and 16. years
of King Charles his Reign, these Impositions were the cause almost of all the
evils under which this Nation groaned.

We had reason to promise our selves this immunity from his Majesty's
Declaration at Bredah, and his first Declaration about Ecclesiastical affairs,
in the year 1660. Whether the wisdom of his Majesty, or that party of the House
of Commons, who then opposed the passing of it into an Act, were greater, let
the experience now of Twenty years more determine, which for the most part have
been years of confusion and disorder; as to matters of Religion. That failing,
Impositions were augmented.

Upon this last attempt for settlement, Ministers were not only left to the
Bishops power to have exacted upon them, 1. A Subscription to the 3. Articles
in the 36th Canon. 2. The Oath of Canonical obedience, which though ancient, as
established by Canons in times of Popery, yet we read not of, all the time of
Queen Eliz. But 3. They must be ordained by Bishops, though before ordained
according to the Ordination of all other Reformed Churches (which in Queen
Eliz. time, the Statute 13 Eliz. cap. 12. dispensed with, and made needless. 4.
They must assent and consent to all and every thing in the Common Prayer, as
now Printed. 5. They must declare, renounce, and abjure: all this over and
above, being tied to the personal reading of the Common Prayer, and use of the
Ceremonies, etc.

The effect was, the laying aside of more than 2000. Ministers. Besides the
Congregations which depended on these good men's Ministry; the number of
Quakers, who had no Ministers, and of Pastors of Congregational Churches, who
had no Livings, but were maintained by their people, together with the people
that depended on them, and the Antipaedobaptists, were not small, who all had
an equal, if, not a greater prejudice to the Common Prayer Book and Ceremonies,
etc.

What could by any wise men be expected, but what we have seen, that in all
places people should gather into separate Congregations? Could it be expected,
that such a vast number of Ministers, not half of which had any thing to live
on but their labors to maintain themselves, Wives and Families, should quietly
have sat still and never Preached (if they could have imagined, that this
humane Law could have discharged them from any previous obligation to God),
especially being importuned by the people whom God had committed to them? If
any had such fancies, they were very wild ones.

In public Temples they must not Preach; what remained, but their own or
others hired houses. What would be the event of this, was quickly seen, and an
Act provided against Conventicles, making the punishment, Fines, Imprisonment,
Banishment, etc. What a stir this made, is sufficiently known. This commenced
1664. and being a temporary Act, determined 1667, or 1668. Soon after this,
1665. passed the Act prohibiting Noncon. Ministers to inhabit in Corporations.
And the Act about Conventicles being expired, another Act was made, which took
place, Anno 1670. How many sober Ministers and people in Eight years time had
been undone, by proceedings against them in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
Indictments at Sessions and Assizes, and by putting the first Act against
Conventicles in Execution, is sufficiently known, and too large, and sad a
story to relate. The new Act against Conventicles (and such a one as never
before passed a Parliament of England with respect to Magna Charta, and the
fundamental liberties of the subject) passed about 1670. Ministers and people
were again prosecuted to incredible degrees, almost in all places, until his
Majesty gave a Writ of ease by his Declaration of Indulgence, 1672. that lasted
but two years; and in 1674. the storm began again, as fierce as ever, but
gradually abated till the year 1677. about which time the Parliament began to
have a scent of a Plot to bring in Popery; indeed they scented it first in
1673. Our worthy Patriots from that time stood upon their watch, something they
discerned to be in hand, and that the project was deeply laid, but on what
persons to charge it they knew not, and were wholly in the dark as to the
methods and particulars of it, till God, in the year 1678. inclined Dr. Oats
to do that (never to be forgotten) service to his Country, at one time saving
the Life of his Sovereign, the Government of the Nation, and the Protestant
Religion, from a total extirpation, and all good Protestants from a Massacre.

The eyes of all Sober persons are at length opened to see, that an Union of
Protestants is necessary. The Question is, which way it shall be effected? for
my own part, I should say, any way, by which it is practicable. There are but
Two that can fall within the comprehension of any man of sense.

1. The First is by continuance of the Impositions on Ministers and people,
rooting out all private Meetings, enforcing people to come to hear the
Common Prayer, and to conform to the Ceremonies, and hear their
Parish-Ministers, and receive the Sacrament with them.

2. The Second is by taking off these Impositione, which all agree to be of
things not in their own nature necessary, but such as the Magistrate may if he
pleases relax.

For the first method to unite us, it is a strange one, it aims only at uniting
by destroying; and purchases such a Church-Vnity as the Papists boast of, who
by destroying of hundred thousands of righteous men, at last made all of one
mind in appearance. The experience of more then 100 years has taught us, that
multitudes are neither to be argued, nor cudgelled into their conformity. The
multitude of Nonconformists has increased all a long, in stead of abateing,
even from the first beginning of the difference at Francfurt, to this day; and
he is very ignorant that knows not, that since the fire of London, they have
been almost doubled to what they were before. Nor has the warmth of many
Clergymen of late, in decrying the Plot, or lessening it, and endeavoring to
make people believe it was a Nonconformist Plot, a little contributed to let
the world know what they are, and would be at. Would any have these impositions
still enforced? what can they pursue, but the old design of Reconciling us and
the Church of Rome, in which the Papists will listen to them, till they have
ripened a design to cut their throats, as well as other men's; but those are
mightily ignorant of Popish principles, that can so much as fancy a possibility
of reconciliation with them, so long as we maintain the Kings Supremacy, or a
married Clergy; so that in truth a reconciliation to the Church of Rome, is a
thing not to be thought on by a married Clergyman, (unless he be weary of his
wife and children) nor by a Loyal Subject that understands sense.

The Union must therefore be effected by taking off these impositions, which
now for an hundred years have produced so ill effects in this Nation. It is
easy to see how great the good of this would be. We should all then be known by
the single name of Protestants, and be hearty as one man in opposition to all
Popish designs. Our Civil, and Ecolesiastical Courts might possibly then be at
leisure to execute the power with which they are betrusted, against Papists and
profane persons. Sober and industrious men would be encouraged to push out in
trading to their utmost. There would be no complaining in our streets for want
of the Ordinances of God so administered, as that concientious people might
freely partake of them, without so much as a fancy that might make them call
out, Death is in the pot, and sit at the Lords feasts without so much as a
jealousy of a Divine Sword hanging over their heads, spoiling their Spiritual
appetite. In short, it would restore us to one of the greatest pieces of
Christian liberty, To serve the Lord without fear, either of offending God whom
they know in matters of Worship to be a jealous God, or of being undone in
their temporal concerns for the exercise of a tender conscience toward God.
All good men should rejoice under the shadow of the King and Parliament, and
unite their Prayers with cheerfulness for both.

What would be the Evil of it? The foundations of Archbishop Whitgift, and
Archbishop Laud, and my Lord Chancellor Hide (the buildings upon which, has
hitherto been kept up with no less guard than the trouble of all the Courts of
Judicature in England) would be something shaken, and our foundations laid upon
the word of God, which surely is far better; the credit of some men, who have
laid all the stress of Religion upon a Common-prayerbook and some Ceremonies,
would be thought a little impaired; the Magistrate should do nothing
displeasing to God, who never required the imposition of these things at his
hands: and doubtless has been highly displeased at a great deal of force used,
which has not been good for the enforcing of them.

It is, as I have said before, more than an hundred years since these
impositions have been the cause of so much evil in these Nations, and that not
only to particular families and persons, but even to the whole Nation. Though
our Civil Wars were bottomed upon Questions and Grievances of a Civil Nature:
yet it is hardly imaginable the common people should have been so inflamed, had
they not before been wounded in so tender a part as that of their Consciences
toward God.

By reason of these contests, Papists have been connived at, and gained a great
deal of Reputation, so much (that till within these 2 years) it was dangerous
for Protestants to vie with them, for Loyalty or Religion. We see the issue,
while they have been thus neglected, yea credited, they have been hatching the
most hellish Plot that was ever heard of, hardly to be paralleled by any story.
The Plot has in the bowels of it been discovered so full of Blood, and Cruelty
and Ingratude, to his most Sacred Majesty; and in the defense of themselves
from the imputation of it, they have been found guilty of so many Lies, so much
Perjury and Subornation, so much ungodliness and unrighteousness, that they
cannot but see their Catholic Cause is wounded under the fifth rib, and their
pretended Religion not like to recover its reputation, until there be none left
of this Geration. They have nothing to do, but to wait a time when they may
fight out their way with some probable hope of prevailing.

It is certainly now high time to restore all Protestants (be their persuasions
what they will) to a just liberty in the things of God, than the want of which
nothing can more dispirit good men in their duty as to a common watchfulness
and defense; for what spirit can be in them who know they shall be ruined by
one hand or another? I surther offer it to the consideration of our grave
Senators, who come up from the several parts of the Nation, and must best know
the complexion of it, Whether those who are most against the taking of these
Impositions, be not (I do not say all, but forty for one) the persons whom
several Proclamations of his Majesty, and several votes of two Parliaments
declaring it, and the several judgments upon some of the Traitors given by our
Courts of Justice, have not been able to convince, That there is any Popish
Plot; but in all their converse they have made it their business to deny, or
lessen the Plot, to defame and vilify the Kings Evidence, to impose upon people
that it was a Plot of the Nonconformists, to make the dying words of the
Jesuits creditable. In short, by all manner of ways to turn the whole Popish
Plot into Ridicule. I do know some few (very few others) zealous for these
Impositions, have born a Testimony against the Papists, and freely declare
their Judgments about the Plot, to the sense of the King, the Parliament and
the Judges; but as to the generality, let observation be made, and judgment
accordingly given. If it be found to be that party, they are fit only to be
regarded by those who pray for the good success of that Execrable design, to
which the continuance of these things, and a vigorous proceeding accordingly
against Nonconformists, will as potently conduce, as it is possible any thing
should.

From this short, and true account of the rise, and growth, and effects of
these Impositions, a good account may be given of a late Authors History of
Separation, the smalness of it at first, and the further increase and
improvements of it, which indeed did much vary, according as Impositions
varied, and multiplied. Those Congregations which he calls Separate
Congregations, were from the first of Reformation; but the numbers of them, and
of the persons in them, was much increased after 1583. when Whitgift first
brought in Subscriptions to Articles, and imposed them universally; and
increased yet more in 1603. and further in Bishop Lauds time, and were greatest
in 1662: when the greatest number of Ministers was thrown out and forbidden to
preach in any public Temples. Till that time Nonconformist Ministers might
preach publicly, and most of them did so in the years 1634, 1635. to 1640:
which is the true reason that in those years there were so few Private
meetings, the people could in public Temples hear their Ministers as
Lecturers, yet in those times there were private meetings; and notwithstanding
all the fury some Bishops used, I remember Bishop Hall in a speech made to the
Parliament 1641 or 1642. complained of an hundred such meetings to be in London
alone.

Nor is it any wonder if in near forty years time, good people have gained a
little more light in matters of Worship and Discipline, and discerned the
unlawfulness of some things in both, which were not at that time discerned. The
Questions relating to both, have been more ventilated since the year 1640. than
ever they were before, since the Reformation. So as a telling of the world, how
few dissenters were at first, and in how few things they dissented, is very
insignificant to any purpose but the loading of present Dissenters with an
Odium from those ignorant and passionate persons who do not understand, That
they had not half so much reason to dissent then, as they have had since, and
now have; and that the present Conformity required of Ministers, is twice more
than was formerly required. And for the people, their Nonconformity in a
greater degree must also be attributed to the further light they have gained as
to matters of Worship and Discipline, the true nature and order of Churches,
together with the outing of their Pastors, they being no such notions as all
can swallow, That the forbidding godly Ministers to preach by an humane law,
dissolves the pastoral relation of Pastors to their Churches. Or, that all
within the bounds of a parish, are obliged to be members of the Church in that
place; or are therefore so, because they dwell within the bounds of such places.

Some observe, that most men have some opportunities in their lifetime offered
them by the Providence of God, which if they lay hold of, they make them happy
in the good things of this life. The like fate possibly attends Nations.

We had one opportunity offered us in Q Elizabeth's time, when Reformation might
have been settled without these ungrateful impositions. This was lost through
the fiery zeal of the then Archbishp, and brought us into near 20 years
troubles. We had a second in the beginning of King James his time; but the same
man, and his successor Archbishop Bancroft etc. again hindered our seeing what
concerned our peace. We had a third opportunity upon his Majesty's
Restoration; by whose means it was then hindered, all know. We have since met
with 20 years trouble more, or very nigh.

We have a fourth before us at this time, upon the discovery of this Execrable
Popish Plot. When God calls us under the penalty of all that is dear unto us,
to seek peace amongst our selves, (for our Savior has told us, A Kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand). All other proposals for Union, but the
abating those Impositions which divide us, are mere idle toys and vanities.
Good men cannot love peace so well, as to purchase it by submission to things
which they judge sinful. If we should lose this also, I shall only say,

The Interpretation be to those that hate us, and to the Enemies of our God. We
may look for good, but no good will come.

FINIS.

