A DEFENSE OF THE ABSOLUTION GIVEN TO Sr. WILLIAM PERKINS, At the Place of
Execution. April the 3 d. WITH A Farther VINDICATION thereof, Occasioned by a
Paper, Entitled a Declaration of the Sense of the Archbishops and Bishops,
etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Though I hope to be rightly understood in all the particulars of my Defense it
not being my intention to give any provocation: Yet I think my self obliged to
advertise the Reader, that Mr. Snatt and Mr. Cook, have been altogether
unacquainted with, unconcerned in, and unconsenting to, the Penning, or
Publication, of these two Papers.

A DEFENSE OF THE Absolution given to Sir William Perkins at the Place of
Execution. April the 3d.
MY being present and in some measure Officiating at the Place of Execution on
Friday last, has been extremely misunderstood. The Weekly Intelligence together
with the Remarker, have censured this Action with a great deal of Liberty, and
Heat. I thank God I am not easily disturbed with intemperate Language,
especially when us given without Occasion. So that it Matters had gone no
farther, I could have passed over the ill Usage and said nothing. I confess
having received notice that some Persons of Figure threatened me with
Imprisonment, I took a little care of my self; and as it happened not without
reason. For on Monday about Twelve at Night, six or eight Persons rushed into
my Lodgings, broke open a Trunck, and seized some Papers of Value, though
perfectly Inoffensive, and Foreign to their Purpose. And since, I understand
there is a Bill found against me for High Misdemeanors. And now one would think
I had done something very extraordinary.

I shall therefore make a brief Report of Matters of Fact, and leave the World
to judge, whether all these Censures and Severities are deserved or not.

Sir William Perkins (whom I had not seen for four or five Years last past)
after his Trial, desired me to come to him in order to his Preparation for
another World. I accordingly visited him in Newgate, as I thought my self
obliged by my Character. I was put in the List of those who had leave to see
him by Public Order, and had the first two Days the Liberty of conversing with
him in Private. Afterward I was not permitted to Speak, or Pray with him
alone, a Keeper, being always present. At last even this Permission was
recalled, insomuch that I could never see him from Wednesday Morning, April the
1 st. till Friday at the place of Execution. Sir William being under an
Expectation of Death from the time of his Sentence, had given me the State of
his Conscience, and therefore desired the Solemn Absolution of the Church,
might be Pronounced to him by me, the last Day. And understanding I was refused
Admittance on Friday Morning, he sent me word that he would gladly see me at
the Place of Execution, I went thither, and gave him the Absolution he
requested, it being impracticable for me to do it elsewhere. This Office I
performed Word for Word in Form, as it stands in the Visitation of the Sick.
And now where lies the great Crime of all this? When a Man has declared his
Sorrow for all the Faults, and Miscarriages of his Life, and qualified himself
for the Privilege of Absolution, with what Justice could it be denied him?
Ought not Dying Persons to be Supported in their last Agonies, and pass into
the other World with all the Advantage the Church can give them? I am
surprised, so regular a Proceeding as this, should give so much Offense, and
make so much a Noise as I perceive it has done, Some People I understand are
displeased at the Office being performed with imposition of Hands. Now this is
not only an innocent, but an ancient Ceremony of Absolution. ' It Was the general
Practice of the Primitive Church in such cases, long before there were any
Exceptions to the Roman Communion. It Is in the Opinion of several Fathers, and
good Modern Expositors referred to by the Apostle (1 Timothy 5. 22.) It Is likewise
prescribed the ^ssisting Presbyters in our own Ordination Form. But I suppose I
need say no more in defense of this Circumstance. To proceed. Others seem very
much shocked at the Thing it self; and think it a strange Presumption to admit
a Person charged with so high a Crime, to the benefit of Absolution. With
submission, on, this is concluding a great deal too fast. Are all people damned
that are cast in a Capital Indictment? If so, to what purpose are they visited
by Divine, why are they exhorted to Repentance, and have Time allowed them to
fit them for death? But if they may be acquitted hereafter, notwithstanding
their Condemnation here; if they may be recovered by Recollection, by
Repentance, and Resignation, why should the Church refuse them her Pardon on
Earth, when she believes it is passed in Heaven? The Power of the Keys was given
for this purpose, that the Ministers of God might bind or loose, as the
Disposition of the Person required. The latter I sincerely believed to be Sir
William's Case: I judged him to have a full Right to all the Privileges of
Communion: And therefore had I denied him Absolution upon his Request, I had
failed in my Duty, and gone against the Authority both of the Ancient, and
English Church, If it is said that the Nature of this Gentleman's Charge
required his being Absolved in Private. To this I answer, so he had been, had I
been permitted to visit him the last Morning. But this Liberty was refused me
more than once. And I hope I shall not be blamed for Impossibilities of other
Men's making. In short, he seemed very desirous of Absolution at my Hands, as
being the only Person acquainted with his Condition. Privately 'twas not in my
Power to give it him; So that he must either receive it Publicly from me, or
not at all. But Sir William confessed himself acquainted with the intended
Assassination. Pray did he confess it to me, and have I revealed any Part of
his Confession? Then I had been guilty of High Misdemeanor indeed. I had broke
the 113 th. Canon, and been Pronounced Irregular by the Church. And he that
falls under Irregularity, is for ever after incapable of Executing the Office
of a Priest. (Dr. Heylin's Introduct. to Cyprian, Angl. p. 6.) I confess there
is an Exception in the Canon, but that does not reach the Case in Hand, even
upon the largest Supposition. Well! But Sir William owned this Charge before
the Committee. How could I know that? I neither saw, Sir William after his
Examination, till Friday Noon, nor the Votes which mentioned it till after that
Time. But he confessed it in his Paper. What then? Which way does the Paper
concern me? It Is well known Sir William Perkins was a Man of Sense, and bred to
Law and Letters, and needed no help to assist him in Writing a few Lines,
Besides, I was not permitted to come near him for more than two Days before he
suffered: Neither was he allowed so much as Pen and Ink till the last Morning.
Then it was that he penned his Speech, as I am told by those who were present;
and having read it before the Keeper, delivered a Copy of it to a Friend, which
was not showed to me till after the Execution. Indeed, I did believe he would
leave some Paper behind him, both because it is customary upon such sad
Occasions; and because on Tuesday Night when he expected Death on Wednesday, he
desired Pen, Ink and Paper, for that purpose.

And now after all, I desire to know, in what single Circumltance I have
misbehaved my self, or done any thing unbecoming my Profession? It Is very hard
a Man must be Persecuted for Performing the Obligations of his Office, and the
Duties of common Friendship, and Humanity. As for any Methods of Murder, I
dislike them no less than those who rail loudest; and nothing but a Mercenary
Malice could suggest the contrary. But if the Functions of the Priesthood, and
the Assistances of Religion, and the Reading the Public Liturgy are grown a
Crime, I am not concerned at the Imputation. I hope the complying Clergy will
take some care to check the Disorders, and inform the ignorance of their People
a little better. If they are unreproved for these slanderous Excesses, their
Pastors must one Day expect to account for it.

As for those in Power, it is possible they may have been governed by
Mis-reports, and sudden Resentment: if so, second Thoughts, and the Reason of
the Case, will put a stop to their Severities. And that this may be the issue
of the Business, I think my self obliged to with as well for their sakes, as my
own.

Apr. 9th. 1696. Ier. Collier.

A FARTHER DEFENSE OF THE ABSOLUTION GIVEN TO Sr. WILLIAM PERKINS, OCCASIONED
By a Paper, Entitled a Declaration of the Archbishops, and Bishops, etc.
ABOUT a Fortnight since I published the foregoing Defense of the Absolution
given to Sir William Perkins. It Is true, the Vindication was not drawn out into
any great length, neither did I imagine it necessary. That which was said, was
in my opinion sufficient to satisfy any candid and impartial Reader. If the
Argument was any where over-contracted, 'twas in that part which mentions
Imposition of Hands. Here I confess the proofs were but generally named, and
the force and improvement of them left in some measure to Collection, My desire
to undeceive the people; and to silence their clamours as soon as might be the
disadvantage of my retirement, and the plainness of the Case, were the reasons
why I was no fuller upon that Head. But now I have a fresh opportunity to treat
the point more at large. The late Declaration, etc. of the Bishops having given
me a just occesion to resume the Argument. I must own the perusal of this
Declaration surprised me very much. I could not imagine these Reverend Prelates
would have published so unsupported a Censure; nor engaged their Character so
far in this Affair. I am almost amazed an innocent Conduct should be thus
misconstrued, and the Charge run so high without proof, or provocation to
defended it.

The Declaration begins with some. Remarks upon the Papers of Sir William
Perkins, and Sir John Friend: These Exceptions I shall pass over, as being
unconcerned in their Defense. Indeed my Resolution upon the whole is, to engage
no farther than the Justification of my own Conduct; as being unwilling to have
any unnecessary Disputes with these Reverend Prelates.

The pretended irregularity objected against Mr. Snatt, Mr. Cook, and my self,
relates wholly to the Absolution given to those two Gentlemen at the place of
Execution. The performance of this Office, the Bishops are pleased to say was
extremely insolent and without precedent, in the manner, and altogether
irregular in the thing. (p. 6, 7.)

I shall endeavor to justify my Practice against every Point of the
Accusation, and prove the Absolution defensible, both with respect to manner,
and form, to persons, and occasion. And 1 st. with respect to the Manner. And
here I shall make good three Things.

1 st. That giving Absolution with Imposition of Hands was the general practice
of the Ancient Church.

2 dly. That the performance of this Ceremony was allowed to Priests, and
sometimes to Deacons, as well as Bishops.

3 dly. That Imposition of Hands is enjoyed the assisting Presbyters by our own
Church, in the Office of Ordination, and by parity of reason is fairly
applicable to the present case.

1 st. That giving of Absolution with Imposition of Hands, was the general
practice of the Ancient Church.

To begin with Tertullian; who lived in the beginning of the third Century.
This Father understands that place of the Apostle, lay hands suddenly on no
man, (I Tim, 5. 22.) of the Offices of Penance and Absolution, ( L. de pudic.
cap. 18.) And ( cap. 22.) He alludes to the same Custom in these words, Carnem
laniatam prosternens, as Albaspinaeus observes. (Albasp. obser. l. 2. p. 97.
Not. in Tertull. p. 181.) Indeed the Design of his Book de Pudicitia, plainly
determines the Author to this sense. Here he treats professedly of those who
were to be finally excluded from Church Communion, and denied the Discipline of
Penance. He disputes nothing about Confirmation, or Orders, so that it is
evident the Imposition of Hands, mentioned by him, must relate to Penitential
Absolution.

St. Cyprian's Council of Carthage, is express to the same purpose. Here
Nemesianus, Crescens, Secundinus, and Vincentius, Bishops of Thubuni, Cirta,
Carpi, and Tiberis, all of them agree, that the Churches Peace, and the
Expedients of Reconciliation, were to pass through this Form of Imposition of
Hands.

The 80th Canon of the 4th Council of Carthage, enjoins, That during the whole
time of Abstinence, (I suppose either stated, or occasional) the Priests (
Sacerdotes) should lay their Hands upon the Penitents.

The 11th Canon of the 3d Council of Toledo, in the Directions for the Methods
of Penance, is positive for the frequent use of this Ceremony, which made
Albaspinaeus conclude, That Absolution-Prayers, and Imposition of Hands, were
repeated and customary in such cases. ( Albasp. Observe. l. 2. p. 86.)

To conclude this point. The Learned Dr. Hammond in his Annotations on the Text
above mentioned, (1 Timothy 5. 22.) refers the laying on of Hands to Absolution.
The Apostle (says he) exhorts Timothy that he should not make too much haste to
receive those who were under Censures, to Absolution. For that was the thing
which would most probably make him partaker, or guilty of their sins, which the
Censures were designed to reform in them, but would not do so, if before they
had approved their Repentance and Reformation, they were received to the Peace
of the Church. This Learned Divine cites a great many Authorities in Defense of
his Opinion, which the Reader may consult at his leisure.

Secondly, The pronouncing the Absolution with Imposition of Hands, is no
Encroachment upon the Episcopal Authority, but plainly allowed to the Order of
Presbyters.

This point I shall make good from several plain Testimonies of St. Cyprian,
whose Authority must be granted to be unexceptionable, both with respect to the
Antiquity and Character of the Person. Indeed it is to this Father that we are
principally obliged for the Remains we have of the Discipline and Government of
the Primitive Church.

Now St. Cyprian is categorical in the case, and affirms roundly, that in
lesser Crimes than those of the Lapsed, the Penitent could not be admitted to
full Communion, unless the Bishops and Clergy had laid their Hands upon him.
Nisi prius illi ab Episcopis and clero manus fuerit imposita. (Ep. 17. p. 39.
Ed. Oxon.) Now where the Bishops and Clergy are thus contradistinguish'd, the
Order of Priests must be comprehended in the latter, in the most restrained
Construction. I might produce his 15th and 16th Ep. (p. 34, 37.) for the same
purpose; but because these Testimonies run much in the words of the former, I
shall wave the Recital.

This Father in his 18th Ep. tells his Priests and Deacons, That they need not
expect his coming Home, to reconcile the Lapsed, but if any of the Laiety were
in danger of Death, a Priest, and if a Priest could not be had, and the
necessity was extreme, a Deacon, was a sufficient Authority, to hear their
Confession, to lay Hands upon them, and consign them to the Peace of the
Church. The same Advice, upon the same occasion is repeated, (Ep. 19. p. 41.)
From whence it is evident, that Imposition of Hands was no reserved
incommunicable privilege of the Bishops, but delegated as low as the Deacons,
upon emergent necessity, and visible Approaches of Death. These Authorities of
St. Cyprian, are all double charged, and prove two points at once. They prove,
that Imposition of Hands was a general Appendix to Absolution, and that it was
within the Commission of the Priest to officiate in the Ceremony. To proceed.

In the 13th Canon of the first Council of Nice, the Viaticum is ordered to be
given to those who are at the point of Death. And by the Viaticum, Albaspinaeus
proves, that Absolution with Imposition of Hands was meant, and not the
Eucharist: And that such an Absolution might be given by those who were no more
than Priests. (Albasp. Not. in quosdam Can. p. 131.) I could amasse a great
many more Testimonies were it necessary; but I conceive what has been said
already, may be sufficient to vindicate my Practice from the Charge of
Encroachment, and Singularity.

Thirdly, Imposition of Hands is enjoined the Assisting Presbyters by our own
Church in the Office of Ordination, and by parity of reason is fairly
applicable to the present case.

If our Church had thought the Imposition of Hands too much for the Character
of Priests, she would not have prescribed them a share in it at her Ordinations.
But since she has allowed them this liberty in the most solemn Exercises of
Authority, why should she deny it in inferior Cases? To assist in the
Conveyance of an Authority, seems a greater mark of Power, than the executing
any Branch of the Authority conveyed. If the Presbyters are permitted to lay
their Hands upon the Clergy, why not a fortiori upon the Laity? St. Hierom
affirms plainly (Ep. ad Evagr.) that the Powers of a Priest comprehend those of
a Bishop, excepting in the point of Ordination. Our Church has never condemned
this Father's Assertion; why then may not the first Absolve with Imposition of
Hands, no less than the other?

But there is no Appointment of this Ceremony in the Absolution-Rubrick. True:
Neither is there any Prohibition. The Rubric is perfectly silent both as to
Posture and Gesture, and yet some Circumstances of this Nature must of
necessity be used.

Now since our Church allows the Priest Imposition of Hands in another case,
and does not forbid it in this, Is it any harm if our Liberty moves upward, and
determines it self by general Usage and Primitive Practice? Our Church has
always professed a regard for the Patterns of Antiquity: We cannot do her a
greater Honor, than by conforming to the Solemnities of the purest Ages, than
by making the Discipline of Fathers and Councils the Rule of our Behavior.
Especially when we are not bound up by National Law, and particular
Constitution. Thus much for the Manner.

I come now to justify the thing and the occasion.

It Is objected by these Reverend Prelates, that the three assisting Clergymen
pronounced a Form of Absolution, etc. With submission, I hope a Form is better
than no Form. Especially when it was a Form Rubrically appointed. A Form drawn
up by the public Authority of the Church, confirmed by Canon, and Act of
Parliament. A Form the most pertinent and proper to the occasion of any in the
Liturgy. I am sorry to see the solemn Offices of Religion mentioned with such
seeming coldness, and Abatements of Expression. Were it not that I am unwilling
to give these Reverend Prelates the trouble of a Question, I would gladly
understand what Form they could have fixed on more suitable to so sad an
occasion? I Am sure that Form of Absolution is the most solemn and Authoritative
of any in the Service Book. Now if ever the Church exerts her self ought it not
to be in cases of the greatest Necessity? Can her most comfortable
Administrations and the highest Acts of her Authority, be better employed than
for the Relief of Dying Persons, who are combating the King of Terrors, and
stand just upon the brink of Eternity? Upon the whole, I am surprised they
should say the Rubric gave us no pretense of Authority to absolve those
Persons. Does not the Rubric give the Priest a power to pronounce the
Absolution, and to judge of the Condition of the Peninent? This cannot be
denied. And why then had we no pretense of Authority? Because the Rubric
relates to the Sick. To this I answer. Had the Church left us a stated Office
for Persons Condemned, and we had refused to make use of it, there had been
some force in the Objection: But as the matter stands, I humbly conceive there
is none at all. The Church without question, would have Condemned Persons taken
care of, as well as others, and their Spiritual Necessities supplied. And if
so, is it not more respect to the Church to officiate in Forms of her own
setting forth, than in private and unauthorized Compositions? And if the
Function was to be performed in the public Devotions, I desire to know what
part of them could have been more proper than the Office of Visitation of the
Sick? If we consider the Design of the Church, and especially the Rubric
before the Absolution, we shall find that she intended this Office to prepare
People for the other World, and considered them rather as Dying, than likely to
recover. This appears evidently from the Questions and Advices ordered to be
asked and given; so that wherever Death is in view, the Office cannot be
unseasonable, nor misapplyed. And can any Persons be more certain of Death than
those who are publicly Condemned, who lie under fatal Sentence, and
irresistible Power? Who have the Force of the County to dispatch them, and are
just ready to receive the Stroke? As to the previous Questions, they were put
and answered, the Absolution was desired, and the Confession received in
Prison; and in short, the Churches Directions were observed in every
particular. But we did not move them to make a special Confession of their Sins
at that time. With Submission, where lies the Necessity, or even the Expediency
of such a Practice? Does our Church oblige Dying Persons to public Confession?
Does she require them to throw open the Retirements of Conscience, and the
Secrets of private Life, to the view of the World? I am at a loss to understand
why we should be charged with Omissions on such accounts as these.

The Declaration, etc. proceeds with great vehemence, ( p. 9.) and charges us
with manifest Transgression of the Churches Order, and profane Abuse of the
Authority of Christ. These are hard words, but I hope altogether undeserved.
It Is true, they instance only in Mr. Snatt, and Mr. Cook, but I must own the
Objection lies equally against my self; for I never saw Sir John Friend during
his whole Imprisonment. But in assisting at his Absolution so far as laying on
my Hand amounts to, I did no more than what is easily defensible. I grant I had
no immediate and particular knowledge of his Condition, neither was it
necessary. Our Church, in conformity to Antiquity, has made the Priest the
proper Judge of the Qualifications of the Penitent, and supposes him fit to be
trusted, and believed in that Affair. Now Mr. Snatt and Mr. Cook, (upon whose
Judgment and Integrity I can very well depend) had given me a general Account
of Sir John's Pious Disposition, and that he was well prepared for all the
assistance the Church could give him. The having so good Information from first
hands, from proper and authorized Judges, is sufficient to warrant my part in
Sir John's Absolution. This, besides what has been said, I shall make good from
two parallel Instances.

First, It Is well known that Bishops of the ancient Church used to give a sort
of Certificates to those that Traveled; by virtue of which, they were not only
entertained and accommodated, but admitted to full Communion all over
Christendom. (Albasp. Not. in Can. p. 115.) From whence we may observe, that
personal Acquaintance, and particular Examination, are not necessary to give a
Right to the Privileges of Christianity. Where the Credentials are good, the
Church is to enquire no farther; she is to presume upon the probity of the
person recommended, and to treat him accordingly.

Secondly, Our own Church in some of the highest Administrations acts upon
Principles of Trust and Confidence. She conveys her Privileges, and exercises
her Authority, without always insisting on personal Enquiry and immediate
proof. At the giving of Holy Orders neither the Bishops, nor the assisting
Presbyters, are always personally acquainted with those they Ordain. The
prudence of our Church does not tie us up to such unreasonable Rigours. Both
Practice, and the Ordination Form, suppose the contrary. And why then may not
the Priest assist in Absolution as well as Orders, without any previous
Experiment of the State of the Person? Why may not the first, as well as the
latter branch of his Authority, act upon the Warrant of unexceptionable
Testimony? By all parity of Reason and force of Consequence, the practice is no
less defensible in one case, than in the other.

If it is objected, That the joining of all the three Clergymen in the
Imposition of Hands is unpresidented, and exceptionable. To this I answer. That
if the Action was lawful, singly performed, I cannot imagine how a concurrence
of more authorized Persons should make it otherwise? Is there any harm in Union
and Solemnity? Or can Religion be treated with too many Circumstances of
Advantage? What Canon is there that stints the Assistance to One, and forbids a
plurality of Persons? Timothy had the Hands of the Presbytery laid upon him, (1 Timothy 4. 14.) which, without doubt, exceeded the Number now objected. Our
Church, at her Ordination, allows this Ceremony to all the Presbyters present.
And in the very case of Absolution, the Penitent was to receive Imposition of
Hands from the Bishop and Clergy; as appears from the Testimonies of St.
Cyprian above mentioned. Farther.

These Reverend Prelates argue that we must either look on the Persons absolved
as Impenitents, or Martyrs; and they make their advantage of each branch of the
Supposition. ( p. 10, 11.) But, with submission, I see no necessity of granting
the Disjunction. For there may be a third way of considering the matter. To
speak to my own case: I absolved Sir William Perkins as a Penitent; and I
suppose every Body must be absolved under that Consideration. For Absolution
supposes both Sin, and Repentance, in the Notion of it. But as for the Matter
of Sir William's Repentance, that is never likely to be known from me. Neither
am I in the least affected with the Bishop's Inference. For supposing I
received a defective Confession, am I accountable for that? However, I neither
do nor am obliged to declare my Opinion in this matter. But thus far I am
positive, that there was nothing confes'd to me, which the Canon obliges me to
reveal: And what the Canon does not enjoin me to discover, it enioyns me not to
discover. ( Can. 113. Vid. first Defense) And so there is an end of this
Dispute.

I hope by this time it may appear, that I am neither unfurnished with Reason,
or Precedent, to justify what I have done. However I shall give one late
instance for the whole case, and so conclude.

At the Execution of Mr. Ashton, Ian. 1690. Absolution was given him in the
same Form, with Imposition of Hands, at the same place, and upon the same
occasion; and a justifying Paper left by the Person that Suffered. Now at that
time there was no Exceptions made either to Manner, or Thing. The performance
was so far from displeasing, that the Sheriff gave his Thanks for the Solemnity
of the Office. There was no Complaints either at Lambeth, or White Hall, no
public Invective, no seizing of Body and Goods; in short, no signs of the
least Dissatisfaction. And who could imagine, that the bare repeating of an
action, should raise such a Storm upon us now, which was so perfectly
inoffensive before? To punish in this manner without warning, or Precedent,
without Canon, or Law, is (with submission) somewhat unintelligible.

And now having defended my self, I shall reply nothing to all the unkind
Reflections, and Tragical Language of the Declaration. It Is probably within my
power, to turn some of these Reverend Prelates Artillery upon them. But my
regard to their Character, and Inclination not to displease, makes me wave the
advantage.

However their extraordinary usage has done me the Honor of an Opportunity to
forgive them, which I thank God I heartily do.

Ap^il 21. 1696. I. C.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have just now received a Sheet, called, An Answer to my Defense, etc. As for
that little which is material in this Paper, it is already satisfied, and I
don't love needless Repetitions. And therefore to begin and end in a word with
this Answerer; If he has any thing remarkable, it is in my Opinion, his Ill
Language, and that I can both Pity and Despise.

Apr. 25.

