THE BODY of DIVINITY, Or, a Confession of FAITH, Being the substance of
CHRISTIANITY: Containing the most Material things relating to Matters both of
FAITH and PRACTICE.

Published for the Benefit and Profit of all, especially of those who love the
Lord Jesus in Sincerity, and desire the knowledge of the Holy, and the way of
the New Covenant that leads to Glory.

Very briefly contracted according to Scripture light, and plainly handled in
31. Chapters.

By THOMAS COLLIER.

John 5. 39. Search the Scripture, for in them ye think to have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me. Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Rule, it is because there is no
light in them. 2 Cor. 4. 13. But having the same Spirit of Faith, according as
it is written, I believe, therefore have I spoken; we also believe, therefore
speak. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch in Exchange Ally, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1674.

THE PREFACE, OR, EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THis Treatise is designed for thy special and spiritual Profit; its true that
the holy Scripture, commonly called the Bible, is the Book of all Books, and
that according to which, we all ought to speak, write and walk; and its true as
the Wise man says, of making many Books there is no end, especially unless our
end therein be the glory of God, and the good of Souls: its true we know but in
part, and a very little, little part too, and therefore can Prophecy but in
part.

Therefore read not any man's Book but with a supposition, that there may be a
mixture* of some Error with Truth, and some mistakes, and receive nothing for
truth from the word or credit of the Person who ever it be, but as its rightly
grounded on the Word of God, the Scripture of Truth, according to which all
ought to speak, and the best of men may be in some things mistaken; though
ordinarily in the substantial things of the New Birth of Faith and Holiness,
the Spirits work is the same in all, yet by reason of the Babylonish confusion
that yet remains, the language of the Saints seems to be much divided; in
consideration whereof, I thought nothing more likely to produce unity in
spirit, then unity in the body and substance of Truth; for which cause I have
made this Essay in bringing forth this brief plain Treatise about the most
substantial matters of Christianity, that all who agree in the substance of
Truth, may unite in Spirit; and although we cannot attain such a uniting as is
desirable, and shall in time be by the Lord accomplished, in and amongst his
People, according to that Prophecy and Promise, Zeph. 3. 9. Yet it is my
hearts desire, that all who truly love the Lord, would show it by their uniting
at least in affection, for that is Gospel Grace and Love indeed, to love for
God and Christ's sake, though of differing apprehensions about some of the
weighty things in the New Covenant, for every Truth of Christ is of weight and
worth, and is, or ought so to be esteemed by all that love him, Psalm. 119. 127,
128. and the right understanding of the mind of God in the Scripture, is the
only wright way of uniting.

I am far from the mind of those who pretend and endeavor the uniting of all
into uniformity in Faith and Worship, by Coersive Power and human force; a
unity more suiting Brutes then Christians, and a way to build up Satan's
Kingdom, under pretense of the Kingdom of Christ; but that I earnestly long
after, and pray for, is, the uniting of all true Christians in the spirit and
faith of the Gospel, who are the Church and Kingdom of Christ, his Body
Mistical, and if through darkness we cannot attain the uniformity of Christian
Faith, and worship in every part, but the language of Christians be yet
divided, yet let every one endeavor the attainment of a spirit of Love, and
forbearance each to other, not Judging, Sensuring, and Reviling, which shows
the spirit of the World, and not of Christ.

And these ensuing Chapters are most especially and principally directed to
such, who alone are capacitated to Understand, Believe and Practice the things
in them contained, they are not the Notions of sudden Conception, but the fruit
and birth of many years Travel and Meditation, and I hope it may, through the
Blessing of God, at some time or other, to some persons or other, add something
or other to the Understanding, Faith, Hope, and Joy of their Souls, and be some
help of direction to a right walk in the way of Life.

I shall not say any thing as to the matters handled in this Treatise, by way
of Commendation, to induce the Reader to its Perusal; if it speak not for it
self, in the use thereof, the Reader is at liberty to lay it aside, only let
him beware that he slight it not, because it is not suited to his mind; if it
be according to the Divine revelation of the Word and Will of Christ; its the
great concernment of all that will approve themselves gracious before the Lord,
to bring their minds to the Scripture, and not the Scripture to their minds; it
is to be feared that great has been the miscarriage of Christians in this very
thing at this day, open-heartedness to Godward, and a sincere will to know
that we may do the will of the Lord, is the ready way to know more of his will,
and then shall we not be ashamed, when we have a respect to all his
Commandments; ignorance of any part of the Revealed Will of God is a sin, a
sinful defect in gracious persons, but to be willingly ignorant, or wilfully
disobedient to any part of the Revealed will of God, is a sin of the highest
nature, and must be punished with many stripes, Luke 12. 47, 48. wilfully to
add to, or diminish from the Word of God, is a sin, and the judgment of such is
declared in the Word, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18, 19.

In a word, I do believe that sincere desires, accompanied with the like
endeavors, after the knowledge of the will of Christ, and a faithful living up
to what we know, resolving our wisdom and wills in every thing into the wisdom
and will of Christ, would be wonderfully blessed of the Lord for spiritual
grouth, and uniting of the Saints both in faith and worship.

I have herein declared my Faith in which I live, and believe that by the grace
of God I shall die, and yet live Eternally: This have I declared as the
discovery of my heart in the matters of my God, when I am gone hence, and shall
be hear no more seen.

And what ever may be found in any other of my Writing that may seem contrary
to any thing in this, or is contrary in very de^d, either understand it by
this, or else let it fall to the ground, for days of Temptation ofttimes brings
forth effects, which occasions after Repentance.

To be sound in the Faith, and in the Principles of Religion, is of deep
concernment to all Christians, and indeed a good and Christian walk in the way
of sincere and universal holiness and obedience, is that which greatly
concerns and becomes Christians, in order to their eternal Welfare.

As a help to both have I presented this small brief Treatise to thy
consideration, in which I have to the utmost of my ability and light, not only
studied Truth, that might be profiting to the Reader, but brevity likewise,
that much might be found in a little Volume, in which, if persons exercise
their own understandings in the use thereof, they may probably reap some
benefit thereby. And Reader, what thee do find differing from thine own
understanding, be not hasty in judging or sensuring, but read and ponder, and
search the Scripture, to see whether it be so or no, without which the most do
wrong to the Truth, and to thine own soul.

But I shall say no more, but commit it to the Readers, in the blessing of God,
praying for their profiting thereby, and if your souls do reap any spiritual
benefit or advantage in the use hereof, let God have the Glory, and the Author
(as Instrument) has his end answered; And so fare the well in the Lord: Grace,
Mercy, Peace and Truth, be with all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

Amen.
An Account of the Particular Matters Treated of in the ensuing Discourse.
CHapter I. Concerning God, 1. That he is. 2. What he is. 3. How he does
subsist. 4. Where he is. Page 1. Chap. II. Of the Holy Scripture, that it is
the Divine Word and will of God, proved by many Divine Arguments, P. 48. Chap.
III. Of the Creation of the world, and all things therein, P. 70. Chap. IV. Of
the Creation of Man, P. 73. Chap. V. Of the Angels, and of their Creation, P.
85. Chap. VI. Of the Devil and wicked Angels, P. 99. Chap. VII. Of the Fall of
Man from his Created Innocence, P. 107. Chap. VIII. Of the way and means
ordained of God for the recovery of Man out of his fallen Estate, P. 113. Chap.
IX. Of the design of God in general, in his New Covenant Restoration, which
was to make all things New, P. 123. Chap. X. Of the order and method of God in
preparing a people for his glorious Estate, page 133. and follows in rest of
the chapters. Chap. XI. Of Faith, 1. what it is. 2. how its wrought. 3. its
grounds and objects. 4. its excellency. p. 139 Chap. XII. Of Repentance, P. 149
Chap. XIII. Treats of Justification, P. 163. Chap. XIV. Is a more distinct
discourse of Justification by Faith, which answers to several questions and
objections about the Matter, P. 180. Chap. XV. Of Gospel assurance, and whether
it may be attained in this life, P. 209. Chap. XVI. A further Discovery of the
New Covenant, and Life of Faith, P. 248. Chap. XVII. Of Sanctification and good
works, P. 253. Chap. XVIII. Of the true and saving knowledge of God, P. 270.
Chap. XIX. Of the Divine Virtue and grace of Love, P. 293. Chap. XX. Of the
Gospel fear of God, P. 324. Chap. XXI. Of the Law of God, and what we are to
understand thereby, P. 341. Chap. XXII. Of Prayer, P. 364. Chap. XXIII. Of
Perfection, and whether it may be attained in this life, P. 406. Chap. XXIV. Of
Sincerity. p. 421. Chap. XXV. Of Election, p. 441. Chap. XXVI. Of Reprobation,
p. 451. Chap. XXVII. Of the Church of Christ in the New Covenant, p. 457. Chap.
XXVIII. Of the Ordinances, Officers, and Administrations in the Church of
Christ, p. 464. Chap. XXIX. That the Estate of the Church in this world is an
Afflicted Estate. p. 499. Chap. XXX. Of Death, and the State after Death; of
the Resurrection and Judgment. p. 531. Chap. XXXI. Of the Coming, Kingdom, and
Reign of Christ on Earth. p. 548.
CHAP. I. CONCERNING GOD.
1. That He is. 2. What He is. 3. How He does subsist. 4. Where he is.
1. THat God is, or that there 1 That God is, or that there is a God.
is a God, i. e. an infinite self-Being, that has given Being to all things,
etc. is necessary to be believed of all* and is the first step of Faith in
order to Salvation, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God, must believe that He is*
and that He is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Now, though it be a
common received Principle that God is, yet in as much as it is evident*
according to the Scripture, That the Fool has said in his heart, that there is
no God, Psalm. 14. 1. And that the transgression of the Wicked says, within my
heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes, Psalm. 36. 1. And oft-times
gracious Souls, through their own weakness, and Satan's wiles, meet with
temptations on this account; I shall therefore speak something to this so
necessary a truth; the grounds I shall present for evidencing this so great and
sacred a principle of truth* are as follows.

1. The Word of God, the Scriptures of Truth, Proof.
1. The Scripture The word of God.
in the substance of them, is* to hold forth this one God, or Invisible,
Creating, Upholding, and Preserving Power, Genesis 1. 1. In the Beginning, God
Created the Heaven and the Earth, v. 6. God said, let there be a Firmament,
etc. and so throughout the Chapter, and indeed throughout the Bible. I shall
mention but a few instances in the name of the whole, Genesis 6. 5. God saw the
Wickedness of man, etc. v. 6. I^ R^pented the Lord, that he had made man, etc.
v. 11. The Earth was corrupt before God, see ver. 12. 13. Exodus 20. 1, 2. And
God spoke all these words saying, I am the Lord thy God, etc. Psalm. 29. 1, 2.
Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty* give unto the Lord Glory and Strength; give
unto the Lord the Glory of his Name, Psalm. 82. 1. God stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty, etc. Joh. 1. 1. In the Beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God, etc: Let this serve among the
multitude of Scripture-Testimonies to prove that God is.

A second Testimony, is the Works of 2. The works of God.
God, which do abundantly declare and Preach forth the Divine Being, and
Omnipotent Power and Wisdom of this Divine, though Invisible Creator of all
things; for Reason will tell us, that none of these things could give Being to,
or Create themselves. Man, who is the most Intelligible and Rational Creature
here below, was so far from creating himself, that let all the Wisdom of all
the men in the World be conjunct in unity, they are not able to Create, or give
Being to the basest of Creatures, no, not a Fly, or Worm; Its true, the Image,
or likeness Man mad^ not himself.
of Creatures they can make, of matter that was made before, by the Creator,
but nothing can they Create, nor put life into their Image which they have
formed; it is the work of a God, and not of man, to Create and give life.

If it be Objected (as by some it is) that all Things come not by Nature^
things came by Nature, I Answer, that although there is a natural and
secondary cause of things, ordinarily producing such effects, almost in all
cases; yet there is the God of Nature, which is the cause of all secondary
causes, and gave the first Being thereunto; he was the immediate cause of the
Creation, and the only foundation* cause of the continuation and promulgation
of the World, by Divine Ordina(...), and Divine Power; for Nature of it self
(distinct, or, separated from Divine Ordinance and Power) is nothing, but must
fall into nihilation and the first nothing, if not supported by the God of
Nature; so that, as at first, God made all things by his Word immediately, so by
his Divine Ordinance and Word of Power, he continues all things in that way of
natural means by himself appointed, as Procreation, Food, Clothing, etc. So
the Earth to bring forth Food both for Man and Beast; the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
with their influences, etc. As God was the former of all (the contrary is
Atheistical and Brutish to imagine) they did not, could not make themselves,
nor influence themselves with power to effect any thing as of themselves, no
more than Create themselves; but what is effected in this way, must be by
Divine Ordinance and Power, according to the Scripture, Genesis 1. 14. to 18. v.
28. Job. 38, 39. chap.

So that indeed the works of God do wonderfully declare that God is, and not
only that he is, but that he is an infinite, Omnipotent one. See what the
Scripture speaks to this purpose, Psalm. 19 1. The Heavens declare the glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork, v. 3. There is no speech nor
language, where their voice is not heard, Romans 1. 19, 20. That which may be
known of God, is manifest in them (i. e. in the Gentiles) for God has showed
it to them, for, the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse, i. e. The works of
Creation that are visible, do convincingly and undenyably show to men the
invisible God in his Being, Power, and Wisdom, and on this account all men will
be left without excuse in the great day of account, Romans 2. 12. For as many as
have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law; that is, as many as have
sinned without the written Word of God, Law, or Gospel, having the Law of the
Creation, shall be Judged, and perish by that, for that shall leave them
without excuse: So that the very Works of God in Creation, are sufficient in
themselves to convince the World of his Divine Power and Godhead, and will
sink the hearts of all Atheists in the day of Judgment.

3. The Faith of the people of God 3. The people of God have still owned, and
believed that God i^.
throughout all ages, i. e. those that from principles of Reason, have been
most likely to be his people, the most humble, holy, selfdenying people, have
through-out all ages, and still do, own, believe, trust in, and acknowledge this
invisible glorious God; this both Scripture, History, and Experience do
testify, Genesis 4. 3, 4. and 5. 24. and 6. 9. and 12. 1, 4. and 24. 3. in things
of this kind I might abound, but it is enough; all the holy ones of God,
throughout all ages, both of Old and New Testament, and to this day have fixed
here, to own the Lord to be their God, to believe, trust in, and worship him,
according to his Name and Nature; and this both History and Experience declare,
that all professing honesty and Conscience, have, and do cleave to this one
invisible Being as their chiefest good, from whence they have their Being, and
by whom they are sustained, and to whom they acknowledge as due, their all, and
who is all in all to them; a wonderful convincing argument to support any man
of Conscience under temptation in this matter, to consider, that all professing
Conscience and Holiness have believed in and owned this God, and may serve to
help and deliver Souls from their Atheistical temptations

4. All the World by the works of Creation, 4^ All Nations b^lieve that there
is a God.
and the natural capacity as rational, are convinced, and do acknowledge that
there is a God; although its true that they are greatly corrupted and blinded
in their understanding, and knowing of the true God; because as the Apostle
has it, Romans 1. 21. That when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, i.
e. being convinced by the works of Creation, that there was a Divine invisible
Power and Being, that made both it and them, they glorified not him, but made
Images like to corruptible man, etc. Yet so it is, and remains in the dark
minds of men by Nature, and cannot be razed out, that there is a God, though
they form Gods to themselves, according to their vain imaginations; and the
truth is, that Atheists must be found, (if any where) amongst debauched,
apostatised, or pretended Christians: though I deny not, but that gracious
souls may sometimes meet with this temptation, (though to their great grief)
which Heathens do abandon; who although they retain not the knowledge of the
true God, yet a Deity they own, Jona. 1. ^. In their fear, they cried every one
to his God, and Nineveh acknowledged the true God, Jona. 3 8. So Nebuchadnezer,
Dan. 3. 28. and Darius, chap. 6. 25, 26, 27. So that God is, is a truth
universally acknowledged, and that in him we live, move, and have our Being,
acknowledged by certain of the Heathen Poets, Act. 17. 28.

And as its necessary for every one to be There is but one God.
established in this truth, that there is a God, so likewise that there is but
one God, and not a plurality of Gods; as the blind Idolatrous Heathen imagine,
although in this one God there is a plurality of Titles, and varieties of
discoveries, properties, and operations; yet I dare not say of persons, or
distinct subsistings (as I may speak more unto in its place) yet to us there is
no other God but one, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.
Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. To us there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, etc and only one, that, is one and no more, Isa. 43. 10, 11.
Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me; I, even I
am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior, chap. 45. 5. I am the Lord,
and there is none else, there is no God besides me, chap. 44 8. Is there a God
besides me, yea, there is no God, I know not any. So that though there are,
that are called Gods, many, yet to us there is but one God, etc. 1 Cor. 8. 5,
6. And who amongst all that are called Gods, are like unto him, Mic. 7. ^8.

2. What this God is, and truly he is a 2. What God is.
mystery; and if his people tremble at his Word, how much more ought we to have
trembling thoughts of his unsearchable Being, and in this he is an invisible
mystery, such a one whom no man has seen, nor can see; but in thinking and
speaking of him, we must think and speak of him as he has discovered himself
unto us in his Word, and by his Works, and the secret teachings of himself
thereby.

1. What he is in his Nature and Essential 1. What God is in his Nature and
Essence.
Being. 1. He is a Spirit, Joh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit, etc. 2. A holy Spirit,
Lev. 19. 2. I the Lord your God am Holy, and chap. 20. 26. I the Lord am Holy,
Psalm. 22. 3. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel,
Psalm. 99. 5. 6. Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy Hill, for the
Lord our God is holy, He is most holy 1. Sam. 2 2. There is none holy as the
Lord, etc.

3. He is in himself an infinite, unsearchable, incomprehensible, eternal, and
glorious spirit, who is in, and of himself, and gives Being to all things;
therein is he differenced from all Created Spirits and Powers, whether of
Angels or men. First, in that he is infinite and incomprehensible in his whole
name. 2. In his Eternity. 3. In his Power and Wisdom in Creating and upholding
all things by the Word of his Power.

2. What he is in his Name and Attributes, 2. What he is in his Name and
Attributes.
which are many, and all thereby to make himself known to his people, that they
might learn to fear before him, believe, love, obey him, and trust in him; as
First, His Power and 1. His Power.
Allsufficiency, he has let us to know that he is an Almighty One; Genesis 17. 1.
He says to Abraham (that not only Abraham himself, but all his Children might
know it, and be encouraged) I am God Almighty, or Alsufficient; walk before me,
and be upright* Psalm. 62. 11. God has spoken once, twice have I heard this,
that Power belongs to God; hence he is called the Almighty, Psalm. 68. 14.
When the Almighty scattered Kings, etc. Psalm. 91. 1. He that dwells in the
secret of the most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. 1 Cor.
6. 18. Rev. 1. 8. and this the Prophet David wonderfully describes in his
Thanksgiving, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. Thine O Lord is the Greatness, and the
Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty, for all that is in the
Heaven and in the Earth is thine, thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou a^t
exalted as Head above all; both Riches and Honor come of Thee, and thou
Reignest over all, and in thine hand is Power and Might, and in thine hand it
is to make great, and to give strength unto all: A great Comfort it is unto
Christians that they have such a great Almighty, and All-sufficient God, able
to do for them whatever they need; they may say as 2 Samuel 22. 33. God is my
Strength and Power, he makes my way perfect, and as Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is
on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me? and that because this God
is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide unto death, and let it
silence and still wicked men for ever. Woe to them that God is such an Almighty
one, able to deal with, and bring down all his, and his Churches Enemies, Ezra
8. 22. The hand of our God is upon all them that seek him for good, but his
Power and his Wrath is against all them that forsake him, Psalm. 66. 7. He
rules by his Power for ever, his eyes behold the Nations, let not the
Rebellious exalt themselves.

2. He is Omniscient as well as Omnipotent; 2. His Wisdom.
he is most Wise, see both Psalm. 147. 5. Great is our Lord, and of great Power,
his Understanding is Infinite, Isa. 40. 28. There is no searching of his
Understanding; we may and must say as Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord how manifold are
thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all; all Wisdom, and Counsel, and
Strength is in him, Prove. 8. 14. Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom, I am
Understanding, I have Strength; comfort for Christians, that their God is such
a God of Wisdom and Counsel, he knows how to deliver his people in time of
need, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptation,
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, and this
Wisdom is all in Christ, and for his people; Who of God is made unto us Wisdom
and Righteousness; etc. he is Wisdom to us, and Wisdom in us; he gives Wisdom
to his people, Prove. 2. 6, 7. for the Lord gives Wisdom, out of his mouth
comes Knowledge and Understanding, he lays up sound Wisdom for the
Righteous, etc. see chap. 3. 13. and 2. 3, 4, 5. and 81. 3. In a word, God is
Infinite in his Wisdom, and his Wisdom is exercised for, and in behalf of his
Church, especially on the New Covenant account, in the Gospel of Salvation by
Jesus Christ, which is called the manifold Wisdom of God, and exercised in all
his works and ways.

3. He is a Holy God, Infinite in Purity, 3. He is a Holy God.
perfectly holy, such a one, with whom Iniquity can have no fellowship, for God
is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, 1. Joh. 1. 5. therefore, let no man
say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man, Jam. 1. 13. No, he is a Holy God, most
Holy, infinite in Holiness, Isa. 6. 3. the Seraphims cried one to another, and
said, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his
Glory; and this holy name in this Scripture is attributed unto Christ, who was
to fill the Earth with the Glory of the New Covenant Grace, Joh. 12. 41. These
things said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spoke of him, i. e. of Christ, as
is evident, a holy God, and a holy Lord Jesus, and he will have a holy People,
or none, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of Conversation; because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy.
Gods holiness should engage his People to holiness, to prize it, and press
after it; for, Holiness becomes the House of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 93. 5.

O blessed Consolation for all New-Covenant-spirited holy Ones! their God is
holy, and loves holiness, and owneth all that are Created after him, in
Righteousness and true Holiness; and will own them in the day of need, when it
will be worth a world to be owned by him, Mal 3. 17. though they are hated of
the unholy and profane world, and though they mourn in the sense of their own
unholiness, knowing that in themselves, i. e. in their flesh dwells no good
thing, yet God owns them, and will own them when it will be worth more than the
world to be owned by him.

But Woe to the Wicked, that God is a holy God, and loves holiness; Woe to
those that establish iniquity by a Law, God will have no fellowship with them,
Psalm. 94 20. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee, who
frames mischief by a Law, Isa. 3. 12. Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill
with him, for the Reward of his hands shall be given him; God is a holy God,
and Holy and Reverend is his Name, Psalm. 111. 9. His Name is Holy, Isa. 57. 15.
his whole name, holy in all his Attributes, holy in his Power, holy in his
Wisdom, in his Justice and Mercy, etc. it is all exercised in a way of holiness,
holy in all his Ministrations: in a word, he is as Psalm. 145. 17. Righteous in
all his ways, and Holy in all his works; so that, as there is not, nor can be
any unholiness in him, so there shall no unholy person dwell with him; for
without holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. and Rev. 21. 27 There
shall in no wise, enter into it, any thing that defiles, etc. see chap. 22. 15.

4ly. He is a Just and Righteous God, and 4. He is a Just and Righteous God.
his Justice and Righteousness runs through all his Name, he exercises his
Power, and Wisdom, and Judgments, and Mercy, all in a way of Justice and
Righteousness, Zep. 3. 5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do
Iniquity, etc. He cannot do Iniquity, its contrary to his Nature, to his Name,
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. His work is perfect, for all his ways are Judgment; a God of
Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right is he; he is just in all the
Judgments he executes upon his Enemies, Rev. 15. 3, 4. Great and marvelous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints:
v. 4. explains what is meant by the just ways of the Lord, i. e. his just
Judgments on his Enemies, for thy Judgments are made manifest. He is just in
all the afflictions and corrections he exercises his own people withal, Neh. 9
33. howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done
right, but we have do^e wickedly.

He has exalted his New Covenant mercy in the way of Justice, for there must
be no variance in his Name or Nature, but his mercy must come to us in the way
of Judgment and Justice; his justice must be satisfied, and so his mercy comes
forth in the salvation of Sinners, here he is called a just God and a Savior,
Isa. 45. 21. Just, and yet a Savior, Zec. 9. 9. He is Just, having Salvation,
Romans 3. 26. that he might be Just, and the Justifier of him that believes in
Jesus. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, etc. Mercy might not come forth with any wrong to Justice, neither
shall Justice do any wrong to Mercy, but fall in with it, and be as truly for
the right objects, or subjects of mercy, as mercy it self, Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy
and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other.

5. He is a gracious and merciful God, it 5. He is a gracious and merciful God,
is his Name, his Nature, to show mercy to men, Exodus 34. 6. When the Lord
proclaims his Name to Moses, he proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God merciful and
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, etc. Mic. 7. 18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of his heritage, because he delights in mercy, to show mercy,
and to do good to sinners is his delight; he is good to all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works, he makes the Sun to arise on the evil and on
the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. God so loved the
World, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16.
Jesus Christ by the grace of God did taste death for every man, Heb. 2. 9.

It is wonderful mercy and goodness to men, that God should find a way to
satisfy his Justice so far for Sinners, that mercy and remission of sins
should be proclaimed to sinners on the terms of the New Covenant, i. e.
Repentance, Faith, and Obedience; Peace on Earth, and good will toward men: He
would have all the world to know that he is a merciful God, and therefore the
glad tidings is to be published to every Creature, but its the privilege of his
own people, true Believers, to have a special interest therein, they are the
people of his mercy, and to them his mercy has, and does abound, Ephesians. 2. 4.
But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved us, when
we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, etc. Tit. 3, 4.
but after the love and kindness of God our Savior to man appeared, not by
works of Righteousness that we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit; so that
this glorious attribute and name of God in our Lord Jesus unto salvation, is
now manifested with a witness, to, and for the salvation of his peculiar ones;
he has wrought them to it, and possessed them of it, Romans 5. 5. and here they
are looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus unto eternal life: This attribute
of God; which is his Name and Nature, is full of encouragement to poor Sinners
to come in and accept of mercy in this day of mercy, and not to judge themselves
unworthy of life, by putting it from them, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold, now is the
accepted time; behold, now is the day of Salvation, Isa. 55. 6, 7. Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near, let the Wicked
forsake his way, and the Unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return to
the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon.

Its full of Consolation to gracious souls, that God is a God of mercy, its his
Name, his Nature, he delights to be gracious in, and for the sake of the Son
of his love: comfort in respect of sin, he is ready to pardon; if we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, etc. he that
confesses and forsakes shall sind mercy.

Comfort in respect of Enemies in the midst of all their oppressions and
wrongs, the mercy of God is their support in the midst of all their oppression,
Psalm. 52. 1. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief thou mighty man, the
goodness of God endures always; and likewise the Prophet implores mercy in all
his distresses, Psalm. 56, 1. and 57. 1. This glorious Attribute of goodness and
mercy in God, will prove dreadful in the end to impenitent sinners, who still
persist in sin, and will not accept of mercy on the terms it is to be had, when
they shall give an account for the abuse of mercy, and be everlastingly
tormented in the thoughts and remembrance of their folly and madness therein,
Romans 2. 4. or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to
repentance, v. 5. but after thy hardness and impenitent heart t^easurest up
unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God. 6. He is a faithful, covenant-keeping God.


The sixth Attribute of Gods Name, is, his Faithfulness; He is a faithful God,
Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know therefore the Lord thy God is a faithful God, which keeps
Covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his Commandments, to a
thousand Generations, i. e. for ever. His Faithfulness shall never fail; for he
is truth it self, and cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which,
God that cannot lie, promised before the World began.

God cannot lie, it is contrary to his Name and Nature, therefore he cannot do
it; for he can do nothing contrary to himself, and he would have his people
know it, that they might build their Faith and Comfort in his Faithfulness, 1
Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called to the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord: chapter 10. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that ye are able, etc. Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the
Profession of our Faith, without wavering; for he is faithful that promised. In
all which Scriptures, with many more that might be mentioned, it is more than
evident, that God delights to have his people know that he is faithful, and to
believe the truth thereof; that is it, I understand, is intended, Ps. 138. 2. I
will worship toward thine holy Temple, and praise thy Name for thy loving
kindness and thy truth; for thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name:
that is, thy truth and faithfulness in performing thy Word: though all his Name
be magnified, and is glorious; yet this of his Truth and Faithfulness he puts
an emphasis upon it, and an excellency, as if God would have more respect to
his faithfulness in his Word than to all his Name: not that there is any
difference in respect of himself, but for the comfort of his people, who are
most ready to fail in their Faith, in his faithfulness in his Word; therefore,
to confirm his people in this matter, he lets them to know, that he has
magnified his Word above all his Name, i. e. whatever of his Name may, (be
supposed to fail) yet his Faithfulness in his Word shall never fail, Psalm. 89.
33. to confirm us in his Faithfulness in his Word, he has given us his Word
and his Oath, two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie,
Heb. 6. 17. 18. if God should be unfaithful in his Word, he must cease to be
God, it must destroy him in his Name and Being; and that is it he has laid so
much stress on our Faith and Believing, which lies chiefly in our believing
the Truth of God in his Word, and living up unto it, he that believes not must
be damned; because not believing we do in our part make him a Liar, Joh. 3. 33.
He that has received (i. e. believed) his Testimony has set to his Seal that
God is true, 1 John 5. 10. He that believes not God has made him a Liar, etc.
no wonder if unbelief be the Portion of Unbelievers; for they thereby do their
part to make the faithful and true God a Liar. This was the Faith of Abraham
our Father, Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed God, and it was acco^^ed to him for
Righteousness: and indeed all the parts of Faith are included in this, of
believing God, relating to Justification, Obedience, and Glory; if we believe
the Truth of the Doctrine of Justification and Life by Jesus, we believe
likewise the Lordship and the Law of Christ, and cleave to him therein, which
is our Justification, or rather the terms of the Gospel, on which God does
justify us: and finding those Terms or Divine Virtues of Faith, etc. wrought
in us, we hence conclude (from the Promise of Life to those in whom it is
wrought) our interest therein; and thus our interest in Life is built on Gods
Faithfulness in his Word; for God would not have his people to conclude their
interest in his Grace of Life from fancy and imagination, but from his Promise
of Life; for whatever Faith we pretend unto, if it be not grounded on the Word
of God and his Faithfulness Use of God's Faithfulness. 1. Encouragement 2.
Comf^rt.
therein, it is but Fancy and not Faith.

This Doctrine of the Faithfulness of God affords not only great encouragement
to believe God in his Word, but likewise strong Consolation to all true
Believers, Hebr. 6. 17, 18. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto
the Heirs of Promise, the immutability of his Counsel confirmed it by an Oath,
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to the hope set before
us etc. the strong Consolation of the Saints flows from the impossibility of
God to lie, i. e. from the infallibility of his Truth and Faithfulness: God
must lie if those who believe and ob^y the Gospel be not saved, which is
impossible: and from hence it is, that the Saints have not only grounds of
strong Consolation, but likewise of everlasting Consolation and good ^ope
through Grace, 2 Th^ss. 2. 16.

But Secondly, on the contrary, Gods 2. Dread to wicked men who continue in sin.
Faithfulness is a dreadful Doctrine to all impenitent and hardened sinners; it
infallibly cuts them off from all hope of mercy, and binds them over to the
eternal Judgment. It Is a common thing with unrepenting sinners, to say, they
hope to be saved, yet keep their sins and lusts, and never repent and turn to
the Lord, nor in truth believe according to the Gospel; for true Faith is
always accompanied with Repentance and Obedience: To such, I must say, it is
impossible for them to be saved, living and dying in an unconverted estate:
Damnation to such is as certain as Salvation is to such as believe and obey the
Truth: they hope for impossibilities, God has said, that he that believes not
shall be damned, and sworn that such shall never enter into his rest. God must
be unfaithful, if wicked and ungodly men be saved, who so live and die without
Repentance; and not only so, but the Faithfulness of God binds them over to all
the Plagues and Judgments threatened in the Book of God: a dreadful word for all
impenitent sinners and hypocrites, and might serve to ^right them out of that
dreadful estate.

7. And finally, all the Names and Titles 7. And finally, all the ^ules g^v^^
to God in Scriptu^e are significant.
given to God in Scripture are significant, and serve to discover his Nature
and Being to us; as El, God, denotes him to be a strong Lord, a creating,
preserving, ruling, governing Power, Jehovah, an eternal Self-Being; and gives
Being to all things, especially to his Promises, in fulfilling them, Exodus 6.
3. I appeared to Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, by the name of God
Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known: i. e. he appeared to them a
God, making Promises, but now a God fulfilling Promises, which his Name Jehovah
imports: and as he was then Jehovah, a God fulfilling all the Promises made to
Abraham, etc. relating to the old Covenant, and bringing them into the Land of
Canaan, see Jos. 21, 44, 45. and 23. 14, 15. so he is Jehovah still, and will
as certainly perform all the Promises of the New Covenant to his spiritual
Israel, i. e. all that believe and obey the Gospel, both of Jews and Gentiles,
Romans 2. 10. Glory, Honor and Peace to every one that works good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile: and this our glorious God is in all, both in
Name and Nature, gloriously infinite, and infinitely glorious and eternal,
Exodus 15. 6. The right hand of the Lord is become glorious in power, the right
hand of the Lord has dashed in pieces the enemy, etc. v. 11. Who is like unto
thee, O Lord, among the Gods? who is lik^ unto thee, glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, d^ing wonders? Deuteronomy. 33. 27. the Eternal God is thy refuge,
and underneath are the everlasting arms, etc. Jer. 10. 10. but the Lord is the
true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King, etc. Ps. 90 2. before
the M^untains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth and the
World, even from everlasting thou art God.

3. How this one God subsisteth, as he subsisteth in and of himself, and is an
infinite, eternal, glorious Self-being, invisible and incomprehensible.

So in the Scriptures of Truth, the Father, ^
Son (or Word) and Spirit is declared to be this one God, so that this one God
subsisteth in three, Father, Son and holy Spirit, and these there are one, each
of the three is God, and yet three is but one God.

1. The Father is God, Romans 15 6. That 1 The Father is God.
ye may with one Mind and one Mouth glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Cor. 8. 6. But to us there is but one God the Father* of whom are all
things, and Ephesians. 4. 6. One God the Father of all.

2. The Son is God, Psalm. 45, 6* with 2 The s^n is G^d.
Heb. 1. 8. But unto the Son, he says, thy Throne* O God, is for ever and
ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, etc. Heb. 1.
10. from Psalm. 102. 25. And thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the
foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thine hands, etc. John
1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God* and the Word
was God. Isa. 6. 3. The S^r^phims cried one to another, and said, holy, holy,
holy is the Lord of Hosts, etc. and it was Jesus Christ the Son of God they
cried out unto, and called him the Lord of Hosts, and that the whole Earth was
full of his glory. John 12. 41. These things said Esaias when he saw his glory
and spoke of him: It is he who is over all God blessed for ever, Amen. Romans 9.
5. This is the true God and eternal Life, 1 John 5. 20

3. The Holy Spirit is God, Act. 5. 3. 3 The holy spirit is God.
Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the holy Spirit? v. 4. Thou have
not lied unto men, but unto God. And the Lord states all Worship to be
performed in this Name, as the Name of the only true God; Mat. 28. 19. go ye
therefore and Disciple all Nations baptising them in the Name of the Father,
and ^on, and of the Holy Spirit, i. e. in the aut^ority of that Name, the great
Name of God.

But I shall endeavor to speak more 2 A more distinct speaking t^ th^s mystery.
largely and distinctly of this unsearchable Mystery, though in this imperfect
state we never can attain the perfection of Knowledge herein, but rather believe
the truth that it is, than understand how it is. I fear that many have been too
boldly curious and confident in this matter, which is in it self an
unsearchable mystery: the Apostles, by whom (as instruments) it is revealed to
us, contented themselves in the revelation thereof, not curiously enquiring
into the mystery it self, but concludes it to be a mystery, 1 Tit. 3. 16, And
without controversy great is the mystery of Godl^ness, God manifested in the
flesh, etc. and the Apostle prays for the Saints, that they might come to the
acknowledging of the mystery of God, even the Father; and of Christ: but we
think it scarce enough for the Saints to acknowledge and believe this mystery,
but must come to know how it is, and it may be by human distinctions so darken
it, that not one of a hundred among believers can understand; and some because
they cannot by reason understand it, deny it, and so lose themselves, in the
loss of Faith in the knowledge of God, according to his own discoveries in the
Word of his Grace.

That the Father is God, and the Son is God, and the holy Spirit is God, is
evident from the Scriptures beforementioned, and might be evinced by many more;
and without all arguments the Scripture alone is the ground of our Faith, and
that all three must be included in the unity of the Divine Nature is as clear,
and that not only; 1 Three in one proved by infallible consequence.


1. By infallible deduction and necess^ry consequence from the Scripture which
lets us know that there is none other God but one, then we must rationally and
religiously conclude, that those three are all included in this unity of Divine
Essence, and is this one God, or else neces^a^ily must own a plurality of Gods,
which is destructive to that unity in Essence.

2. The Unity in Essence in these three is 2 Proved in their unity in Creation,
Preservation and Redemption.
proved, in their unity in the Work, both of Creation, Preservation and
Redemption: hence the work of Creation is sometimes attributed to the Father,
sometimes to the Son, and sometimes to the holy Spirit.

1. Sometimes to the Father, Heb. 1. 2. 1 Creation Attributed to the Father.
By whom he also made the Worlds (He) that is, God the Father made the Worlds,
Ephesians. 3. 9 the mystery of the Gospel there spoken of, that was hid in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ: here the Creation is attributed to God the
Father.

2. It is attributed unto the Son, Heb. 1. 2 To the Son.
10. Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and
the Heavens are the work of thine hands, which the Apostle applied to Christ
the Son of the Father, as is by the scope of the matter clearly discernable,
Col. 1. 16. For by him (i. e.) Christ, were all things created, etc. Joh. 1. 3.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made.

3. It Is attributed to the Holy Spirit; in 3 To the Holy spirit.
the work of Creation it is said, Genesis 1. 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters. Psalm. 104. 30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit and they are
created, etc. Job. 26. 13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens, etc.
and chapter 33. 4. The Spirit of God has made me, all which hold forth unity in
the Divine Essence, from their unity in the Work, as we must unavoidably
understand, unless we lose both Reason and Religion; that when the Creation is
attributed to God, the one infinite glorious Being, it includes the whole
three* Father, Son and Spirit, it being attributed to each of them apart,
inrallibly includes the unity of Essence, in the three, Father, Son and Spirit,
and these three are one: and that the three are included in such Scriptures as
these, wh^re one is spoken of, Act, 14 15: That you should turn from these
vanities, un^o the living God that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea and all
things therein, chapter 17. 24. God that made the world and all things therein,
etc. with multitudes of the like Scriptures which include the whole, as one in
Essence and Work, though three in that unity, or else all three could not be
said to create the World.

2. In Preservation and Redemption, God 2 Pr^v^^l in Preservation and
Redemption.
the Father is said to preserve man and beast, Psalm. 36. 6. and all things are
said to consist by Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 17. God is frequently in Scripture
called our Savior, and so is Jesus Christ, Tit. 3. 4, 6. and the holy Spirit
had his operation, in this work of Salvation and Redemption, by, Jesus Christ
crucified, Heb, 9. 14. so that there was and is unity and concurrence in every
work which proves them to be one God, or God to be one in three, Father, Son
and Spirit.

3. The Unity in these three is discovered 3 In their unity in the power of the
Gospel.
in their unity in the power and authority of the Gospel, which is to be
administered in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Spirit,
Mat. 28. 19. unity in power and authority declares unity in Essence and Nature;
or unavoidably three Divine Beings.

I shall yet proceed to speak more distinctly A more distinct discovery.
to this wonderful Mystery, and pray the Lord to do it humbly, soberly,
tremblingly, and plainly, and according to the word of Truth, and I trust I
shall not vary from the very plain terms and discoveries of God in the Gospel
in this matter.

1. God the Father is in Scripture said to God is said to be the father 1 as
the original cause of all things:
be the Father, and so distinguished, as seems plain by the Divine Revelation.

1. As he is the original cause of all things as a Father; 1 Cor 8. 6. To us
there is one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, Romans 11.
39. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, etc. Ephesians. 4. 6. One
God the Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. And
on this account he is the father of the whole Creation (as the first effectual
cause of all) who are therefore said to be his Offspring; Acts 17. 28, 29. For
we are also 2 as making provision for all.
his Offspring, forasmuch as we are the Of spring of God.

2. He having, as a Father, brought forth a Creation, as his Offspring, he
takes care of all, and makes provision for all as his Offspring, and as a
Father. Psalm. 145. 15, 16. The Eyes of all wait on thee, and thou give them
meat in season; thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every
living thing, Psalm. 147 8, 9. Who covers the Heaven with Clouds, and gives
to the Beast his food, and to the young Ravens that cry, Mat. 5 45. He makes
his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends Rain on the just and
on the unjust: hence Christ teaches us to pray to God as our Father for daily
bread.

3. He is the Father in relation to his Son, 3 He is the Father in relation to
Christ, his Son.
our Lord Jesus, Luke 1. 35. The holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the
power of the highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing,
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. John 1. 14, 18.
And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, as
the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace and Truth, v. 18. No
man has seen God at any time (i. e. God the Father) the only Son which is in
the bosom of the Father he has declared him, Romans 15 6. That you may with one
mind and with one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
These with multitudes of Scriptures of like import, prove God to be the Father,
as relative to Jesus Christ his Son.

4. And so in him he is the Father relative on the New Covenant account, of all
4 In relation to his Children in him.
his New Covenant-spirited people, i. e. true Believers espoused unto Jesus
Christ his Son by Faith. Gal. 3. 26. For ye are all the Children of God by
Faith in Jesus Christ: John 20. 17. Go to my Brethren, and say to them, I
ascend to my Father and your Father, etc. Romans 8. 16. 17. and thus he is the
Father of the whole family in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians. 3. 14, 15. with chapter 2. 19.

5. And so in him he is the Father of all 5 He is the Father of all our New
Covenant-Mercy.
our New Covenant-Mercy, relating both to Grace and Glory, 2 Cor. 1 3. Blessed
be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies and God of
all Comfort, 2 Tit. 1 9. who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and Grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began. Tit. 3. 4 but after that
the Love and Kindness of God our Savior toward man appeared, etc. Ephesians. 1 17.
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of Glory. By all which it
appears, that God is the Father, relative to all our New Covenant-mercies,
relating both to Grace and Glory.

2. Of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 How Christ is God, and the Son (...)
God.
who is likewise God of the same nature, not only God over all in Name, but in
the Divine Nature, as before has been proved, Joh. 1. 1: Col. 2. 9. For in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: and is eternal, Mich: 5. 2.
where it is said, that his goings out have been from of old, from everlasting.

Quest. How may we conceive of Christ as the Son of God, and so God in the same
nature, distinguished from the Father, and yet one in the Father? Christ the
Son of God in his both Natures: so not two sons but one.


Answ. 1. I understand, not a Son only in the divine nature, (but in the unity
of natures as God and Man) as is commonly understood; what does this less than
make him to be two Sons, one in the Divine Nature, and another in the Human
Nature, by Grace of Union. 1. One begotten of the substance of God by an
unspeakable Generation, this is a Son by Nature. 2. The Man Christ, or the
Manhood of Christ, which is the Son of God by Grace of personal Union, being
united unseparably to the person of the Son of God, a Son by personal Union.
(See Wilsons Scripture-Dictionary on the Word Son:) What does this but suppose
him to be two Sons, one by Nature, another by Grace and personal Union, which
seems contrary to all Scripture-Record of this great Mystery of the Son of God.

But 2ly. and affirmatively, we are to understand, that wherever the
Scripture speaks of Jesus Christ the Son of God, it intends him as in both
Natures, not as two, but as one Son, whether it be in his creating, preserving,
ruling, judging, or saving redeeming power, it is always in relation to the
Union of the two Natures, as God-Man and Man-God: so he was the Word, and so he
was and is the Son of God, so not two, but one Son.

For the clearing this, consider first, that Proof 1. It is so to be understood
in Scripture
where ever Christ is spoken of in the Scripture as the Son of God, and that
relating to his Eternity, it is to be understood i^ his both natures, as in
time he was manifest in the Flesh: the Divine Nature was God eternally, the
human considered in the eternal Council as in union, who calls things that
are not, as though they were; and with him it is all one, there is no new thing
with him; but Christ the Son of God was so, and the same relating to the Father
from eternity, as when manifest in time, and so should we understand him.

That he was thus considered in his both natures as the Son of God from
eternity, see Col. 1. 15, 16. who is the Image of the invisible God, the
firstborn of every Creature: in this verse and in the verses before, ^e is
sp^ken of as God and Man; for so he was a Creature, a Son, a wonderful one*
that God should become Man, and Man God, not by confusion or mixt^re of
Natures, but by personal union of Natures, the firstborn of every Creature in
the eternal Council; and that because by him (as thus born) all things were
created, Rev. 3. 14. he is said to be the beginning of the Creation of God: a
wonderful Mystery it is indeed, that Jesus Christ should be considered as in
his both Natures with the Father from all eternity, the Father by him
manifesting his eternal Power and Godhead, in the Creation, and yet to be made
of the seed of David according to the Flesh, when made visible in the world in
time, Romans 1. 3. Gal. 4. 4. thus was the Son of God considered as in his both
Natures from eternity, and was the medium by which the Father did all his
works, and without whom nothing was made that was made; nor probably had the
invisible God manifested himself in the Creation of the world, but in this way
by his Son; for by him he wrought all his Works. The truth hereof appears in
that the work of Creation, and so of Redemption and Salva^ion, is not ascribed
to the Son as the first mover therein, but to the Father who did all by him: as
will appear by these Scriptures, to which all others that ascribe the work of
Creation to the Son may be referred for light in this matter, Fph. 3. 9. has
been hid in God who created all things by Jesus Christ. He was Jesus Christ as
God-man, so considered in the work of Creation, Heb. 1. 2. by whom (i. e. by
Christ his Son) he (i. e. God the Father) also made the worlds, 1 Cor. 8. 6.
but to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, Joh. 1. 3. all things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made; the Father
did it by him, and not without him, Col. 1. 16. by him were all things created,
etc. all things were made by him and for him: and Heb. 1. 10. we may very well
understand by these Scriptures, and it no whit derogates from the Godhead and
Glory of the Son of God, but it affords us Light in this wonderful Mystery,
John 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word, the Word was with God, and the Word
was God: Verse. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, etc. i.
e. the same Word and Son of God, God-man, was made (...), viz. made in and of a
Woman; born God and Man: Him by whom the Worlds were made, and nothing was made
without Him.

Further, Consider M^^^h 5 2. Out of thee shall He come forth unto M^, that is
to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings ^^rth have been from of old, from
Everlasting: i. e. the same that was born in Bethlem of the Virgin, that was to
be Ruler of Israel, He it was whose goings forth were from of old, (...)ing:
And Verse. 4. He that was (...) rule, or feed in the Majesty of the Lord, was
the same whose goings forth was from (...), etc. which was and is Jesus Christ
in both Natures, God and Man in one Person. Jer. 23. 5, 6. Prove. 8. 14. to 31.
The Son of God is the same Person, the same Wisdom, not 1 Cor. ^. 2^.
in one but in both Natures, compared with Mat. 11. 19. Psalm. 45. 6, 7. Thy
Throne, O God is for ever and ever, the Sc^^ter of thy Kingdom is a right
S^^pter; Thou (...)teousness and hate Wickedness, (...) God, even thy God
has (...) Oil of Gladnes^ above thy fellows. This is a high and glorious
Description of the Son of God. yet in his both Natures, Man as well as God; as
he was a^^^^ted with the Oil of Gladness above his f^ll^ws, as he was the Son
of God. Heb. 1. 1. God has in these last days spok^n to ^^ by his Son; is it
by the Divine Nature only? surely I suppose none will say so; but in and by
that Person which was and is his Son the Man Christ Jesus, that holy thing that
was born of the Virgin, Luke 1. 35.
and called, The Son of God. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. It was the same He, that was in
the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, that was made
in the form of a Servant, etc. Surely it was not the Divine Nature only, that
was not subject to death.

2. His Name Christ signifies Anointed; 2. His Name Christ imports b^^h
Natures.
there is the Anointing, and the Anointed; the Divine Nature is the Anointing,
the Humane Nature is the Anointed. And indeed it is contrary to the Divine
Revelation of this Mystery, to suppose a Christ or Son of God in one of the
Natures only, whether the Divine or Humane: Look on the Humane without the
Divine, so he would not be Anointed; or the Divine without the Humane, so it is
the Anointing, not the Anointed: It Is a conception that in it self seems to
un-Son him, and un-Christ him; let no man put that asunder which God has
joined together, for as he was Christ the Anointed, so was he the Son of God,
Mat. 16. 16. Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.

3. Otherwise to understand it, and to 3. Else he must be a Son dive^s manner
of ways.
suppose impossibilities in this, because it may seem so to our reason, seems
to un-God the whole Trinity, in whom and with whom all things are possible, and
all things by him declared we ought to believe. It seems to import that Christ
is a Son in differing manner of ways; either two Sons, one by Nature, and
another by Grace and Personal Union, or one manner of Son before time, and
another manner in time; so making things to be various, changable, and new to
God, as it is to us; and so Christ's Humanity must be an addition to the Son of
God; Whereas the Scripture presents us with one only Son of the Father, God
and Man, by whom he made the Worlds, and by whom it all consists, and by whom
he will save the World, i. e. such as shall be saved, 1 John 4. 14. and by whom
he will judge the world, Acts 17. 31. by whom it was the Fathers great and
eternal Design to open and make known the Mystery of himself in his times, 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. Even the same that was yesterday, and to day, and for ever;
which cannot be true, if the Sonship of Christ was not the same to the Father
at first, as it was at last: This seems to un-God him, and make him like to
man, and not eternally the same.

So that this Truth thus considered, seems to contradict that common notion of
Christ's being the Son of the Father in the Divine Nature only, by an Eternal
Generation in the Godhead only* which seems to be an unwarranted expression,
and that which the Scripture (which is the Divine Revelation of all Truth) is
unacquainted with, being rightly understood. Permitting the sense of it own
language, it will appear that all those Scriptures that speak of the begetting
of the Son of God, intends him as he was the Christ, the Son of the Father in
the Unity of Natures, and not in the Divine Nature only. John 1. 14. It was
the Word as made Flesh, that was the only begotten Son of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth, begotten in the Eternal Counsel and Mind of the Father, 1 Pet.
2. 20. and in time, according to purpose, was wonderfully begotten in the Womb
of the Virgin, Luke 1. 31, 35. Gal. 4. 4.
which must be understood in his whole Person God and Man, whole Christ.

Christ is said in Scripture to be the first-begotten, or firstborn, on a
threefold acco^nt: Christ the Fi^^t-Begott^n, fi^^ (...) upon a three fold
acc^unt.


1. He is said to be the First-begotten, or Firstborn of every Creature, Col.
1. 15. Rev. 3. 1^. and here he lies at the bottom of the Creation, as all was
made by him.

2. He is said to be the Firstborn among many Brethren, Romans 8. 29. and here
he is presented to us as lying at the bottom of Election, as the rest were
elected in him, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.

3. He is said to be the First-begotten of the Dead, and so he lies at the
bottom of the Resurrection, Rev. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21, 22. and to this does
the Apostle apply ^sal. 2. 7. Thou a^t my Son, this Day have I begotten thee,
Acts 13. 33.

But to finish this, I shall draw up the result in this short Conclusion: that
as the Son of God was promised to come forth, and did come forth in time, so
was he considered by and with the Father before time: But he was promised to
come forth, and did come forth God and Man in time; Therefore he was so the Son
of God before time, which has been fully cleared; Yet I add John 16. 30. and
17. 8. Isa. 9. 6. or else he was not yesterday, and to day the same for ever.

Further, As we are to understand him always to be the Son of God in both
Natures, so are we to understand him to be the Son of Man in both Natures.
God-Man, as Man-God, God and Man in one Person, so that the Son of God is the
Son of Man, and the Son of Man is the Son of God, Mat. 9. 6. That ye may know
that the Son of Man has power on ^ar^h to forgive sins, John. 3. 13. Hence his
Blood is called: The Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. And that God laid down his life
for us, 1 John 3. 16. Yet the Divine and Humane Nature remaining distinct and
unmixed, though in the Unity of Person, One Man, One Son, truly God, and truly
Man; yet Relative Properties and Operations distinct, as to the Divine and
Humane Nature, at least in the time of his Humiliation.

Thirdly, Touching the Divinity of the 3 Touching the Divinity of the holy
Spirit.
Holy Spirit, that he is God, as I said before, he is of God, and is God: This
is evident in the Scriptures: He is joined in with the Father and the Son in
the Work of Creation, Genesis 1. 2. Job 26. 13. and 33. 4. in the work of
Teaching, Prophesying, Convicting, Converting, it is all applied to the holy
Spirit, John 14. 26. 1 Cor. 12. 7. to 11. John 16. 8.

The holy Scriptures declare the holy Spirit to be of God, and therefore God of
the same Nature, and is the Efficacious Effecting Power of the Father and the
Son, the Father is the Fountain and first Cause of all things, it is he of whom
are all things; the Son is the Medium, or Arm by which it is effected, for
whose sake it was done, and by whom it was done, by whom are all things: The
holy Spirit is the Effecting Power, accomplishing what he purposed in and by
his Son, as the Way; hence the holy Spirit is called in Scripture, The hand of
God, Job 26. 13. Psalm. 139. 5, 10. Isa. 50. 2. and 59. 1. The finger of God,
Exodus 8. 19. and 31. 18. Deuteronomy. 9. 10. Luke 11. 20. with Mat. 12. 28. The Power
of God, Luke 1. 35. and 24. 49. with Act. 1 8. The breath of God, Ps. 33. 6.
Job 33. 4.

And this is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, and is Omnipotent,
Omniscient, and Omnipresent, this Spirit is in the Father and the Son, and
proceeds from the Father and the Son, John 14. 16, 17, 26. and 16. 7. and is
the Convincing, Converting Power of God, the Teacher and Comforter of his
People.

Whereas some say that the holy Spirit is The opinion that the holy Spirit is a
Creature, confuted.
a Creature, a glorious Created Spirit, and not God; there is no ground in
Scripture for such an imagination, but its contrary to the Truth thereof.

The Reasons ordinarily rendered, are,

1. Because he is said in Scripture to be sent by the Father and the Son,
therefore subject to the Father and the Son; and must be a Creature, for
greater is he that sends, than he that is sent.

I answer, He may be said to be sent of God, (and so is Christ the Son) and to
be subject to the Father and the Son, yet one in the same Nature and Essence;
his being in Office and Work subject, no whit derogates from his Divinity: All
the Actions of a man follows the Understanding and Will, of which the Head and
Heart is the seat; yet the Hand works what the Head and Heart directs unto;
this argues not that the hand is not essentially of the same body, because
subject to the head, neither does it argue inferiority (though subjection) in
essence or substance, but in office and work. for every Member of the Body is
of the same, though every Member has not the same Office and Work, yet all are
governed by the Head and Heart, and shall be of the same in Glory to eternity.
I mind this low comparison, which Reason can reach, to illustrate this high and
divine My^^ery by* of Father, Son and holy Spirit God may be, and is said to
be, the Head, 1 Cor. 11. 3. and 3. 23. and the Son may be said to be the Heart
of God, he th^^ (...) (and is) in the ^^som of the Father, John 1. 18. and came
out from God, Joh. 1^. 27, 28. the holy Spirit the Hand by which the Head and
Heart works and accomplisheth all; as I minded before: yet all three in unity
of Nature, Will and Work.

2 Reason, because it is said, he shall not speak of himself, etc. this shows
him not to be God.

Answ. This is not spoken by Christ to declare the Spirit not to be God, but to
distinguish the Spirit of the Father and the Son from all false Spirits whether
of Devils or Men that as the Father has honored the Son, and will have all men
to honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, Joh. 5. 23. so it is the
Office and Work of the Spirit not to speak of himself, (or of the Father
either) distinct and without the Son; but to be opening the Mystery of the
Father and the Son, the good Will of the Father in the Son, to show Jesus
Christ unto us; because he is the Way, the Truth and the Life, Joh. 14. 6. If
our Teaching be of the Spirit of Christ, it opens Jesus Christ unto us, and the
Mystery of the Love of God in him, the Pardon, Peace, the Life and Salvation
which is in him, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now we have received not the Spirit which is of
the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that
are freely given us of God: but false Spirits speak of themselves, and exalt
themselves, and in something or other designedly derogates from Christ, and the
Salvation that is by him.

In this Answer note these two things: 1. In that he speaks not of himself, but
shows us the things of Jesus Christ, things to come, i. e. the Salvation to
come, that is to be obtained by our Lord Jesus Christ with eternal Glory: it is
so far from proving him not to be of God, that it indeed proves him to be God,
and one in the same Work with the Father and the Son, to exalt the Son as the
Father has.

And 2ly. That he is in this, by our Lord, clearly discovered to us in way of
distinction from all false Spirits, who exalt themselves, and not the Son of
God, and i^ the special character, or discovery of the difference between the
Spirit of God in its Workings and the Spirit of the World, the one exalts
Christ our Lord and Savior, opens him and the Mysteries of Life by him, the
other leaves him out, speaks of it self, and exalts its self without him, and
this is indeed the Spirit which is not of God, or of Christ, what ever persons
pretend unto in this false self-exalting and Christ-abasing Spirit.

3 Reason Because the Spirit is said to hear, to have a hearing property, what
he shall hear that he shall speak, etc.

Answ. 1. Hearing in it self is no argument to prove the Spirit not to be God;
for God in Scriprure is frequently said to hear, Ps. 65. 2. Jer. 8. 6.

2. Hearing in Scripture-sense imports Understanding, Mat. 13. 13, 14. so that
by Hearing (in that saying of Christ) we are to understand, is meant, the
Spirits Understanding and Knowledge, of the depths of the Mysterys of Salvation
that is by Jesus Christ, and to be opening that to the Saints, 1 Cor. 2. 10,
11, 12.

4. Because it is said, that the Spirit makes intercession for the Saints
according to the Will of God, therefore not God.

Answ. The word properly must be understood, in us, Romans 8. 26, 27. the scope
of the matter explains its self, the Spirit helps our infirmities: this is
the way of the Spirits intercession, by helping our infirmities, with sighs and
groans which cannot be uttered rationally: this must be in us, and this suits
with the Scripture in this case, Jude v. 20. praying in the holy Spirit, so
that the Spirits Intercession for us, or in and by us, is by helping our
infirmities both in matter and manner, according to the Will of God, Zech. 12.
10. Christ our Mediator is our Intercessor for us, and the holy Spirit is our
Intercessor in and by us, helping and assisting us to pray for such things as
we need, and in such a manner as we ought, so that all those Titles given to
the Spirit in the Scripture, and those Works ascribed to him relating to his
Office and Work in the Godhead, no whit derogates from his Union in the same
Divine Nature, or eternal Existency in and with the Father and the Son.

That there is any personality in God, or three Persons in the Divine Essence
is a Language I do not yet understand, is made use of in the Scriptures;
therefore I avoid the terms, though I am not willing to question, or doubt, but
that those who use it (who are godly, and understand what they say) do it
thereby to express the Truth of the Scripture-distinction in the Trinity, i. e.
that there is Father, Son and Spirit in unity of Nature, and is but one God,
the word Person being not at all, as I know, given either to the Father or holy
Spirit, but to the Son, as God and Man in one Person. The truth of the Trinity
proved from the Old Testament


And this Truth, i. e. a plurality in one infinite and eternal God is clearly
to be proved from the Old Testament, even from the Creation, and that probably
in more clear and God-like Terms of Distinction, than Persons, which probably
the Learned have avoided for some (at least supposed) good Reasons, on which
account I shall at present say no more, only present to those that understand,
Genesis 1. 1. with verse. 26.

The sum of all is this, That God is One, Eternal, Infinite, Substantial Being,
distinguished into Father, Son and holy Spirit, and in all there are Divine and
Distinct Relative Properties and Operations, yet in all no one wills, no one
acts* without the other, Genesis 1. 1, 2, 26. Heb. 1. 2. Job 33. 4.

Thus have I given a brief Discovery of The Conclusion.
my little, little Apprehension in this great and wonderful Mystery of all
Mysteries, whom rightly to know, is Life Eternal; a Mystery not too curiously
to be pried into, but in the plain Demonstration of his own Word, and I am sure
it will remain a Mystery still. This I believe is necessary for every Christian
to believe in this matter; That there is One only True God, and that this True
God is One in Essence and Nature; and that the Father, Son, or Word and holy
Spirit, is this True God; That Jesus Christ in his both Natures, Divine and
Humane, is the Son of God; The second Man is the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.
47. And that the holy Spirit is the Outgoings and Effecting Operations of God,
and so is God of the same Nature, the Enlightener, Convincer, Converter,
Sanctifier, Strengthener and Comforter of the Saints, in and (...) ^ea^s
appointed for that end, i. ^. t^ Word of Truth, and Doctrine of the Gospel.

Fourthly, Where this glorious God is.

1. He is in all places by his Spirit, Psalm. 4 Where God is.
139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, and whither shall I flee from thy
presence? See Verse. 8, 9, 10. Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good. 2 Chronicles. 16. 4. The Eyes of the Lord
run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in behalf of
them whose Heart is perfect toward him. And as he is by his Spirit every
where: So,

2. His Paternal Presence is in Heaven, God the Father is in Heaven
his Glorious Majesty, for we must believe God to be a Substantial Being (not
^n Airy Fancy, a Nothing) and such a Substantial Being as the Scripture
declares him to be; yea and infinitely beyond all Verbal Declaration, or
Heart-Conception; that He is such an One whom no man has seen nor can see and
live such a One in his own Glory* that if he should discover himself to the
World, would destroy it at once, for no man has seen him or can see him. It Is
true, Jesus Christ his Son is the Brightness of his Glory, and the express
Image ^f his Substance, Heb. 1. 3. But the Glory of the Father is a hidden
Glory, and by the Son the Father has been and shall be revealed in His Times,
1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. And, Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his Footstool.

That the glorious Habitation of God is in Heaven, is clear from
Scripture-Revelalation, that whiles the Son was on Earth, the Father was in
Heaven: John 20. 17. Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but
go to my Brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father to and your Father,
to my God, and to your God. And Christ teaches to pray, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc. Mat. 6. 9.

And the Heaven where the Glorious Majesty is, seems to be above all Created
Heavens, in the Increated Heaven, his Eternal Habitation: For as God is
Eternal, so He must have an Eternal Habitation: Which is the Heaven into which
Christ our Lord is Ascended to the Right Hand of Power and Glory: Ephesians. 4. 10.
He that descended, is the same that ascended up far above all Heavens, etc. The
most Glorious Heaven, and Eternal Habitation of GOD, far above all Created
Heavens, is called, The High and Holy Place where He dwells, Isaiah 57. 15.
Psalm. 8. 1. Thou have set thy Glory above the Heavens, i. e. the Created
Heavens. Psalm 113. 4, 5, 6* The Lord is High above all Nations, and his Glory
above the Heavens: Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on High, who
humbles Himself to behold things in Heaven and Earth: i. e. To behold things
in his Created Heaven and Earth: Who is said to humble himself to behold things
in Heaven and Earth, that is, Because the Created Heavens and Earth are all in
the Fallen State, by reason of the Sin and Fall of Man: Therefore God does
greatly humble himself in looking after the Heavens and Earth in the Fallen
State.

CHAP. II. Of the Holy Scriptures: That it is the Divine Word and Will of God,
proved by many Divine Arguments.
I shall now proceed, to present some grounds to prove the holy Scriptures to
be the Word and Will of God, the holy and vine Truth of God, it being a matter
of concernment for Christians to be established in, next our believing that
there is a God, and indeed we cannot savingly believe that God is, unless we
believe the Truth of his Word, that it is the Divine Revelation of his Will,
relating both to matters of Faith and Practice, in order to our spiritual and
eternal well-being. And (I trust) I shall propound several weighty and
undeniable grounds for Confirmation of Faith, in the Truth and Divinity thereof.

And, the f^rst ^ort of Grounds I shall present 1. Its own witness, which
proves it Divine.
are such as arises from it self, that we may see its own Witness full of all
sufficiency to prove its own Divinity.

1. Its Divine Purity proves it to be of 1. Its Divine Purity.
God, who is most holy; it treats about, presents us with, and calls us to,
Holiness and Purity; it allows of no uncleaness, no impurity; it is that which
is above Men or Devils to bring forth, who are filled with all uncleanness; it
is a pure Word, a holy Word, a God-like Word, a Word that all unholy persons do
hate, (because they hate Holiness) what ever they pretend to the contrary in
word, yet in deed they hate it, and wish there were no such Word to condemn
their Unholiness; a Word that the Devil hates; and that is it he so much
endeavors to destroy the Faith of Men therein: Holiness and Purity is that
which is contrary to the natural inclinations both of Men and Devils: this
Truth of the Scriptures Purity, all holy ones must and do acknowledge, and this
testimony it bears of it self in the general body thereof, that who so runs may
read it: It forbids and condemns Sin, it commands and commends Holiness, and
directs unto it; but see some particular Texts of Scripture, that confirms this
general Witness, Psalm. 12. 6. The Words of the Lord are pure Words, as Silver
tried in a Furnace of Earth, ^u^ified seven times. Psalm. 119. 140. Thy Word is
very pure, therefore thy Servant loves it: it commends Holiness, Psalm. 93.
5. Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord, for ever: it teaches Holiness, ^sal.
34. 11, 12, 13, 14. it commands Holiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. and
reproves and condemns both Sin and Sinners, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Psalm. 11. 5. 6.
and 9. 17. Rev. 22. 15. it is a holy, pure Word, and therefore of God.

2. Its Divine Power witnesses it to be 2. Its divine power.
the Word and Truth of God, or rather the Divine Power of God attending it, and
manifest in it, and by it, in renewing and begetting Souls to the Faith, and to
work dead Sinners into a Conformity to it self, i. e. the Truth and Holiness
therein contained, Joh. 17. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them
also which shall believe on me through their word: i. e. the Preaching of the
Word, or Reading of the Word, Romans 10. 17. Examples of the Power and Efficacy
in and with the Word; see Acts 2. 37, 41. and 8. 12. and 12. 24. Gal. 3. 2.
Jam. 1. 18. and common experience witnesses the truth hereof, it is that Word
which makes wicked men to tremble, Act. 24. 25. and Devils too, Jam. 2. 19.
that resists Satan, Matt. 4. 3. to 11. it is that Sword of the Spirit, being
exercised by Faith, which repels and quenches all the fiery Darts of the Devil
and Men, Ephesians. 6. 11, 17. 1 Pet. 5. 9. So that its Divine Power proves it to
be a Divine Word.

3. Its Divine Wisdom and Mystery 3. Its divine wisdom and mystery.
proves it to be of God, and not of Man: Such is its Divine Mystery and Wisdom*
that it confounds and brings to naught all the Wisdom of the World, and turns
it into foolishness; it opens the Mysteries of the Wisdom of God in the
Salvation of Man by Jesus Christ; which all the world in all its wisdom could
never have thought on. Nay, such a height and depth of Mystery and Wisdom is
there herein, that now it is brought to light; none of themselves, in the
Wisdom of man, can savingly understand it; its that which none of the ^rinces
of this World knew; it is such Wisdom as is indeed foolishness to this world,
and the fleshly wisdom.

This is not only witnessed by the Scripture, 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. and 2. 6, 7,
8, 13, 14. and 3. 18, 19, 20. but understood, believed and experienced by the
Saints in some measure, that the Mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ is the
mani^old Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10.

4. Its Divine Tendenci^s proves it to be ^
a Divine Word. The matter at which it aims, and ends to which it tends,
wonderfully discover its nature, and whence it is; As*

First, Its Exalt^ion of God in all his Name, and its laying low of the
Creature: It is a God and a Christ-exalting Word, and a man-abasing Word, a
Devil and S^n-discovering and condemning Word, and therefore of God; for it is
not possible for man, as man, to bring forth any thing but that which will
exalt himself: But the Scripture does not only condemn Sin and Sinnars, but it
lays low the Righteousness, Wisdom, Will and Power of Man in Divine things;
and exalts the Righteousness, Wisdom, Will and Power of God.

1. The Wisdom, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8.

2. The Will, John 1. 13. Romans 12. 2. Col. 4. 12. Heb. 10. 36. 1 John 2. 17. 1
These. 4. 3.

3. The Power, Josh. 24. 19. Prove. 16. 1. Jer. 10. 23. John 15. 5. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Phil. 2. 13. and 4. 13.

4. The Righteousness of God, and lays low the Righteousness of Man, and
therefore it i^ of God Isa. 45. 24, 25. and 64. 6. Dan. 9. 24. Romans 4. 3. and
8. 23, 24. Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9.

Secondly, The second Design discovered 2. It is to bring the H^^e God and
sinful man into Unity again.
in Scripture, is, To bring the holy God and sinful man into Unity again; a
wonderful Design, both as to the Way and Work! May this be a Divine or Humane
Work, think you? We were all gone out of the way, gone out from God into a
state of sin and death, enemies to him who had power to destroy us for ever;
and the Great God has declared in his Word that he has found out a way of
Reconciliation and Peace for poor Sinners, and declared it in this his Word: He
has given his only Begotten out of his Bosom, that he might give his Life and
Blood for our Reconciliation and Redemption, and this is the Message of the
Word to us, Ephesians. 2. 13, 15. Col. 1. 20. and this was not of Man, but of God, 2
Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, etc. 1 Pet. 3.
18. Jesus Christ gave himself for us, the Just for the Unjust, that he might
bring us to God. This was a God-like Design, which proves the Word to be of God.

Thirdly, And in a word, The design of 3. It is to make us holy here, and happy
hereafter.
the Word, and of God therein, is to make us holy here, and happy hereafter, to
make us conformable to the Will of God here, that so we may live eternally
with him hereafter: A glorious Divine Design! far above the reach of Humane
Reason, or the Will of Man; nay, its contrary to the Will of Man by Nature,
who is so far averse to it, that he resolves not to be holy, though he be never
happy, and so judges himself unworthy of the Life promised to those that obey
him, Psalm. 8. 4. John 3. 16, 19. Acts 13. 46.

5. A fifth Testimony from the Word it A 5th Testimony is its divine truth
self, is, its Divine Truth, and the Truth of God witnessed therein, John* 17.
17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy word is Truth; this is the witness of
Him who is Truth it self, and is the faithful and true Witness. Psalm. 119. 160.
Thy Word is true from the beginning, etc. Psalm. 19. 9. The Judgments of the
Lord are True, and Righteous altogether.

I shall give some particular convincing Proved by Demonstrations of its own.
Demonstrations in confirmation of the truth thereof; the Scripture declares
the Creation of the World by the Word of God, with the manner and order
thereof, Genesis 1. which all may see, and conclude the truth thereof, if not
Atheists: The Bow in the Cloud to be a sign of Gods Covenant with all flesh,
Genesis 9. 13. visible to be seen of all, that God may be known by his Works which
he has made, Romans 1. 19, 20. Psalm. 19. 1, 2. confessed of all except Atheists:
That he gives us rain and fruitful seasons, Acts 14. 17. That He causes the
Sun to arise on the good and on the evil, and the Rain to fall on the just and
the unjust, Mat. 5. 45. All to be seen and acknowledged by all: Fulfilled the
Destruction of Jerusalem, threatened Mat. 24. 2. Luk 21. 20, 24. known and
believed of all that do not wilfully shut their Eyes. All which confirms the
Truth thereof.

See further the Truth as testified in and of its self, and ought to be
believed, Genesis 15. 13. The affliction of Abraham's Natural Seed four hundred
years, the truth thereof you may see Exodus 12. 40. Gal. 3. 17. The truth of all
the Promises made to the Fathers, see Jos^. 21. 44, 45. and 23. 14. Their
Babylonish Captivity threatened, and executed accordingly, Jer. 17. 1, 4. and
21. 4, 7. with their return, according to the time, and by the person foretold,
Dan. 9. 2. Jer. 29. 10. Isa. ^4. 28. and 45. 1, 2, 1^. with Ezra 1. 1, 2.
Christ was promised to be of the Seed of David, and to be born of a Virgin, and
it was so fulfilled, Isa. 7. 14. with Mat. 1. 23. Gal. 4. 4. and that he should
suffer death, which was accordingly fulfilled, Luke 24. 25, 26. Acts 3. 17, 18.
with multitudes of like examples that might be named, but these are sufficient
to the matter in hand, and end intended, i. e. to confirm us in the truth of
this blessed Word.

6. And finally its Divine Harmony witnesses 6. Its divine harmony greatly
c^nfi^ms us Divinity.
abundantly to its Divinity, or Divine Truth: I say, its Divine Harmony and
Concurrency with it self, written by so many men in so many Ages of the World,
at such distance of times and places, and to hold harmony and Unity with it
self from first to last, wonderfully declares it to be from that one God that
changes not, and not from men: For such a word to be giving forth about Two
Thousand years, some at one time, and some at another, in some part was
fulfilled what was promised in another, the New Testament being the fulfilling
of the Old; I say Harmony and Unity in the Substance and Body thereof: What may
be supposed of difference by some, is only in matters circumstantial, but not
material; and it may be their ignorance in not understanding wherein the Unity
and Harmony consists. But the Substance and Body of the Scriptures, as it
treats of and discovers God and Christ, and the Works of Creation and
Redemption, what he has done for his People in all Ages, and under all
Ministrations; what he has promised he will do for them, and what he requires
his People to do; and what he has done and will do to his and his Churches
Enemies, in a word, the Volumn of the Book treats, Heb. 10. 7. Or of Man's
Fall, sinfulness and misery thereby, of Christ promised and effected, and of
all things concurring to the Redemption and Restoration of Fallen Man by
Christ, in all which is fullness of Unity and Harmony.

And so much shall suffice to be here spoken for the Authority of the
Scriptures own witness to its Divinity and Truth.

II A second Witness is, The Consent II* W^tn^ss ^^ the C(...) all G(...)e
Persons.
and Testimony of all the Godly in all Ages unto this day.

1. The Testimony of those Godly Persons who writ the ^criptures, who give
their own Testimony that it was the Word of the Lord, and not their own.
Amongst the multitude that might be named, take these few in behalf of the
whole, Genesis 12. 1, 2. and 17. 1. Exodus 20. 1. and 31. 1. and 33. 1. Lev. 4. 1.
and 6. 1. Deuteronomy. 33. 9. 1 Kings 8. 26. Psalm. 119. 9. Isa. 1. 2. Jer. 1. 2. Ezekiel.
1. 3. Mark 7. 1^. John 10. 35. and the Apostles confirm it in the New
Testament, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. and 3. 15* 16. 1 Cor. 14. 37.

2. And all other Godly Persons, both in the times of the Scripture's being
given forth in the Old and New Testament, and in all Ages since to this day,
has believed the Divinity and Truth thereof, as both History and Experience
declares; else what means their faith in, practice of, and suffering for the
truth therein contained, as has been so abundantly demonstrated in all Ages.

And almost all men where it comes, must fall before it, acknowledging the
Truth thereof, though most of men dare be so bold as to add their Inventions
to it, and not to live in obedience thereunto: How they think to escape the
Judgment threatened, it concerns them to consider in time, Rev. 22. 8. John 12.
48.

III. It must be from God, and so be his III. It is from God, because it can be
from none else. 1. It cannot be from Angels Good or Bad.
Word and Will made known unto us, because it can indeed be from none else.

1. It cannot be from Angels alone, either Good or Bad.

1. It cannot be from good Angels, any otherwise than as Messengers of God to
deliver it; for good Angels durst not assume such an Authority distinct from
God, but as Messengers from God, so they delivered part of it, as Dan. Chap.
10, 11, 12. Rev. 1. 1.

Nor 2dly, Could it be given by bad Angels, or the Devil; it being the holy
Word of Truth, it is contrary to his nature; he is a Liar, and the Father
thereof, and an Enemy to all Truth and Holiness, especially to God, and Christ,
and the Salvation of men, which is the substance of the Truth which is held
forth unto us in the holy Scripture.

2. It Is against his Interest and Kingdom, it destroys him in all his ways, and
tends to deliver Souls out of his Kingdom and Captivity, and discovers his
destruction without all hope or help; and therefore it cannot be of him.

2. It cannot be from men, no not of any 2. It cannot be from men alone, either
Good or Bad, Rich or Poor.
sort of men.

1. It cannot be of debauched men, of vicious life and conversation, for it
abundantly preaches forth their reproof and condemnation; I need not to
mention Scripture for this, it is so abundantly known; so that none can
rationally think that it should be the work of wicked men.

2. Nor can it be a device of great men, or the Princes of the Earth, to keep
men in awe, (as some imagine) though some such were employed by the Lord
therein* as Moses, David and Solomon, etc. That it could not be the device of
great men, is evident,

1. Because the truth contained therein is a Mystery, and above their reach to
understand it (only as men) the Grace and Glory held forth therein is a
Mystery to them, 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8.

2. It cannot be of great men, and the Princes of the Earth, for they
throughout all Ages have been the great Persecutors of those who have owned it,
and in truth of heart have cleaved to it: there needs no proof for this;
therefore no man of reason can imagine it to be their device.

3. It cannot be of them, for it discovers their sin and judgment as much as of
any sort of men, Psalm. 82. Jer. 5. 5, 6. Isa. 30. 33. Rev. 6. 15, 16.

Nor 3dly, Can it be the Word of the Wise men of the World: Because,

1. It condemns the Wisdom of the World as Folly, and lets such to know that
they must be Fools, if ever they will be wise in the Wisdom of the Scriptures,
1 Cor. 3. 18, 19.

2. The wise men of the World are most averse to the Wisdom therein contained,
and as few of them as of any sort of men attain to the saving knowledge
thereof, and conformity thereunto, Luke 10. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 20. 26.

Nor 4thly, Can it be the Word of Fools or Madmen, as sometimes Festus charged
Paul, Acts 26. 24. and as wicked men still account the People of God, who own
it, and live according to it; but the Scripture discovers them to be the Fools
and Madmen that do not believe it, nor walk according to it, and they shall one
day confess it, Psalm. 64. 8. Wisd. 5. 4.

Nor 5thly, Is it the Word of Worldly Rich Men: For,

1. It preaches their doom and judgment, Psalm. 49. 16. Mat. 19. 23, 24. Luk 6.
24.

2. It sets Rich Men on Works which they themselves are averse unto, 1 Timothy 6.
17, 18. And well it were if Christians that are rich in this World, were more
set at liberty in this Work than they are.

Nor 6thly, Was it given by Poor Men, as such; for it holds their misery,
without Christ, to be worse, in some sense, than the misery of the Rich;
miserable both here and hereafter; for all wicked men, both Poor and Rich,
without Repentance, must perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. and that he that believes not
must be damned, whether Rich or Poor, Mark 16. 16. And that the Cause of the
Poor must not be favored because they are poor, more than the Rich, Lev. 19.
15. Exodus 23. 3.

Nor 7thly, Was it the Word of Hypocrites or self-righteous Persons, for it
condemns Hypocrites with a witness, Mat. 23. throughout, and 24. 51. Luke 11.
44. and for self-righteous Persons, who think to be saved by their own works,
it shuts them out both of the Grace and Glory thereof, Mat. 5. 20. Luke 18. 9.
to 14. Romans 10. 3.

Nor 8thly, Was it the Word of Proud Persons: For,

1. It generally requires Humility, it prefers and works Humility; Humility and
Self-abasing is the very spirit of the Gospel, Mat. 5. 3.

2. And on the contrary it discovers the sin and judgment of all proud persons,
I wish it were more laid to heart, Prove. 16. 5. Isa. 2. 11, 17. Mal. 4. 1.

9thly, Neither was it Godly Men of themselves who writ it; although it is true,
it was written by Holy Men of God, as they were inspired by the Holy Spirit, 2
Pet. 1. 21. But only as Godly men it came not from them; and that,

1. Because none could be so good of themselves as to reach into those Divine
Mysteries of God and Christ, of Grace and Glory, as are so abundantly and
divinely opened unto us therein, even the manifold Wisdom of God.

2. Because none truly gracious durst belie the Lord, and say, The Lord spoke,
and, Thus says the Lord; and that these things are the Commandments of the
Lord, and yet speak their own imaginations: therein they must be Liars and
Deceivers, which, far be it from any who love the Lord, to imagine: For it must
be the Lords Word, or the Word of Liars and Deceivers, and it condemns Liars to
destruction, Isa. 28. 15. Rev. 21. 27. and 22. 15.

IV. And as a result from what has been IV. Its Impartiallity proves it to be
a divine word
said in this last Argument, Its Impartiality proves it to be the Word of God,
and not of Man: It respects neither High nor Low, Rich nor Poor, neither
Learned nor Unlearned, etc. It Is a wonderful Divine and God-like Word on this
Account: It Is impossible for any Men, as Men, to bring forth such a Word,
without being partial to themselves in something or other at one time or other;
But purely to Exalt God and Holiness, Grace and Glory, without all respect of
Persons, directing the way thereto, condemning sin and sinners, without any
respect of persons, one or other, declares abundantly that it is of God, and
not of Man.

V. It must be of God, and Divine, if V. The Scripture is of God, if Christ be
of God.
Jesus Christ was of God, as the Scripture witnesses, and all good men
believe, John 16. 27. and 17. 8. Acts 9. 22. He confirmed the Scriptures, and
fulfilled them abundantly; He came forth in the fullness of Scripture; owns it,
and lives to it, commends it to be the Truth, John 17. 17. and commands the use
thereof, John 5. 39.

So that our Lord having before us owned the Scriptures and fulfilled them,
commended and commanded them, I say, That if we believe that He was the Christ,
and not a Deceiver, which is blasphemy to think, we need no further proof of
the Truth of the Scripture. Dive into the weight of this Argument, and it will
establish you for ever*

And that both Christ and Scripture are of His miracles a high demonstration
that he was the true Christ
God, and that the things relating to Christ recorded in Scripture, are Truth,
the wonderful Works and Miracles He did in His Fathers Name, is a very high
Testimony of the Truth both of Christ and Scripture, witnessed by the
Scripture, done so openly in the view of all, confessed by all, none opposing the
truth thereof, no not the Jews, who were His Enemies; confessed by Mahomet in the
Turkish Alcoran, received and believed by Tradition, without all contradiction
to this day; not only of the Saints, but of the World too, strongly and
rationally confirm the truth thereof.

VI. The Divine Impressions stamped on VI Sealing Testimonies by the holy
Spirit.
the Hearts of the Saints by the Holy Spirit, suitable to the Word of Grace,
the Work in them answering the Word without them, as the New Covenant and Law
of God written in their Hearts, which has wrought in them Faith, Love, and the
Life of the Word, which are to them sealing Testimonies of the Truth and
Divinity of the Word: And hence it is that they set their seal to the truth
thereof, in believing, loving, and obeying thereof, and cleaving to God
therein, and suffering any Difficulties inflicted by men for the truth thereof,
adventure their Souls and Eternity upon the truth of God therein, and the loss
of all in the World, rather than lose their share in the Word of Life: A high
Confirmation of the Divinity thereof!

VII. Finally, As the Resultance from the VII. Dan^er of de^ying the Scripture
^^ be of God.
whole, To deny the Truth and Divinity of the Scripture, is to deny God
Himself, and Jesus Christ, and all Religion, to pass a black Sentence on all
the VVriters thereof, as Liars and Deceivers, and on all the Saints throughout
all Generations, who have believed, obeyed, and suffered for adhering to the
Truth therein; and on all the Effectual Workings of the Holy Spirit in the
Hearts of Believers, conforming them thereunto; so that it is impossible for any
man that has lived under the Instruction thereof, to deny it, and not to be an
Atheist, if not to be guilty of the unpardonable sin: for the whole matter the
Scripture treats on, in the substance thereof, is, as I said before, God, and
Christ, and Holiness, the Reducing of Man back again to God, through Christ,
from whom he was gone astray. And therefore what can those expect who deny this
Holy Divine Word of Truth, but all the Judgments and Plagues that are written
therein?

I shall now come to Answer some Objections in relation thereunto.

Object. Though the Scripture was given of God, and Divine Truth, the Word and
Will of God to the People of these times in which they were given; yet it is a
great Question whether it be so to us, and whether we have ought to do with it,
unless the same Spirit work immediately the same Truth in us; we are to hearken
to what God speaks in us, and not without us, etc.

Answ. To this I answer: That Truth is Truth still, and the Word and Will of
God is the same still, although its true that God has made known his Will at
various times and various ways, under several manifestations; yet when one
Ministration ended, it was by the coming in of another, as the substance of the
former, and openly declared from Heaven by the Son of God, with great Power;
and great Witness; and the Word and Ministration of the Son of God is the same
till his second coming, Man. 28. 20. unto which all are bound to take heed
unto, under peril of Judgment, Heb. 2. 23. Act. 3. 22, 23. Joh. 12. ^8. and it
is the Word and Will of the Lord still, whether men believe it and obey it or
not, whether you have the Spirit to work you to it or not: and if you are not
taught by the Word, and wrought to God in the Word to believe the Gospel, it is
an evident sign that you have not the Spirit of Christ, but of Error and
Delusion; which will fail you in the day of need.

Obj. Though they were given of God

Ans. It Is true* that it has passed through the hands of those who wanted not
wickedness enough to do it; but we have undoubted grounds to believe, that the
Lord preserved it and kept them from corrupting of it; for if they or any other
had corrupted it, it must have been to serve their own ends: but the Scripture,
that was by them preserved, and by them owned to be the Word of God, the
Scripture of Truth, is so far from serving their interest, that it leaves them
neither Root nor Branch, no Word have they from hence to warrant them in any of
their ways: as a Church of Christ their Dependency lay rather in the Authority
of their Church, keeping people in Ignorance, false Translations, coercive
Power and the like, rather than in corrupting the Scriptures in the original
Languages: a Divine Hand it was that it should be preserved holy and pure, as
it is, as has been proved.

Obj. The Scripture is not all the Word etc.

Answ. When I say it is the Word, or Words, of God, I intend thereby, that the
Body and substance thereof is the Divine Mind and Will of God made known to men
by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, by such ways as he pleased, and by such
persons as he pleased.

2. As to the Discoveries of the Words or Works of Satan* or wicked men, and
the Sins and Failings of the Godly, I easily grant, that it is not the Word of
God in the first sense, given by Inspiration.

Yet 2ly, As written and recorded by holy men inspired by the Lord, those
things, with many other Historical Relations recorded, are true by Divine
Testimony, that such things were, and so are, of divine and undoubted Credence;
whereas all other Histories, that are merely humane, can have but a humane and
doubtful belief.

3. It was written by the Will of God for the use and advantage of his Church
and people, Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever was written before time was written for our
Learning, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 11, 12.

1. Let us hence be informed of the greatness believes not must be damned.

2. Of Exhortation, 1. to believe the

2. To live the life of the Scripture, the life of Faith, and the life of Love,
the life of Obedience, and the life of Holiness: it is a holy Word, and
Holiness becomes all those who profe^s to own it, what ever Scripture, Faith or
profession we pretend unto, if we live not the life of the Scripture, it will
Judge us at the last day, Joh. 12. 48.

3. To be improving and applying of the Consolations of the Scripture, and that
it may be so, acquaint your selves more therewith, Romans 15. ^.

3. Of Consolation to all those who promises are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus;
2 Cor. 1. 20. theirs is the Grace held forth in the Scripture, and theirs shall
be the Kingdom of the Glory promised.

4. If this be truth, that the Scriptures are i. e. his Divine Will made
manifest to men, then woe to all wicked men, that walk contrary to this Rule,
they are not only like to miss of the Glory promised, but must expect
undoubtedly to meet with all the Plagues, especially the eternal Plagues and
Judgments therein denounced against unrepenting sinners.

If the Scriptures be the Divine Word and Will of God, given as the Rule of
Faith and Practice, in order to our serving and the attaining of the
Righteousness and Life therein held forth, then woe to all those that slight it
and refuse it, that will have none of it, that take what they list and leave
what they list, or like not: certainly such must know one day what it is to
undervalue the Word and Will of so high and so holy a God

CHAP. III. Of the Creation of the World, and all things therein.
1. IN general, that God created the World, and all things therein, is plain by
manifold Testimonies of Scripture, Genesis 1. 1. ^sal. 33. 6. and 136. 4. to 9.
Act. 14. 15. and 17. 24. And not only so, but,

2. Light of Reason teaches the same, that there must needs be a First Cause
of all things* from whence they proceed. Though Reason teaches not the time
and manner thereof, that we must have from Divine Revelation, Heb. 11. 3.
Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God,
etc. that is, not only that God made the Worlds, but the Manner, Method, and
time, according to the Scripture-Revelation, Genesis 1. This the Apostles (as we)
understood by Faith in the truth of that Revelation. And this Creation of the
Worlds intends the Celestial World* and the Terrestrial World, and all things
therein, whether they be things in Heaven, or things in Earth, visible and
invisible, etc. all things were created by and for Him. And that He made the
Worlds in six days, and that He made all things good, yea very good, the
Scripture informs us in, and the matter whereof the World was made, is expressed
Genesis 1. 2. the deep unformed Chaos, The Earth was void, and without form, and
darkness was on the face of the deep, etc. When this unformed Deep was created,
I suppose is not expressed in Scripture, though its supposed to be part of the
first days Creation, and intended in verse. 1. I^ the beginning God created the
Heaven and the Earth, i. e. the matter of which Heaven and Earth was afterward
formed. But this seems not to be the thing intended, and that,

1. Because this confused deep was neither Heaven nor Earth.

2. In that the Creation or forming of Heaven and Earth in order follows, and
the word Beginning seems not to intend the first days work only, but as a
Preface or Prologue to the whole six days work, in which the Heavens and the
Earth were created, in the beginning, i. e. in the first six days of the World,
God created the Heaven and the Earth, according to the Method there expressed, in
which all was finished, and God rested from His Work the seventh day. Whether
God made the matter of which all was made, of nothing, is known only to
Himself; Reason seems so to teach, that if there were any first matter
uncreated of which all was made, that there must be something Eternal besides
God: But this being a secret, I shall so leave it, con^luding with the
Scripture Light and Language, H^b. 11. 3. Through Faith we und(...)and that the
Worlds were framed by the Word of God, so that the things that are (...) not
made of things that do appear.

The Unity of the Father. Son, and Spirit, with the M^nner and Method, in this
Work of Creation, I have (according to my Understanding in the Scripture Light)
spoken to in what I have before written concerning God.

The Reasons of Gods making the Worlds, seems to be rendered in the Scripture,
i. e. to ^ulfil His Eternal Will and Counsel, and to show His Eternal Power and
Godhead, Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 1. 20. to glorify Himself in His own Works, Prove.
16. 4. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. and that all things might glorify Him; therefore He
made all things in a suitableness thereunto, for He made all things good, very
good.

CHAP. IV. Of the Creation of Man.
IN this Chapter I shall, according to the Light of the Divine Revelation,
treat of Man's Creation in five particulars.

1. The time when he was made, and 1 The Time when.
that is expressed, Genesis 1. 26, 31. to be the sixth day, after all the rest of
the Creation was made: God made all things first, and Man was the last of the
Creation, in relation to his time of being formed, though first in purpose and
council: In which we may learn, that ordinarily Gods greatest and most glorious
ends and designs are effected in his last and concluding Work: so it was in
this wonderful work of Creation; all the foregoing Work was but an Usher or
Preparation for Man. So it was in his calling Abraham out of his Country and
the Affliction of his Seed four hundred years, it was all in order to their
possession of the promised Land, which was the crowning Work at last, and all
before was a Preparation to it: so in the work of Redemption and Restoration
by Jesus Christ, in all the parts of it, the last will be the perfecting and
crowning Work: so in the Saints spiritual Race and Warfare, and the
Regeneration-state, the last is that shall crown all, 2 Tit. 4. 7, 8.

2. Man was in his Creation the most 2 The Excellency of Man in his Creation.
excellent of all Gods Works here below; and this appears, 1. in that he made
all things for him before he had made him, he built him the World for his
House, the Garden of Eden for his Pleasure and Delight, and all the Creatures
for his Service; and this appears in that he made all things first, and last
made Man, and brought all to him, and made him Lord of all, Genesis 2. 19, 20.
Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8.

2. In that he took time to consult about making man, more than in all the rest
of the Creation; the rest of the Creation was made suddenly, he spoke the Word,
and it was done; and much was done by Divine Ordinance, Genes. 1. 11, 12, 20,
21. but when he comes to make Man, he deliberates upon it, an there seems to be
(as it were) a Consultation of the whole Trinity, Let us make Man, which he did
not of any other part of the Creation.

3. In that he made Man in his own image, and after his own likeness, which is
not said of any other of the Creatures: so that Man being the most excellent of
the Terrestrial Creation, God made all for his service first, provided for him
before he brought him into the world, that so he might be furnished with all
things convenient for Use and Pleasure, for Honor and Dignity.

3. The Matter of what God made Man, 3 Of what God made man.
and that is expressed, Genes. 2. 7. And the Lord formed Man of the Ground, and
breathed into his N^st^ls the Breath of Life. Here is the whole Man, Body and
Soul, his Bo^y was made of the Dust of the Ground, chap. 3. 19. In the Sweat of
thy Face shall thou eat Bread, until thou return to the Ground; for Dust thou
art, and to Dust thou shall return. Which, as it abundantly It should teach man
to be humbl^, and to a^mire his Creator.
declares the Wisdom and Power of the Former, to form such a Piece for his
Praise out of the Dust, so likewise it should teach Man to be humble, being
made of so base a Matter as his Body was framed of, and must return to it
again: of what should Dust be proud, and why should Rational Men and Women, nay
Religious Men and Women, paint out their dusty, dunghill Bodies, as they do? and
likewise to admire the Wisdom and Power of his Creator, as the Prophet, Psalm.
139. 14, 15, 16.

2. For his Soul, that was more spiritual, Of the Soul or Spirit of man.
it is said, Genesis 2. 7. that God breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life,
and so more spiritual and excellent than the Souls of other Creatures, else he
could not have born the Image of God: and hence, it being the Breath or Spirit
of Life before it was breathed into the Body, it shall live when the Body is
dead: as for the Matter of the Soul, or Spirit, what it is in its Essence and
Substance, is too curious for any to pretend any further to determine; but that
there is the Soul, or Spirit, that dies not, Scripture does determine, Eccl.
12. 7. Matt. 10. 28. Luke 23. 44. Act. 7. 59. Rev. 6. 9. the Soul or Spirit is
rather to be demonstrated by its Properties and Faculties, than by its
Substance or Essence, the several Properties of the Soul are, the
Understanding, Will, Affections, Conscience, Memory, etc. the Seat of the Soul
(though its operations appear in all the Body) is principally in the Head and
Heart; the Head is principally the Seat of the Understanding and Memory, the
Heart of the Will, Affections and Conscience.

It has been a matter of School Dispute Whether the Soul comes by Generation
or Inspiration.
whether the Soul (since Adams Creation and Inspiration) comes by Generation or
Inspiration, a matter I think not much material, yet I shall give some probable
discovery hereof from Scripture-Revelation; and it seems most probable, that
Souls come by Generation, as the Bodies do; it is true, the word Soul often in
Scripture intends the whole man, Body and Soul; the Soul being the principle
part of man, the whole is included therein, Genesis 12. 5. And Abraham took Sarah,
his Wife, and Lot his Brothers Son, and all their substance which they had
gathered, and the Souls that they had gotten in Haran, chap. 46. 18. These are
the Sons of Zilpha, whom Laban gave to Leah, his Daughter, and these she bare
unto Jacob, even sixteen Souls, v. 22. These were the Sons of Rachel, which
were born to Jacob, all the Souls were fourteen: Now this I understand, that
when the Soul is put for the whole Man, that the Soul, by which the whole is
expressed, may not be left out, and not at all intended, v. 26. All the Souls
that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his Loins, were seventy
Souls, etc. Now if we may not rationally (where the whole is expressed by the
Soul) leave out the Soul from being part of that which is by it expressed; then
it is evident that Souls come from the Loins of Parents, as the Body does; so
that, I think, that the Letter of Scripture in plainness determines this case:
and farther, in a way of reason, if it were not so, Man should (as other
creatures) procreate his like, in the ordinary way of Generation, by the Divine
Ordinance and Power of the great Creator. Here are two Objections to be
answered.

Object. 1. Its said, Zech. 12. 1. Tha^ God (...)
forms the Spirit of Man within him therefore it comes not by Generation.

Answ. It Is true, God forms the Spirit of Man, and so he forms the Body
likewise in the Womb as he does the Spirit; yet that argues not that the Body
comes not in the ordinary way of Generation, because God forms it: for
Generation is his Ordinance, and leaves not out his forming Power and Wisdom in
the Work: Psalm. 139. 13, 15, 16. For thou have possessed my Reins, thou have
covered me in my Mothers Womb. And further, it is said Jer. 10. 16. That He is
the Former of all things; yet that argues not that those things come not in way
of Generation.

Object. 2. If it be so, this will seem to destroy the Immortality of the Soul:
for what comes from Man by Generation, must die and return to the Dust, etc.

Answ. That will not necessarily hold true. For we must understand this, that
the Soul of Man is not immortal by Nature, for then it must be God; there is
nothing of it self immortal, but God; not the Spirits of Men no nor Angels:
Immortality both to Angels and Men is by Divine Ordinance and Power from the
Immortal God, for He only it is that has Immortality, and makes whom and what
He will to be Immortal. So that this no whit derogates from the immortality of
the Soul, because that comes not from its own Nature, but from the Ordinance of
the Lord, who has designed to make the Body immortal too in his own time. How
we are to distinguish in B^dy, S^ul and Spirit.


Quest. How are we to understand that distinction of the Apostle, 1 These. 5.
23. where he mentions Spirit, Soul, and Body? Wherein lies the distinction?

Answ. Sometimes Soul intends the whole Man, Body and Soul, as has been
already proved; sometimes the word Soul intends both Soul and Spirit only,
Mat. 10. 28. sometimes the word Spirit intends both Soul and Spirit, Zech. 12.
1 But when it is distinguished as in that Scripture before expressed, and in some
others likewise in the threefold distinction; I understand the Difference and
Distinction to consist in this:

1. As in all men, the Spirit I understand to be that Reason, Wisdom, and
Understanding, Conscience, Will and Affections, wherein consists most
especially the Image of God, the most pure part of the Soul, and this is that
which is called the Spirit of Man, in distinction from the Soul; and this is in
all men, though exceedingly defaced by the Fall.

And in as much as there must be Animal Spirits, Vigitation, Sense, Lustings,
Hunger, Thirst, etc. that is called Soul in other Creatures, and this lies and
lives in the whole Body, and is the Life and Animation thereof; and this I
understand is intended by Soul, when distinguished from the Spirit. In a word,
to be plain, what is in man as to Life, and Sense, and Motion, as in other
Creatures, that is the Soul; what is in man above and beyond other Creatures,
wherein his Excellency consists as Rational, that is the Spirit; and this is
the Spirit in all men.

2. When considered in Saints, as renewed by Grace, 1. Negatively we are not to
understand it to be the Spirit of God; for we must distinguish between our
Spirits and the Spirit of God as the Scripture frequently does; nor. 2. Do I
understand by Spirit, is only intended the renewed Work of Grace, or New Man
created after God; though much of the matter lies there.

But affirmatively, I understand, that by Spirit in the Saints, is meant, the
more rational, understanding, divine Part, in which the New Work is wrought,
with the Work wrought in it, Ephesians. 4. 23. And be ye renewed in the Spirit of
your Minds. By Mind is meant the Natural Soul, the Spirit of the Mind that in
which the Renewed Work is wrought; the Image of God must begin to be Renewe^
where first it principally was, and where it was principally defaced which was
in the Spirit of the Mind or Soul; and this spiritual Work must pass upon the
whole Man before our Redemption will be completed: Hence our Bodies must did,
as well as our sins and sinful Natures, that so our Bodies may be changed as
well as our Spirits, that they may be raised immortal and incorruptible; and
that before we can attain the Perfection of the New-Covenant-Restauration, they
must be raised spiritual Bodies.

Wonderfully blinded are they, who pretend themselves perfect, or own Personal
Perfection in this sinful and mortal Body, and but in part renewed Soul or
Spirit.

IV. In what Estate God made Man; and 4 In what estate man was made.
this the Scripture does help us in: We know in what Estate we are by Nature,
in part, by woeful experience; but what we were in our first Parents, the Divine
Revelation only instructs us in; which was an Estate of Uprightness, free from
sin, Eccles. 7. 29. In the Image of God, Genesis 1. 26. And God said, Let Us make
Man in Our Image, after our Likeness: and ver. 27. So God created Man in His
own Image, in the Image of God created He him, Chap. 5. 1. and 9. 6. And
doubtless this Image and Likeness to God carried such an Excellency and Glory
in it, as that we being gone out from it, cannot in any case comprehend it, any
otherwise than as by the Light of the Spirit in and by What is meant by being
created in the image of God. In ^ things.
the Scripture, we may give some guess at it in our Understandings. And I shall
propose my apprehension herein in these six things.

1. In the Purity and Perfection of his Soul or Spirit, breathed into him by
God, his Understanding, Memory, Will, Affections, Conscience, all perfect,
concerning both God, himself, and the whole Creation, as far as needed him in
his station, and might tend to make him comfortable and happy, while abiding in
that state.

2. Without all sin, or sinful inclinations, any otherwise than as Temptations
presented might prevail, else he could not be upright, and in the Image of God;
yet subject to Temptation, else he had not sinned.

3. A Power of Free Will, of standing or falling, keeping or losing his present
happy Estate: A power of standing, or else he could not be in the Image of God;
or of falling; and that both he and we have found (I may in some sense say) by
woeful Experience.

4. Rule and Dominion over all the rest of the Terrestrial Creatures, as Gods
Vicegerent here on Earth, as before has been mentioned, Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8. And
herein consists one special part of his being in the Image of God, with his
fitness thereunto.

In the fallen state, where, for necessity, are but petty Kings and Rulers over
men (in comparison of this Great Lord of the World;) yet it is said of them, Ye
are Gods; there being something of Gods Image in Government, though exercised
by bad men in the fallen state.

5. He might be made in the Image of God in the whole Man, Body and Spirit, for
so the words seem to import, Let Us make Man in our Likeness, i. e. in the
Likeness or Image that God designed to bring forth His Son in, who was with
God, and was God, Immanuel, God with us, and in this, as in other things, might
he be said to be the Figure of Him that was to come.

6. I may add that he was made in the Image of God in the Trinity: Father,
Son* and Holy Spirit, yet but one God; so He made Man, Spirit, Soul and Body,
yet but one Man, all pure and perfect in the First Creation; a Trinity in
Unity, and a Unity in Trinity in Man; this Glorious Terrestrial Creature, yet
but one Man: That as there was a Unity in Trinity in God, Three and yet but
One; so would He make His Creature Man in His own Image, that he might the
better understand and know his God.

V. How Man was made: God made 5 How Man was made.
Man in His own Image, Male and Female created He them; He created Man both
Male and Female; for by the word Man, is intended Mankind, i. e. both Man and
Woman. Whether the Woman was dividedly made the sixth day, I suppose cannot be
positively determined, but that she was made in the Man the sixth day (if not
dividually) is plainly asserted, and the taking of the Woman out of the Man was
but the separating of the Male from the Female, that so they might be the more
fit for all their relative concerns in this World, and should doubtless teach
the Man to love his Wife as his own Flesh, and the Woman to love her Husband,
and to be subject to him as to her Lord: and the End of God in the Creation of
Man was, His own Glory, that Man might serve him in enjoyment of all his Works
in this World, and be to His Praise and Glory.

CHAP. V. Of the Angels, and their Creation.
1. THat there are Angels, heavenly Spirits, 1 That there are Angels.
the Divine Word does evidently declare, Genesis 16. 7. and 24. 7. and 19. 1.
Psalm. 8. 5. with multitudes of Scripture to this purpose.

2. That they were created, and are the 2 That they were created.
Creatures of God, though the Creation of Angels is but little mentioned in the
Scripture, if at all; yet it is evident, they were created: and that both from
Scripture and Reason,

1. From Scripture, Col. 1. 16. For by Him all things were created that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, etc. By things invisible we are to
understand the Angels, and the same Principalities and Powers, compared with
Ephesians. 3. 10. where the Angels are called Principalities and Powers, in heavenly
places.

2. Reason teaches, that they must be and are created, or else they must be
eternal, which is proper to none but God, and if so they must be God, but they
are not God, but his Creatures, made by Him, and for Him.

3. The time when they were created: this 3 The time when they were created.
is not expressed with clearness in the Scripture, though it is supposed, that
they were created in one of the six days; and that it was in the first day,
Genesis 1. 1. that under the term of Heavens ( God created the Heavens and the
Earth) the Angels are included.

But to me it seems probable, that they And that before the six days Creation.
were created before the beginning of the six days Creation, and not included
in the six days Work.

Reas. 1. Because the Creation mentioned, Genesis 1. seems to be the Creation of
the visible Worlds, i. e. of the Heavens and the Earth, and not the celestial,
invisible Angels, and that not only because there is nothing expressed about
the Creation of the invisible Spirits, but of the Heavens and the Earth, with
the manner thereof. But

2. In that Creation all things were made

Reas. 3. It is not probable, that they should be any part of the six days
Creation, that being made for Man, and therefore, as a punishment upon Man,
fell all with Man; both the Heavens, Earth and all things therein (of the six
days Creation) fell into a corrupted estate by the Fall of Man, Genesis 3. 16, 17,
18, 19. Job 15. 15. and that is it that the Heavens must be restored as well as
the Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Heb. 1. 11, 12. and if Angels had been then and on the
same account created, they must all have fallen with Man for the Sin of Man.

And therefore, Fourthly, probably not Job 38. 7. called Morning-Stars, and the
Sons of God, who were present at the Creation of the World, and sang the
Praises of God in beholding thereof; when the Morning-Stars sang together, and
the Sons of God shouted with Joy. Compare it with v. 4, 5, 6.

By all which it seems to appear, that the Angels were the first of Gods actual
Creation, and the first World that he made was the World of Angels, and may be
included in the plurality of Worlds, Hebr. 1. 2.

4. The Matter of what they were created, 4 The ^^tter of what they were (...)
p(...)bly of the (...) El^ment.
is not in Scripture so clearly expressed, as the Creation of the visible World
is. It is evident that they are Spirits, substances, and not fictions and
imaginary only, but spiritual Bodies or Substances; whether they were made of
all the four Elements, or any of them (which some deny) is not to us ma^erial,
though the Scripture seems most to adhere (in their Description) to that of
Fire, that they are of fiery Bodies, though invisible: it is true, they
appeared sometimes in the likeness of Men, yet it seems, that when they
appeared most proper to their own nature, it was in the likeness of Fire: it
was a Chariot of Fire in which Elijah was carried up to Heaven, 2 King. 2. 11.
and chap. 6. 17. Elisha prayed and said, O Lord, I pray thee, open his Eyes
that he may see, and the Lord opened the Eyes of the Young man, and he saw, and
behold the Mountain was full of Horses and Chariots of Fire round about Elisha.
The Angels seem to be in their invisible Glory; for the Young man could not see
them till his Eyes were open: to this the Prophet seems to agree, Psalm. 68. 17.
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels. Ezekiel. 1. 13.
The likeness of the living Creatures was like burning ceales of Fire, and like
unto Lamps, etc. Exodus 3. 2. the Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in the
Bush burning with Fire, and the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame
of Fire out of the midst of the Bush, etc. with Act. 7. 30. Psalm. 104. 4. who
makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flaming Fire: I understand the
proper reading of the Words to be this, to have the true sense thereof, He
makes his Spirits Angels, that is, Messengers: this holds analogy with the
Scriptures, and with Truth, Angel signifying Messenger: to make his Messengers
Spirits is improper, they were made so at first, and he makes them his
Messengers, even a flaming Fire his Ministers, that is, Ministering Spirits, his
Angels. These things thus considered, I most incline to this, that they are for
the most part of the fiery Element.

5 The Number of Angels; as to the account 5 The Number of Angels numberless.
of Man they were innumerable, we may say, as Rev. 7. 9. in another case, a
great number which no man could number. God did not create them as he did Man,
one Man and one Woman to increase the World thereby, and the Number to come
forth in many Generations; but he made them all at once, a multitude in this
Creation: the Prophet speaking of good Angels says, Ps. 68. 17. The Chariots
of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels. Where he names a certain
number for an uncertain, as appears by Dan. 7. 10. Thousand thousands ministered
unto him, that is, of Angels; for they minister to Christ, and serve him in
Judgment, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, that is, to be
judged by him; Mat. 26. 53. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father,
and He shall presently give me more than twelve legions of Angels. The fallen
Angels are multitudes, Mar. 5. 9. therefore they must needs be many in their
first Creation.

6. The state in which they were created 6 The state in which these were
created.
must needs be good, holy, pure, perfect; for ^s they were a higher and
foregoing Creation, excelling Man in their Creation, so they must be good; for
God, who was and is Goodness it self, could make nothing but that which was
good; I say, could not, in respect of his Nature; it would have been contrary
to himself; and that they were all so created is evident from the Scripture;
for some of them are good still, Elect Angels, called the Angels of God, Heb.
1. 6. Psalm. 103. 20. and the others were so created; for the Scripture says,
that they kept not their first estate, that is, of Innocence and Goodness, in
which they were created; for God never made them Devils, but Angels of Light.

The Titles given to the good Angels in Scripture discover their Nature and
Goodness: they are called Spirits, Heb. 1. 7, 14. Ministering Spirits and
Messengers of God. They are called Gods, Psalm. 138. 1. and 8. 5. and 97. 7.
with Heb. 1. 6. Sons of God, Job 1. 6. and 38. 7. Principalities and Powers,
and Dominions, and Cherubims and Scraphims; all which holds forth their
excellency in Nature and Work.

7. Of the Degrees of Angels, that there 7 Of the Degrees of Angels.
are Degrees of Angels is manifest in the Scripture; there are Principalities,
and Powers, and Thrones, and Dominions, Col. 1. 16. which intends not a
difference in Nature, but in Office and Employment: we read of Michael the
Archangel, or chief Angel, Jude v. 9. Rev. 12. 7. However some think him to be
Christ, I am (and that on good grounds) of another mind. But what those Degrees
and Orders of Angels are, is not any further manifest in Scripture; therefore I
shall speak no further of it, only thus much, that God is the God of Order, and
has set an Order and Government in the whole Creation, and we have ground to
believe, that there is the most perfect and glorious Order in the heavenly Host.

8. Of the Office, Work, and Ministry 8 Of the Office and Work of Angels.
of the good Angels, their Work and Office is twofold. 1. Such as respects God
their Creator. 2. Such as respects the Creatures.

1. Such as respects God their Creator. 1 To praise God.
1. It is to praise and glorify him continually, Psalm. 14. 8. 2. Praise him
all ye Angels, Praise him all ye Hosts, Isa. 6. 3. One cried to another and
said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his
Glory. Luke 2. 13, 14. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the
heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on
Earth Peace, Good will toward Men.

2. They wait on God in Heaven with a 2 To do his Will.
ready mind to know and do his Will, Mat. 18. 10. I say unto you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father that is in Heaven.
Psalm. 103. 20. Bless the Lord ye Angels of his, that excel in strength, that do
his Commandments, hearkening to the voice of his Word. Hence it is, that Christ
teaches us to pray, Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, that is, as
it is done by the Angels in Heaven.

2. Such as respects the Creatures, and the 2 Their Service to Men. 1 Such as
respect the Nations of the World.
World here below in the Government thereof, in which Angels are employed; as
is employed in Heb. 2. 5. Unto the Angels he has not put in subjection the
World to come, etc. which implies, that this World is much under the
Government of Angels: and in this, note, that not only good Angels, but evil
Angels are employed, and at work in the Government of the Nations.

1. Good Angels, that is it I am now treating about, they have their Work both
in the Government and overturns of the Nations. Dan. 10. 20. the Angel tells
Daniel, Now will I return to fight the Prince of Persia, and when I am gone
forth, lo, the Prince of Grecia shall come, and chapter 11. 1. Also I, in the first
year of Darius, the Mede, even I stood to confirm and strengthen him: which
clearly imports, the employment of Angels in the Transactions and Government of
worldly Kingdoms, to carry on Gods Design in the Earth, among the worldly
Powers, and to accomplish his Will.

And likewise the evil Angels are at work there, to carry on their Design, and,
if they could, to prevent Gods Design: Dan. 10. 12, 13. the Angel tells Daniel,
that the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood him one and twenty days, and
that Michael, one of the chief Princes, came to help him. In which I observe
two things, 1. That by the Prince of Persia is intended an evil Angel, who, as
far as permitted, governed both the King and Kingdom of Persia; for the King of
Persia, as a man, could not stop the Angel, till Michael came to his help. 2.
That he did, for a time, stop the Angel in his way and work for Daniel. The
Devil will hinder good from the Saints as much as possible he can.

But 2. and especially, such Works as 2 Such as respect the Saints
relate to the Saints, the Ministry and Government of the Angels being
especially for them, and they are such as relate either 1. to this Life, or 2.
at and after Death. 1. Such as relate to them in this Life, and they are such
as relate 1. to the Body, 2. to the Soul, i. e. both to the outward and inward
man.

1. Such as relate to the Bodies of the 1 Their Bodies. 1 To preserve and
defend.
Saints, 1. is to preserve and defend them from dangers, they are liable to
both from Devil and Men, as likewise accidents of danger they may fall into,
Psalm. 134. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about those that fear him
and delivers them, and 91. 11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee,
to keep thee in all thy ways: Genesis 48. 16. The Angel that redeemed me from all
evil bless the Lad: so the Angel warned Joseph to flee into Egypt to preserve
Christ, and to return when Herod, who sought his life, was dead, Mat. 2. 13,
19, 20. see Dan. 3. 28. and 6. 22. and sometimes makes use of his Angels in an
offensive way to the wicked, for preservation of his people, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20,
21. 2 King. 19. 35. and to deliver out of the hands of Enemies, Number. 20. 16. 2
To supply in need and distr^ss. 3 To direct and Prosper in lawful undertakings.


2. To bring needful things to them for their sustenance and preservation in
time of distress, as in the case of Hagar, Genesis 21. 17, 18. and Elijah 1 King.
19. 5.

3. To direct and prosper them in their lawful and just undertakings, and to
accomplish their businesses for them, as in the case of Abraham's Servant, Genesis
24. 7, 40. Genesis 23. 20.

2. Such as relate to the Soul, 1. They 2 Such as relate to the Soul.
have and may reveal the Will of God to them, in this they have be frequent.
It is said, the Law was given by the Disposition of Angels, Act 7, 53. that it
was ordained by Angels, etc. Gal. 3. 19. There are multitudes of examples of
this kind in Scripture, which I shall forbear to mention, only Rev. 1. 1. to
inform what to do in distress, as in the case of Hagar when she fled from her
Mistress, Genesis 16. 9.

2. To comfort them in case of trouble 2 What is their work at and after Death.
and temptation, as in the case of Christ, before his suffering, in his agony,
Luke 22. 43, 44. in dangers and difficulties, as in the case of Paul, Act. 27.
23, 24.

2. What is the Office and Work of the good Angels, at and after Death.

1. They wait to convey their Spirits (when separated from their Bodies) to the
place prepared for them till the uniting of Soul and Body again, Luke 16. 22.
which is not into the highest Heaven, the most high and holy place, the
glorious and eternal Habitation of God, the holy of holies, where Christ our
high Priest (only) is entered, there to appear in the presence of God for us;
but into Paradise, Luke 23. 43. or the third Heaven, which is all one, as is
explained by the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 12. 2, 4.

2. They shall come with Christ at the day of Judgment, to gather all the
faithful to him, Matthew. 24. 31. And separate the wicked from among them, Matthew.
13. 49.

Quest. Have the Saints every one a particular

Answ. Very probably it is so: yet Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all Ministering
Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation: and
Christ says, Matthew. 26. 53. Think thou that I cannot pray unto my Father,
and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of Angels. See 2 King.
6. 16, 17. and whereas the Prophet says, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. I understand it
to be intended of the general care of the Arch, or Chief, Angel over the Church
in general, who have all the heavenly Host for that Service, and is called,
Dan. 10. 21. Michael your Prince: And probably it was the same, Luke 2. 9, 10.
11. that brought the tidings to the Shepherds of the Birth of our Savior; and
ver. 13. and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly
Host praising God, etc. so that the Saints have not only one Angel, but the
whole heavenly Host for Service, as need and occasion requires, who are
intelligible spirits, swift in motion, great in strength and ready in mind, to
do the Will and Pleasure of the Lord, in this or any other matter, Psalm. 103.
20, 21.

CHAP. VI. Of the Devil and evil Angels.
IN this I understand, that when the Devil A Chief or Prince of Devils.
is spoken of in the Singular Number, it intends him as the Chief; for it is
evident, that there is an Order among the Devils, a Chief, or Prince of Devils,
at whose service all the rest are, and this Prince of Devils has many Titles
given him in Scripture: His Titles and Names given in Scripture is to discover
his Nature.


1. Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, as is supposed from Baalzebub the God of
Ekron, 2 King. 1, 2, 6.

2. The Old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9. so called for age in Wickedness, and Subtlety
to deceive, He it was that deceived our first Parents, Genesis 3. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
and the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 2. 11. We are not ignorant of his Devices.

3. The Devil, Mat. 4. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 6. which signifies a malicious Slanderer,
and false Accuser, a Calumniator, 2 Timothy 2, 3. Tit. 2. 3.

4. Satan, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Job 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. Zech. 3. 1. an Adversary, or
Enemy, sometimes ignorantly, so was Peter to Christ, Matthew. 16. 23. Mark 8. 33.
2. maliciously and intentionally, so is Satan, Mat. 4. 10.

5. The Dragon and a roaring Lion, Rev. 12. 9. 1 Pet. 5. 8. so called for his
fierceness and cruelty to mankind, wicked and cruel men are so called, Isa. 27.
1. Ez^k. 29. 3.

6. The Prince of this World, Joh. 12. 31. and the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.
4. which signifies his ruling Power in and over the people of this World, the
Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.

7. The Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2. which notes the great Power
of Satan in the airy Firmament, as also his place of passage to and fro, and
under this single Title in various Expressions, or Names, relating to the
Prince, or Chief, is the fullness of his Nature and Work discovered: and
likewise the whole number is sometimes included, Mark. 5. 9. My Name is Legion,
for we are many, and they are all of the same Name and Nature.

2. Of evil Angels, or Devils, in general, 2 Of evil Angels or Devils in
general. 1 Their Creation.
I shall note,

1. Their Creation, and that (as I said before) was good; for God made all
good, Angels of Light, that is clear; for they kept not their first estate, and
abode not in the truth, Joh. 8. 44. which argues that they were in the truth,
but abode not therein.

2. Of their Fall, and that was by Sin; 2 Of their Fa^, that it was for sin.
what Law God gave them is not expressed, but doubtless it was the Law of
Humility and Obedience, to be content in their station, and to be obedient to
their Maker, but they brake it and fell from that estate by sin, and sin must
be a transgression of some Law: that it was for sin that they were cast down
and became Devils is clear from Scripture, 2 Pet. 2. 4. For God spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, etc. Job 4. 18. he charged his
Angels with folly, that is sin; for sin is the greatest folly, and so they fell
from God into the greatest enmity and hatred against him.

3. What the sin of the Angels was by 3 What was the S^n of the Angels (...)
fell.
which they fell: as for this, various apprehensions there are concerning it:
with the confutation of any I shall not meddle, but state the truth from the
Scripture: and that describes it, especially in three things; the first is
Pride, and this appears from two Scripture-Grounds; the first is 1 Timothy 3. 6.
amongst the Qualifications of a Bishop; this must be one, Not a Novice, lest,
being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil: from
whence I would observe these four probable things,

1. That Pride was the cause of the Devils Fall and Condemnation, or that by
which he became a Devil.

2. That very probably the fallen Angels stood but a little while; they fell in
the young estate of their Creation, while Novices.

3. That Novices in Faith or Ministry are in greatest danger to be ensnared
with the Devils sin of Pride. And

4. That such is the evil of the sin of Pride, that it exposes those that are
ensnared therewith, and captivated thereby, to the Devils Condemnation that is
eternal, without hope or help: O therefore take heed and beware of Pride.

The second Scripture-Ground is, the temptation he made use of, and prevailed
upon our first Parents withal; which was, Pride and Disobedience, he knows ye
shall be as Gods, etc. It seems he knew by experience what aspiring Pride would
do, and so prevails to throw down Man (as he thought) into his own condemnation.

The second sin of Satan was Lying, as described by our Lord, Joh. 8. 44. He
abode not in the Truth, but turned from the Truth to his own Lies; for when he
speaks a Ly he speaks of his own, i. e. his own Nature, and his own Sin;
for he is a Liar, and the Father thereof.

And thirdly, to Pride and Lying Disobedience must be added: I may say truly,
that Pride and Lying is Disobedience it self, and that all known Disobedience
carries Pride and Lying in it: Pride is the cause why Men will not obey, when
they know, what they promise themselves in Disobedience proves a Ly.

I am not of the mind as some are: either 1. That in their first Creation they
were set to minister for Man's Good; and their thinking that too mean, was the
cause of their Fall: and that,

1. Because (as I have before minded) that very probably their Creation and
Fall too was before Man was made.

2. Because that Man in his created estate of Innocence had no need of Angels
to minister to him.

3. The World then was not put in subjection under Angels till after the Fall,
but Man was the sole Lord thereof* under his Maker; nor shall it be in
subjection to them after Restoration, Heb. 2. 5.

4. Nor was it likely, that they should be assisting him on the spiritual
account, to keep him from sin; for then he had not been left to his free will,
in his created estate, to stand or fall

Nor 2. do I think their Sin was against the holy Spirit, as some suppose,
according to the Sense thereof in Scripture, as it is the unpardonable Sin; (
i. e. in their Fall) because they were created upright and holy Creatures, as
Man was; and was no more capable to sin that Sin than Man was; though all Sin
ever was, and is against the holy Spirit, though not in the Sense as the
unpardonable Sin is: they having nothing to provoke them to sin on the one
hand, so nothing to prompt them to constancy in Humility and Obedience on the
other hand, but their good created estate, and the Goodness of their Creator;
but after their first Sin and Fall, they (doubtless) became the sink of Sin and
nursery of all Abomination.

4. Unto what they fell, as into sin, so 4 Unto what they fell.
into remediless and perpetual misery, never to be restored; but are reserved
in everlasting chains of darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day, Jude v.
6.

Quest. Whence is it, that Angels should

Answ. Next to the wonderful Will and works all things, Ephesians. 1. 11. probably
it was,

1. Because the Angels, in their Creation, were more noble and strong Creatures
than Man, who was made of the Dust; and God took it as a more unpardonable
Offense in them than of weak Man, who was made of the Dust: for to whom soever
much is given of them is much required.

2. Angels, though of a higher degree by Creation, yet fell of their own
voluntary will, without any one to tempt them; but Man was tempted to it by the
evil one, and so was snared by temptation.

3. The evil and fallen Angels proceed and persist in their Pride and Enmity
against God and his New Creation, to destroy it immediately; which might tend
to provoke God to set an everlasting Seal of Darkness and Judgment upon them,
and to exercise Pity and Compassion toward poor miserable fallen Man, to open
a way of recovery, on the terms therein proposed.

Q^^st. Whence is it, that the Devil

Answ. 1. Probably, because when the Angels fell, God made Man* of a lower
station than they, to be in some sense in their ste^d, that so he might delight
himself in a lower Creation, Prove. 8. 31.

2. Because God would not, by any means, lose his poor Creature Man* but
brought to light a high and glorious way of Restoration for Man out of his
fallen estate, and left the Angels under Darkness, unto Judgment; which fills
them with all enmity both against God and Man; and his great design is to
hinder this gracious and glorious Work of the Salvation of Men, though his own
Damnation be the greater in the end. ^ The evil Offices and Works of the Devil
toward Man.


5. What are the evil Offices and Works of the Devil and his Angels against
Mankind in general, and they are twofold:

1. Such as respect the Bodies, and outward man and estate, if permitted by
God, as is clear in the case of J^o, Ch^p. 1, and 2. to smi^e and afflict him
in his Children and Substan^^ and in his Body too with dreadful Sores and Pains.

2. Entering ^n and possessing the Bodies of Men, and using them in a dreadful
manner, Mat. 8. 16. Mar. 9. 17, 18, 25, 26.

3. By stirring up wicked men to persecute the people of God, for their
believing and obeying the Truth, Rev. 2. 10. 1 Pe^. 5. 8, 9.

2. Such as relate to the Soul.

1. In stirring up and troubling some with Melancholiness, to their great
wrong, as in the case of Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 14. 16. 23.

2. To be a Lying Spirit in the mouths of False Prophets and Ministers, to
seduce and deceive Souls to their destruction, 1 King. 22. 21, 22, 23. 2 Cor.
11. 13, 14, 15.

3. In blinding the Minds of Unbelievers (where the Gospel is published) to
their destruction, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

4. In prevailing over wicked men, to some gross and horrible iniquity, and
after to follow them with the guilt till they destroy themselves: as in the
case of Judas.

5. To reign and rule in the Hearts of wicked men, the Children of
Disobedience, as their Lord and King, so making them willingly subject to him,
Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Col. 1. 13.

6. To use all endeavors to entice and ensnare the Lords People with Sin, if
possible, to ruin them effectually, 2. Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 5. 8.

7. To prevent them (if possible) by some means or other from doing that good
they might and ought to do, 1 These. 2. 18.

8. To accuse them for their miscarriages (it may be much by his occasion) both
before the Lord and in their own Consciences to condemnation, if possible, to
drive them to despair, Rev. 12. 10. Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13.

9. If he have no matter wherewithal to accuse them before God, he will accuse
them with what they will do if God will but permit him to afflict them in Body
or state, as in the case of Job, chap. 1. 11. and 2. 5.

10. And finally, He will use all his skill and power to the utmost of his
limitation, to bring ruin and destruction both to the Bodies and Souls of Men;
for he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

CHAP. VII. Of the Fall of Man from his created Innocence.
THat God made Man upright after his own Image, has been before treated on,
but he continued not in that estate, but fell from it by transgressing the Law
of his Maker, in eating the forbidden Fruit, Genesis 2. 16, 17. and 3. 3, 6, 17.

Quest. Was that the only sin and transgression i. e. the eating of the
forbidden Fruit in the Garden?

Answ. It was the only Transgression,

Quest. Is it likely, that God should inflict

Answ. 1. The less the mattter seems to be, that is required, or forbidden, the
greater is the sin in him that transgresses, he that will adventure the
transgression of Gods Law for naught, for an Apple, will much more make a
breach on a higher account, or supposed advantage: to sin for a little, or
small matter, is as truly accounted a profane spirit, as the greatest sinner,
Heb. 12. 16. Esau for a morsel of M^at sold his Birthright. And it argues a
base spirit to transgress for a piece of Br^a^, Prove. 28. 21.

2. The wilful breach of a (supposed) little command, is as truly a sin and
contempt against God, as the breach of the greatest.

3. This was a great Command, and all the Commands that God gave to man in his
Innocence, so that it was the only great Command of God given to Man.

4. In this actual Transgression of Eating the forbidden Fruit was contained
much of Sin, (though the Act it self was the Transgression:) For,

1. There was not a giving to God that due Honor and Worship that was right
and meet, nor had he respect to himself and his posterity as he ought, but
sinned against God, Himself and Posterity in that one Act; and so transgressed
that general Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and
thy Neighbor as thy self: he failed in both, transgressed both, so that though
his Sin and Transgression consisted in that one Act, yet it contained in it the
breach of the whole Law, was a high affront against God, and wrong to himself
and all mankind, attended with Pride, Unbelief and Disobedience; they were
willing to be as Gods, and obeyed the Devil rather than God; so that the Sin
was a great Sin, especially as committed against an infinite God.

2. Into what he fell, and that is expressed, 2 Into what be he f^ll.
into a state of Death; in dying thou shall dye.

Quest. Did Adams Sin bring Death upon himself only?

Answ. It brought in Death upon himself and all mankind, and a Curse upon the
whole Creation, Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19. Romans 5. 17, 18, 19.

Quest. Whence came it to pass, that the

Answ. 1. Because Adam was the Father Romans 5. 12.

2. Because the Contagion and Defilement of Sin came into us all, our Natures
were corrupted, and by Generation ever since all the Sons and Daughters of Adam
have been sinful, and defiled by Nature even from Conception, and this is that
we call Original Sin, the sinful Nature and sinful Disposition that every one
brings into the World with him, Romans 5. 18. as by one Offense into all men,
into condemnation; so it is read in the Greek, Psalm. 51. 5. Job 14. 4. by
reason whereof they fall into actual Transgression suitable to their capacities
as soon as born into the World, Psalm. 58. 3. Romans 3. 12.

Quest. What is the reason that the whole

Answ. Because that the whole Creation

Quest. What was the Life that Adam

Answ. It was the Deprivation and loss

Quest. What Death was it that came in Adams Transgression?

Ans. A Death in Soul from the enjoyment Genesis 3. 19. Romans 5. 12.

Quest. Was the Death that came in Adams Transgression the first Death, that is
the Death of the Body, or the first and second Death, the Death of Body and
Soul eternally in misery?

Answ. Adams Sin made way to the eternal Adams Transgression, but for the
actual Transgressions of Men committed by themselves against God since the
Fall: the Soul that sins it is that must die this Death: the first Death is
the Punishment of Adams Transgression, which is still in execution; all are
liable to it, old and young; but the second Death is for Men's actual
Transgression against the second Covenant, which took place vertually in
promise immediately after the Fall, on which account both Man and the World too
was reserved in order to the Restoration.

Quest. By what means did Adam thus

Ans. By the Instigation of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 1, 4. which was taken out of
him, Genesis 2. 21, 22. and given to him by the Lord, that she might be a meet
help for him, Ge. 2. 18. which may teach us, that those things that are
ordained by the Lord for the use of Man do oft-times (through Man's weakness)
prove to his hurt, Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. and should teach the Woman Humility and
Subjection to the Man according to Gods Ordinance, and not to usurp Authority,
lest she be deceived, and deceive others, as Eve the Mother of all did, 1 Timothy
2. 12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.

Quest. Was it the Serpent that deceived

Ans. The Devil in the Serpent; for it is the Serpent was more subtle than any
Beast of the Field, Genesis 3. 1. From whence the Devil is called a Serpent for
his subtilty; and his subtilty (in part) was in making use of the most subtle
Creature to effect his design by: which may teach us, that Satan makes use of
the most subtle and likely ways and means to carry on and accomplish his
designs by, in order to man's destruction. He made use of the Serpent to deceive
the Woman, and the Woman to deceive the Man; the Woman being the weaker
vessel, he assaults her first; and, prevailing on her, his work was more than
half done; for she was likelier to deceive the Man than the Serpent was to
deceive her: therefore it deeply concerns all (especially Women, who are the
weaker vessels, and most liable to be deceived) to be very heedful of Satan's
Wiles, and not to be ignorant of his D^vic^^.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Way and Means ordained of God for Recovery of Man out of
this Estate.
MAn being fallen by Sin into a state of Death and Misery, gone out from his
Maker, God did not let him go, but took hold of him again, designing to do him
good, and that immediately after the Fall, in the first Promise, Genesis 3. 15.
that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head. It was a Threat to
the Serpent, but a Promise to Man; in which behold,

1. The Severity of God:

1. To Man, that had sinned, though by occasion of Temptation, yet the Curse
and Judgment threatened, must come upon him* Severity to the Serpent as a
Creature and Beast of the Field, being used by the Devil for effecting so bad a
work^ therefore cursed must he be above all the Beasts of the Field, on his
B^ll^ must he go, and Dust must he eat, and enmity has God set between him and
the Woman, etc. which we see verified according to the Word; Severity against
the Devil, the chief agent in the work, expressed in these words, It shall
break thy Head. i. e. the Devil; he was the Serpents Head in this design; the
Head is the seat of Wisdom, Government and Speech; the Devil in this sense is
said to be the Head, who made use of the Serpent and governed him, and spoke in
and by him; and therefore the Seed of the Woman, that is, Jesus Christ, that
was to be born of a Woman, should break the Devil in his design, in his
present work against mankind: so that Jesus Christ the Seed of the Woman to
break the Serpents Head, (which was a Threat to the Serpent but a Promise to
the VVomans Seed) Mat. 1. 23. Gal. 4. 4. is the way and means ordained by God
to recover Man out of that estate into which he fell by sin; that as sin and
death came in by Man, so deliverance out of that estate must come by Man, by
Christ Jesus the seed of the Woman, both God and Man: and this Promise was
frequently renewed from age to age, till the fullness of time was come that God
had determined; and then (according to this and all his Promises) he sent forth
his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, that he might redeem them that
were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.

Quest. What did Jesus Christ, for sinners,

Ans. As the first Man brought in Sin and Death by Disobedience, so Jesus
Christ the second Man wrought Deliverance, and brought Life and Immortality to
light by Obedience, Romans 5. 9. For as by one man's Disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the Obedience of one many shall be made righteous: as Adams
Disobedience brought us into a state of Sin and Death, so Christ's Obedience is
the alone way by which we must come into a state of Life, if ever we obtain it.

Quest. By what part of Christ's Obedience

Ans. In some sense it was by both, but Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 John 2. 12. Hebr. 5. 9.

And his active Obedience, in the fullness and perfection thereof, was his
perfect Holiness, by which he was fitted to offer up himself to God an
acceptable Sacrifice for sinners, which perfect Obedience and Holiness in him
as our Head, is become the Believers by imputation, and so his active Obedience
is the Believers Sanctification* as his passive is his Justification. 1 Cor. 1.
30. but of this more in the matter of Justification when I come to speak of
that distinctly, so that, in a word, he gave himself, that is, his Life and
Blood, for our Redemption, Justification and Salvation; so that the Death and
Sufferings of Christ it was, in which the Father was well pleased, and fully
satisfied, as a propitiatory Sacrifice for sinners, a covering Sacrifice to
cover the sins of those who believe and obey the Gospel out of his sight, i. e.
the sight of his Justice in the pardon of them, Psalm. 32. 1. Romans 4. 7, 8.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
etc. and nothing can cover sin from Justice, but the Blood, the Sufferings, of
the Son of God, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. which does present us with the evil of
sin, and our bad estate thereby, that when God had a mind to help us, nothing
less than the Blood of his Son could do it; and with the strictness and
severity of Justice in God, that when his own Son had undertaken the
satisfaction, it must cost him his Life and Blood; and the Riches of Grace and
Mercy both in the Father and the Son for poor sinners; the Father to give the
Son to that end, 1 John 3. 16. and the Son to give himself a Sacrifice for
sinners, Joh. 10. 17, 18. and the Father to accept his own only Son for
sinners, that so he might extend Mercy to them, and make them who believe
accepted in him. This Grace and Love of the Father and Son is a height and
depth unsearchable, if we lived more in the apprehensions thereof, it would
fill us more with his fullness, and conform us more to his likeness, Ephesians. 3. 18,
19. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

Quest. Did Christ our Lord give himself

Ans. He gave himself a ransom for all men, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy
2. 6. he tasted Death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. he was a Propitiation for the
sins of the world, 1 John 2. 2. God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their sins, Cor. 5. 19. and God so loved the whole world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16.

Object. If it be so these absurdities will

1. That where Justice is satisfied the sinner must be saved, it seems to be
injustice, to take satisfaction in Christ, and to damn the sinners, unless you
hold that all shall be saved.

2. Christ suffered in vain, if he bear the sins of any that may miss of
Salvation by Him.

Ans. 1. The Satisfaction that God took the sufferings were exceeding great,
being born by an infinite Person; it was the infinite Worth of the Person that
suffered, that set an infinite value on the Suffering, more than if all the
World had suffered to eternity, 1 Peter 18, 19.

2. Had it been for the redemption but of one person, it must have been with
the same price; so that Satisfaction for the Sins of the World no whit
augmented the price paid; therefore no absurdity at all.

3. No person is delivered only and simply on the sufferings of Christ, but the
satisfaction that God took in the sufferings of Christ was on terms of their
believing and obeying the Gospel; and on these terms it is, that the Grace of
the New Covenant is published to all, and none are like to partake thereof
without Faith, Repentance and Obedience, though not as the meritorious cause,
yet as the terms on which it is dispensed, Mar. 16. 16. Luke 24. 47. though,
it is true, Repentance effected is the gift of Grace.

4. Were it not so, the Plaster would not be as large as the VVound, nor the
Physicians hand be as large in the Cure, as the Destroyer was to destroy, which
seems not only dishonorable to the Undertaking of Christ, but contrary to Romans
5. 15. to 20. though all partake not of the benefits, the fault is in
themselves, and not in the Physician, Hosea 13. 9. 2 Peter 2. 1.

5. Yet God had a special respect in this great transaction of the Suffering of
his Son, unto his elect, whom he foreknew, and predestined them to be
partakers of the Benefits thereof, Romans 8. 2, 3, Heb, 2. 10. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.

6. And finally, the manner and method of Gods work, both in the Creation of
Man and since the Fall, was

1. He made Man upright in his own Image, and so left him in that good created
estate, to his own power and will to stand or fall: God did not act to forward
his Fall, nor yet to hinder it, more than give his Law of Command, with the
Threat on Disobedience; but he sinned voluntarily, by the temptation offered.

2. Man being fallen from God, he has provided a Remedy, a blessed way of
Recovery; and this Remedy is as large as the case requires, and is to be
published and tendered to all, (and that truly too) on the terms thereof; that
is, Faith, Repentance and sincere Obedience, etc. that now whoever will, may
come and take of this Water of Life freely; and Man is left free to accept or
not accept; and so man's Destruction will be (the second time) of himself.

God has not bound himself, nor is he tied in Justice to work men to the terms
prescribed, nor does he any thing to hinder, but very much the contrary, not
only in the All Sufficiency of the Means, but by the publishing thereof, and
manifold mercies, and invitations to Repentance.

What he affords of special Grace and Assistance to any, is his superabounding
Mercy, and it no whit derogates from from his general Love, Kindness and
Provision for mankind in general: and it is man's wilful wickedness, in choosing
Death rather than Life, and thereby judge themselves unworthy of the Life that
is offered to them.

It is true, God foresaw Man in his fallen state; and saw, that notwithstanding
the Greatness of the Grace of his New Covenant* yet that none would of
themselves seek after God, and sincerely cleave unto him in that New and
Livings way, on which he did determine; and it was the Covenant, and Contract
between the Father and the Son, (in this great Undertaking, that his Suffering
might not be in vain) to bring in some Souls effectually into the Grace of the
Covenant, and that not from any natural good in them more than others, but
without all respect of persons, only his special and superabounding Grace;
having passed no Act, but as relative to Sin and Disobedience, that may hinder
any: but has afforded both Means and Helps sufficient, by which men might
believe, obey, and be saved* but they will not.

CHAP. IX. Of the design of God in general, in this his New Covenant,
Restauration-Work, which was to make all things New.
THe design of God by Jesus Christ in his New Covenant-work, was, to make all
things New, Rev. 21. 5. And he that sat upon the Throne, said, behold I make
all things New, etc. God made the first, or old World, both Heavens and Earth,
and all things therein for the use of man, and then made man to possess it; but
man fell by sin, and the whole Creation fell with him, as a just Judgment of
God upon man for his sin, Genesis 3. 17. Job 15. 15. Now in as much as this old
Creation was lost and fallen, the design of God by Jesus Christ was the recovery
and restoration of all again, and to make all New, not of new matter that was
not before, but to make the Old New again; all Old things must be made New.

Quest. What is it that God designed by What will God make new. A new People.
Jesus Christ to make New?

Answ. 1. A new people, brought out from the old stock; a people renewed by the
power and spirit of Grace, by and through the Gospel; and this is that which is
owned of all the godly, witnessed in the Scriptures, and in a measure
experienced by all the Saints, 2 Cor. 15. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a
New Creature, Old things are past away, behold all things are become New, Ephesians.
4. 23, 24. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the New
Man, which after God, is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness, and this
is that birth which is from above, without which, no man can see the Kingdom
of Heaven, Joh. 3. 3.

Obj. This is effected here in the Kingdom of Grace, etc.

8. Answ. True, It is so, in the beginnings thereof, in order to its perfection
in the Kingdom of glory; for it will not be perfected till the Resurrection of
the body from the dead, that is called the day of Redemption, Romans 8. 23. Ephesians.
4. 30. It is perfected already in Christ our head, the second Adam, who was the
Lord from Heaven; but it must have its time of perfecting in the members, begun
here, and perfected in the day of Christ, 1 Cor. 13. 10. then it is, that our
vile bodies shall be changed and fashioned like unto his glorious Body, Phil.
3. 21. Then the whole man shall come forth complete in the Heavenly Birth.

2. This new Creation shall be effected 2 By a ne^ Cov^nant.
by, and under a New Covenant; man lost all in the breach of the Old Covenant,
but by the New Covenant he shall be renewed, and become Heir of all things, in,
and with Christ the Head and Lord thereof, it is New Covenant Grace, and
New-Covenant-Work, all true blessedness is by the New Covenant, i. e. the
Covenant of this new estate, Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 8. 13. and 12. 24.

Obj. This Covenant is said to be made, and to be of force from the death of
the Testator.

An. True, it is so, it took its effect then, and virtually from the Fall; from
the first Promise, that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head;
so that all the Saints since the Fall, were renewed and sanctified by virtue of
this Covenant, which became the alone ministration of God to men, after the
death of the Testator, in, and with whom the Covenant was made, and that before
the world was, 2 Timothy 4 9. Tit. 1. 2. so that it has had its effect virtually
from the beginning, as a preparation to glory, but it is indeed the Covenant of
the glorious Estate.

3. And in this New Covenant is brought 3 A new Law.
forth a new Law, for this new People, the Law of Faith, and the Law of Love,
Joh. 13. 34. A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another, etc.

Obj. This was the Old Commandment, and from the beginning, the Sum of the
whole Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy might, and thy
Neighbor as thy self.

Ans. True, as the Law, it did require it, as employed in it, but if any
answered it, it was by the Grace of the New Covenant, though the duty of the
Old; but now its the duty of the New Covenant, seated on the new terms of the
Gospel, from the grace thereof, from the love of Christ, and effected thereby,
Romans 5. 5. The love of Christ is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Spirit
that he has given to us, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he loved us first:
its therefore new, because in all the Saints its not only required, but is true
both in him, (i. e. Christ) and in you, i. e. the Saints; and this is that
which is, and shall be, the great Law of the perfect and glorious Estate, in
the new world, and that to Eternity.

4. There shall be a new habitation, or 4 A new Habitation.
dwelling place for these new people, a new Heaven, and a new Earth, Rev. 21.
1. I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and the first Heaven and the first
Earth was past away etc. Is. 65. 17. and 66. 17. to these Peter has Relation,
2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless, we according to his promise, look for new Heavens,
and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteous^ess; in which note 1. That the
Apostle in this Scripture, relates to the promise before mentioned, Isa. 5. 17
as appears in that he uses the express terms of that promise, and there is no
other promise thereof in the terms expressed, in the Old Testament. 2. That it is
to be understood literally, and not mystically, or spiritually, that is a wrong
to the Scripture; for it is the material visible Heavens and Earth that Peter
treats of, verse. 5, 6, 7. its the same that must be dissolved, and this is
that which is frequently called in Scripture, the World, or Earth to come, Mat.
12. 32. Luke 2. 35. Heb. 2. 5. the world, of which the Saints by Faith, are
made Heirs, Romans 4. 13. For the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir of the
world, was not to Abraham, or his Seed through the Law, but through the
Righteousness of Faith, and this cannot be understood that it intends, that all
Believers should be accounted his Children (though that be a truth, and is
expressed, verse. 11.) and that for two reasons: 1. It Is improper so to understand
it, for so believers are rather his Heirs, his Children, and not he their Heir,
for in this he is to be Heir of the world. 2. Because in this Heir-ship of
Abraham to the world, his Children are Heirs to the same Promise with him, the
Promise is to Abraham and his Seed, verse. 16. therefore it is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace, that the Promise might be sure to all the Seed. What
Promise? to be the Heirs of the world: this is the Country that our Fathers
were seeking after, and dyed in the Faith thereof, Heb. 11. 13, 14, 15.
Wherefore God has prepared for them a City, verse. 16. a Holy and Heavenly
City, that must come down into this new world, Rev. 21. 2. New Jerusalem, that
must come down from God out of Heaven, that the Tabernacle of God may be with
men.

Obj. This seems to be expalined, verse. 9. to be the Church, the Bride, the
Lambs Wife.

Answ. I question not, but that the chap. 3. 12. and Gal. 4. 25. Old Jerusalem
was in Bondage with her Children, and verse. 26. but Jerusalem which is above is
free, which is the Mother of us all. Here is new Jerusalem, the holy City,
which is above, and her Children, which are the Saints expressed in these words,
which is the Mother of us all; who are born from thence, without which they
cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. see Psalm. 87. 3. and in this is
clearly a distinction between the City and the Inhabitants, Heb. 12. 22, 23.

5. The Saints shall then have a new 5 A new C^v^^ant
name, Rev. 2 17. and 3. 12. as they are already in some measure made partakers
of the new nature, and new name, they shall then be perfected therein 2 Pet. 1.
4. Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 44. 48, 49. 53, 54. they shall have a new name, Isa.
55. 15. he will call his Servants by another name, chap. 62. 2. and thou shall
be called by another Name, which the Mouth of the Lord shall Name; the Lord
will take away that Name of Reproach which his people has had in the world
throughout all ages, and they shall be known and owned (even by their Enemies)
to be the blessed of the Lord, Isa. 61. 9. All that see them, shall acknowledge
that they are the Seed which the Lord has blessed, chap. 60. 14. The Sons also
of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all they that
despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and they
shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy one of Israel.

6. In this new Estate, their work shall 6 Shall sing new Songs of Praise.
be to sing new songs of praise to God, and to the Lamb, Rev. 5. 9. and 4. 8.
that is it the prophet speaks so much of, and exhorts so much unto, singing of
new songs, Psalm. 96. 1. and 98. 1. it relates especially to this Estate, they
shall sing such new songs of praise to God, and to the Lamb, as none can learn
but the Redeemed ones, suitable to the measure of the new work in them; can the
Saints now sing new songs, (or else they were better sing none,) but then they
shall be completed therein, without mixture.

Reasons from Scripture further to illustrate and confirm this glorious Truth.
1. Its the accomplishment of the Eternal Counsel and purpose of God, the
Prophet speaking of this same work ( i. e. the Restoration,) says Isa. 25. 1.
Thy Counsels of old are Faithfulness and Truth: So likewise Further to confirm
this Truth 1. The purpose and counsel of God.
the Apostle Paul deeply discoursing, and discovering this Mystery of the
Restoration by Jesus Christ, in the New Covenant, says Ephesians. 1. 11. Who
works all things after the Counsel of his own Will. Hence it is, that Jesus
Christ by whom the Work was to be accomplished, was from Everlasting, Mic. 5.
2. John 6. 38, 40. And the Mercy of God herein, is from Everlasting to
Everlasting.

2. His Eternal Grace and-Love to his 2. His Eternal Grace and Love.
Chosen Ones, whom he purposed to this Estate, therein to glorify the Riches
of his Grace, and to glorify them with this Glory, in this New World, Jer. 31.
3. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

3. This is the substance and Life of the 3. This is the substance of the New
Covenant.
New Covenant, which all true Christians believe; and should claim their
Interest therein; and indeed, it is of concernment to all Believers to
understand, what, and wherein Heirship does consist; which is to this New
World: see the New Covenant, Genesis 12. 3. and 22, 18. In thy Seed (that is in
Christ) shall all Nations of the Earth be blessed. This Promise in the word
Blessed, includes the Blessedness of this New World, to the Heirs thereof: So
the Apostle applies it, as has been before minded, Romans 4. 13, 16. Gal. 3.
18, 19. 29. in all which it is evident, that the Hiership of Abraham and his
Seed, (that is Believers) by virtue of the New Covenant, is to this
Inheritance, which serves to open the Heirship spoken of in all other
Scriptures; I mean, the New Covenant Heirship.

4. It was the great Design of God, made 4. It was the design of God,
manifest since the Fall.
manifest ever since the Fall; and all things since has been working in order
thereunto, Genesis 3. 15. and 12. 3. Psalm. 37. 11. with Mat. 5. 3. Rev. 5. 10. It
was the great Design of God, in sending Christ into the World; and of Christ
in coming into the World, to do that for the World, without which, this new
Work and World could not be accomplished, Heb. 11. 40. And in order to the
accomplishing hereof, he is ascended up where he was before, to prepare a place
for his People, John 14. 2, 3. and to prepare a people for that place, Heb. 12.
2. 2 Cor. 5. 5. And when he comes again the second time in his Power and Glory,
it will be in order to the finishing of this Work, Mat. 25. 34. Rev. 21. 1. to
the

Object. It Is frequently said in Scripture, that the Reward of the Saints is in
Heaven, That it is laid up in Heaven for them, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 4.

Ans. It is true: it is so, and that without any Contradiction at all to this
present Truth, which is so apparently held forth in Scripture. It behooves us so
to Understand one Truth, as not to lose, or destroy another; which has been a
great Weakness amongst Christians. But let us see a little how both may stand
together; the Inheritance of the Saints may be said to be in Heaven, and to be
reserved in Heaven for them.

1. As all the good Gifts of God given to the Saints, on the Gospel account,
now in this day of Grace, in order to that Glory, are said (in sense and
substance) to be in Heaven; for our Heavenly Birth must be from thence, John 3.
3. Except a man be born again above (so the Word is) he cannot see the Kingdom
of Heaven. Jerusalem which is above, is the Mother of us all, and every good
and perfect Gift comes down from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. 17. And
doubtless the Glory of that Estate is administered here below, by the Word and
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 12. But the Glory it self is reserved in Heaven, till
the time appointed, and then the Glory shall be administered down from thence,
as now the Grace, and gracious Gifts are.

2. We Read in Scripture, that New Jerusalem must come down from God out of
Heaven, and the Tabernacle of God will be with them, Romans 21. 23. So that it
may very well stand together, that it is in Heaven, and yet shall come down
into the New Earth.

No wonder, if that State and Glory of the Saints is called Heaven then, when
in perfection in the New earth, and New state of the Church in it is
imperfection, in this side that Glory (because made partakers of some of the
Virtues of Grace) is called Heaven; and the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13. 31, 32,
47. and 25. 1. Rev. 18. 20.

3. It is said in Scripture, that the Bodies of the Saints shall be fashioned
like unto the Body of our Lord Jesus, Phil 3 21. and they shall be like unto
the Angels, Luke 20 36. and that they shall have Spiritual Bodies, 1 Cor. 15.
44. Capable to ascend and descend; and so may have the possession of Heaven, as
well as of the Earth, if it will add to their Glory; But he will make the place
of his Feet glorious, Isa. 60. 13. and what place that is, see Chapter 66. 1. Mat.
10. 35. Act. 7. 49. ^o conclude this Chapter; this opens ^ Window into that
Truth, so much by most condemned; that is, the personal Reign of Christ, with
his Saints, where it is like to be* no doubt but in this New World, must have
the Glory there, it cost him so Dear in preparing for it, and purchasing of it.
Ephesians. 1. 14. In a word, it is, and shall be made by him, and for him. But of
this I shall speak in Chap. 31. more fully and distinctly.

CHAP. X. Of the Order and Method of God, in preparing a People for this
Glorious Estate; which is, 1. By Effectual Calling.
MAN being created in a good Estate, Chap. 10
and by Sin fallen from God, gone out into Darkness, Wrath, and Enmity: And God
having opened a way of Recovery, that is, by Jesus Christ crucified. I shall
now come to speak something of the Order and Method of God, in preparing, and
bringing up a People to this State of Glory; and that is,

1. By Effectual Calling; although it is Of Effectual Calling.
true, that Effectual Calling concludes the whole Work of Grace, in order to
Glory, or else it is not Effectual. Yet in as much as it is so frequently, and
distinctly spoken of in Scripture, I shall speak of it distinctly, to pass by
the various use of the word, Call, Called, and Calling, in the Scripture sense;
I shall speak only of this Calling unto, and of Sinners, out of their lost
Estate by Sin. Unto God by Jesus Christ

The Scripture presents us with, 1. A general Call, or Calling to all; as all
have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, 1. A general Calling to all.
and he has opened a Way and Means full of Sufficiency for All; therefore he
calls upon All to come in, and accept of this Grace, where the Word of the
Gospel comes; and where it does not, his Works does so far, and sufficiently
declare, and make known God to the World, as that they shall be inexcusable in
the Day of Accounts, Romans 1. 20. This general Call by the Gospel to Sinners, is
fully confirmed in the Commission of Christ, given to his Apostles and
Ministers, Mark 16. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature, etc. See, it is likewise confirmed, Prove. 8. 1. to 10. and 9. 1.
to 6. And of this first sort of Call, many, yea multitudes, are called, that
will not Obey* which is their sin, and will be their Condemnation, Prove. 1. 20*
24. The Truth hereof we see daily by woeful Experience, that Men refuse their
own Mercy, and destroy themselves, Hos. 13. 9. They judge themselves unworthy
of the Life tendered them in the Gospel, in refusing the Ways of Life, and
choosing the Ways of Death and Darkness; preferring the Devil and his service
before the Lord Jesus and his Ways of Life.

2. Others there are, who pretend to yield 2. A more particular Calling.
Obedience to the Heavenly Call, and come into the Profession thereof; but it
is but faignedly, not in Truth, and with their whole Hearts, to give up
themselves to God therein, and so come short of the Glory prepared, and
promised; not because there is any failing in the Truth of God, but because
their Hearts was not Right with God, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant; but like treacherous Judah, they turned not unto the Lord with their
whole Hearts, but feignedly, Jer. 3. 10. And of this sort are such as either,
1. Receive the Word with Joy, without any Heart-Conversion to the Lord; and for
a while Believe, but when Tribulation, and Persecution arises because of the
Word, by and by they are offended: Or, 2. Such as Profess to know God, but in
Works deny him, being Abominable, and Disobedient, and to every God Work a
Reprobate, Tit. 1. 16.

Or, 3ly. Such as are palpably Hypocrites, who come into the Profession of the
Gospel, Designing some Base ends to themselves, and make use of Profession to
Cloak their wickedness withal; of the Discovery of these, the Scripture is
full, Mat. 15. and 23 Chapters: And of Such is to be feared there has been,
and still are many in the visible Profession of the Way of Life, but such are
still in the Way of Death; For the Hypocrite in Heart do heap up Wrath, Job 36.
13. And the Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, Job 8. 13.

Or, 4ly. Such as Foolishly content themselves with Lamps (that is, visible
Profession of Truth) without Oil in their Vessels; that is, the Annoynting of
the Spirit and Truth of Grace and Life in the Heart, like the Foolish Virgins,
Mat. 25. 2, 3, 8* -- 11, 12. And thus having not the Wedding Garment, i. e.
Clothed and Covered with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, by Faith and
sincere Obedience, come Short of Obtaining the End of the Heavenly Calling; and
so the Truth of that Word will appear, Mat. 22. 11, 12 That many are Called,
but few are Chosen.

A Third Sort of Call is; such as are Effectually 3. Is the effectual Calling.
called, by the Power of Christ in the Word of the Gospel, And turned from
Darkness to Light; and from the Power of Satan unto God: Such a Call as the
Apostle was Partaker of, Gal. 1. 15, 16. But when it pleased God, who separated
me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his Grace to Reveal his Son in me,
etc. And this Call is Effected by the Word of God's Grace, which is his General
Call to all, and Effected by some secret Divine Operation of the Holy Spirit in
the Word of Grace, begetting Souls to the Lively Faith, and Hope of the Gospel,
Sam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 3. And this Lively Faith and Hope, where it is in Truth;
that is, where this Effectual Calling is, it is of a purifying Nature, Acts 15
9. 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this Hope in him, purifyeth himself as he
is Pure. This Divine Calling, it is in Scripture called:

1. A High Calling, Phil. 3. 14. Not only because it is Effected from on High,
but because they are called to High Things; made Partakers of Heavenly Virtues;
interested in High and Heavenly Relations; the Children and Servants of the
most High God, as also interested in the High and Heavenly Glory, Made Heirs
according to the Hope of Eternal Life.

2. A Holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Called to Holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. verse. 3. 4.
For this is the Will of God, your Sanctification, that you should abstain from
Fornication; that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel in
Sanctification and Honor. By Vessel in this place, I understand is intended
our Bodies; that every one might know how to possess his Body in Sanctification
and Honor: So the word Vess^l in Scripture Sense imports, Acts 9. 15. 2 Cor. 4
7. For the Lust of Concupiscence and Fornication, arises in the Heart, and the
Members are but Instruments to Execute what works from within; and the
Scripture says, that the Body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord; and
know ye not, that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 13, 19.
The Lord has called his People ^o Holiness here, and to Happiness hereafter;
wonderfully are they mistaken, who think that the Calling to Christianity, is
only to the Profession thereof here, and the Glory thereof hereafter, without
Holiness, when the Scripture says in express Terms, that without Holiness, no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

3. A Calling to Glory and Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Glorious Relation, and virtuous
Conversation; or Virtue, as the Way; and Glory, as the End: This is that
Calling the Apostle mentions, Romans 8. 28. Who are the Called according to his
purpose. And therefore it greatly behooves such to walk worthy of God, who has
called them to his Kingdom and Glory. 1 These. 2. 12.

4. It Is called a Heavenly Calling, Heb. 3. 1. Wherefore Holy Brethren,
partakers of the Heavenly Calling; it is effected from Heaven, and possesses
the Soul with a Heavenly Mind, and interesteth in Heavenly Glory; it being such
a High, Holy, Heavenly, Virtuous, and Glorious Calling: It greatly concerns
such to Honor their Christian Calling; that as he that has called them is
Holy, so be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation and Godliness, 1 Pet. 1. 15.

The sum of the Matter wherein this Effectual Calling consists; it is an
Effectual turning of the whole Man, from Sin and Satan to God, (in the way of
the Gospel) both in Heart and Conversation; or an Effectual yielding up our
selves in Obedience to the Heavenly Call, sincerely turning to, and following
of the Lord; as Paul, Gal. 1. 15, 16. Acts 26. 19. And with purpose of Heart to
cleave to, and follow the Lord, in wa^ of constant, universal, and sincere
Obedience: This is the special Effectual Calling, According to his purpose, to
the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, and gives Right to the
Promise of the Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9. 15.

CHAP. XI. Of Faith. 1. What it is. 2. How it is wrought. 3. It Is Grounds, and
it is Object. 4. It Is Excellency.
FAith is an excellent Divine Virtue; that Chap. 11. Of Faith.
which the Scripture lays much stress upon, and that without which there is
no Salvation: He that Believes not shall be Damned. I shall therefore speak
something distinctly concerning this Great and Divine Virtue of Faith: It Is
satisfying and saving Faith only, that I shall endeavor to be speaking of.

1. I shall discover what Faith is; Faith in 1. What Faith is.
it self (take it on all Accounts) is a giving Credence to the Truth of God, it
is to Believe God: Faith is a giving Credit to, or Believing a Report, be it in
Humane or Divine Things: To give Credit to Humane Relations on Humane
Testimony, is a Humane Faith; to give Credit to the Divine Report of God in the
Gospel, is a Divine Faith.

So that the Divine Faith of the Gospel to which Life is promised, is a Hearty
giving Credit to, and Believing of the Truth or God, and Christ in the Gospel,
with a hearty consenting to be Saved, and Ruled by the Lord Jesus.

1. That the Divine Faith, is a giving Credence to, and believing of the Truth
of God in the Gospel; this (according to the Ministration) has been accounted
the True Faith in all Generations, to Believe, and Obey God. This was the Faith
of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed
God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness; and it was accompanied with
Obedience: Faith and Obedience always goes together, else it is none of the
Faith of God's Elect, Heb. 11 8. By Faith, Abraham when he was called to go out
into a Place, which he should after Receive for an Inheritance* Obeyed, and he
went out, not knowing whither he went, Jam. 2. 22. See you how Faith wrought
with his Works, and by Works was his Faith made perfect: And this was the
Faith required, and accepted throughout that Ministration, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; Believe his Prophets,
so shall ye prosper. And their Failing herein, was their great Sin and Reproof,
and the Cause of their other Sins and Judgments, Deuteronomy. 1 32. Ye did not Believe
the Lord your God; the Effects thereof are Described, both as to their Sins and
Judgment, verse. 34. 35. Unbelief in this Matter, has been the Condemning Sin,
both in Law and Gospel, Isa. 53. 1. A Pophesy of the Gospel, compared with John
12. 38. Romans 10. 16. Who has Believed our Report, (or our Doctrine,) and to
whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed, Mark 16. 15, 16. Preach (or Publish) the
Gospel to every Creature; He that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be Saved,
he that Believes not, shall be Damned; that is, He that Believes, and Obeys
the Gospel, shall be Saved: This is the Gospel-Faith, heartily to Believe, and
Obey the Gospel, is the Faith to which Salvation and Life is promised, John 20
31.

2. How this Faith is wrought; it is Effected 2. H^w its wrought.
in the hearts of Men by the Word and Spirit of Christ; it must be a
Word-Faith, or else it is but a Fancy, and therefore it must be wrought by the
Word; that is, the Word must be the Instrumental means thereof, because without
it Persons know not what to Believe; it is the Instruction of the Gospel that
directs to the Matter of Faith; that is, what is to be believed; without which
Persons remain Ignorant of the Historical part of Faith; the Truth of this is
obvious and clear, both from Scripture and Reason, Romans 10. 14. How shall they
call on him in whom they have not Believed, and how shall they Believe on him,
of whom they have not heard? Where the Apostle, even from Principles of Reason,
concludes, that as Faith is absolutely necessary to calling on the Lord, so is
Hearing the Doctrine of the Gospel absolutely Necessary to Believing; that is,
to instruct in the Matter what to Believe, which without the Doctrine of the
Gospel cannot be without a Miracle, which has not been, nor is it God's way of
Working; and by the Gospel, do the Lord Efficatiously work the Saving Faith of
the Gospel, Col. 2. 12. Heb. 12. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 5. It Is by the Word that Faith
comes, John 17. 20. The Word being the Divine Revelation of the Will of God,
accompanied with the Divine Power of God, accomplisheth the Work, 1 These. 1. 5.

3 What are the Grounds and Objects of 3. The Grounds and Objects of Faith.
Faith? The Ground of Faith, is the Truth and faithfulness of God in his Word,
and his All Sufficiency to perform it.

1. His Truth and Faithfulness; the Ground or Reason, why you believe a Man is,
because you judge him to be Honest and True, that he will not (knowingly) tell
you a Lie; it is true, in matter of Law, for Ending of Controversies among Men,
both by the Law of God and Men; the Oath of Two (in Common) determines the
Case, from Supposition that they will not Swear false. Though (according to the
Proverb) the Word of one honest Man is a Surer ground of Credence, than the
Oath of Two Liars; but the Truth of God in Divine Credence, is the sure Ground
of Faith: And when a Soul comes to this pitch of Faith, to Believe, that he
that has spoken is God that cannot Lie; that Faithful is he that has
promised, who will do it. Then he is quiet, it puts the Matter out of doubt;
and for this, he has given us Two Immutable things, in which it is impossible
for God to Lie, Heb. 6. 18. In which is included the Mercy of God; for it is
his Mercy to promise, and his Truth and Faithfulness to perform: Hence the
Scripture says, Mercy and Truth are met together, Psalm. 8^. 10. And the coming
of our Lord into the World, was to perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers,
and to remember his Holy Covenant, Luke 1. 7^. So that there is a Concurrency
of Mercy and Truth in God as the Ground of our Faith. 2. The All Sufficiency of
God to perform his Word, his Mercy, and his Truth, is the ground of Faith. If
an honest Man promise you that which he is able to perform, you give great
Credency thereunto; though there can be no Infallible Credence in this Matter:
For Men (be they never so Faithful, yet) have not the power of Performmance in
themselves, therefore may fail; but God has all power of Perforance in
himself; and this was the ground of Abraham's Faith, Romans 4. 21. Being fully
persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able to perform: And when God
commanded him to offer his Son, (for which he had so strong Faith) he fixes
both on the Truth and Power of God; and on that account yields ready Obedience,
Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the Dead, Heb. 11. 19.
There is likewise an All Sufficiency in the Lord Jesus, for the accomplishing
of the Word, and Work of Salvation for The Object of Faith.
all true Believers, Heb. 7. 25.

And the same, that is the Ground, is likewise the Object of Faith; that is, to
what, and to whom we are to look in Believing, that is to God and Christ, Who
performs all things for us: We are to look to him, and Believe in him; to
have God and Christ in their Mercy, Truth, Faithfulness and Power always in our
Eye, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth; that
is, Gentiles as well as Jews, Mich. 7. 7. Therefore will I look to the Lord,
and wait for the God of my Salvation, etc. Isa. 17. 7. John 3. 14, 15.

4. What is the Excellency of Faith? Faith 4. Of the excellency of Faith.
is an excellent and choice Virtue; it is called in Scripture (for it is
Excellency) precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. To them that have obtained like
precious Faith with us: It Is called Precious for it is excellent and precious
Uses and Effects; Which are as follows:

1. It justifies God in his whole Name; 1. It justifies God.
especially, in his Mercy, Truth, Faithfulness, Power, Wisdom, Purity, and
Justice, wherein Faith is mostly exercised; He that believes not God,
(abaseth, and abuses him in his whole Name) has made him a Liar; but he that
Believes, justifies God in his Truth, John. 3 33. He that receives (i. e.
Believes) his Testimony, has set to his Seal, that God is true. No wonder
that Unbelief must be punished with Damnation, s^eing it gives God the Lie, not
only in not Believing that Jesus is the Christ; Men may believe the general
Doctrine of the Gospel, touching Salvation by Jesus Christ, by Education and
Tradition, and not believe the Truth thereof, in matter of Holiness and
Obedience, to conform thereunto, and that do as truly give God the Lie, as not
to Believe the Doctrine of Salvation; for if Men may be Saved in ways of
Unholiness and Disobedience, the word of the Lord is not True which says the
contrary, 1 Cor. 6 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 12. 14. Rev. 21. 27.
Therefore let God be True, and every Man (in this matter) a Liar.

2. It Is that (as the Condition) will justify 2. I^ justifies the Sinner.
the Believers before God, Romans 5 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God: But of this, more at large in the Doctrine of
Justification.

3. It Is of a Soul-strengthening Excellency; 3. It Is of a Soul* strength^ning
Excellency.
it helps to hold out, and to overcomeing the Spiritual Warfare, 1 Cor. 16. 13.
Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit ye like Men, he strong: Our strength in
the warfare, is by standing fast in the Faith; the Saints have many Enemies to
Encounter withal, both within them, and without them; and it is their
stability in the Faith of the Gospel that is their strength, Ephesians 6. 16. In the
Spiritual warfare with those high Enemies, the Saints are to Encounter withal,
Expressed verse. 12. The chief Defense of the Saints in Faith; Above all, take the
Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the Fiery Darts of
the wicked One. It Is that by which we must get the Victory over the World if
ever we get it, 1 John 5. 4. And this is the Victory that overcomes the World,
even your Faith. What we are to understand is intended by the World, see Chap.
2. 16. For all that is in the World, as the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the
Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but of the World. The World,
the Flesh, and the Devil are the three great Enemies of the Saints; and by
Faith it is that they overcome them all. How so? Why Faith believes the Truth
of, and Interest in, better things than either any, or all of these can
propound; and that makes the Gracious Soul to slight All, and to account it but
Dung and Dross, and to part with All, for the Excellency of Christ: It believes
down the World, and Sin, and Satan; believes in Grace and Strength from the
Lord: Hence the Scripture says, that we are kept by the Power of God through
Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 5. God strengthens, keeps, and preserves his People in a way
of Believing, not without, or out of the way of Faith: In a word, our Lord
expresses the Power of Faith, All things are possible to him that Believes,
Mark 9. 23. Faith believes all things possible for God to do, that he has said
he will do; and all things possible for Man to do and suffer, that God calls
him to; it strengthens the Soul both in doing and suffering.

4. Excellency of Faith is; it purifieth the 4. Faith purifieth the heart.
Heart, Acts 15. 9. It Is of a purifying Nature in it is Exercise and Employment;
it exercises it self about the Holiness of God in his own Nature, the purity
of his Word and Will, the greatness of his Love in the Death of the Lord for
Sinners, with the Holy ends thereof, etc. And this works the Soul into the
Hatred of Sin, and Love of Holiness; believes the Truth of all the Holy
Institutions, Ordinances and Commands of the Lord; and it is Bounden Duty to
live up to him therein: In a word, Faith in the Word of the Lord it is that
works the Soul to Eschew Evil, and to do Good, to abhor that which is Evil* and
to cleave to that which is Good: No Holiness without Faith; and the more Faith
is thus exercised, the more Holy Conformity will there be to the Lord.

5. Excellency of Faith is, that it fills the 5. It fills the Soul with J^y and
Peace*
Soul with Joy and Peace, Romans 15. 13. Now the God of Hope fill you with Joy
and Peace in Believing etc. It Is true, it is the God of Hope that gives this
Joy and Peace; but it comes into us through Believing, it never comes to any
Soul but by Believing; that is, believing the Truth of the Doctrine of the
Gospel in all the good Tidings thereof, in all the Promises and Precepts; it
all affords Joy and Peace to the Believer, who is exercised therein, 1 Pet. 1.
8.

6. Excellency of Faith is; that it is the 6. I^s the Mother of all ^ther Divine
Virtues.
Mother (if I may so say) of all other Divine Virtues, Love, Hope, Patience,
Obedience, etc. They are all Nursed, and Nourished up under Faith; and without
Faith, there can be none of all these, though Faith works, and gets
strength by these: Yet without Faith there can be none of these, as Without
Faith we cannot please God. So without Faith we can have no Divine Virtue, and
if our Faith be right and true, then it carries in it something of every
Divine Virtue of the New Covenant: And this Christians should be instructed in,
that it might engage their Hearts to be Adding to their Faith Virtue, etc,
according to 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.

Faith is the first Active Demonstrative Virtue in the Soul, and lies at the
bottom of every Virtue, and of every Duty.

7. Such is the Excellency of Faith, 7. It renders both Persons and Services
acceptable.
that it renders our Persons and Services, and all we Do and Suffer for
Christ, according to his Will, acceptable to and with the Lord; See Heb. 11.
almost throughout. The Works of the Saints and Elders of old, were all
accepted, being done in Faith, and verse. 6. Without Faith it is impossible to
please him.

Object. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. seems to prefer Love as the only Gospel,
amiable, and acceptable Virtue, yea, even above and beyond Faith, verse. 2.
Though I had all Faith, etc. and have no Charity, I am nothing.

Answ. It Is true; if it were possible to have all Faith without Love, it would
be nothing; that is, produce nothing, issue in nothing; true Faith is always
accompanied with true Love, and though Love be the most Heaven-born Virtue,
that which makes us most like God, yet this Love is not, cannot be, before, and
without Faith; we cannot love God till we believe him to be God, nor Jesus
Christ, till we believe the Truth of the Gospel concerning him, nor love his
Word, till we believe it to be his Word, etc.

8. It Is excellent End and Issue, discovers 8. It Is excellen^s End.
the Excellency of the Virtue; it Issues the Soul in Glory, it prepares the
Soul for Glory; through it it is preserved by the Power of God to Glory; He that
endures (i. e. in the Faith and Profession thereof) to the end, shall be
Saved, 1 Pet. 1 9. Receiving the end of your Faith, the Salvation of your
Souls. By Soul, we are to understand the whole Man, Body and Soul* and this is,
and will be the end of all true Faith, to bring you to Salvation both Body and
Soul; but this note, it is not Faith only in the Habit of it, but in the
Living-working Power thereof, according to the Gospel, as it brings forth those
other Divine Virtues aforementioned. But to this of Faith, I shall speak more
distinctly in the Doctrine of Justification in some Cases.

CHAP. XII. Of Repentance.
REpentance and faith are undoubted Chap. 12. Of Repentance.
Companions; in as much as sometimes Repentance is included in Faith, and
sometimes Faith is included in Repentance, and it comes in immediately with
Faith, and much spoken of in the Scripture, as absolutely necessary unto Life;
and in my Method in speaking to it, I shall endeavor

1. To show what it is; the Greek Word 1. What it is. (...).
( Metanoesate) properly signifies a Change of the Mind, which cannot be
without a Measure of Faith; and that not an ordinary change of the Mind from
one thing to another, but it is a change of the Mind from owning of, delighting
in, and following after the Service of Sin, Satan, and the World, to the owning
of, delighting in, and following after the Lord, in serving of him. In a Word,
true Repentance is the turning of the whole Man from Sin and Satan unto God; to
Believe and Obey the Gospel, for where the Mind is eff^ctually changed, there
will be a change in the whole Conversation; it is one in Substance with
Conversion, for that is a turning from Sin to God, and so is Repentance; it is
not a turning from one Sin to another, or from one Opinion to another; (unless
it be from Error to Truth) or a turning from Prophaneries to Civility or
Formality. So the last Estate may be worse than the first; but it is the turning
from the Power of Sin and Satan to God, Acts 26. 18. Isa. 55 7. Let the Wicked
forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him turn to the
Lord, and he will have Mercy on him, etc. This I take to be the Essence and
Substance of Repentance, the change of the Mind; and so the turning of the
whole Man, from Satan to God in the way of the Gospel; in which Way and Work of
Repentance the Soul shall obtain Remission of Sins here, and an Inheritance
amongst the Sanctified Ones hereafter.

2. That this Repentance is an Evangelical 2. It Is an Evangelical Duty.
Duty, and Virtue, and not Legal, as some imagine; unless it be the Law of the
New Covenant; so it is Legal and a Duty, Persons who think Repentance to be only
a Legal Old Covenant Work, and the Persons exercised in it* to be of an Old
Covenant Spirit, discover themselves to be indeed strangers to the New Covenant
Grace, and the way of Interest therein, that must needs be Evangelical; that
is, the Condition, or Terms of all our New Covenant Mercy: the Grace and Mercy
of the New Covenant is propounded on the terms of Repentance, and without it we
may not expect any Interest therein, Luke 24. 47. That Repentance and Remission
of Sins might be preached in his Name etc. Repentance must precede the
Remission of sins as the Condition; no Repentance, no Remission of sins, Acts
2. 28. Repent every one of you for the Remission of sins; that is, that your
Sins may be remitted, or forgiven. So that Repentance is so much a Gospel Duty,
as that there is no Remission of Sins without it, which leads us

3 To the Necessity of this Repentance; the Necessity appears in ^wo things: 1.
From the stress the Lord has laid upon it,

1. By Precept and Command, Mark 1. 15. 3. The necessity thereof.
Repent ye, and believe the Gospel Acts 17. 30. Now he commands all Men every
where to Repent. That answers the Terms of the Gospel, on which Remission of
Sins is to be Preached; that is, on the Terms of Repentance, which implies a
strong Command unto Repentance: So that Unrepenting Sinners continue in a way
of Disobedience to God in the Gospel in this matter.

2. The Danger of not Repenting, discovers the Necessity thereof, if there be
no Remission of sins without Repentance, then there is no Salvation, no
New-Covenant-Blessedness, Romans 4. 7. Blessed is the Man whose Iniquity is
forgiven, and whose Sin is covered. It Is the same in Sense and Substance as
that of Faith, Mark 16. 16. He that Believes and is baptized, shall be Saved,
he that Believes not, shall be Damned. What Christ here calls Believing,
Peter, Act. 2. 38. Calls Repentance, who best understood his Lords
Commiss^on. Repentance and Faith being inseparable; Christ says, he that
Believes and is Baptized: answering those very Terms, and Acting according to
this Commission, says, Repent and be Baptized, etc. So that it follows, that
he that Believes not, he that Repents not, must be Damned, Luke 13. 3.
Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish. So that such is the Necessity
of Repentance, as that without it there is no Remission, and so no Salvation;
but on the contrary, Perishing and Damnation; God accepts of none on any other
Terms but this; of a Soul turning to him, he Remits sins on no other terms.

And the Reason is, because it was indeed the great Design of God in the
Gospel, and End of Christ's suffering for sinners to Effect this Work, to bring
us off from Sin and Satan to God, in this way of Repentance; and indeed they
are wonderful, contrary, Base, and dishonorable Thoughts of God, and our Lord
Jesus; to think he should give his Life and Blood to so base an End, as to
purchase a Liberty for Persons to serve Satan and Sin without danger: No, it is
far otherwise, 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ has once suffered for our sins, the
Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to God. And we turn to God by
Repentance, Isa 55 7. There is no other way for us to come to him; it is true,
Christ Crucified is the alone way of Acceptance when we come; yet no Acceptance
in him without Faith and Repentance.

4. That this Grace of Repentance is the 4. Repentance is the Gift of God.
Gift of God, Acts 11. 18. Then has God also to the Gentiles grante^
Repentance unto Life; it is the Gift and Grant of God, on a Twofold account.

1. It Is his Gift, his Grant, that poor 1. He give^ the Doctrine.
Forlorn perishing sinners, may have Acceptance and Life by Jesus Christ, on
the terms of Repentance. It is a wonderful, free, and rich Grant, if this were
all, for God to grant Remission of Sins, and Life Eternal, on our Acceptance
and turning to him by Repentance, Then has God granted Repentance unto the
Gentiles unto Life; that is, God has granted the same Grace to the Gentiles as
to the Jews; that on Repentance they shall have Life, and this Grant is
Universal wherever the Gospel comes; Life upon Repentance is to be published,
that whosoever does Repent and Believe the Gospel, shall be saved. O bless the
Lord for this Grant, and improve it.

2. Not only the grant of Life on terms of 2. He gives the Grace of Repentance.
Repentance is the Gift of God, but the Grace of Repentance ( i. e. that Grace
by which we do Repent) is the gift of God: The Grace of Repentance (or to
Repent) is (as all other Divine New Covenant Virtues are) the gift of God;
Every good and perfect Gift comes down from the Father of Lights. So does this
good Gift and Grace of Repentance; hence the Apostle exhorts firmly* and with
him all true Ministers, 2 Timothy 2. 25. In Meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging
of the Truth, etc. That is, give them Grace to repent, and to turn to him: Man
by Nature is Averss to this great Work of Repentance, he will not come to God
though he perish, John 5. 40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have Life;
But it is the Lord that gives, and works the Grace.

5. What are the concomitant Virtues, or 5. The concomitance, or companions of
Repentance.
Companions of Repentance? And they are many, indeed all the Divine Virtues of
the New Covenant, as Faith, and Love, and Holiness, etc. it contains the Birth
which is from above, without which none can see the Kingdom of God John 3. 3.
It contains in it the whole Work of Regeneration, and Sanctification. But that
which I shall more particularly mention is:

1. That true Repentance is always accompanied 1. It abhors the Evil, and loves
the Good.
with a Soul-^ating of sin, and Love of Virtue, and Holiness; It abhors that
which is Evil, and cleaves to that which is Good. It does not only leave Evil,
but abhor it as it is Evil and Sin, as it is against God, his Holy Name and
Nature; and not only abhor sin, all sin: But those in whom it is, do abhor and
loath themselves because of sin and the sinful Nature, Ez^k. 36. 31. Then shall
ye remember your own ^v^l ways, and your Doings that were not Good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight, for your Iniquities, and for your
abominations. Jer. 31. 19. After that I was turned, I Repented, I smote upon
my Thigh, I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the Reproach
of my Youth. These are New Covenant Discoveries of this great Work of
Repentance, Romans 7. 24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of Death. Therefore in vain do those talk of Repentance and Interest
in Gospel Grace and Life, who love themselves, and sin still, And are not
purged from their old Filthiness.

2. True Repentance is always accompanied 2. Godly Sorrow.
with godl^ Sorrow for sin; as it is against God, his Holy Will, his Holy Name
and Nature: Contrition, and Brokenness of Heart for sin as it is against God,
always accompanies true Repentance, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, thee, only have
I sinned, etc. So Peter, Mat. 26 75. When he had sinned, and repented. He went
out and wept bitterly, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort
him, lest perhaps such a one be swallowed up with too much Sorrow. By all which
it appears (and likewise from Experience) that true Repentance is always
accompanied with godly Sorrow; and that not only in the Souls first Return from
sin to God, but the Saints in all their Relapses, and Returns, it is accompanied
with godly Sorrow.

3. Concomitant and Companion of true 3. Holy Resolution.
Repentance is Holy Resolution in the strength of Grace.

1. To Sin no more, to be Drunk, to be 1. To sin no more.
Profane, and Graceless no more, Hos. 14 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to
do any more with Idols! Isa. 30. 22. Thou shall cast them away as a Menstruous
Cloth, thou shall say unto it, get you hence: O! sin in the eyes of true
Repenting Souls is a Monstrous thing, and they resolve against it! they say to
it, get you hence; get you hence Pride, and get you hence Covetuousness, etc.
Job 40. 5. Once have I Spoken, but I will not Answer; yea twice, but I will
procced no further.

2. Holy Resolution for time to come in 2. To cleave to, and serve the Lord.
the strength of the Grace that is in Christ Jesus; to keep close with God, and
to be a Faithful Follower of him, in (...) his Ways, and to be obedient to him
in all ^^s Will; according to the Exhortation to New Converts, Acts 11. 23.
They exhorted them all that with purpose of Heart they would cleave to the
Lord. This was the Holy Resolution of Joshua, Chapter 24. 15. But as for me and my
House, we will serve the Lord. And the Prophet, Psalm. 119. 115. Depart from me
ye Evil Doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God. This Holy Resolution
brought into Practice God owns abundantly, Isa. 26. 7 8. 1 Cor. 15. 58.

4. Companion of Repentance, is Watchfulness 4. Companion of Repentance is
Watchfulness.
and Care for Future to come against sin, and to the performance of Duty,
without which, the highest Resolutions prove Abortive, and comes to nothing;
without this Watchfulness against sin, and the occasions thereof, persons are
easily ensnared therewith; to be Watchful of Satan, and all his Wilds and
Devices, who Watches to catch Souls with his Baits; to be Watchful of Men, and
all the Occasions they meet with in the World to draw them to Evil; to be
Watchful of themselves, and their own Deceitful Hearts, that they be not
enticed and ensnared: O the Carefulness of the gracious Soul in this matter,
and the Pains he takes with his own Heart, to keep it in subjection to the
Lord, that it miscarry not in any matter, either of Omission or of Comm^ssion,
by any Temptations! but where the Repentance is not right, but feigned, there
is no Care or Watchfulness; or very little and slender Care or Fear of sin;
very little Care and Conscience to keep close with God in Duty. Very little
Watchfulness unto Prayer, to times of Prayer, and to keep the Heart to God in
Prayer: but the wise Man's Eyes are in his Head, and his Heart is instructed in
Wisdom; he knows, that to depart from Evil, that is Understanding, Job 22.
28. And therefore according to the frequent Exhortations in the Scriptures, is
Watchful and Circumspect, very careful of Occasions and Temptations, Avoiding
all Appearance of Evil, and Companions that may ensnare therewith; see 1 Cor.
16. 13. Ephesians. 5. 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17. 1 These. 5 22

6. Repentance is a continued Work in all 6. Repentance is a continual work.
the Parts thereof, or with all it is Concomitants; it is never over, or ended,
while in this World, in this Imperfect and Sinning state.

1. It Is necessary in the first Work of Closing with God; and the first visible
Work is, a turning to the Lord, a change of Estate, a change in Spirit, in
Principles, in Conversation, without which there is no Salvation, as has been
before showed, 2 Cor. 5 17. If any man be in Christ, he is an New Creature; Old
things are past away, behold all things are become New.

2. It Is the daily Work of Christians, in as 2. It is the constant Work of
Christians.
much as the sinful Nature continues; by reason of which there are many
Vanities and Evils that occasions Need of daily Repentings; and through
Temptations, sometimes (especially with some) gross Miscarriages, which must
be repented of. The Truth hereof the former Examples of Saints in Scripture
does witness, as Job, David, Peter, etc. with many others Repenting, Mourning,
and Abhorring themselves; as likewise the present Experience of some in this
matter; so that its the daily Work of Christians to be daily renewing their
Repentance, and to be turning more and more to the Lord; and this Work must go
on till we come to Perfection.

The Life of Saints is a Life of Watching, Warring, Repenting, Mourning,
Praying, Believing, and Obeying, till they come to Glory; every New sin must be
repented of, and the Body of Death must be Mourned under; and the Pardon of
Purging of not only known, but unknown sins must be prayed for, Psalm. 19. 12.
Who can understand his Errors, cleans thou me from secret Faults. A Loose,
Vain, Carnal, Careless, Sluggish, Negligent frame of Spirit, and Conversation
do wonderfully unbecome true Christians; and do rather demonstrate such Persons
in whom it is, to have a Name to be Alive and yet are Dead, Dead while they are
Alive: They are the Humble, Holy* Repenting, Believing, Obeying Souls, that are
in the way of Life, Mat. 5. 3. to 8. Psalm. 50. 23. Phil 3 20 21.

Therefore 1. Wonderfully is the World 1. Use.
cheated, with the Name of Christians, and Church, without Repentance; who talk
of Christianity, Church. Worship, Ordinances, Remission of Sins, Glory, and all
without Repentance; which is impossible, a horrible Thing is committed in the
World upon this account; not only to pretend to Christianity without
Repentance, but hates, abhors, and persecute those that do repent, and come to
the Lord; surely such are far from the Truth of Christianity.

2. Greatly likewise are they mistaken, 2. Use.
who think that Repentance is no Evangelical Work, but Legal; or that it is but
once to be performed, it is not only contrary to the Scripture, and Experience
of Saints, but tends much to Carnalness and fleshly Liberty; or it must be
found in Persons who think themselves perfect and without sin, and so need no
Repentance: An Argument of gross Ignorance, not knowing themselves; and from
thence pride of Heart, being puffed up with their own Deceivings.

3. Therefore let gracious Souls be exhorted 3. Uses
to be daily Repenting and Turning to the Lord, there being daily Cause
thereof, and need to be Exercised therein; as there is of Faith; for Faith as
to Interest, cannot be kept alive but by Repentance, therefore as they sin
daily, it behooves them to Repent daily, and to be daily turning to the Lord.

Object. Repentance and Faith, and every Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law in
their inward Parts, and will write it in their Hearts: What need so much a do
about the matter as if it were the Work of Man; this seems to be Legal, and not
Evangelical, to set Man upon that which is God's Gift and Work.

Answ. We are to distinguish in this matter, etc. is our Act, and our Duty, and
sure enough we shall Perish if it be not done: Therefore though it be of God to
effect the New Work within, which is his special Grace, where it is, yet four
things do weightily concern us, to be instructed in.

1. That the Acting of Divine Grace, into the Performance of Gospel-Duty, does
concern us, and is the Duty of all, though they have not the Law written in the
Heart.

2. That you can never know this Law of Grace to be in your Hearts, but by your
Holy Disposition of Acting Divine Virtues and Duties, sure enough they are
Graceless Persons who act not those Divine Virtues the Gospel requires.

3. Persons sincerely Acting, and Working toward God in Divine Grace and Life
received, is the undoubted way of Increase thereof, and therein God will bless
Endeavors with Increase, and curse Sluggishness and Negligence with Loss of
all, Mat. 25. 16. to 29.

4. That it is a dangerous and pernicious Understanding of Gods absolute Promise
in the New Covenant; so as to make null, his Conditional Promises in the
Administration thereof, even as dangerous, if not more, then to fix on the
Conditional, so as to make null the absolute. But there is a saving
Understanding of both if rightly directed therein.

CHAP. XIII. Treats of Justification.
THe next thing I shall come in order to Chap. 13. Of Justification.
speak unto, is the matter of Justification, this follows Faith and
Repentance according to the Law of the New Covenant, it follows Effectual
Calling, according to the Order stated, Romans 8. 3. Whom he predestined, them
he called, and whom he called, them he justified, etc. In this Order,
Justification follows Calling, in which Faith and Repentance is included, and
therefore is it propounded in the Gospel on terms of Faith and Repentance, Acts
13. 39. By him all that Believe are justified, etc. Romans 5. 10. Being justified
by Faith we have Peace with God. Luke 24. 47. Repentance and Remission of Sins
must be preached in the Name of Christ* etc. Remission of sins upon Repentance.

In my Discourse about this Matter, I shall endeavor to show:

1. What Justification is; Justification is 1. What it is*
an Acquittance and Discharge from the Guilt and Eternal punishment for sin,
and is the same as Remission and Pardon of sin: For a Person whose sins are
pardoned, is justified, and his sins are as if they had not been; that
Justification consists in the Pardon and Remission of sin is clear, Romans 4.
6, 7, 8. Even as David describes the Blessedness of the Man unto whom God
imputes Righteousness with Works. Here is an imputed Righteousness without
Works; Righteousness and Justification in this place is all one, and verse. 7.
explains what this Righteousness and Justification is; Blessed are they whose
Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are covered; Blessed is the Man to whom
the Lord will not impute Sin. So that it is evident, that Righteousness unto
Justification consists in this; the Forgiving, Covering, and not Imputing of
sin; the same we have in substance, Act. 13. 38. Be it known to you Men and
Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the Forgiveness of Sins;
the Forgiveness of Sins is the glad Tidings of the Gospel, and verse. 39.
declares this Remission of sins to be Justification, And by him all that
Believe, are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified
by the Law of Moses; that is, their sins are forgiven, Col. 2. 13. Having
forgiven you all Trespasses; and where all Trespasses are forgiven, such
Persons stands Quit and Justified before God, Romans 33. 34. Who shall lay any
thing to the Charge of God's Elect; it is God that justifies, who is he that
Condemns? If God pardon, acquit, and justifies, who can Condemn? And thus
much as to the Matter of Justification, what it is, and wherein it consists.

2. How this Justification and Righteousness 2. How it is to be obtained.
is to be obtained; and this I shall mind on a twofold Account. 1. As it
relates to God, and 2. As it relates to us.

1. As it relates to God the Father, that 1. As it relates to God, his Justice
must be satisfied.
so it might come unto us in a way of Justice as well as Mercy: Man having
sinned, and being gone out from God by sin, and Disobedience; he being a Just
and Righteous God, his Justice must be satisfied, that so he might have a
Honorable and Righteous way of exercising Mercy to Sinners* and the way of
satisfaction to Divine Justice, and Demonstration of Divine Love and Grace to
Sinners, was by Jesus Christ crucified; The Son of the Father in Truth and
Love: The Death and Sufferings of our Lord, was the alone satisfactory
Sin-offering to the Father for the sin of sinners; this will appear if we
consider:

1. How frequently Christ is said in Scripture, It appears 1. Christ dyed for
Sinners.
to Dye for our sins, 1 Cor 15 3. For I delivered first of all that which I
received; how that Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, Gal.
1. 4. Who gave himself for our sins, etc. that is, because of our sins, our
sins were the cause of his Death, that he might thereby make Peace and
Reconciliation for sinners; that the way of Mercy might be opened, and a
Hopeful way of Salvation for sinners, in that He bear our sin^ on his own Body
on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. That he dyed for us, 1 Pet. 4. 1. And for our sins,
the Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. that is,
in our sted, that we might Live.

2. That God the Father has in Scripture, 2. God has declared his
satisfaction.
as clearly and fully declared, his being satisfied and well pleased with, and
in the Sufferings of his Son for the sake of Sinners: And this will appear if
we consider:

1. That God the Father laid our sins upon him; and surely he would never have
laid our sins on the Back of his Son, if he had not been well pleased in his
Bearing of them, Isa. 53. 6. All we like Sheep are gone It appears 1. He laid
our sins upon his Son.
astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him
the Iniquity of us all; that is, he has laid on him the Penalty, and
Punishment of our Iniquities, as verse. 4. 5. explains it, He has borne our
Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, he was Wounded for our Transgression, he was
Bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, etc.
verse. 10. It pleased the Lord to Bruise him, he has put him to Grief, when you
shall make his Soul an Offering for Sin, etc. That is, his whole Man Body and
Soul; so Soul often imports in Scripture: Now if God the Father make his Son an
Offering for sin, and lay the sin of Sinners upon him, he must needs be
satisfied and Well-pleased with such an Offering.

2. Jesus Christ came into the World to 2. His Son came to do his Will.
do the Will of God, Heb. 10. 7. Joh. 6. 38. Who gave him a Body suitable to
this his Will, that he might have some what also to offer, Heb. 10. 5. and 8.
3. And it is apparent, that it was the very Design of the Father in sending
him into the World, that he might offer himself to God, a Sacrifice for the sin
of Sinners, and therefore must needs be satisfied, and well-pleased in that
Work.

3. The Scripture in plain terms, declares 3. The Scripture declares that he is
satisfied.
the Father to be well satisfied with, and in the Sufferings of his Son for the
sake of Sinners:

1. From the Mouth of the Son himself, Joh. 10. 17. Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my Life, etc. And the cause of his laying down his
Life, see verse. 15. I lay down my Life for the Sheep. If God the Father loved
him for doing this part of his Will, then surely he accepted him in it, and was
well pleased:

2. From the Testimony of the Father, Mat. 3. 17. This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased; that is, well pleased in all his Sufferings and
Undertakings for Sinners, Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in Love as Christ has loved us, and
given himself for us, an Offering and Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
Savor. Jesus Christ was a satisfactory sweet smelling Savory Offering to the
Father for the sin of Sinners.

4. The Efficacy of his Sufferings lay much 4. It lay much in the Fathers will.
in the Will of the Father; for if the Sufferings of Christ had not fully
answered the Fathers Will; there could not have been so clear satisfaction to
us Sinners, that God had accepted the Sufferings of his Son for us as
satisfaction to his Justice for the sin of Sinners: But Christ accomplishing
his Fathers Will in the whole Work, it must needs be acceptable and
satisfactory, Heb. 10 9, 10. Lo I come to do thy Will* O God, by the which
Will we are Sanctified through the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once
for all. So that it is evident, that it was the Will of the Father that Christ
came to Do, and the suffering of Christ concurring with, and answering of this
Will of God, is it by which the Work is effected, and we are sanctified.

5. These things thus considered, it necessarily 5. It follows that the
Offering of Christ was to satisfy Justice.
follows; that there must be some great cause of this wonderful Offering that
must be given to God for Sinners; for the Scripture speaks, that this Offering
was given to God, Heb. 9. 14. Who through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself
without Spot to God, etc. And to what end may we suppose it to be, that He
offered himself without Spot to God.

Was it only to fulfill his Will and Pleasure, or only to manifest his Love to
Sinners, or only to be a Pattern of Sanctity and Sufferings to his People, as
some imagine; surely it must be both Irrational, and Irreligious so to imagine:
It Is true, all these was included in it, but satisfaction to Divine Justice was
the Foundation and Principal Cause of his Suffering; he came to do his Fathers
Will; but it was in order to this, that so he might show Mercy to Sinners; can
any Man rationally imagine, that God should send his only begotten Son into the
World to be Abused, Scourged, Tempted, Buffetted, falsely Accused, unjustly
Condemned, Crucified, lay Punishments upon him, etc. only to fulfill his Will,
not relative to something further, or to commend Love to Mankind, or to be a
pattern of Sanctity and Suffering. Would any Parent deal so with an only Son?
Would it not be justly accounted Irrational, and Tyranical; God could have
found out some more Moderate and Rational Way to have eff^cted such a Work. But
the Scripture tells us, that Jesus Christ came to do, and did that for us
which the Law could not do, Romans 8. 3. which the Levitical Priesthood could
not do, Heb. 7. 11. to 19, 24. to 27. With Silver or Gold, or Corruptable
things could not do, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. That he was an Offering for Sin and
Sinners; that he offered himself to God, that he Bear our sins in his own Body,
Dyed for us, the Just for the Unjust, etc. With Multitudes of like Expressions
in Holy Scripture; all which do abundantly discover, that the Sufferings of
Christ was to satisfy Justice, and that the Father was satisfied and well
pleased therein, and therewith; and did love the Lord Jesus, because he was
willing to undertake such a Service for Sinners, and that he does on this
account; that is, for the suffering Sake of Christ, Pardon and Justify those
who Believe in, and Obey the Lord Jesus, 1 John 2. 12. with Ephesians. 1. 7.

2. As it relates to us; that is, the Terms 2. As it relates to us, it is on
the terms of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience.
and Conditions on which it is administered to us, and that is on the Terms of
Faith, Repentance, and sincere Obedience to the Lord: Though Justification
comes free to us, without any Meritorious Work of ours as the Deserving Cause,
yet as the Condition or Terms on which we must have it, which is but Reasonable
and Religious, it is on our Faith and Obedience to the Lord. Hence it is that
Justification and Salvation is so frequently in Scripture propounded on these
Terms, and indeed it is never propounded but on these Terms, either Expressed or
Implied; this was the Doctrine which was first begun to be preached by the
Lord, Mark 1. 14, 15. and confirmed by them that heard him, and were
Commissioned by him, Mar. 16. 15, 16 Luke 24. 47. according to that Commission
so they taught in this matter, Act. 2. 38. Repent and be Baptized every one of
you for the Remission of sins; that is, that your sins may be Remitted, Acts
26. 18.

1. There must be the opening of the Eyes, and a turning from Darkness to
Light, (that is, to the Light of Gospel Grace) and from the power of Satan to
God, and then follows Remission of sins, That they may receive Forgiveness of
sins; where note, that Forgiveness of sins follows a Soul turning to God,
which includes both Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, according to the Gospel,
and the Inheritance follows Forgiveness of sins, that is, Justification: the
sum of all is this, that where the Gospel is sincerely Believed and Obeyed,
there is a Legal New Covenant-Right to Forgiveness of sins, and to the
Inheritance, a Legal Right to the Justification, and the Glory of the Gospel,
Heb. 5 9. He is become the Author Our right is continued on the same account.
of Eternal Salvation to all those that Obey him. And as we come to have a
Legal New Covenant-Right in Justification and Salvation, by Believing and
Obeying the Gospel, so our Right is continued therein, by our Sincerity and
Constancy therein: And this is, as abundantly Witnessed too in the Scriptures
as the former, Mat. 10. 22. He that endures to the End shall be Saved, Luke 9.
62. No man having put his Hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 13. Mark 13. 13. And this is confirmed by the
Apostles, Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. Heb. 3. 6, 12, 14. and 9, 1. 11.

Object. This seems to imply a Possibility

Answ. The Unchangeableness of the Love

1. Therefore I say, that the Lord knows them that are his, and who are
effectually Called, and they shall be kept through Faith unto Salvation, 2 Timothy
2. 19. Nevertheless, the Foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this
Seal, the Lord knows them that are his. But we know (as yet) no otherwise but
by Faith and sincere Obedience, and our Constancy therein, by which we are
under the Law of Grace, of the New Covenant; so that though we ought to believe
the Unchangeableness of the Lord's Love in the New Covenant of his Grace; and
that there are a People known to him who shall be kept by his Power through
Faith, and shall obtain the Inheritance promised; and that we are of that
Number, if we in Truth and Sincerity, Believe and Obey the Gospel unto the end.
And the more steadfast we are in the Faith, and Constant, Sincere, and Universal
in our Obedience, the Greater, and Well-grounded will be our Assurance, both of
Interest, Standing, and Glory, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Romans 2. 7, 10. Rev. 22. 14.
Luke 6. 47, 48.

2. We must distinguish between the state of Grace, and the state of Glory; the
Assurance of the Saints in the state of Grace, must be distinguished from their
assurance in the state of Glory, then all Doubts will be over: But in the state
of Grace, there are, and will be ground of Doubts and Fears; not to Fear or
Doubt the Truth of the Gospel, and of the Love of God therein, or of the
Changeableness thereof; here our Faith should be without Doubting, but as to
our Interest therein, and certainty of Obtaining; in as much as it depends
(according to the Law of Grace) not only on the Truth of God in the Gospel, but
the Truth of our Faith therein, and Constancy of our Obedience to the end, and
our Interest must flow from both; for without the second we have no Interest in
the first: So that it requires not only Self-examination of the Truth of the
Work, of the Heavenly Birth, and Regeneration, but Constancy therein to the
end; and by reason of the Corruption of our Natures, and Imperfections in those
Divine Virtues to which the Promise is made, necessarily may occasion sometimes
Doubtings and Fears; and this seems to be owned by the Scriptures, to be rather
a Virtue than a Vice, in Believers, Romans 11. 20. Be not Highminded, but fear,
Heb. 4. 1, 11. Let us fear, left a Promise being left us, we come short, Prove.
28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always: Not only fears God, but fears
his own deceitful Heart, fears a Heart of Unbelief, to depart from the living
God; fears to sin against God, whether in Omission, or Commission: This is a
Godly fear, that must be where Grace is, and may sometimes be accompanied with
Doubts and Godly Jelousies of a Man's self, and tends to establish the Soul
in a well-grounded Assurance, suitable to the Gospel; and this I must say, I had
rather have Fellowship with Self-examining, Self-judging, and Self-fearing
Souls, stable in the Faith, though as to Interest something, at sometimes mixed
with Doubtings, than with High-flown Believers without all fear, that have High
Assurance on Low grounds, scarcely able to give (from the Law of the New
Covenant) a Reason of their Hope. But see this more in Chap. 15.

CHAP. XIV. Wherein I shall speak more distinctly to the matter of Faith, and
of Justification by Faith: With Answer to several Questions and Objections
about the matter.
HAving spoken something to the matter Chap. 14.
of Justification what it is, and whereit does consist; that is, in the Pardon
and Remission of sins, taking away the Guilt and Condemnation of sin, with the
Terms on which we must have it, if ever we have it. 1. Relating to God. 2. Our
selves, i. e. on the Terms of Faith, Repentance, and sincere Obedience. I shall
in this speak more distinctly unto the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and
endeavor to answer such Questions and Objections, as ordinarily are, or may be
made about it.

What the Faith is to which Justification is promised, I have already stated in
the substance thereof, in Chap. 11. that it is to believe God in his Word, to
believe the Truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel, of God's Grace to Sinners in
Jesus Christ, which if True and Right, is accompanied with true Repentance,
Truth of Love to God, and sincere Obedience; or a Hearty and Willing Consenting
to the Truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel, to be saved by Jesus Christ, and in
all things to be Ruled by him as Lord and King.

They are vain Imaginations that People create to themselves, of a Faith
without Repentance, or a Faith with Works, or a Faith without Works after their
own Imaginations, and not after the Will of Christ, or to expect to be saved by
him, when they have no mind to be ruled by him, Acts 3. 22, 23. But as to the
particular distinct Act of Faith, it is to believe God in his Word; and that
not only in this, but in all Cases, Faith is to believe God: It Is a Fancy and
not Faith, that has not the Word of God for it is Foundation. I intend in
Divine and New Covenant Concerns; Abraham believed God, and it was accounted
unto him for Righteousness: This was the Faith of the Father, and may, or must
we suppose the Faith of the Children to be another Faith; see Verse. 23. 24. Now
it was not Written for his Sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for us
also, to whom ^^ shall be imputed, if we believe on him, who raised up Christ
our Lord from the Dead.

Object. This with other Scriptures, mentions Believing in God, as well as
Believing of God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. John 14. 1. so that it seems it is not enough
to Believe God; but we must Believe in God, and in Christ. Answ. It Is all one
in substance, to believe in God and in Christ, is to believe his Faithfulness,
and All Sufficiency; that he is as good, and as true, and able as the Scripture
reports him to be; to perform his Word, you Believe in him, that he will not
fail, etc.

But to return, the Faith of Justification is to Believe the Truth of the
Gospel Record concerning the Justification and Life therein promised (to those
that do Believe) by Jesus Christ Cr^cified, Romans 5. 9. Much more being now
justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through him, Ephesians. 1 7.
Col. 1. 14. To Believe this truly, being accompanied with the Concomitants of
saving Faith, i. e. Love, and sincerity of Obedience, is the justifying, saving
Faith of the Gospel, to which the Promise of Life is made, Mark 16. 16. He that
Believes, and is Baptized shall be saved; that is, he that Believes and
Obeys the Lord, shall be saved: That of Baptism (being the first Initiating
Ordinance i^to the vi^ible Constituted Church of Christ) includes the whole of
Obedience.

Object. But, What must we Believe?

Answ. The Gospel, that which was to be preached; Preach the Gospel etc. The
Gospel is the Glad ^idings of Pardon* Peace, and Life by Jesus Christ, Mark 1.
15. Repent yea and Believe the Gospel, was Christ's own Doctrine; for further
Confirmation of this Truth, see John 8. 24. and 20. 31. Romans 10. 9, 10. 1 John
5. 10, 11. All which Scriptures if well weighed, with many others, bear
testimony to this Truth, that Faith is, to believe God, to believe the Truth of
the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Object. This is accounted, and called a

Answ. Notwithstanding it may be the

Quest. Wherein lies the Difference?

Answ. The one, from either common Illumination, Romans 10. 10. For with the
Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, Acts 8. 37. If thou believe with all
thine Heart, thou may, Psalm. 37. 31. The Law of God is in his Heart, none of
his Steps shall slide. It Is the Promise of the New Covenant, that God will
write his Law in the Hearts of his People; that is, implant a Holy sincere
Disposition of Faith, and Love, and the Fear of his Name; the Heart is wrought
after God, but Hypocrites have it at most, and best, but in the Head, in the
Understanding from common Illumination, etc. There is a great deal of
Head-Faith in the World, of Customary-Faith that will come to nothing: But
where it is in Truth, in the Heart, it effects a Heart-Change, with a Change in
the whole Conversation: Heart-believing, Heart-Love to God and his things;
Heart-hatred of sin, and Heart-obedience to the Will of Christ; and thus He
that is in Christ, is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And he that Believes, has
the Witness in himself, 1 Jo^. 5. 10. and do, or might know, that he has this
Heart-Faith in him.

So that the Truth remains, that that which Men call a History call Faith, i.
e. believing the History, the Truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel, truly as
has been demonstrated, is the justifying Faith of the Gospel. And as for
Devils, if Christ had Dyed ^or them, and God had in the Gospel promised Life to
them on the Terms he has to M^n; Li^e might be preached to Devils on the same
terms as to Men: But God having in Justice left them without the reach o^ this
Gospel Grace; whatever they believe about it, let not Man quarrel about the
easy way of Man's obtaining, i. e. Believe, Repent, and Obey the Gospel; and
be justified and saved.

Quest. But how shall I come to believe mine own Interest in Justification and
Life, which has been accounted with some, the Faith of Justification?

Answ. True, it has so with many, and I believe that want of Spiritual skill,
has done wrong to many tender Souls, and has caused them to go with Sorrow to
their Graves; and that either, 1. In teaching, that the Faith of Justification
and Life must be the Faith of Application, or assurance of Interest, which is
not the Truth of the Gospel, but this of Interest must grow from that of
Justification.

Or 2. In not laying the right Foundation of Assurance; so Souls have been kept
much in the Dark in this matter: For the Faith of Interest must be Founded on
the Promise of Life (if right) as well as the Faith of Justification; for it is
to believe God, as I said before, all Faith if right, must be Founded on the
Word of God. So that the right Gospel-way for Believers to Read their own
Interest, and to Read their Names in the Book of Life, is, to make a
Resultancy, or Conclusion from the Premises, (thus) God has promised
Justification and Life to them that do Believe and Obey the Gospel; I do so
Believe, therefore I shall be saved, and this is the Gospel-Ground or Reason of
our Hope of Interest in Gospel Grace and Life; and thus our Interest will be
grounded on the Promise of God in the Gospel. If I have the Faith of the
Gospel, and abide therein, I am Justified, and shall be Saved.

There are three Things that it behooves Three Things considerable.
Christians to be Instructed in, in this Matter, for their Support and Peace in
this Mortal, and Imperfect Estate.

1. To understand and know, that to believe the Truth of the Glad-tidings of
Salvation by Jesus Christ crucified, according to the Gospel, is the Terms and
Condition of our Justification and Salvation, and that who does so Believe
shall be Saved.

2. That who so does believe, has the Promise of Life from the Law and
Covenant of God in the Gospel, and from hence must claim his Interest in Grace
and Life; and if he claim it any other way, it may be a Fancy; only note this,
that we cannot be so Infalliable as to our particular Interest in Life, as we
are (or ought to be) in the Truth of the Doct^i^e of the Gospel, (as I have
before minded) because the one fixes only on the Truth of God; the other not
only on the Truth of God, but likewise on the Truth of our own Faith, which
being accompanied with Imperfections, may occasion Doubtings: But of this more
full in Chap. 15. of the Assurance of Faith.

3. That in all the Fa^lings of the Saints (for the Lord knew that his People
could not live perfectly without sin in his New Covenant of Grace) his Law of
Grace on this account is, that his People sincerely humble themselves, confess
their sins, forsake them, and beg Mercy, and he will Forgive them, for the sake
of his Son: And this is the Law of Grace in the New Covenant for support of
Believers, in their Spiritual Race and Warfare after Conversion, and the way
for them to have the Assurance of the Pardon of their daily Miscarriages; it
must come in from this Law of Grace; it is true, I sin daily, and come short in
every Duty, I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good Thing. But
it is my Burden, I am in Truth humbled, and do not only Watch and War against
it, but do daily implore the Throne of Grace for Pardon: Hence I have ground
from the Law of Grace, to believe mine Acceptance, and Remission of my sins;
this is the way of the New Covenant for the daily Pardon, Peace, and Comfort of
the Saints, Mat: 6 12. Psalm. 32. 5 Prove. 28. 13. Heb. 8. 12. 1 John 1. 9.

Quest. The Scripture says* that we are justified by Faith, Romans 5 1. 2. That
we are justified by Grace, Romans 3. 24. 3. That God justifies, and Christ
justifies, Romans 8. 33, 34. 4 That Works justifies, and not Faith only, Jam.
2. 24. How may we understand these Distinctions, and reconcile the Scriptures?

Answ. 1. Faith is said to justify, not as which we are justified; that is, we
are not, nor cannot be justified without it: This is the Law of the New
Covenant, it is said Romans 4. 3. That Abraham's Faith was accounted to him for
Righteousness, or imputed as verse 22. 23. Not that Abraham's Faith was his
Righteousness to Justification, but God accounted him Righteous, and does
account one Righteous that does Believe, or imputes Righteousness to such a
one that was not so accounted before, nor can be Righteous without it; for he
that believes not must be Damned. So that Faith justifies, as it is the
condition of Justification in the New Covenant, on our parts to be performed,
though in the Spirit and Life of the Covenant, or Law written in the Heart.

2. We are justified by Grace; that i^, it is all of Grace, and nothing of
Desert in us; our Faith is not any meritorious Cause in us, but it is all Grace;
it is Grace in God to give his Son for us and Grace in Christ to give himself,
and Grace in God (as to usward) to accept the Sufferings of his Son for us;
and Grace in him, to Pardon and Justify Sinners on their Believing; so that
it is all Grace as from God, and we may, and ought to c^y, Grace, Grace unto it.

3. It Is God that justifies, it is God the Father that justifies:

1. Because he Prepared and D^signed the Sacrifice, and our Justification
thereby, John 3 16. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. Heb. 10. 5.

2. He accepted the Sacrifice for us when offered, Ephesians 5. 1. 2. and 1, 6, 7.

3. It is he that Pardons us; that is, justifies us for the Sake of Christ
(our Peace Offering) when we do believe; and Christ is said to justify us as
the Meritorious, Satisfactory Cause of our Justification; therefore it is said,
Romans 8. 34. It is Christ that dyed, etc.

4. We are said to be justified by Works, and not by Faith only; because that
the Faith to which Justification and Salvation is promised, must be a working
Faith, and when Salvation is promised to Believing, we must understand it to be
such a Faith as the Gospel intends; that is, a Faith that carries in it Love,
and sincere Obedience to the Will of Christ; it is a Faith which works by
Love, Gal. 5. 6. the contrary is a dead Faith, as a Body without a Soul, that
will never justify, Jam. 2. 26. Thus Works justify:

1. The Truth of our Faith, for Faith without Works is dead

2. Works justifies (in some sense) as Faith does; that is, not as the
Meritorious Cause, but as the Condition, because the Faith to which
Justification is promised, includes Works in it, and so is as truly the
Condition of our Justification as Faith; for the Gospel excludes that Faith as
no Condition at all; that is, without Works, so that Faith without Works is
none of the justifying saving-Faith of the Gospel. So that thus considered,
here is a sweet Harmony and Concurrence in those Scriptures, and helps to a
more full Understanding of the glorious Method of God in this way of
Justification and Salvation of Sinners, by Jesus Christ.

Object. The Apostle says, Romans 4. 4, 5. Now to him that works, the Reward
is not reckoned of Grace but of Debt; but to him that Works not, but
Believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness.

Answ. We are to understand in this verse. 4. it is such a Working as that the
Reward is not counted of Grace but of Debt; not that we may not Work at all,
that is profane to imagine: But not to Work Meritoriously, so as to expect
Justification and Life, as a due Debt for our Working; here Works are nothing.
He that Works not (in this sense) but Believes: But Faith and Works as the
terms on which God will justify and save, of his own Love and Grace in Christ
Jesus, is absolutely necessary to Salvation: And further, Works are necessary,
for thereby we show forth the Life of Christ in our Mortal Bodies, and glorify
God in our Bodies and Spirits; who has done, and does all freely for us, and
in us.

Quest. Do not this seem to make Faith Col. 3. 31. Christ is all and in all.
And Romans 9. 32. They sought Righteousness, as it were by the Works of the Law.

Answ. It makes it no otherwise Copartners What God has joined together, let
no Man put asunder: God has joined Faith and Work as the Condition, and the
Sufferings of his Son our Lord Jesus, as the Meritorious satisfying Cause, and
his own Eternal Grace in Christ Jesus as the Foundation, and applying Cause; so
all these does concur in Unity, see Ephesians. 2 7. 8. Yet not of Works as any
deserving Cause, lest any should boast, verse. 9. Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6 7.

Yet Works are absolutely necessary to Salvation, as the Concomitant of true
Faith, and Condition of our Salvation, and Way that we must walk into Glory,
For without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. see Mat. 7. 24,
25, 26, 27. Romans 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. Rev. 22. 14.

There are four things which stand in Unity, and it greatly concerns Christians
to be instructed therein.

1. That all our Spiritual and Eternal Note four Things.
Good, is Founded in, and is the Effect of the Eternal Love of God; there is
all the Grace and Glory of the New Covenant bottomed, 1 Timothy 1. 9. Jer. 31. 3.

2. That Jesus Christ is the Way, and Meritorious Cause of the accomplishing of
this Salvation; God never intended to save any One by his Grace alone, without
Relation unto Jesus Christ crucified, Acts 4. 12. Though probably many
saved-Ones have dyed without Faith in Christ Crucified, before he came in the
Flesh, and had Suffered; yet in the great Day, all the saved Ones shall know
that their Salvation was effected by him.

3. That Faith is the terms on which we must have this Salvation, and so is (on
that account) absolutely necessary; for he that Believes not, must be Damned.

4. That Works as included in Faith, and may not be separated from it, are
absolutely necessary; likewise without which the Faith is naught, dead,
feigned, that will stand the Owners thereof in no steed in the day of Need.

Quest. Whether the Scripture do not hold

Answ. Actual Justification cannot be, He that Believes not, shall be Damned,
and Act. 13. 39. By him all that Believe are justified from all things, from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. It is a Doctrine the New
Covenant is unacquainted with, and therefore contrary to the wholesome Words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine that is according to Godliness.

It Is true, we Read Romans 8. 29, 30. of a Calling, and Justification to be from
Eternity; but we must understand that as in God's purpose to be done, not as
Actually done; for a purpose in God to justify, is not Justification; and the
Scripture will clear it self in this matter; Whom he foreknew, them he
Predestined to be Conformed to the Image of his Son. Note, Predestination was
to something in time, namely, to Conformity to Christ, which is not before
Believing; Whom he Predestined, them he Called; and Calling is in time, And
whom he Called, them he Justified; and whom he Justified, them he Glorified; or
as the Margin Reads it, them he is wont to Call, wont to Justify, wont to
Glorify; and take it in this Sense and It Is clear: But however, they were no
more Justified, than Called, than Glorified from Eternity, which must all
relate to Purpose, and to be Effected in time; they are called Sheep, John 10.
16. Children, Gal. 4. 3. Yet still in Purpose, Romans 4. 17. will clear us in
this matter, and many other things of like concern, that God calls things
that are not, as though they were. They are not in Actual being, yet are in his
Purpose to be in time; we may as well say God made the World before he did it,
and that the World was Drowned before it was, and that Christ was come in the
Flesh, and had Suffered, and was Raised, and Ascended, and come again to
Judgment, etc. before it was, or is, because it was God's Purpose, that all
these, and Multitudes more of things should be done, which is indeed contrary
to all Reason, and would overturn all Truth to say it is done: and as for
Actual Justification, when Christ Dyed, and Rose again; it is true, there was
Actual Satisfaction to Divine Justice, both given and taken, in order to
Justification; but Satisfaction is one thing, and Justification is another.

It Is true, if Christ had done for us, what he did, as our Surety, being bound
with us to pay our Debt, if we could not; and in so doing, had fully answered
the Law to which we were liable; then Actual Justification must have followed
Actual Satisfaction, without all terms of Believing and Obeying; for if the
Surety pay the Debt, and Cancel the Bond, in strictest Law, the Principle is
quit without any terms, and likewise no need of pardoning Grace, if the
Satisfaction was such, that Christ as our Surety, paid our Debt in strictest
Law-sence; but it is evident, that what Christ did for, and in behalf of
Sinners, was by voluntary Contracts between the Father and the Son, John 6. 38,
39. 2 Timothy 1. 9. and voluntarily undertaken by the Lord; and the Satisfaction
that Christ gave, and Justice took, was not the Payment of our Debt in kind, as
our Surety obliged to it, if we could not do it; neither was he the Person that
the Law might expect Satisfaction from; for the Law says, The Soul that
sins, that shall Die, and We all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of
God. So that the Satisfaction that Christ gave, was voluntarily given, and
graciously Received and Accepted, as Acts of Grace to us, both in the Son in
Suffering, and the Father in Accepting; and therefore it must come to us, as it
is indeed, Acts of Grace; and on the terms agreed on between the Father and the
Son, which are published in the Gospel; and it was no ways intended to acquit
the Sinners presently without any more ado; no, it holds true, That he that
Believes and is Baptized, shall be Saved; but he that Believes not, shall be
Damned. Therefore it concerns you to take heed how you understand Actual
Justification, to be, when there was Actual Satisfaction, lest you put an end
to the Terms and Conditions of Justification by the Law-Covenant of Grace, and
to the Pardoning Grace of God the Father, and so miss of Justification and Life
on the Terms propounded. This will make way for two Questions further.

1. Quest. What is the Reason that God should lay so much ^tress on Faith, as
that there should be no Justification, nor Salvation without it?

1. Answ. Because thereby we justify He that believes not, has made him a
Liar, 1 John 5. 10. but He that Receives his Testimony, has set to his Seal,
that God is True, John 3. 33. Which God takes well, and will justify those
that justify him.

2. It was the Design both of the Father and the Son, that this wonderful
Design of Grace to sinners, both in the Father and the Son, should come to us
in the Way of Faith and Obedience, that it might be valued, and thankfully
received; and that God and Christ might be thereby glorified, Ephesians. 1. 3. 1 Cor.
6. 20. Else we must suppose the Design to be to purchase a Liberty for Men to
sin and serve the Devil, and dishonor God; which would be Irrational, and
Irreligious to imagine.

3. Because God and Christ in this Work did not only Design to save Sinners
from Wrath, but to make them conformable to the Image of his Son; and the
Entrance of this Conformity is at the Entrance of this Grace, even the first
Work of Saving Faith; and in this Conformity, must Believers grow up more and
more, 1 Cor. 15. 48, 49. 2 Cor. 3. 18. and 4. 10, 11. Till they come to a
Perfect Man in Christ, their Head, Ephesians. 4. 13.

Quest. 2. How can it be just in God, to lay the Sin and Punishment of Sinners
upon a just Person that had not Sinned? 1 Pet. 3. 18. The Just for the Unjust
to bring us to God.

Answ. 1. God will clear his own Justice Romans 3. 26. That he might be Just, and
the Justifier of him that Believes in Jesus. Verse. 5. 6. Is God Unrighteous,
etc. God forbid: then how shall God judge the World, Genesis 18 25. Shall not the
Judge of all the World do Right?

2. Though it was not the same Persons that sinned, yet in the same nature is
the Redemption accomplished, Heb. 2. 14. For as much as the Children were
Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself took part of the same; so that
though not the same Souls that sinned, yet in the same Nature is the
Satisfaction made and accepted, Romans 8 3.

3. Christ did the Work voluntarily and freely for Sinners, and not by
Computation; otherwise there might not have appeared so much of Justice in it,
but he freely undertaking the Work, having Power to dispose of himself in the
Matter, Joh. 10. 17, 18. And God the Father accepting, it was a wonderful Act,
both of Justice and of Mercy; Justice in the Father in punishing the sins of
Sinners upon his own Son, and Mercy to us sinners, that we might have a Door of
Hope for Deliverance.

Quest. Whether this Justification imputed on Believing, be a perfect, and
complete Justification?

Answ. It is so from the Guilt and Psalm. 89 30, 31, 32, 33. Heb. 12. 6, 10. and
does judge them too; but it is, that they may not be Condemned with the World,
1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32.) For when sin is Pardoned, the Offender is free, and
stands to God as if he had not sinned, as to the Eternal Condemnation; which
was the great Design of God and Christ in this Transaction, Romans 8. 1. There
is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the Flesh but after the Spirit, Col. 2. 13. 1 John 4. 17.

Quest. Is this Righteousness and Justification by Faith, the Everlasting
Righteousness of Saints spoken of? Dan. 9. 24.

Answ. As it is a perfect Righteousness, the Blood of the Covenant; that is,
the Blood of the New and Everlasting Covenant, which is the Covenant of the
Glorious State, and so it is an Usher to the Everlasting Righteousness, that is
to be perfected in the Persons of the Saints: Justification here for the sake
of Christ, is our Righteousness unto Acceptance, Personal and Perfect Holiness
in our complete Conformity to Christ our Head, will be our Eternal (Personal)
Righteousness in Glory, our Righteousness by Faith here, will bring us to the
Righteousness of Holiness and Glory hereafter, Gal. 5. 5. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Col.
3. 4. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. (See Mr. Wilson, in this Life, there is a justifying
Righteousness, which is not had but by Faith, (such as Abraham had) it is
perfect, but not Inherent in us; it steeketh in Christ's Manhood as the
Subject, and is ours by Imputation, Romans 4. 4, 5, 6. There is a Righteousness
of Sanctification, or sanctifying Righteousness in this World, etc. This is
Inherent, but not Perfect, growing daily by degrees unto Perfection, Jam. 2.
21, 22. More briefly thus, there is a Righteousness in Heaven both Perfect and
Inherent, a Righteousness on Earth that is Perfect but not Inherent, which is
Justification, or Inherent, but not Perfect, which is Sanctification. Thus far
Wilson in his Scripture-Dictionary on the Word Righteous.) In a Word, that
which I believe in this Matter is, that the Imputed Righteousness of Christ
here by Faith, must abide for ever, as the Foundation of our Eternal Happiness,
that if ever that should fail, we must Perish: So that the Church in Glory
shall for ever admire Jesus Christ crucified; and know the Weight and Worth of
the Blood of the Covenants, and the Personal perfect Holiness of the Saints,
shall be their Everlasting Personal Righteousness in Glory.

Quest. Whether the Imputation of Justification to a Believer on the First Act
of True Faith, be Perpetual? And whether One ought to Believe the Pardon of all
Sin, past, present, and to come, as is the Apprehension of some?

Answ. 1. Though it is true, that the ground to conclude it certain to him, any
longer than he continues in the Faith, for he stands by Faith, Romans 11. 20.
Thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded, but fear, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye,
stand fast in the Faith etc. Heb. 3. 6, 12. Yet we ought to believe that God
will maintain our Faith, and keep us from Falling, Phil. 1. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
Jude, verse. 14. Else we could have no solid Comfort.

2. And although I know no ground to believe the Pardon of sins before they are
committed, and that:

1. Because I know no Scripture. Rule for such a Faith, it is an Unscriptural
Fancy, and Imagination.

2. The Scripture does direct us to the Pardon of sin after it is committed,
and the way in which we must expect to have it, (though not the cause) that is,
in a way of Confessing, (as has been before-minded,) 1 John 1. 9. Forsaking,
Prove. 28. 13. Prayer, Mat. 6. 12. Forgiving of others, Mat. 18. 35.

Yet 3. We ought to believe that God will pardon our sins on the Terms
mentioned, after they are committed.

Quest. Is not this Legal Doctrine? It is the Judgment of some, that a Believer
ought to believe the Pardon of all sins, past, present, and to come; and that
to pray for the Pardon of sin is Legal?

Answ. It Is true, it is Legal, i. e. according Heb. 4. 16.

We ought to believe that God will continue the Grace of Faith and give us
Repentance for sin, and will Pardon our sins in this way of Repentance; and
this is according to the Law of the New Covenant.

The Great day of Mercy and Pardon, will be at the Great day of Judgment; when
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Act. 3. 19. 2 Timothy 1.
18. Jude, verse. 21. Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus unto Eternal Life.
And this I understand to be the glorious Ministration of the New Covenant, Heb.
8. 12. For I will be Merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and
Iniquities will I Remember no more. Though Believers are interested in this
Covenant, and God pardons their Iniquities here, in the Order and Way
prescribed, that they shall not prove their Eternal Ruin, if we are not yet
under the perfect and glorious Ministration thereof; for the New Covenant in
the Perfection of it is Ministration, is the Covenant of the perfect
Restoration and Glory: God do now remember the sins of his People, so as to
correct them by various Ways, according to his own Will, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32.
1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. But then he will so Pardon the Iniquities of all his
People, as not to Remember them, so as to Correct or Punish them, Isa. 33. 24.
Mich. 7. 18, 19, 20.

Quest. Whether the Faith unto which Justification is imputed, be an Act of the
Old, or of the New-Man?

Answ. True and Saving Faith is an New Wine is not put into Old Bottles, 2 Cor.
5. 17. Old things are past away, behold all things are become New. It Is the Act
of the New Man, from a principle of Life wrought in the Soul by the Gospel,
flowing from the Second Man, the Lord from Heaven, who is a quickening Spirit.

Note, 1.* That there is, or may be a Faith without Life, John 2. 23, 24, 25.
and 8. 30, 31. Mat. 13. 20, 21. Luke 8. 13. 1 John 2. 19.

2. That that Faith to which Life is promised, is an effect if Life, Joh. 11.
26. Whosoever Lives and Believes in me, shall never Die; that is the Faith of
Life, that is an Effect of Life, 2 Cor. 4. 13. Having therefore the same Spirit
of Faith, etc. There is a Spirit of Faith; that is, the Spirit of the Gospel
that begets Life and Faith in Men, by the Word of Faith, called by our Lord,
The Birth from above; and a Begetting again by the Word of Truth, Jam. 1. 18.
and a being Born of God, 1 John 3. 9. and 5. 18. The New Covenant, or Law in
the Heart, Heb. 8. 10.

Quest. If the Case be thus, How shall I know that my Faith is Right? I shall
be left still in Doubt, and at a Loss in this Matter?

Answ. I must say to this as Christ By their Fruits you shall know them, Mat.
7. 16, 20. If thy Faith be the Effect of the Spirits Working, and Work of the
New Man: then see 2 Cor. 15. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature,
Old things are past away, behold all things are become New. New Light, and new
Life, new Affections, new Objects of Love, new Delights, suitable to the new
Birth, and new Man, Which is created after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. Gal. 5. 22, 23. Where the Fruits of the Spirit are
described, as effected in the true Believer; The Fruit of the Spirit is Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
etc. Where these Fruits of the Spirit are in Truth, there the Faith is Right
and Saving: But more particularly,

1. Where Truth of Faith is, there is Humility; this is a special
distinguishing Character of New Covenant Faith: when the Soul is truly Humbled,
it is the Property of the Effectual Working of the New Covenant-Spirit in the
Gospel, to lay the Creature low, Romans 3. 27. Where is Boasting then? It is
excluded; by what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. So that Faith
takes off all Boasting, where it is in Truth; and the Reason is, because the
true Believer sees, and knows, that he is a poor Nothing, wretched Creature
in himself; and that he must have all, both Pardon, Peace, and Life, from the
Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and that all he does, or can do, is no
Meritorious Cause of Grace or Life, of Pardon, or Peace; but that when he has
done all that he can, he is an Unprofitable Servant. And that his best Services
are Defiled with sin, and sinful Imperfections of Nature; and this makes the
Soul humble, and low in it self, to abhor it self; and this declares it
evidently to be under the Blessing pronounced by our Savior, Mat. 5. 3.
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Revel. 2.
9. and 3. 8. This is the Man to whom God will look. Isa. 66. 2. and with whom
He will dwell, Chap. 57. 15. and that shall dwell with him for ever. Zeph. 3.
12. to 18. For this grows not upon the Old stock of Nature, that is Proud and
Self-conceited; and if any New Covenant Gifts come into such a Soul, it is but
as the Putting of New Wine into Old Bottles, that will make them swell and
burst, first or last.

2. Where Truth of Faith is, there is Truth of Love; and therefore it behooves
every one to prove the sincerity of their Love, that great New Covenant Virtue,
and Heaven-born Grace, to love God and Christ above all, Mat. 22. 37. Ephesians. 6.
24. Mat. 10. 37. To love his Word and Will, and to Delight in it, and prize it
above all Worldly Treasure, Psalm. 119. 97, 103, 127. To love his People for his
Sake, because they are his, and bear his Image, and Likeness, 1 John 3. 14. and
4, 12.

3. Where Truth of Faith and Love is, there will be Willing, and Universal
Obedience to the Will of Christ; he that loves the Lord sincerely, will Obey
him Universally; it is in Vain to talk of Faith and Love without Obedience, see
Psalm. 119. 6. John 14. 15. 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. Whoever
accepts of Jesus Christ to be his Savior, must, and do Willingly consent
that he shall be his Lord to Rule him.

Quest. What is the Reason that God should bring Forth, Accept, and Apply unto
Men such a Righteousness unto Life, in the New Covenant which is not their own,
but of Grace, imputed and Accounted theirs on Believing, etc.

Answ. His own good Will and

1. No Desert in us; there was nothing in us, unless our Misery, that called to
the Depth of Mercy, Psalm. 42. 7, 8. Deep called to Deep: The Depth of our
Misery, that called to the Depth of Mercy, and the Love of Pity and Compassion
in God, brought forth this Free Ministration of Grace and Life by Jesus; and
this is rendered as the Cause, Joh. 3. 16. God so Loved the World, that he gave
his only Begotten Son, that whosoever Believes in him, should not Perish, but
have Everlasting Life. What he has Done for us on this Account is Love, and
likewise what he Works in us, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

And 2. His Eternal Council and Purpose, as well as his Eternal Love, Ephesians. 1.
11. The Apostle speaks of this Wonderful Mystery of Grace and Life, through
Faith in Christ; says, He works all things after the Council of his own
Will. And Isa. 25. 1. The Prophet speaking of the Restauration-Work, says,
Thy Councels of Old, are Faithfulness and Truth, all the Salvation-work of the
New Covenant, is the Effects of God's Ancient Purpose and Council.

3. Because else there could have been no Salvation for Man; our own
Righteousness could not have done it, at best, that could have been but as
filthy Rags, Isa. 64. 6. Though we had endeavored to Answer the Righteousness
of the Law, Acts 13. 39. Phil. 3. 9. It must have left us short of
Justification and Salvation, Joh. 8. 24. If you believe not that I am He, you
shall Die in your sins.

4. That so our Justification and Salvation might be sure, Romans 4. 16.
Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end the Promise
might be sure to all the Seed, etc. It is a Righteousness that will not Fail,
though we in many things, through Weakness fail, Romans 7. 18, 19. Jam. 3. 2. Yet
the Apostle Triumphs in this Righteousness, because it is sure, Romans 7. 25. and
8. 1. It Is called the Sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. and an Everlasting
Righteousness, Psalm. 119. 42. Thy Righteousness is an Everlasting
Righteousness, and thy Law is the Truth. Christ our public Person, having
undertaken the whole Work, both for us, and in us; it is very sure to those who
commit themselves to him, to be Saved, and Ruled by him, John 6. 38, 39. Phil.
4 13. Ephesians. 3. 16, Isa. 26. 5.

CHAP. XV. Of Gospel-Assurance; and whether Assurance of interest in Christ, in
Grace and Glory, may be attained in this life.
I Shall now come to speak something about Of assurance of Faith.
Gospel-assurance, or the assurance of Faith, whether the assurance of interest
in Justification and Salvation may be attained in this life, on this side the
possession of the purchased inheritance: and as for the assurance of Faith, we
must consider it in two particulars.

1. Assurance of Faith in the truth of the Assurance of Faith in the Doctrine.
Doctrine to be believed, and the truth and faithfulness of God therein, this
being the Faith to which Justification is promised, (as has been before
proved) and in this, assurance of Faith is requisite unto Justification and
life; for if we falter in the truth of the Doctrine, we must needs fail in the
whole; by believing the truth of the Doctrine of God, we justify him, and set
to our seal that God is true; and he will justify those who justify him: if
we believe not, yet be abides faithful, (to those who believe,) he will not,
he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. this being the Faith of Justification and
life, of this we ought to be fully assured, and infallibly, and undoubtedly
satisfied of the truth of God in his Word, and of all things related therein,
relating to Salvation by Jesus Christ Crucified, raised and ascended: Joh. 6.
69. We believe, and are sure, that thou art the Christ the Son of the Living
God, Chap. 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins; so
that Assurance in this is positively necessary, i. e. the full assurance of
Faith; this Peter Preached as necessary to Salvation, Act. 2. 36 therefore let
all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus,
whom ye have crucified, b^th Lord and Christ; 1 These. 1. 5. Our Gospel came not
to you in word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much
assurance, etc. to that end was those mighty gifts given to, and by the
Apostles in the Primitive time, for confirmation of the truth of the Doctrine
of the Gospel, Act. 5. 3. 1 Pet. 12. which confirmation stands firm to us, and
to all believers to the Worlds end; though, it is true, it is by the work of the
same spirit, in the same Doctrine that does establish our hearts therein, 2
Cor. 4. 13.

Yet in this it is possible for gracious souls sometimes to be under temptation,
and to want that assurance of Faith as is requisite in so weighty a matter as
this is; there is no temptation but a Christian may be assaulted with; consent
is the dangerous sin, and in this matter, to depart from the Faith, and to
reject Christ crucified, and Salvation by him, is the unpardonable sin, Heb.
10. 26. 29. and 6. 4, 5, 6.

Many gracious souls trouble themselves The unpardonable sin in two things.
about this sin, fearing themselves to be guilty thereof, through their
ignorance of the sin what it is: all sin (it is true) is against the Holy
Spirit, but the unpardonable sin, or sin unto death, consists especially in two
things;

1. A wil^ul departing from the Faith, and refusing and rejecting Salvation by
Jesus Christ crucified, by persons after they have professed Faith in him, and
obedience to him, according to those Scriptures before mentioned.

2. A wilful and malicious opposing of the Spirits workings, or any known truth
of the Lord Jesus, after conviction, that it is the Holy Spirit, and the truth
of the Lord Jesus; yet contrary to light and convictions of conscience, for
base, by, and fleshly ends to oppose, contradict, and blaspheme, is the sin
against the Holy Spirit; and this is it mentioned, Mat. 12. 31, 32. with v. 24.
but for Christians to meet with doubtings about the matters of Faith, (though
they ought to watch and war against it) they have no ground to draw sad
conclusions against themselves, though it is cause of humiliation. For support
in such cases, consider, 1. The Prophet, Psalm 89. 34. 19, to 37. the Lord
having made great and precious promises to David, and in him to Christ, on the
new covenant account, in which was much of the Gospel Grace; yet immediately
his Faith fails in the whole, as if God had made void his covenant, and broken
all his promises in that matter, ver. 38. 45. which has been fulfilled on the
natural seed, and worldly Kingdom, to visible appearance: but as it related to
Jesus Christ, it stands firm, and he is exalted upon the Throne, and the
Promise is sure to all thee seed. 2. John the Baptist, who had many high
confirmations from Heaven concerning the Lord Jesus, that he was the Christ; he
saw the sign upon him, which God gave him, by which he should know him, Joh. 1.
33. insomuch that he could say, ver. 34. 56. I saw, and bear record, that this
is the Son of God; and behold the Lamb of God, etc. and heard the voice from
Heaven saying, This is my beloved Son, etc. yet after all these testimonies and
assurances of his Faith in this matter, he being in Prison, comes to doubt
whether he was the Christ or not, Matt. 11. 3. Art thou him that should come,
or do we lo^k for another? which discovers that there was in John a doubt
whether he was the Christ or no: and this appears not only by the message or
question, but if we consider, 2. the time when he sent, when he was in Prison;
it was a Prison temptation: 2. By the answer of Christ to John to strengthen
him under this temptation, Go and show John those things that you do hear and
see, etc. 2. By his answer to the multitude, What went ye out to see, a r^ed
shaken with the wind? etc. which clearly imports, that John was shaken in his
Faith; and yet for all that, he was a Prophet, and more than a Prophet, v. 9.
Which clearly imports, that gracious souls may come under temptations and
doubts in matters of Faith of highest concernment, and yet be gracious still:
yea further, gracious persons may, through a sudden fit of fear, and surprisal
by temptation, not only doubt in the main matters of Faith* but even deny the
Faith they have been established in. The case of Peter is full in this matter,
who denied and forswore his Lord: but the difference lies here, the gracious
person may fall by a sudden surprisal of sinful fear, and weep bitterly for it
when it is done, and loves the Lord the more; but the other deliberately
resolved, and wilfully departs from the Lord, and will no more of him, but with
the dog returns to his vomit, and with the sow that was washed, to her
wallowing again in the mire: yet it deeply concerns souls to be heedful of such
temptations.

2. The second sort of Assurance, is the 2. Of Assurance of Interest.
assurance of interest in the Doctrine believed; and in speaking to this, I
shall show, 1. That there is a Gospel Assurance of interest in Grace and Glory
to be obtained in this World. 2. What this Assurance is, and how, and how far
it may be attained. 3. What it is that ordinarily hinders persons from
obtaining thereof.

1. That a well grounded Gospel Assurance 1. That it may be attained.
of Faith may be attained here in this life; it is that which many Saints have
attained, and a possibility is stated for all to attain it. 1. That many have
attained it, Job, though under afflictions, yet could say, I know that my
Redeemer lives, etc. whom I shall see for my self, etc. Job. 19. 25. 27. and
the Prophet could say, after a cloud of darkness, and temptation, Psalm. 73. 24.
26. Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory; and
Paul, Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me: and 2 Tit. 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the Faith, from henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge will give me at that day, etc.

But, 2. Lest it be objected by any, that these were extraordinary persons, and
therefore may doubt whether it be attainable by believers as such; a
possibility is stated for all to attain it: and this will appear in the
promise; it is promised (not Prophets, or Apostles, or Ministers as such) to all
Believers; he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; and John 6. 40.
and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son,
and believes on him, may have everlasting life, see Act. 16. 31. Romans 10. 9.
If God has made the promise of life to believers as such, without distinction,
he has stated a possibility to believers to obtain a Gospel assurance of their
Salvation.

2. It appears in that it was the Apostles work, (and should be the work and
endeavor of every faithful Minister) to help Believers in this matter, that so
they might attain a well groun^e^ comfortable assurance of their intere^t in
the grace of life; so Paul, Romans 3. 22. The righteousness of God, which is by
Faith of Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe; and Chap. 8. 1. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, wh^ walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit: 1 John 5. 13. These things have I
written to them that believe, etc. that ye may know that ye have eternal life,
etc. The Lord's design is not only to give his people eternal life, but he
would have them to know it for their comfort; and for that end he has stated
clear grounds in his Word, by which they may come to know it, as I shall
endeavor in the second place to show what it is, and ^ow it may be attained.

2. What this Assurance is, and how far it may be attained 1. What it is, it is
called in Scripture sometimes, the assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw
near in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 6. 11. The full assurance of hope, the
full assurance of understanding; Col. 2. 2. Confidence, boldness; Ephesians. 3. 12.
Heb. 10. 35. The confidence of hope; Heb. 3. 6. Whose house are we, if we hold
fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end. The
assurance of Faith, Hope, Confidence, is sometimes higher, and sometimes lower;
sometimes more, sometimes less, according to the souls exercise in the word of
Life, and work of Faith, and the working of the Spirit in the word of Faith;
for there is no such assurance to be attained here, as when we come to the
possession of the Kingdom and Glory promised, when all occasion of doubting
shall be done away: for the assurance here, is but the assurance of Faith,
Hope, and Confidence, which affords Peace, Joy, and Consolation: the Scripture
(and so must reason too) make a vast disproportion between the life of Faith,
and the life of present and full Enjoyment, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We live by Faith, and
not by sight, that is, not by present enjoyment; Heb. 10. 38. Now the just
shall live by Faith, that is, now in this side the Glory promised, in which it
may be supposed, is danger of drawing back: If any man draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him.

2. How it must be obtained; the assurance 2. How it must be obtained.
of Faith and hope must be attained by a reflect act of the soul, or a
resultancy, or conclusion from the condition, on which life is promised* to
instance, Mat. 5. 3. etc. are many precious promises made to persons that are
endowed with those Divine Virtues therein expressed, as, Blessed are the poor in
spirit, etc. Who so finds those Virtues in him, may, and ought to claim his
interest in the promises: so Mat. 16. 16. He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved; that is, he that believes, and obeys the Lord, (of which,
Baptism is the first, and ingageth to the whole duty of the Gospel) shall be
saved; I do believe and obey the Gospel, therefore I shall be saved: so 1 J^h.
5. 1. Whosoever does believe that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; this
Faith, if right, is accompanied with those other Virtues mentioned, as love to
God, love to his people, obedience to his will, and his Commandments are not
grievous, it gets victory over the World, etc. as ver. 2. By this we know we
love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his Commandments; ver. 3.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous: that is, they are not grievous to Believers;
ver. 4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World; and this is the
victory that overcomes the World, even your Faith. What the World is that
Faith overcomes, the Apostle had before explained, Chap. 2. 15, 16, 17. Faith
gets the victory, by fixing the soul on better objects than the World is:
Heb. 5. 9. He is become the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey
him. Now the resultancy from the whole is, I do believe that Jesus is the
Christ, and my Faith is accompanied with love to God above all, and do love his
people for his sake; and do sincerely desire to know and do his will, and keep
his Commandments; they are not grievous to me, but my failing therein, is my
grief; and by this Faith I have overcome the World, and am dead to it; and it
is my real desire and endeavor to abandon all things that are contrary to the
will of the Lord, to abhor that which is evil, and to cleave to that which is
good; therefore I am born of God, therefore I have an interest in the new
covenant, this is the way appointed of God, in which they may make their
Calling and Election sure, if they give diligence to it, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and
these are the things that John write in his Epistle to them that did believe,
that they might know that they had eternal life, 1 John 5. 13. and according to
our abounding in those Divine Virtues, or not abounding, so will our assurance
be, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

Quest. Is not Assurance the immediate Ephesians. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 1 22?

Answ. 1. It Is without all question to me, evidence, which relates neither to
word, nor work of the Spirit, but some apprehended over-powrings, or ^rong
persuasions without all grounds, ^rong confidence and consolation, but knows
not from whence it comes, can give no reason thereof, but supposes that it
(...) be from the Spirit: this may (...) (...)on of our own spirits, or the
(...) who can transform himself into an Angel of l^ght; and I fear many souls
have miscarried on this account.

2. The assurance and comfort of Saints Romans 15. 13. The God of Hope fill you
with joy and peace in believing: as, 1 Pet. 1. 8. What ever comes in any other
way, may prove a ^ancy, and Faith in this matter must have a relation to the
word of Grace, or the work of the Spirit suitable to some word, or both, in
which is found the sealings of the Spirit, it must be in and by the word and
work. The Spirit was promised and given for a twofold Seal. 1. To seal the
truth of the Doctrine, to be believed by its gifts and mighty works, in and by
the Ministers thereof; and 2. To seal the truth of our Faith relative to
interest in that Doctrine, and that is by the word and work of the same Spirit

1. By the word, Joh. 16. 13, 14. Where ^he Spirit seals by the Word.
the manner of the Spirits work is (...)ed; that is, he shall guide you into
truth, ^e (...) not speak of himself, he shall show you things to come, he
shall glorify me, he shall take of mine, and show it unto you; so that the way
of the Spirits working and leading into truth is, in opening the Word, and
showing the goodness of the Word, the Doctrine of the Gospel which leads us to
Christ; for he shall glorify him, and take of his, and show it to the soul;
and there is nothing of Christ to be showed to us, more than is revealed in,
and by the Word: so that the Spirits sealing is in, and through the Word; and
this Believers have experience of, more or less, (of the Spirits sealing
through the Word, read, heard, and applied) to their joy and comfort; for the
Spirit comforts, by opening Christ, and the blessed truths of the Gospel
relating to him, by his Word, and his Ordinances appointed for that end.

Quest. In what manner does the Spirit

Answ. Sometimes the Spirit of Christ and the show of the sealing testimony (as
apprehended) lies rather in the manner than the matter; Satan may transform
himself therein, and deceive the soul: I have known some looking so much after
the manner of receiving evidence in this way, as that they thought scarsly any
Scripture there, or worth a looking into, unless brought in in this way, which
is a great and dangerous temptation. But if at any time the Spirit of the Lord,
do in distress supply the soul in this way, it may be known; 1. When the
Scripture is suitably applied to the souls condition; 2. When the fruit thereof
is thankfulness to God, humility, and an humble walk with God, and with his
people: for delusions in this case are accompanied with bad effects, as pride,
self-exalting, neglect of duty to the Lord, and slighting the Word, (unless it
be in this manner of revelation, as it is called;) but to the Believer, every
word of the Lord is pure and precious, and the Spirit meets with sealing
evidences sometimes in one word, and sometimes in another, from the openings of
the Grace and Glory of the new covenant, with the applications thereof; so that
the soul can say on good ground, this is my promise (wherever it finds it) my
Grace, my Glory, and the Lord is my Portion, my God in whom I trust. 2. By his
work in the soul.


2. The Spirit seals Assurance, by his work, in the hearts of Believers; as by
his Word, he leaves such an impression upon the soul, of his own likeness, by
which the whole man is in a measure formed into the Image and likeness of
Christ, that, upon examination, the Believer finds the Spirit of Christ is
there; he finds Faith, and Love, and Humility, and Meekness, and Obedience, and
Joy in the Lord; from whence the Believer cl^arly concludes, that the Spirit of
the Lord is there: it is the Spirit of Adoption, that inables those, in whom it
is, to cry Abba Father; that is, it discovers the Adoption and Sonship to the
soul; and this does not import (always) an undoubted assurance, yet the soul
can cry it out, cry Abba Father; so it is, in both Scripture that speaks of
this truth, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. It Is a Metaphor taken from children, who,
when their Father frowns, or hides his face, yet they lose not their relation,
though they cry, yet their cry is Father, Father; so gracious souls that have
the Spirit of Adoption, though but low in their apprehensions, yet they cry it
out; Father, Father; and claim their interest and relation still.

Obj. In the same Scripture it is said, for ye have not received the Spirit of
bondage to fear, again, but the Spirit of Adoption, etc? Which seems to import,
that where the Spirit of Adoption is, all doubting and fears is done away: and
John says, 1 John 4. 18. That perfect love casts out fear.

Answ. 1. We are to understand, that the i. e. between the old and new
Covenants, and the differing spirit that each tended to; the first, with all
its sacrifices, which could not make the come^s thereunto perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience, Heb. 9. 9. and 10. 1. had a natural tendency to
leave them under bondage and fear, there being a remembrance of sin every year,
when the sacrifice was over, they must necessarily be under fear till another
sacrifice.

But the Gospel ministration is a ministration of Liberty, Life, and Peace, by
that one Sacrifice once offered for all, that there is no cause of fear for
need of another Sacrifice; so that the spirit of the Gospel in the ministration
thereof, has its natural tendency to take away legal fear out of the hearts of
Believers, where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, that is, from the
spirit of bondage: it does not import that the Saints are freed from the filial
fear of God, nor from fear of sinning against him, nor from having an holy fear
of themselves, lest they come short, Heb. 4. 1.

And it is true, perfect love casts out fear; that is, that fear which has
torment, the legal fear; and it is true likewise, that if we did or could live
up in the perfect apprehension of the love of God in Christ to us, (which could
perfect our love to him) we could not fear the legal fear, you cannot fear,
that one whom you believe do entirely love you, will do you hurt; so live in
this love of God, and you cannot fear this fear, that is, you cannot fear that
he will damn you, and destroy you after all the Gospel Grace and manifestations
of his love.

But yet for all this, you may fear, and you will have need (sometimes) to fear
your own naughty hearts, and sinful nature; and to take heed of an evil heart
of unbelief, to depart from this Living and Loving God.

So that the sum of all is this, that Believers under the Gospel are freed from
the old covenant spirit of bondage, and under that notion cannot fear again,
because they are by one Sacrifice for ever perfected; they need not another to
take away their sins, if they live up much in the love of God, they cannot fear
that God will hurt them, but do them good.

But when their fear works so high as to disclaim their relation, that is
besides the Spirit of the Gospel, unless it be as a punishment of some former
or present sin, thereby to work the soul to a more watchful frame, how it walks
for time to come.

Now this new Covenant assurance, as it admits of degrees, so in the highest
degree it admits of imperfection, and reaches not so far as sight and
enjoyment; so that in the same souls may be high confidence and comfort at one
time, and flagings and fears at another; not fears of Gods love and
faithfulness, nor the all sufficiency of that one Sacrifice, but fear of our
own deceitful hearts, and naughty natures; and the reason is, because (as I
said before) our assurance depends not only on the truth and faithfulness of
God in his Word, but likewise on the truth of the work of Grace in us, and that
work being imperfect as in us, our assurance must needs be something like unto
it; but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall
be done away; then no more sin nor sorrow, no more fear of coming short of that
rest.

Quest. If our assurance must come in

Answ. 1. This is the most certain and infallible

2. Those high (supposed) assurances, without relation to the Word or work of
the Spirit, (if true) may fail as much, and more than the other, unless souls
will live for ever under one single sealing evidence, (as I fear too many do so
neglect the daily exercise of Faith,) or expect daily renewed sealings, which I
suppose are not ordinary in this way; whereas those Divine Virtues of the
Spirit to which the promise is made shall never totally fail, in truly gracious
souls; though through the prevalency of corruption they may be clowded, yet the
soul may through all the clouds of darkness, see something of the Divine stamp
left and remaining on the heart: if sometimes (to apprehension) there should
appear nothing but a sense of sin, and bitter weeping for it, with a heart
longing after Christ, as was sometimes the case of Peter, yet this is
something, yea very much of the Divine impression, and so it appears to be the
sure way for solid peace, and salvation in the end.

3. What it is that ordinarily hinders 3. The hindrances of Assurance.
Christians from obtaining this assurance; though first* I fear that many
Christians content themselves with an ungrounded assurance, and such need to be
startled out of their groundless security: and, 2. Others scarce trouble
themselves about the matter, but content themselves in the form of the Gospel,
leaving the matter of assurance of interest to those that will trouble
themselves about it: but it is that which does concern every true Christian
(both for his own comfort, and the comfort or conviction of others) to be able
to give a reason of his hope, a grounded and comfortable assurance of interest
in Christ and Grace being of that worth; for a comfortable walking with God
here, (though not the essence of Christianity) I shall endeavor to state some
of the lets and hindrances, that Christians may escape them, and obtain the
mercy.

The first let or hindrance I shall mention, Lets and hindrances of obtaining
Assurance.
arises from the confused notions about the way of obtaining thereof, which
have occasioned many miscarriages; some to conclude that they have it, when
it is to be feared they do mistake, and if so, they deceive themselves, and
others, serious seeking souls, sent with sorrow to their graves, for want of
right direction from the Word of Life in this matter.

1. It has been by many supposed, that 1. Supposing the Faith of interest to
be the Faith of Justification.
the Faith of assurance of interest, has been the Faith of Justification; and
hence persons falling sho^t in this, conclude that they have no Faith at all,
but that they are in a state of unbelief: I have known some to lie in sorrow,
complaining they had no Faith, and so under fears of perishing, because they
could not believe their own inter^st, being unskilled in the right way of
making it up to their comfort; I have asked them, do you believe in truth that
Jesus is the Christ? they answer, yea, then you are born of God, Joh. 5. 1. Do
you believe the truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning the life and
salvation held forth therein by Jesus Christ crucified; (yea) then you have
that Faith to which Salvation is promised: Mar. 16. 15, 16. 1 John 5. 10, 11,
13. Do you believe with your heart that God has raised Christ from the dead?
if you do, you cannot but believe that he died for our sins, according to the
Scripture, (yea) then you shall be saved, Romans 10. 9. Are you in good earnest,
willing to be saved by Christ* and to be ruled by him as your Lord, and to
serve him in all things? Answ. yea, with my whole soul, if I may be accepted;
then you have the Spirit of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 3. Do you love God and Christ
above all, and his people for his sake? yea, I love God and Christ (I hope)
above all, and desire to love them more, and his people, because they are his,
and his image is stamped upon them then you are born of God, 1 John 3. 14, 19,
and 4, 7, 12. And do you see your self vile, are you poor in your own eyes, and
do you see and believe, that if ever you be saved, it must be by the free Grace
and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ? Yea, I do find it so to be with me, then
yours is the Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And what Faith is it that you would have? will
the Faith of Abraham the Father of us all do it? He believed God, and it was
accounted to him for Righteousness, Romans 4. 3. Will the Faith to which
Justification and Life is promised do it? why that you have, and yet conclude
that you have no Faith: thus many poor souls lie grovelling on the ground,
supposing they have no Faith, when in truth they are rich in Faith, and heirs
of that Kingdom which God has promised to them that love him, Jam. 2. 10. and
from such a self-examination may doubting souls come to see that they indeed
have Faith, even the Faith of Gods Elect, and be able to give a reason of their
Hope both to themselves and others.

But for persons to suppose, that the Faith of interest is the first and only
Faith of Justification and Life, is according to the Proverb, to set the Cart
before the Horse, which must needs go heavily, and bring disconsolation and
confusion to the soul.

2. Others talk at such a rate about the 2. Supposing it to come in in some
unknown way and manner.
attaining of Assurance, as if it must drop down from Heaven into the heart in
some wonderful, unknown way, immediately from the Spirit, with such
over-powrings of consolation, as if they were in Heaven already, such as scarsly
any serious Christians have experienced; which have amazed serious souls out of
their hope and confidence, having no experience of such a thing; and others it
may be cheated with something like this, with a foolish confidence of assurance
of Heaven, ordinarily attended with Pride and Self-conceit, and neglect of an
humble walk with God, which is the way for Christians to walk into Glory;
whereas solid and sound assurance must come by believing, and the Spirits
sealing is in that way, and the highest attainment of Joy and Peace is by
believing; what comes in any other way, comes we know not whence, and may lead
us we know not whether.

3. Others will have no Faith of assurance, 3. Others some immediate
application of some Scripture.
unless it be from some Scripture immediately and powerfully brought to them by
the Spirit to the satisfying of their souls, and silencing all doubts in the
matter, and this they account the sealing o^ the Spirit. To this I say, 1. That
it is mercy when the Lord does bring Scripture to remembrance, to his people,
suitable to their conditions, for their comfort and instruction; I doubt not
but that God does instruct, support and comfort his people in this way: yet, 2.
This is not the Scripture way in which souls may undoubtedly read their
interest: it is true, it is matter of meditation and consolation to gracious
souls, to have the Word brought into their remembrance, but not the way
prescribed by which they may undoubtedly conclude their interest.

2. The Scripture says, that we should be able and ready to give a reason of
our hope; now this is no sufficient reason, according to the Scripture, either
to satisfy our selves or others, that I had such a Scripture brought home to
me at such a time, in which the assurance of my interest in Grace and Life was
sealed: this singly of it self may be true or false, if there be not the
rational Scripture ground, that is, the true work of Grace; it is a hundred to
one but it is false and delusive, therefore, at a distance from the work of the
Spirit, it is no sure ground; for Satan can make use of Scripture to deceive
souls. So that I say, that evidence that may admit of doubt, and if the party
receiving it, be void of those evidences I have minded, then it is undoubtedly
false, and therefore not overconfidently to be built upon.

But in the other way, of concluding our interest from the work of the Spirit
in us, suitable to the Word without us, when there is an answerableness in this
matter, it is surely of God, and in this the Devil will not, cannot deceive you;
it works you more to love, and be like the Lord: but the other, if not right,
it serves rather to harden, and to cure miscarriages ever after. Well, says
such a soul, I had such a word brought in at such a time, in such a manner, in
which I was sealed: I will never let go that, it was of God, I fear neither
Devil nor men, etc. Though the right use of former experiences is precious, yet
I fear this has proved to the damage of many souls.

And on the other hand, gracious and tender souls that has the root of the
matter in them, understanding that this is the supposed way to get assurance;
and having no experience thereof in themselves, put their souls upon the rack
of doubts and fears without cause, fearing they have no Faith, being afraid to
draw conclusions from right Gospel grounds: O, says the soul, I never had
experience of such a sealing evidence, therefore I fear all is naught.

4. Some talk of assurance at such a rate, not only as if it must come in some
strange immediate way from the Spirit, but likewise it must come to whom, and
when he pleases, and that it is retained from some for ever; that is, in this
World, and as if it were reserved to sometimes, and for some persons, etc. And
this puts tender and serious souls to a doubt in the matter, where ever they
may meet with any comfortable assurance of the love of God to their souls, etc.

To this I say, it is true it is the gift of God, but no other than the Spirit
and Faith is, and if any one has not the Spirit of God, and Faith, he is none
of his; and whoever can assure himself that he has the Spirit of Christ, is
sure of all; for God no more withholds assurance from any of his, than he does
his Spirit, and the virtues thereof; but it is as common for all Saints as
believing, though all Saints are not so commonly instructed herein: God is no
respecter of persons, he would have all his little ones to have the
consolations of the Gospel: it is true, there are causes why God may hide his
face from his people in this matter, but that relates to themselves as the
cause, which is the second hindrance of assurance.

2. Sin proves a great hindrance to the 2. Sin proves an hindrance to assurance
comfortable assurance of the Saints; and that, 1. Sometimes through mistake;
and, 2. Sometimes justly. 1. Sometimes through mistake; for indeed sin, if seen
and repented of, cannot justly hinder assurance, for to such souls there is the
promise of mercy, they are under the promise of the pardoning Grace of the
Gospel, 1 John 1. 9. The remembrance of old sins, or new sins, if repented of,
should not hinder, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

2. Sin sometimes justly hinders assurance, when it is regarded in the heart,
and unrepented of; it stares in the conscience, and fills the soul with fear;
and no wonder, if sin be harbored secretly in the soul, whether it be pride,
covetousness, oppression, disobedience, neglect of duty, loss of first love,
etc. one of these two things must necessarily follow; either, 1. a dull
insensible, hardened frame, without all fear or doubts: or, 2. Clouds and
darkness, doubts and fears do arise about interest, and that justly too, till
the soul do repent, forsake, and turn to the Lord; If I regard iniquity in my
heart, God will not hear my Prayer; there is the same reason as well as rule,
for a Believer to repent of sin, before he can have true Peace, as for a sinner
in the first work of Conversion; for sin is the same still wherever it is;
and on this account it is, that God does hide himself from his people, and
leave them under affliction and sorrow, Deuteronomy. 32. 20. And on this account it
is, that persons may have a comfortable assurance, and lose the sense thereof
again, by renewed acts of sin, without repentance.

3. Hindrance is, mistakes in the manner 3. Is misunderstanding the Spirits
working.
and method of the Spirits working, and so of witnessing in some cases, proves
a great hindrance to Christians in their assurance; by reason of which,
gracious souls take up that against themselves, as an hindrance, which is one
of the most assured grounds of the truth of Grace, and of the Spirits working;
to instance, Joh 16. 8, 9, 11. The Spirits work is to convince the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; now when the Spirit in the Word effects
this work in the hearts of sinners, when they see themselves to be sinners, and
miserable in themselves, and that they are unrighteous, and that their own
righteousness is nothing worth, and that there is righteousness in Christ for
sinners, because he is gone to the Father to make good his suffering on that
account, and of the certainty of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is
judged; this work being effected in them, they sink in their spirits, and think
they are undone, that there is no hope of mercy, when they are in the highway
of mercy and the Spirits working in order to their eternal safety. Hard it is
to suffer the loss of all things, not only their sins, but their own
righteousness, and to submit themselves to the righteousness of Christ, Phil.
3. 7, 8, 9. and this not only in the first work of Conversion, but after some
progress in Christianity; many gracious persons are exceeding liable to this
mistake: O, says the gracious soul, (that lives most in self-examination, and
so in the knowledge of himself, and the badness of his own nature) I find such a
deadness in my nature, such an indisposedness to that which is good, etc. that
I fear all is naught, and that it is not for such a one as I to think that I
have any thing of good in me. This, I know, is the case and complaint of many
gracious souls, whereas this is one of the most undoubted evidences of being
possessed with the Spirit of Christ, and so in a state of Grace, Romans 8. 9, 10.
The Apostle having asserted this truth, That if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his; but how shall I know that I have the Spirit of
Christ? The Apostle answers this question; If Christ be in you, the body is
dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness; that is,
if the Spirit of Christ be in you, it has discovered your own death to you;
you see that there is nothing but death in your own nature, because of sin, but
the Spirit is life, because of righteousness; that is, if the Spirit of Christ
be in you, it has discovered your own death to you; you see there is nothing
but death in your bodies by reason of sin, but the righteousness of Christ, the
Grace, the Mercy, the pardon of sin for the sake of Christ, is the life of your
Spirits; this is a certain evidence of the Spirits work, when it causes souls
to be sensible of their own death, and the life that is in Christ Jesus, and
that not only in their first conversion and turning to the Lord; but it keeps
up, and carries on that work in the hearts of Believers all the days they
live in this world, Col. 3. 3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God: not only dead to sin, but you do, or should know, that there is
nothing but death in your nature, as of your selves, and your life is in Christ
hid there; so that sometimes Christians themselves that are interessed in it
can scarce see it, or believe it, altogether hid from wicked men; they are
strangers to it, and as for the glory thereof, hid from all Saints, till Christ
who is our life do appear, then shall they appear with him in Glory, v. 4. that
this is so sure a character of the Spirits working, does further appear, Romans
7. 18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. O, but
when Christians are taught this lesson, they think they are undone, and so
indeed they are in themselves, but it is an high discovery of the Spirits
working; the flesh never did, never will discover its own badness; but the
flesh will be always priding it self, and puffing it self up, though
altogether without cause; but, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 5. 3. That is, those who are sensible of their own
poverty, and want of all good in themselves, that what of virtue is in them, is
of the Lord, and from him, and that their righteousness and life is of free
Grace in our Lord Jesus Christ; so that this (it is evident) has been a
needless hindrance in the way of the Christians comfort, and is rather a strong
ground to confirm them in the truth of their partaking of Gospel Grace. 4.
Hindrance is, mistake about the end of seeking.


4. Hindrance is, that mistaken notion amongst many Christians, that is, that
we must seek God and his Glory only in all our seekings, services and
sufferings, and not any thing for our selves; O, says the gracious soul, I
cannot, I dare not lie, I find that I cannot but have respect to my self, and
mine own salvation; if that were left out, I should sink and fail in the work,
and that makes me fear that it is not right, whatever I do.

Doubtless this is a mistaken notion, and contrary to the very drift and scope
of the Gospel; for the great design of God in the work of Redemption, next his
own Glory, was the salvation of poor sinners; and to suppose that God would
have his people to leave out their own good and salvation in the Gospel work,
which he himself has so much designed in the whole work of Gospel Redemption,
is contrary to all (both divine and humane) reason.

1. The encouragement to believing, obeying, and suffering is this,
Justification, Act. 13. 39. Salvation, Mar. 16. 16. Act 16. 31. Romans 2. 10.
Augmentation of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. And certainly God would never have
stated these as encouragements, if he would not have his people to have respect
thereto.

2. This is that which has been the encouragement of the Saints throughout all
generations, and that which they had in their eyes, to which they had respect,
and which they sought after, Matt. 19. 27. Peter's question, with Christ's
gracious answer, We have left all, and followed th^e; and what shall we have?
Heb. 11. 13, 14, 15, 16. describes the Patriarks to be seeking a Country, and
so to have respect to the recompense of reward, and God's owning them therein;
wherefore (even for seeking an heavenly Country according to the will of God)
he was not ashamed to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a
City, ver. 24, 25, 26. Moses left Egypt, and Pharaoh's house, and refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh' s Daughter, and chose rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt;
for he had respect unto the recompense of reward, 1 Cor. 9. 24. to 27. Romans 2.
7. Heb. 10. 34. 36. Rev. 22. 14. with multitudes of like Scriptures that might
be mentioned in this matter. In all which it appears, that it is the will of
God, and has been the design of the Saints in all ages, to be seeking after
their own spiritual and eternal welfare: and indeed it is one of the first
exhortations of Christ to his, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof, etc. and the reward is that which all true Believers
must and do believe, Heb. 11. 6.

To clear this matter further, I shall mind 4 Things to clear this matter.
four things, 1. That we are to seek God and his Glory first and chiefly,
because he is the chiefest good; and in seeking him, and finding him, we find
all; yet not to leave out our selves, and our own good in seeking him, it is
for his worth that we seek him, that we may be able in truth to say as the
Prophet, Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my Portion, says my soul, therefore will I
hope in him; for when once the soul has an interest in Christ, and in God, he
has an interest in all, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life, 1 Cor.
3. 22, 23.

2. He that truly seeks the honor of God and Christ, seeks his own honor
in the right way; he that takes care of the honor of God and Christ in the
right way, (that is, in believing, loving, and obeying the truth,) God will
take care for his honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. the Lord says, He that honors me, I
will honor.

3. If we seek our selves in the way that God has appointed, we cannot
miscarry, that is, in the lose of our selves, and cleaving to the Lord alone,
expecting all from Grace, in the way of Faith and Obedience, not for any
meritorious good that is in us; that when we have done all we can, see and say,
that we are unprofitable Servants, and cry Grace, Grace, to the whole work,
both for us, and in us, then we rightly seek God and Glory.

4. It Is true in one sense, that we may not seek our selves by any means, that
is, our own esteem and glory here among men, or to be lifted up in our own
minds, that is, fleshly, and of the first man, that must be mortified, as a
dangerous and soul-ruining, and God-dishonouring evil, that Christians are too
much by nature inclined to, through the remainders of the old corrupt nature;
and must be watched and warded against; self-wisdom, self-will, selfesteem,
self-boasting, and self-glorying, is to be abandoned; but in seeking after and
obeying of God and Christ, To seek glory, honor, and eternal life, is so
consistent with the truth of the Gospel, that it is impossible to sever them,
whatever souls foolishly and vainly imagine to the contrary; What God has
joined together, let no man put asunder.

5. Hindrance of souls assurance is, when 5. Hindrance, when souls trouble
themselves about Gods Decrees.
they trouble themselves about the Decrees and Counsel of God, whether Elected,
or not Elected; if they are not Elected, then it is in vain for them to believe,
etc.

This is not a work for Christians to trouble their minds about, neither are
they like to have the assurance of Gospel consolation, while they make this
their first work: I shall for help in this matter, prescribe these seven things.

1. That Christ died for all, and that the 7 Things considered in this matter.
love of God in the Gospel is truly propounded to all, and that all are brought
under it, either in a way of life or death; life, if they repent, believe, and
obey it; death, if they re^ect it, 1 Tit. 2. 6. Heb. 2 9. 1 John 4. 14. Joh. 3.
16, 17. Mar. 16. 15, 16.

2. That all are invited, and required to believe and obey the Gospel, with
gracious promises of acceptance, by him that is truth it self, and cannot lie,
nor will he deceive those that come to him, Isa. 55. 7. Matt. 11. 28. Acts 17.
30. 1 Tit. 2. 4.

3. There is the same reason for all to halt, and doubt in this matter, as for
any one; and yet we find not any one mentioned in the Scripture, among the many
thousands of Believers. that made a doubt on this ground, no, not of the worst
of sinners: those that had a hand in the Crucifying of Christ, Acts 2. 23. 36,
37, 41. They gladly received the word of Salvation, not questioning the matter
of Election, but glad, with the good news of Salvation, on the terms
propounded; with many like instances of Gentiles as well as Jews, Acts 13. 48.
And the Apostles did not propound Election as any hindrance to the Faith of
any, but assures them, (wherever they came) that on the terms of the Gospel
they should be saved; Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved.

4. Nor did the Apostles mention Election to Believers after conversion, with
any design to stumble them in the matter of Faith relating to their own
interest, but that they might the more admire Grace, and live to the God of
Grace, that they might not sacrifice to their own net, nor take the Glory of
the work of God wrought in them, and for them, to themselves, but that they
might give the glory of all to him, and live to him in the enjoyment thereof,
Romans 11. 6, 33. Ephesians. 1. 3* 4.

5. Nor has God done any act (contrary to the free tenders and invitations of
the Gospel) that may tend to discourage, or hinder any from believing and
obeying the Gospel, that they may be saved; God's Electing some, that he might
not lose his design wholly in the restoration work, is no bar to hinder any,
because he affords means and helps to all; so that men shall one day
acknowledge, that God is righteous, and their damnation is of themselves, and
of their own choice; I would, but ye would not; see Prove. 1. 20. to the end.

6. Take heed of entertaining such thoughts about the Decrees of God, (which
are secret and hidden) as are inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Gospel, his
revealed will; for all notions about the Decrees, really inconsistent with the
Doctrine of Grace, and promise of life on the terms of the Gospel, are
dishonorable to God, and dangerous to your souls; therefore look you to the
revealed will, believe and obey that, and you are safe.

7. You are to know, that the way by which you shall know your Election, is by
believing and obeying the truth; and sure enough it is, that if you continue in
a state of unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel, you are not Elected; For he
that believes and obeys, it is, that shall be saved; but he that believes
not, shall be damned.

O therefore be wise, and stumble not where God has laid no stumbling stone,
but fall in with the truth, believe and obey the Gospel, and you shall be
saved; you are under all the precious promises of life, which are all yea and
amen (certain and sure) in Christ Jesus, who is become the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all those that obey him, Heb. 5. 19.

The sixth and last hindrance I shall mention, 6. Hindrance is, the loss of Hope.
is, the cancelling, and striking out of hope out of the Believers Book, or
turning it into another thing than it is, making new covenant hope to be
nothing else but the expectation of the soul, expecting and looking for that
which Faith believes; whereas hope and expectation are two distinct Virtues;
expectation is the daughter both of Faith and hope; Faith believes the truth,
hope puts in for an interest, then comes expectation of the full enjoyment
thereof.

This of Hope, is a step for the soul to stand upon, till it attain assurance;
but when this is taken away, and the soul supposes there is no degree short of
assurance, and finding that something difficult, especially to step into it at
one step, lies grovelling on the ground without hope; but this we are to know,
that Hope is a blessed Gospel virtue, when rightly grounded; and that
Christians may, and should exercise it in this very case; step up into Hope
first, and there stand and wait till assurance come, that will come in by
degrees, in the souls constancy in the Faith and sincere walk with God,
improving Divine Grace received, and acquaintance with the right way of
attaining of assurance: it is true, that Hope as well as Faith admits of
degrees; sometimes there is the full assurance of Hope, which is the next step
to the full assurance of Faith; we are saved by Hope as well as by Faith, Romans
8 24. And Hope is the anchor of the soul, to hold us firm and steadfast to the
Lord, Heb. 6. 19. Therefore be sober, and hope to the end, and cast not away
your confidence: if you never get above a well grounded hope of an interest in
Grace and Glory, you are safe. See the precious promises made to this Grace, or
rather to the persons in whom it is, Ps. 31, 24. and 33. 18, 19, and 147. 11.

Quest. How may I know that my Hope

Answ. 1. When it is rightly grounded, hope to be saved without any work of
Grace at all in the heart, and thus deceive themselves with a vain hope, can
give no reason thereof, but God is merciful, and Christ died for sinners, and
they be Christians, and hope to be saved, although altogether strangers (if not
enemies) to the work of Grace.

Others hope arises from a mere rational conversion from some external acts of
sin, to some external duties, and so (it may be) to another, though not a new
life, altogether without a new heart, and thence hope to be saved.

Now the well grounded hope of the Gospel, must be on the same that Faith of
interest is, on the same grounds must souls get first into hope, that is, the
word and promises of the New Covenant, and the work effected in the heart;
where there is an harmony in word and work, there is a stable ground for hope;
as there is no stable ground for hope from the Word without the work, so is
there no ground for hope from the work without the Word; but when the soul can
say, I have believed, repented, and obeyed the Gospel, and it is its desire and
endeavor to persevere therein to the end, there is a Gospel ground for hope of
an interest in the precious promises of the Gospel.

2. From the effects of this hope, to increase and strengthen it, when the soul
is sincerely prosecuting the design of Holiness, and desires, and endeavors
to be more like Christ daily, and less like the World, it is an undoubted
discovery that the hope is right; 1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself as he is pure. And a wonderful discovery, I fear, it is
of the vanity of the hopes of multitudes of professors, that think themselves
gotten above the World, whose great design is to be like the World; great and
rich, like the World; proud and vain in their fashions, like the World; dead
and lifeless to the power of Religion, like the World: but where is the man,
where is the woman to be found, who designs conformity to Jesus Christ, and
mourns in the sense of nonconformity that yet remains, and rejoices that a
time will come, that the vile body shall be changed, and fashioned like unto
his glorious body? He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is
pure.

CHAP. XVI. A further Discovery of the New Covenant, and Life of Faith.
OF this much has been spoken in what has been before minded; yet I shall
speak a little more distinctly to it in this place.

1. The Gospel, or New Covenant, are 1. Of the Gospel, or New Covenant.
terms equivalent, and intends one and the same thing in substance; the New
Covenant is so called, because it is the Covenant of the renewed Estate, of the
new Life, and deliverance out of that estate of sin and death into which we
fell by the first transgression; this Covenant relating to new men and women in
Christ Jesus, and the new World, the whole new estate propounded and promised
therein, made, 1. In and with Christ Jesus the head of this new and glorious
design of God, in the renovation and restoration work: and, 2. In him, with
all the members of his body, the Church, Tit. 1. 2. Tit. 1. 9. On whom this
design of God shall undoubtedly be accomplished* it being the glorious and
undoubted end and issue of the great undertaking of Christ our Lord in his
suffering for sinners, Joh. 6. 38, 39. Ephesians 5. 25, 26, 27. Called a Covenant of
Grace, because the regeneration and restoration work in all the parts thereof,
is the effect of the free Grace of God in Christ Jesus, and a Covenant (or
promise) of Life, because it is a deliverance from death, into a state of Life,
never to die again: it is called the Gospel, which signifies glad, or good
tidings, Luke 2. 10. Romans 10. 15. It imports all the good promised in the New
Covenant, of Pardon, Peace, Life, of Justification, Sanctification and Glory,
with the way by which it is effected, that is, by Jesus Christ crucified,
raised and ascended in the performance of his Mediatory Office, 1 Cor. 15 1, 3,
4. It intends the glad tidings of remission of sins by Jesus Christ, and of
Salvation; Luke 24. 47. with Mark 16. 15. It being one and the same commission,
it promises remission of sins, and Salvation, on its own terms, i. e. on
Faith, Repentance and new Obedience; it prom^seth acceptance in service, and
gives rules relating thereunto, unto which all New Covenant spirited people
ought to take heed, Acts 3. 22, 23. It promises assistance in service, Isa.
26. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 5. Phil. 2. 13. Ephesians. 1. 6. With eternal Life and Glory in the
World to come, and preservation thereunto, in the way of Faith Holiness, and
sincere Obedience unto the end, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Heb. 5. 9. This is the New
Covenant, the Gospel, the glad tidings of Gods free Grace and good will to men,
accompanied with the discovery of the dreadful state of all that do not believe
and obey this Gospel.

There is Pardon and Peace, Grace and Life, a Kingdom and Glory, and that
Eternal, given by covenant and promise to all that in truth believe and obey
the Gospel, Heb. 5. 9, and 9. 5. Contained in that, Genesis 12. 3. In thee shall
all thee Families of the Earth be blessed; which includes all the blessings of
the New Covenant, relating to Grace and Glory: but of this I have written
distinctly, and of the Mediatory Office of Christ, in this New Covenant, in a
Book entitled, The Discourse of true Gospel Blessedness, or, The distinction
of the two Covenants, Old and New; to which I refer the Reader that desires to
see further in this matter.

And, 2. As for the Life of Faith in this 2. Of the Life of Faith.
Gospel, or New Covenant, and the truth of God therein; what the Faith of the
Gospel is, to which the promise is made, has been before showed: but the
Scripture speaks of living by Faith, Heb. 10. 38. Now the just shall live by
Faith; 2 Cor. 5. 7. We live by Faith, and not by sight; that is in this side
the glory promised, we live by Faith, and not by present possession and
enioyment; only the Spirit and Faith we have, as the Earnest and Evidence of
the Inheritance, and purchased Possession, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Hebr. 11. 1.

Now this Life of Faith imports three The life of Faith in three things
things; 1. A constant abiding in the Faith and profession of the Gospel unto
the end, Heb. 3. 12. and 10. 23, 38, 39. 2. A constant exercise of Faith in the
truth and faithfulness of God in all the good discoveries and promises of the
Gospel, 1 These. 5. 24. Faithful is he that has called you, who will do it.
Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, for
faithful is he that has promised. Faith rightly exercised on the faithfulness
and allsufficiency of God, will fill the soul with Joy and Peace, Romans 15. 13.
To believe not only the truth of the mercy promised, but the faithfulness of
God therein, and his allsufficiency in the performance thereof: this was it
supported Abraham in his life of Faith, Romans 4. 31. He did not only believe the
faithfulness of God, but being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he
was able also to perform.

3. When the soul thus abides in the Faith, and thus exercises Faith on the
good promises of the Gospel, as that it is strengthened, comforted, nursed up,
and nourished thereby unto life eternal: when the soul is kept alive to God
thereby in the greatest temptations and difficulties this World affords, this
is to live by Faith, to live by believing the truth of the good Word of God to
live by believing the truth of his precepts in the Gospel, so as to obey him
therein, the truth of all his great and precious promises of life, so as to be
comforted therein, Matt. 17. 5. Romans 15. 13. O that Christians would study more
this life of Faith, the want of which, is the cause they go on so heavily in
the ways of the Gospel, and meet with so many obstructions and hindrances
therein; whereas, if the life of Faith were kept up more in the true nature
thereof, how might Christians make Christ's commands their songs, and
sufferings for him their joy, in the house of their pilgrimage: but for want of
this it is, that his service is too often a burden, and sufferings for his sake
too much feared; whereas the Lord would have his people to serve him with
delight, and to suffer for him with joy, Ps. 100. Luke 6. 22, 23. Acts 5. 41.
Which is possible to be performed in this life of Faith, and no otherwise, Mark
9. 23. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

CHAP. XVII. Of Sanctification and Good Works.
THE next thing in order that I shall speak of, is, Sanctification and good
Works; for whom he justiefith, them he sanctifies, and makes to be an holy
people for himself.

Sanctification in Scripture-sense, is variously It Is variously understood.
understood and applied. 1. It imports a separation to an holy use for a time,
as was frequently used under the Law, which was a legal or ceremonial
Sanctification, or separation to an holy use for some time, as Aaron and his
Sons were separated, consecrated and hallowed for the Priests Office, which was
a typical sanctifying or hallowing, during that ministration, with their holy
garments, as appears, Exodus 28. 1. and 29. 1. Holy garments, holy place, holy
anointing oil, holy vessels, etc. which were all typical, and but for a time.
But this is not the Sanctification that I am to speak of.

It Is true, that in the Gospel there are some sanctified and holy instituted
ordinances ordained, and left by our Lord for sanctified and holy ends, to
promote and carry on the work of Sanctification in his people till they come to
Glory: but the Sanctification that I shall speak of, is, the sanctification of
justified persons, in order to Glory; for Without holiness, no man shall see
the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

Sanctification in general, sometimes includes the whole work of Grace, a
mortification of sin, and vivification of the Spirit, by which the whole life
of Grace is carried on, and effected, 1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of Peace
sanctify you throughout; and I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body
be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

But, 2. And more particularly and distinctly, Sanctification of two parts;
Imputed, and Inherent, or Imparted.
Sanctification consists of two parts, 1. Imputed, 2. Imparted, or Inherent;
1. Imputed, there is an imputed Sanctification, as there is an imputed
Justification: if any scruple the time of imputed Sanctification, it is no other
in sense and substance, than the accounting the holiness of Christ our Head in
his own person, to be the Believers: the Scripture speaks of an imputed
righteousness to Believers, Romans 4. 6, 7. Which must be their Faith, as, ver.
3. 22, 23, 24. Or the pardon of sin on the satisfaction of Christ by his death,
which most properly is the righteousness of Saints unto Justification, Romans 5.
9. And on this account there is as much said in Scripture for this imputed
Sanctification as of Justification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Who of God is made unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; He is made to be our
Wisdom, and Sanctification, as our Righteousness, that is, the perfect purity
of Christ the Son of God, with his perfect and complete obedience to the holy
Law of God, is reckoned and accounted the Believers, as their Sanctification,
as he is not only wise for them, and communicates of his Wisdom to them, but as
their Head, his Wisdom is accounted theirs, and he is made to be their
Righteousness, that is, his death and satisfaction was accepted for us; and on
that account does God remit and pardon the sins of Believers; and he is made
our Sanctification, that is, his Sanctification is accounted ours; and this is
fully included in, Col. 3. 11. Where Christ is said to be to Believers, All,
and in all: all, in matter of Justification, and all in matter of
Sanctification, and in all: effecting the work of Sanctification in his people,
by his Spirit that dwells in them: and in this sense (as he is made the
Sanctification of or to Believers, their Sanctification is perfect, as their
Justification is perfect, as considered in the Sanctification, and perfect
holiness and obedience of Christ: and hence it is the Apostle says, 1 John 4.
17. That as he is, so are we in this World; that is, by his imputed
Righteousness and Holiness, accounted so of God, and he would have his people
to know it for their comfort.

2. Of the Inherent or Imparted Sanctification; by it I intend the
Sanctification wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ in and by the Word of the
Gospel; for that is the way of the Spirits working, Sanctification; and from
hence it is that Sanctification is sometimes attributed to the Spirit, 1 Pet.
1. 2. 2 These. 2. 13. And sometimes to the Word, Joh. 15. 3. and 17. 17. Thereby
to let us to know, that the Word effects it not without the Spirit, nor the
Spirit without the Word.

And this Sanctification is likewise to be Imparted Sanctification is of two
parts.
considered and understood under a twofold consideration; 1. As within us; 2.
As wrought and brought forth, and made manifest; and that is it I join
Sanctification and Works together; for all the Works of the Gospel are the
external parts of Sanctification.

The first of these is, Holiness of Mind 1. Holiness of mind.
and Spirit: The second is, Holiness of Conversation, universal Obedience to
the Law of Christ. See both these together, Ps. 45. 13. The Kings daughter is
all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought Gold.

But, 1. This Sanctification, as it is in the Saints, it is an holy disposition
wrought in them by the Spirit, through the Word of the Gospel, which is called
in Scripture sometimes, the law of God written in the heart, Heb. 8. 10. in
which is both Faith, Love, and Holiness. Sometimes its called the new man,
which is created after God in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
Renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him, Col. 3. 10. It is
after God, i. e. after his image and likeness; after God, that is, an holy
disposition and desire to be more like the Lord in holiness, 1 John 3. 3. After
a conformity to his will in every thing, both within and without; desires and
endeavors daily the mortification of sin, and to increase in the newness of
the spirit of holiness, such a soul is minding the things of the Spirit, Romans
8. 5. And with the mind do serve the law of God, Romans 7. 25. Would be more like
Christ whiles here in this mortal state, 1 J^h. 3. 3. The mind and affections
are set on things that are above, Col. 3. 1. And grows in the sense of the
sinful nature, and body of death, which so much hinders their perfection in
holiness, Romans 7. 24. And is waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption
of the body, Romans 8. 23.

And where this inward holiness, and holy disposition of heart is, there is not
only an holy desire of conformity to the Lord, and of appearing more in the
image of Christ, but such souls do sanctify the Lord in their hearts, 1 Pet.
3. 15. That is, have holy and reverend thoughts of him, according to his name
and nature, Psalm. 111. 9. They sanctify him in all his Ordinances, for their
spiritual building up in the Faith, Ps. 119. 18. 129. In all his ways, and in
all his works, Ps. 145. 17. Yea, in his afflicting, correcting dispensations,
that are cross to the flesh, and unpleasing to nature, yet the sanctified heart
does sanctify God therein, and give him the glory, and justify him in what he
does in this matter, Joh 1. 21. Ps. 119. 65, 75.

2. This sanctification is to be considered 2. Of Conversation.
as it is brought, or wrought forth and made manifest, so that although it is a
truth, that all external holiness in appearance, not flowing from this inward
principle of holiness and life, will end in obscurity: yet it is as certain,
that wherever this Principle and life of Grace is, it brings forth the fruit
of holiness, Romans 6. 22. And this in Scripture is called holiness of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. And includes all the good duties and works of
the Gospel.

This holiness in conversation, or good This is of two parts. 1. Such as
concern religious worship.
and holy works of Saints consists of two parts; 1. Such as relates to our
walking with, and living to God in all religious service, and obedience in
matters of worship: these are works that God requires of his people, and must
necessarily come under that of sanctification and holiness; for the
institutions of our Lord and Lawgiver are holy, they are a part of his holy
Will, left recorded in the holy Scripture, and it is a part of our
Sanctification, to sanctify the Lord in our obedience to him therein, Luke 1.
6. It is said of Zacharias, and Elizabeth his Wife, that they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of God
blam^lesly, that is holily: and ver. 74, 75. That we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, Romans 12. 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9.
All which Scriptures do present us, with the Saints holy service of God in
matters of Worship. And this part of the Christians holiness must always
answer the Law and Will of the Lawgiver; for God will have his Ordinances and
Institutions to be observed by his people, because therein his Worship and his
Honor is concerned.

There are four things too common among men, that God and Christ will not pass
over without rebuke in the end.

The first is, neglect; when persons out of sluggishness, and unzealous frames
of Spirit, do neglect the service and worship of God, according to his own
appointments, making it a matter of indifferency, seeing (as they suppose) they
may be saved without any such observances; and so do not undervalue the wisdom
and will of God, (which is an high degree of iniquity and sin against him,) in
omitting and neglecting their duty in his service and worship. But let such
know, that look how far short they come in their obedience to Jesus Christ in
matters of worship, so far they come short in holiness; every breach made in
this matter, makes a breach upon sanctification and holiness. It Is true, all
come short in this matter in some measure, in matter or manner, or both: but
when persons do willingly fail in the matter of Worship, that is the great sin
to be willingly ignorant, or willingly disobedient, will not, may not go
unpunished.

The second is, when persons change the ordinances of Christ, and things of
instituted Worship, or mix their own inventions therewith; this will he not
bear with, though he suffer it long, yet it must be accounted for in the end.
When the Lord ordains, and commands one thing, and we resolve to do another,
it is an high act of disobedience and transgression of his Law: the danger
thereof see, Isa. 24. 4, 5, 6. Acts 3. 22, 23.

3. When persons undervalue the holy Ordinances of Christ, counting them small
things, matter of circumstance, scarce worthy to be taken notice of, as if
there were no matter of Religion, or religious observance to be had of them;
whereas in truth, Christ's Church on Earth is visibly distinguished from the
World, and false worshippers, only in the matters of Faith and Worship, and
especially in keeping close to God in the formalities of his Worship, according
to his own appointments: an unholy spirit and principle it is, that does
undervalue the holy, instituted Ordinances and Worship of the Lord.

4. When persons set themselves in direct opposition to the will and worship of
the Lord in his appointments; when they they think it not enough to turn away
from the truth of worship, and cleave to their own inventions and imaginations,
or to the inventions of others, but are inveterated and ^mbitterated in their
spirits against the holy Ordinances and Institutions of our Lord, and against
his people, for worshipping him therein, and so come under that blame, Hos. 8.
12. I have written to him of the great things of my Law, but they were counted
as a strange thing. The constitution of Churches, according to new covenant
rule, by the Doctrine of the Gospel, Faith, Repentance, and Baptism, so clearly
stated in the Gospel, that he that runs may read, is become the contempt and
scorn of too many who otherwise we willingly hope are godly. It Is no wonder for
profane men, to profane and blaspheme the holy Ordinances of Christ, and his
people for walking therein: but it behooves all that pretend true godliness, to
take heed what they do in this matter, and to know, that look how far they
miscarry herein, so far they miscarry in the great matter of holiness; and, at
the best, must expect to meet with blame and shame in the end, and suffer the
loss of all their building, that is contrary to it, 1 These. 3. 13. 2 Pet. 3.
14. 1 John 2. 28. 1 Cor. 3. 11, to 15.

The second sort of holy works are such 2. Such as relate to men.
as relate to our walking before, and toward men; and herein consists a
great part of a Christians holiness: for God does not only require, and expect
his people to walk holily toward him; but likewise, that they walk holily,
justly, and inoffensively toward all men. The truth of this is confirmed by
these and the like Scriptures, Mat. 5. 16. Phil. 2. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.
By all which it appears, that it greatly concerns all Christians, (who are so
indeed) to walk holily before men.

This holy walking before men, I shall mention or distinguish in five
particulars.

1. Take heed and beware of sin; for although it is a truth, that all sin is
against God, and on that account ought to be abhord of all sincere souls, in
love and obedience to him; yet we should have respect to men in this matter
likewise, because the glory of God, the honor of Religion, and the souls of
Sinners are concerned herein; therefore the Lord's people should take heed of,
and depart from every evil way, and every evil work. O take heed, and beware of
Covetousness, Pride, Oppression, Profaneness, ^^ght behavior, jestings, evil
communication, and the like, which will occasion men to reproach, and harden
them against the (...), to their own destruction. Thus men professing
godliness, not only sin against God and wrong their own souls, bring dishonor
to Religion, but the guilt of the damnation of poor sinners upon themselves,
hardening them in their evil ways, by their bad example. O consider this all
ye that pretend to be religious, and have not conscience to God in this matter:
see Romans 2. 23, 24. Phil. 3. 18, 19.

2. To walk justly and righteously toward men, in all civil and worldly
concernments: Christians should be exceeding conscious and careful in this
matter, that no unjust or unrighteous thing be done by them, but to keep to
that righteous rule, As ye would that men should do to you, so do ye to them.
If this rule were sincerely followed, it would prevent many miscarriages on
this account; and this is an undoubted truth, that persons who can for worldly
advantage do wrong, defraud, or oppress others, have very great cause to
suspect their own sincerity in the great things of the Gospel; for he that is
unfaithful in the least, is not faithful in the greatest. This of Injustice and
Oppression is that the Lord complains of, and dislikes in his people throughout
all his ministrations both in Law and Gospel; and it is that which is directly
contrary to the holy Law of God, and indeed to the law of Nature; therefore let
not such persons who can gripe and grind, defraud and oppress, deceive
themselves, in counting themselves of the number of the holy ones of God.

3. An holy walk before men is an inoffensive walk; that is, to give no just
occasion of offense by any means, in any thing, unless it come to pass, (as it
too often does) that ignorant and foolish men will be offended at holiness, and
the worship of God: in such case we ought rather to displease men than God, and
rather to please God than men, Acts 4. 19. and 5. 29. Gal. 1. 10. But in cases
wherein we may without sin against God, and wrong to our own Consciences, we
may, yea we ought to walk inoffensively, Romans 12. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. And
wilful breach in this matter, is a transgression of the Law of Christ, and an
unholy thing: and I fear there is much of unholiness in too many professing
people in this matter.

4. An holy walk is a peaceable, holy walk with men; this is the law of the
Gospel, As much as in you lies, live peaceable with all men; and follow peace
with all men, and holiness, etc. The Law of God is holy, and it is the great
part of our holiness to live to it; and unpeaceable, froward persons cannot
well be accounted an holy person: a wonderful mistake it is in persons, who
under a pretense of holiness, make a breach of peace on unsound and ungrounded
notions: when it may be, these very notions on which the breach is made, (when
rightly examined) are unholy notions, without all footing in the law of Christ:
and thus, through the slight of the subtle Adversary, is unholiness shrouded
under the name of holiness; it behooves all serious souls ensnared with this
evil, to consider it in time, and to repent.

5. An holy walk, and holy works, are works of Charity, and doing the will of
Christ, in doing good to men; Gal. 6. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let
us do good unto all men, especially to them who are of the household of Faith.
In this Christians should be like their Lord, of whom it is said, that he went
about doing good, Acts 10. 38. And truly, as good works are a part of the
Christians holiness, so are they the undoubted concommitants of Faith; for the
Faith that is without the works of the Gospel, is a dead Faith: and this is the
charge given to those that are rich in this World, to be rich in good works,
etc. 1 Tit. 6. 17, 18. And that those that have believed in God, to be careful
to maintain good Works; these things are good and profitable to men, Tit. 3. 8.
Not to God, he needs them not, Job. 22. 2. and 35. 7. But good works are
profitable to men, i. e. to those that are sincerely exercised therein. 1. They
prove the truth and sincerity of their Faith and Love, for without it the Faith
is naught, and the Love is of the same nature; it is none of the Faith and Love
of the Gospel that is without the works of the Gospel, Jam. 2. 14, 18. 2 Cor.
8. 8. 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5. and 3. 14, 17, 18. He that pretends to have the Faith
and Love of the Gospel, without the works of the Gospel, deceives himself; Jam.
1. 22. Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

2. It will make for their account in the day of account; for we must all
expect to give an account in the great day of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And the
good works of the Saints shall be rewarded at that day, Matt. 25. 20, 21, 22,
23. and ver. 34, 35, 36. 1 Tit. 6. 17, 18. Rev. 22. 14. Only this, it behooves
us to beware of Popish meritorious works, deserving any thing, either in
Justification, or Salvation, but it is all of Grace.

In this note three things; 1. That Believers are put into a capacity of doing
acceptable works, only by Grace, renewed, justified, and accepted in person and
service, only by Grace, through Faith in Christ Jesus.

2. That being put into this saved estate, and capacity of doing acceptable
works in the Lord Jesus, it is expected that they live to God herein, and are
faithful in that high and holy Calling: this is it unto which they were created
in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them:
and this the Grace of Christ (where it is in truth) teaches, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
And they are in Scripture account, graceless persons, that are void of good
works, Tit. 1. 16.

3. God will give rewards to his people according to their works; not that the
works are the meritorious cause of reward, for so it cannot be, because all the
works of the Saints, as done by them, are imperfect, and mixed with sin, and so
in themselves can deserve nothing but condemnation: but, as accepted in the
beloved, so are accounted as perfect, and shall have as full a reward as if
they were perfect, so that the reward is still of Grace: It Is Grace that God
will crown the imperfect works of his people (done in sincerity of Faith and
Love) with Glory: and suitable to the diligence and labor of love in the Lord's
work, shall the reward be dispensed, Matt. 25. 20, 21, 22, 23. Luke 19. 16, to
19. 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. Matt. 19. 27, 28, 29. And the suffering Saints, for the
name and sake of Christ, are like to have the greatest share in the Glory to
come, Luke 6. 22, 23. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. 1 Pet. 4. 13. A wonderful encouragement
should it be to the Saints, both in doing and suffering the will of the Lord,
they shall suffer no loss at all by it, but great advantage for encouragement
in the way and works of the Lord, both in doing and suffering his will, 1 Cor.
15. 58. Heb. 5. 10. Romans 2. 7. 10. And they are profitable to the souls and
bodies of others, they are relieved and refreshed thereby, 2 Cor. 9. 12.
Philem. ver. 7.

Thus have I endeavored to give a brief touch to this great matter of
Sanctification and good Works; with the great concernment of all godly persons
to walk therein. The truth is, (I fear) that as the Papists, and Popishly
affected, make too much of of them, in looking on them as meritorious, and
their Saviors; so the Protestants run far on the other hand, under the notion
of being all for Faith, and so have been, and are too little for works. But I
hope the Reader will lay this matter to heart, and not content himself with any
Faith short of this holy working Faith. And O that every that names the name
of Jesus in truth, would show themselves Christians on this account, in an
exemplary walking in the works of the Gospel. Stronger Christians should be
examples to the weaker; and elder Christians should be examples to the younger;
and especially should Ministers be examples and patterns to the Saints, they
should shine forth not only in Doctrine, but in Life; they should be patterns
in love, humility, meekness, patience, holiness, and every good work; examples
in Word, in Spirit, in Conversation, and Doctrine; that so the Gospel be not
blamed, nor God dishonored, nor Men justly offended, 1 These. 2. 10. 1 Tit. 4.
12. And thus should both Minister and people prize and press after holiness,
within, and without, because holiness becomes the house of God for ever, and
thereby he is glorified; and such are manifested to be in the hopeful way of
Salvation; for ^^^hout holiness no man shall see the Lord* though not as the
meritorious cause, but as thereby prepared thereto, and as the way in which
they must walk to Glory.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the true and saving Knowledge of GOD.
THE true and saving knowledge of God As for the knowledge of God, I refer the
Reader to Chap. 1. where it is more distinctly treated of.
is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and indeed is the first work wrought in
the soul in order to conversion: there can be no Faith, nor Repentance, nor
Love, nor Obedience, or holy walking without knowledge; for without knowledge the
heart cannot be right: therefore it is said, when God works effectually in
turning souls to himself, Hos. 8. 2. Israel shall cry unto me, my God, I know
thee: and 2. 20. I will betroth thee to my self in faithfulness, and thou shall
know the Lord. It Is the new covenant promise, Jer. 31. 34. They shall all know
me, from the least of them to the greatest, says the Lord; and Joh. 17. 3.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. In these Scriptures we must understand, is intended the true
and saving knowledge of God and Christ in the new covenant, and contains in it
Faith, Repentance, Love, the fear of God, holy Obedience, and all the Divine
Virtues of the Gospel in order to eternal Life, or else it is not that knowledge
that is, or has eternal Life; it is the knowledge of God in the Gospel that I
intend; and much I shall not speak, as to the matter of illumination, in the
knowledge of God; for God in himself is a mystery, we cannot know him, but as he
has made known himself in his Word, and by his Works; know him in his Name, in
his Greatness, and his Goodness, etc. Jer. 9. 24. Let him that glories, glory
in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which
exercises loving kindness, judgme^^ and righteousness in the earth etc. To
know that he is the Lord gracious and merciful, etc. As he has opened and made
known himself in Jesus Christ crucified, in whom he was, and is well pleased,
and satisfied; and (...) his sake, pardoning, justifying, and saving all that
come unto God by him. In a word, He that comes to God must believe, and know
that God is, (as he has made known himself to be in the Gospel) and that he is
a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Knowledge differs little from
Faith, and sometimes it is all one, when the soul is so enlightened into the
knowledge of God, and Christ, and Truth, as to believe, Joh. 6. 69. We believe,
and are sure, (Greek, know) that thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living
God; 1 John 5. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, etc. And Job, I
know that my Redeemer lives, etc. By all which it appears, that knowledge which
is saving, differs but little from Faith, and includes Faith.

Now in as much as knowledge, or illumination Difference between saving
knowledge, and that which is not.
is common to all where the true light shines, i. e. to hypocrites and
formalists, as well as sincere Christians, as Heb. 6. 4. 6. and 10. 32. 2. 2
Pet. 2. 20, 21. Romans 2. 17, 18. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2. I shall therefore
rather apply my self to speak something to show the difference between the
saving knowledge of God and Christ in the new covenant of his Grace, and that
which men may have, and yet be short of Grace and Life; referring the Reader to
Chap. 1. for the distinct knowledge of God.

The first difference is, the saving knowledge 1. It is a soul-humbling knowledge.
of God and Christ, is a soul-humbling self-abasing knowledge: and that in the
first work of Conversion, the very entrance of saving knowledge, gives the soul
such a sight and apprehension of God, and of Christ, and of himself and sin,
that it throws down, and lays low the soul, and makes him cry out as those.
Acts 2. 37. Being pricked at the heart, with the light of truth: they
understood and believed what they did not before, both concerning Christ and
themselves: They cried out, men and brethren, what shall we do? How wonderfully
was the case changed? they who but a little before, cried out, Crucify him,
Crucify him, now are pricked at the heart for it, and cry another cry, Men and
brethren, what shall we do? Suitable to this is that, Psalm 119. 130. The
entrance of thy Word gives light, it gives understanding to the simple. The
very entrance of the Word of Life into the heart, gives this light; the soul
comes thereby to know something of God, of his Holiness, of his Justice, and
Goodness; and something of himself, of his own badness, unholiness, sinfulness,
and need of mercy; and this amaseth and abaseth the soul; and if the work be
right, this soulabasing is not only in the sight and sense of some one
particular sin, or particular sins, but it gives a sight of the body of death,
that is, of the sinful nature, that there is nothing but sin, a sinful state,
the thoughts and imaginations, the words and works; yea, that the best works
(as done by us) are menstruous and filthy. A soul never rightly knows himself,
till he thus know himself: and the want of this is the cause of so many
abortives in Religion, that comes to nothing. Persons may meet with some
convictions of, and conversion from some particular sin, or sins, but never see
themselves utterly lost, and undone, and filthy all over; and such conversions
ordinarily first or last comes to nothing: not but that the beginning work
oft-times may arise from conviction of some capital iniquity, as those, Acts 2.
37. But if saving, it leaves not till it discover the body of death: this is
the effect of saving knowledge; or if it meet with, and steal in by degrees on
those that have lived under good education, and use of means, that it makes not
so great a noise at first. This must be effected first or last, the knowledge of
God in Christ Jesus, in the way of the Gospel, and of themselves, to know
themselves to be indeed wretched, and miserable, without which they never
rightly embrace Christ, and the Grace and Mercy of the new Covenant.

And this self-humbling, self-abasing, and self and sin-abhorring frame, is not
only a work for a day, i. e. at first conviction, but where the true light
shines, it abides; and gracious growing Christians, the longer they live, and
the higher they grow in Gospel light, the more they know themselves and the
more they abase themselves, have little and low thoughts of themselves. This is
that which sincere Christians do and can experience; see witnesses from
Scripture of this truth, David, a man after God's own heart, though a King,
when he danced before the Ark, and withal his wife mocked him, he said, I will
yet be more vile than this* and base in my own sight. By which we may see, that
this is the common work of God in all gracious souls; Greatness nor Kingship
did hinder: it lays low the souls of Great men and Kings, where it is in
power; Job 40. 4. I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand
upon my mouth, etc. And Chap. 42. 5. 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes. The more a soul knows of God and Christ, the more he abhors
himself; not only an abhorrency of sin, but of self, because of sin, attends
gracious knowing persons, Isa. 6. 5. That Evangelical Prophet cries out, Woe is
me, I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips, etc. For mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of Hosts. He had seen King Jesus, it was a Gospel sight which
did thus humble and abase him, Joh. 12. 41. These things said Isaiah when he
saw his glory, and spoke of him. It was the glory mentioned in this Chapter,
the Evangelist alludes unto. John the Baptist, the forerunner of our Lord, of
whom he testifies, that he was greater both in light and work, than the
greatest Prophet, yet he had this frame of spirit in him, Joh. 1. When they
sent to him to know who he was, he confessed, and denied not that he was not
the Christ; He it is, who coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoes
latchet I am not worthy to unloose, ver. 20. 27. Not worthy to do the meanest
service for him. So the holy Apostle Paul acknowledges, Romans 7. 18. I know
that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing: and hence he cries
out, ver. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? And confesses himself, 1 Cor. 15. 9. To be the least of the
Apostles, not meet to be called an Apostle; and Ephesians. 3. 8. The least of all
Saints. By all which it appears, that true and saving new covenant knowledge, is
a soul-humbling, and self-abasing knowledge.

But the common head-knowledg that hypocrites and formalists attain unto, is a
soul-exalting, and self-boasting knowledge, it puffs up, and makes them proud,
and self-conceited; they swell with their own good esteem of themselves, they
think themselves best, and every one worse than themselves: he says as the
Pharisee, Lord, I thank thee, I am not like other men. Not but that it is the
duty of gracious souls to be thankful for God's gracious work in them, as well
as for his benefits bestowed on them. But to be proudly thankful, is proper to
hypocrites, and ca^nal professors: the hypocrite Jehu like says, Come see my
zeal for the Lord, when it is all for himself. But this self-abasing, and
soul-humbling knowledge, if far from the tabernacle of the hypocrite;
self-boasting, and self-glorying, is the fruit of the flesh; and indeed,
whatever such persons pretend to know, yet they are in truth ignorant; did
persons know themselves as they are, (which they can never rightly do without
the saving work of Grace) they would see cause enough in themselves to abase
themselves; but ignorance is the cause of pride, that is it the Apostle
intends, 1 Cor. 8. 2. If any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing as he ought to know: that is, he that thinks of his knowledge, so as
to be puffed up, grows proud, and self-conceited therewith; such a one knows
nothing as he ought to know: in which it is clear, that ignorance is the cause
of pride, and puffings up; he that knows most, being puffed up, knows
nothing as he ought to know.

But here I would mind a word further, lest any gracious soul, by this, should
fall into temptation, we are to know, that saving knowledge may be attended with
the same temptation of pride and puffings up; not that it flows from knowledge,
but partly from ignorance, and especially from fleshly corruption, there being
the remainders of all sin in the nature of the Saints; and that is it the
Apostle intends, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth. He speaks
there of the knowledge of good men, as well as bad; for it differs not in the
formality or kind thereof, as speculative, relating to the things known or
understood; it differs rather in the manner of the work, than in the matter,
for the most part: for, says the Apostle, We all have knowledge, knowledge
puffs up. Even such knowledge as the Apostle had* and as we all have: not (as
I said before) that knowledge in it self puffs up, if saving, and sanctified;
but it is the base flesh, corruption of nature, that takes an advantage
therefrom to be puffed up: the Saints having the root of all sin in them, and
so of pride, as of worldliness, and other like sins; and are liable to puffings
up, as the Hypocrites. Experience teaches this, and the Apostle had the same
experience, as is manifest, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be exalted above
measure, through the abundance of revelations, etc. The holy Apostle was in
danger of this self-boasting, through his abundance of revelations and
knowledge: hence he says, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body, and bring it in
subjection, lest by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should
be a cast away. Such is the baseness and corruption of nature, even in the
Saints, as to be priding it self, and puffed up in heavenly light and knowledge.

The difference then between the sincere soul and the hypocrite is, the sincere
heart that lives in light, does not only know God and Christ in some measure,
but himself; and so espies these fleshly motions and workings to
self-exaltations and puffings up, and so judges it, and abhors it as a
detestable thing; watches it, and wars against it, as against any other
iniquity.

But the merely notional head professor and hypocrite, he pleases himself in
it, it is his life, his glory, self-glorying is his highest attainment; and so
his life, all his receptions of light has not brought him out of self, he
seeks himself, and glories in his self-attainments, and lives therein with
pleasure; he preaches for himself, and prays, and discourses, and
professes for himself; and so he lives in self, as his Element, as the fish
lives in the water; all his light and knowledge works him not out of himself,
if he attain but to a show of humility; he is proud, and puffed up therewith,
for such may attain to a show of humility, and be va^nly puffed up in their
fleshly mind, Col. 2. 18. 23.

2. Saving knowledge is an heart-affecting 2. It is an heart affecting, and an
hearttransforming knowledge.
knowledge, it is an heart-transforming knowledge: the saving knowledge of God and
Christ in the Gospel, affects the heart where it is, with love to God, and love
to his Word and Will, love to his Promises, and love to his Precepts, and an
hatred to every false way, Ps. 119. 125. The Prophet prays, Give me
understanding, that I may know thy Precepts, ver. 127. I love thy Commandments
above Gold, above fine God; therefore I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all
things to be right, and I hate every false way. This is true knowledge that
affects the heart with love to, and delight in the Lord and hatred against all
things that is contrary to him. Saving knowledge affects the heart with God, and
exalts God and Christ above all, and has low and contemptible thoughts of the
World, and all things here below, looks upon it as it is, to be all but vanity,
and vexation of spirit. So the Apostle, Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung,
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, etc. And as it is an
heart-affecting, and an heartdelighting knowledge, it affects the heart with God
and Christ, and the things that concern his Name and Gospel; so is it an
heart-transforming and changing knowledge, it leaves not souls carnal and
worldly, and vain and sinful, as they were before; no, but it changes those in
whom it is, it very much effects what God requires, Romans 12. 2. Be not
conformed to this World, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds,
etc. And thus saving knowledge effects, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of God, are changed, etc. The knowledge of God
and Christ in the Gospel is of a changing nature, it works those in whom it is,
into the image and likeness of Christ, which is God's design in the Gospel, 1
Cor. 15. 48, 49. It accomplisheth the work of Sanctification, and an holy
conformity to the Lord Jesus.

Saving knowledge reaches the heart, it is exercised about heart-work; it
humbles the heart, it changes the heart, it glads the heart, it conforms the
heart, and so the whole man to the will of Christ; all that the understanding
receives, it immediately conveys to the heart: the understanding savingly
enlightened by the Word and Spirit, conveys light and love to the heart. In this
way the love of Christ is shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit; Romans 5.
5. 2 Cor. 4. 6. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in
the face of Jesus Christ. God's new-covenant-light shines not only into the
head, but likewise into the heart, making an heart-change, and working
heart-love, and heart-obedience, and giving heart-consolations: it works
heart-hatred of sin, and heart-performance of duty, Ps. 37. 31. The Law of God
is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide; that is, it is in his heart to
believe God, to love God, and obey him as far as he knows, and is willing to
know more, that he may do it: he prays with the Prophet, Ps. 119. 33. Teach
me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end. The
truly knowing soul accounts nothing well done, in which the heart is not;
believes with the heart, loves with the heart, obeys with the heart, hates sin
with the heart, rejoices in the Lord with the heart; in a word, whatever such
a soul does, he does it heartily, as to the Lord.

But head-knowledg, or the knowledge of the hypocrite and formalist never
affects the heart, unless it be some sudden flashes of seeming joy, Mat. 13.
20, 21. But short it is, and short of truth, and reaches not so far as to
affect the heart indeed with God and Christ, his Word and Will, his Precepts
and Promises; he goes no further (at best) than that Church, Rev. 3. 1. I know
thy works, that thou have a name, that thou live, and art dead: Dead while
alive, and such men's works are dead works, and dead services, with all their
knowledge, they are not changed, but remain the same, worldly still, and carnal,
and proud still, and vain, and like the World still, no true nonconformists to
the World; it is to be feared that there is too much of this sort of knowledge
among Professors, that will at last leave them where it found them, i. e. in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

The knowledge of the hypocrite dwells most in the head, it is
swimming-brainknowledg, and runs into the tongue, and it may be into some form
of profession, but sinks not into the heart, it makes no change there, works
not the heart after God; come to Christ's Ordinances they may, and make
profession of his Name, but their hearts are after their covetousness; the
world has their hearts be-sure, wherever their persons are; so that word is
fulfilled in them, ^rov. 10. 20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver,
but the heart of the wicked is little worth.

But saving knowledge reaches the heart, affects and transforms the heart, and
conforms the whole man into the image of our Lord Jesus.

3. Saving knowledge is a trusting, relying 3. It is a trusting, relying
knowledge.
knowledge; the soul that rightly knows God, will trust in him, trust in his
Faithfulness, in his Word, trust in his all sufficiency to perform it; trust in
him for body and soul, and that in the greatest difficulties, and under the
greatest temptations, Ps. 9. 9, 10. The Lord also will be a refuge for the
oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble; and they that know thy Name will put
their trust in thee: that is, they that know him to be (according to his Word)
merciful and gracious, all-sufficient and faithful, will put their trust in
him, and rely upon him. It effects in them that exhortation, Isa. 26. 4. Trust
in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. This
knowledge of the Name of God it was, that made the three children, Dan. 3. 17.
Not to be careful, or fearful of the Fiery Furnace, Our God, whom we serve, is
able to deliver us out of thine hand, O King: they knew Gods allsufficiency,
and there they trust, and leave the issue to him, ver. 18.

But head-knowledg, or the knowledge of the hypocrite, whatever it talks yet, it
never works a soul truly to trust in God at all times, nor truly at any time;
there may be a supposition of trusting sometimes, but when the difficulty
comes, the soul starts aside from God to some secondary and unlawful way of
deliverance, like those complained of, Hos. 5. 13. But the soul that truly
knows the Lord, does trust in him at all times, especially in times of need and
danger, Ps. 56. 3. What time I am afraid I will trust in thee; that is the time
especially to trust in God, in time of need: this was it kept up the heart of
the Apostle in all his temptations, 2 Tit. 1. 12. Nevertheless I am not
ashamed, for I know whom I have believed (or trusted) and am persuaded that he
is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day.

I know his goodness, faithfulness, and all sufficiency, and that makes me
trust him with body and soul, I commit all to him, and to his keeping unto that
day: thus knowing souls are trusting souls, Psalm. 52. 8. I trust in the mercy
of God for ever and ever. They trust in his Word, in his Mercy, in his
Faithfulness, in his all sufficiency, that he will never fail them. See the
precious promises to such knowing, trusting souls, Jer. 17. 7, 8. Ps. 34. 22.
and 37. 40. and 125. 1. O therefore trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength.

4. Saving knowledge is a doing, working 4. It is a doing knowledge.
knowledge: they who rightly know, are ready to do what they know, Joh. 13. 17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them; see Heb. 12. 17. Saving
knowledge is no sluggard, it is no idler, but its design to know, is, that it
may do the will of God; that is the design of the soul in all his seekings, to
know that he may do the will of God, Ps. 119. 33, 34. Teach me, O Lord, the way
of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end; Give me understanding, and I
shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.

Heart-knowledg designs heart-obedience to the Lord, ver. 10. With my whole
heart have I sought thee, O let me not wander from thy Commandments: and the
Word, the Scripture of Truth, is the rule of the gracious souls obedience, he
knows, and believes, that the Scriptures, by the teachings of the Spirit
therein, is able to make him wise unto Salvation, 2 Tit. 3. 15. See Psalm. 119.
97, to 100. And he is universal in his obedience, have respect to all the
Commandments, Ps. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to
all thy Commandments, and that always, even to the end, ver. 112. And that
readily and cheerfully, swiftly, and with alacrity, ver. 32. I will run the way
of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge mine heart, ver. 54. Thy Statutes
has been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. Works of Piety, and works of
Charity, all works that God requires; Grace teaches to a ready and right
performance thereof, Ps. 100. 2. 2 Cor. 8. 5, 6, 7. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

But head-knowledg only, is more for word than deed, talks much, but does but
little; and if there be any deeds, it is for low, base, and by-ends, for self,
and not for God, to some commands, and not to all; at some times, in a good
fit, or when applause or advantage concur, with a cold and dead heart, not with
delight and joy, not serving the Lord, but themselves: hence the Lord
complains, Zec. 7. 5. 6. That his people did fast for themselves, and eat and
drink for themselves; whereas gracious souls, who live in light, should do all
for God, eat and drink for him, that they may live to him, perform every duty
for him, that he may be glorified, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever you do* do all to the Glory of God; see 2 These. 1. 11, 12 Gal. 2.
19. And this the hypocrite and formalist do never attain unto, but does all for
self.

5. Saving knowledge is a growing and incresing 5. It is a growing, increasing
knowledge.
knowledge, it increseth where it is, 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in Grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; it grows, and increases,
and where this growth is, there is an increase and growth in every virtue, in
the whole new man, which is created after God. Which new creation consists
first and especially in knowledge, Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man,
which is created in knowledge, after the image of him that created him. Knowledge
is the first and principal work, and in it, and with it, righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. Without it there is nothing but ignorance of the life of
God, ver. 18. This is the saving work of the Lord, to cause the true light to
shine into the hearts of his people, 2 Cor. 4. 6. And this increases and
grows up by degrees, with the increase of Faith, Love, Holiness, and every
divine virtue, Col. 2. 19. It increases with the increase of God, and grows
up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4. 15. This of
spiritual growth, is the design and end of God in the ministry and means he
has afforded his Church; see Ephesians. 4. 11, to 15. And this is, or should be the
design of all faithful Ministers; the spiritual growth of themselves, and the
Church, in the knowledge of, and conformity to the Lord, 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11, 12.
Where the Apostle discovers, that the end of all Gods dispensations was, that
they might be more like Christ, that the life of Christ might be manifest in
their mortal flesh; and concludes the same of the Church, though they were not
under the like afflictions, yet they expected the same work to be effected in
them, by their liberty, and the use of the means that God had given them,
expressed in these words, So then death (that is afflictions) works in us, but
life in you; that is, we expect and hope that a conformity will be wrought in
you by your liberty, and peaceable enjoyment of the Ordinances of God, and
opportunities of Grace, and of growth; and so if that work go forwards, be it
by death, or life, affliction, or liberty, we have our desire: this was his
frequent Prayer for the Church, their growth and increase in this Grace, Ephesians.
1. 16, 17, 18, 19. Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11. Col. 1. 9, 10, 11. And this is (o^
should be) the desire and endeavor of every gracious soul, according to the
measure of their capacities in the use of the means God has appointed, to grow
and increase thereby, in light, in love, in holiness, and an holy conformity to
the will of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby; and in so doing that Word is made good,
Prove. 4. 18. The path of the Just is as a shining light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day.

But on the contrary, head-knowledg only, or the knowledge of hypocrites and
formalists, either decaies, grows downwards, less and less, worse and worse,
till it come to nothing, or grows in the head only, no increase in the parts of
holiness; it is like the disease called the Rickets, the head grows, but the
body decaies, grows weaker and worse, till at last, without cure, head and body
goes to the dust. So it is with head-Christians, grow in the head, in notion,
but decay in the body of Christianity, or stand at a stay without any spiritual
growth; though there is no standing or stopping in Christianity, who so grows
not better, must (though insensibly) grow worse. I do not question but that
gracious souls do meet with their winter-times, times of temptation, and to
apappearance sometimes grow worse rather than better; but it proves to their
advantage in the end: the best of Saints have had, and have their ebbings and
flowings, their winter and summer; but it is a sign of life where is the sense
thereof: this is common in the Scripture, and in the experience of the Saints:
but the notionist and head-professor is insensible of his deadness and decaies.
This I speak, that serious souls may not sink in the sense of their shortness
and wants, that the Eunuch that is joined to the Lord, may not say I am a dry
tree, Isa. 56. 3.

But the head-professor grows big in the head, but little in the heart, like
Ephraim the Lord complains of, Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is like a silly dove without
an heart: no heart for God, his Name and Truth; great in his own eyes, commends
himself; But not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends. It may be he grows great with error, fancies and imaginations,
finds out some better Religion (they think) than the Lord has ordained; like
those the Lord complained of, Jer. 2. 32, 33. Why trimmest thou thy way to seek
love; and in their inventions think themselves to be innocent as they; ver. 35.
Yet thou say, because I am innocent: and yet, ver. 36. G^d about to change
their way: and Chap. 6. 16. When the Lord calls to them to return to the good
old way; (of Faith, Love, Obedience,) and to walk therein, they will not. Thus
says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and ask for the old paths, where is the
good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest to your souls: but they
said, We will not walk therein. Thus evil men, and seducers, wax worse and
worse, deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Tit. 3. 13.

6. Saving knowledge is a defusive knowledge, 6. It is a defusive knowledge.
it is willing to impart to others what it knows of God; as it receives freely,
so it does as freely impart to others: so the Prophet, Ps. 40. 10. I have not
hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy Faithfulness, and
thy Salvation; I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the
great Congregation. Prove. 15. 7. The lips of the wise despise knowledge, but the
heart of the foolish does not so: and Chap. 10. 21. The lips of the Righteous
feed many, but fools die for want of wisdom: and 20. 15. The lips of knowledge
are a precious Jewel; the lips of the Righteous despises knowledge, both to
Saints and Sinners. The reason is, because they have received from the Lord of
his teachings; their hearts are filled with his divine knowledge; and it may be
so sometimes, that there needs skill in the learner to draw it forth, some
having learned that lesson to be slow to speak, and slow to wrath, and swift to
hear: and that, Prove. 14. 33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has
understanding, but that which is in the midst of fools is made known: so that
the knowledge of the Prudent is dispersed wisely, and must have its occasion and
opportunity; and sometimes some to draw it out, Prove. 20. 5. Counsel in the
heart of man is like deep waters, but a man of understanding will draw it out.
Sometimes there needs a wise tongue, as a bucket to draw out of those living
waters that are in the hearts of the Saints, Joh. 7. 38, 39. But this is a
truth, that those that know God, or rather are known of him, cannot but be
speaking of those things they have seen and heard, Acts 4. 20. According to the
measure of their receptions, Romans 12. 3. Occasions and opportunities.

Quest. What difference may we understand Cor. 12. 8.

Answ. Sometimes knowledge includes wisdom, and sometimes wisdom includes
knowledge, Isa. 50. 4. Jam. 3. 13. But when it is mentioned distinct, as
distinct gifts, as, 1 Cor. 12. 8. Knowledge is a gift of understanding some
truths more than others: and that it may be some secret and hidden mysteries,
by virtue of special gift, as Chap. 13. 2. Though I understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge, etc. Wisdom is a gift to apply this knowledge to the benefit
of the Church; one may have a gift of Knowledge, that may tend to inform the
understanding; another the gift of Wisdom and Prudence, to apply it to the
profit of the Church suitable to its worth. And this distinction will usefully
hold in many cases; some know much, and want wisdom to make so good use of
their knowledge as might be desired: some have Wisdom and Prudence to use more
Knowledge than they have; but indeed the ready way to attain more, is to use
well what we have: Hos. 14. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these
things; and prudent, and he shall know them, etc. That is, who so is wise and
prudent, to make a right use of what he knows, he shall understand; that is, he
shall understand more of the will of the Lord: he whose knowledge is truly
practicable, stands in the road-way of higher and larger instructions and
teachings; Joh. 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. O therefore, let
all be exhorted to be seeking after this saving knowledge of God and Christ in
the Gospel, and content not your selves without this humbling, heart-affecting,
sanctifying, transforming, trusting, doing, growing, and increasing knowledge of
God; it is that, without which the heart cannot be right; nor can your souls
enjoy the Grace and Peace of the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1. 2. Col. 2. 2, 3.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Divine Virtue and Grace of Love to God, etc.
THE choice Virtue of Grace of Love, which always accompanies true Knowledge
and Faith, is as the oil to the wheels, that makes the soul as the Chariots of
Aminadab, to run swiftly, and perform every duty relating both to God and man
cheerfully and willingly; the Lord loves willing and hearty service, and that
can never be, unless it flows from the truth of love to God, as well as
conscience and duty to him.

This duty and virtue of love, must be, 1. and chiefly to God and Christ above
all. 2. To his people for his sake. 3. To all men, to enemies as well as to
friends.

1. To God and Christ, as our chiefest 1. To God and Christ.
good, as there are many excellent and useful new covenant Gifts and Virtues,
being accompanied with love; yet love is the most excellent of all Gifts, and
of all Virtues next to Faith; and the Apostle prefers it beyond Faith, that is,
that Faith which is without love: there may be (and I fear is) much Faith
without love, which will fail in the end: but Gospel-love cannot be without
Faith; for where truth of love is to God and Christ, there is Faith: for no man
can love him on whom he does not believe; but men may have Faith without Love,
therefore he prefers Love above Faith, 1 Cor. 13. 2. And though I have all
Faith, etc. and have not Charity, (that is love) I am nothing: the word all
Faith, not only intends the Faith of miracle, for that is but one sort of
Faith, but all Faith in the habit of it, though not in the power and life; for
if there were not Faith in the Doctrine, ordinarily there could not be the
Faith of miracle, as, Mat. 7. 21, 22. Though saving Faith is always
accompanied with the truth of Love, and a measure of all the Divine Virtues of
the Gospel, ver. 13. Now abides Faith, Hope, Charity; but the greatest of
these is Charity. So Col. 3. 14. The Apostle having mentioned several choice
duties and Virtues, says, And above all these things put on Charity, which is
the bond of Perfection; or the perfect bond, by all which it appears, that
Love, Charity, is a most choice and singular Virtue, and desirable for
Christians to be prising and pressing after.

What Love is in general; Love is an affection A description of Love.
of the soul fixed upon, cleaving to, and delighting in something wherein it
apprehends some special worth and good; thus it is in natural Love, and thus it
is in spiritual Love; for there is a natural, and there is a spiritual Love:
the second it is I am speaking of; and the difference is rather to be discerned
in the object than in the root or principle, that being a Divine secret, the
rise whence Divine Virtues flow from the secret and hidden work of the Spirit
of Grace; yet the Spirit propounds to us the distinction rather by the object
than the principle from whence it flows: it lets us to know, that if our love
fix sincerely on the right objects, then it flows from the right principle: so
then, as natural love fixes on natural and worldly objects, from natural
causes; so that is spiritual love that fixes on spiritual objects; natural love
never looks so high as God, and Christ, and Glory, to fix there.

So then this is spiritual love that fixes upon, cleaves to, and delights
in God, and Christ, in Grace, and Glory, as its chiefest and most special good:
and this is certain, that we can never love God as we ought, and as does
concern us, unless we apprehend him to be our chiefest and most especial good.
Matt. 22. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with all
thy heart, and with all thy mind; which we can never do, unless we prize him
above all other good in the World; and so of Christ: Matt. 10. 37, 38, 39. He
that loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, or Life more than me, he is not
worthy of me. Which no soul can attain to, but by being instructed into the
transcending worth of Jesus Christ: this could the Prophet say, Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee; and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee: and the Spouses song, 5. 10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand: and Paul, Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless, I do account
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord,
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung
that I might win Christ, etc. And this is that which every soul that loves the
Lord Jesus in truth and sincerity can say: so that if you love God and Christ
above all, you do then esteem him as your chiefest good, as your alone portion;
you do undervalue every thing here below; you can look upon every thing here
below to be but vanity, yea, vanity of vanities: Eccl. 1. 2. Vanity of
vanities, (says the Preacher) Vanity of vanities, all is vanity: this doubling
and trebling of its vanity, argues it to be exceeding vain, little, and
contemptible to the soul that loves Christ, in comparison of him; souls that
have seen into, and tasted of the goodness of the Lord, and the excellency of
Divine things, can say with the Prophet, Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion
says my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

Quest. How shall I know that I love God

Answ. 1. If you love God above all, as your chiefest good, which you do, if
your 1. Your meditations will be much upon him.
love be right; your meditation will be much upon him, and about him; that as
in the first place you have left all for him, so your thoughts are precious of
him: if God and Christ, Grace and Glory be of highest esteem in your hearts,
then you love God above all; for what a man loves most, and best, his mind is
most upon, be it persons, or profits, etc. a man may know what he loves most,
and best, by the running out of his mind after it, and exercise of his mind
about it. The worldling has his mind taken up with the world, runs after his
profit, and seeks after his gain from every quarter; and when it goes well on
that account, all is well; he troubles himself as little as may be about things
of Divine concernment; but the gracious soul presses hard after God, Ps. 63.
8. My soul (says the Prophet) presses hard after thee. As the worldling
presses hard after the world, because it is his portion, his all, his chiefest
good: so does the soul that loves God as his portion, follow hard after him,
that it may know him more, and enjoy him more; his meditations are daily of
him; he esteems his loving kindness better than life, and therefore his soul is
set upon him: Ps. 104. My meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad in
the Lord; so that in a word, where your minds are most set, and most exercised,
and what you most prise, there you love most, and best; For where your treasure
is, there will be your hearts also, Mat. 6. 21. O how few that profess
Christianity, can approve their hearts to God in this matter.

2. If you love God above all, as your 2. You will love his things.
chiefest good, you will love his things, whatever has his stamp upon it; I
mean on the spiritual account, you love it, and prize it for his sake.

1. You love his Word, and Will, his 1. His Word.
Promises, his Precepts, all will be precious to you: it is not possible for
souls to love God, and not to love his Word, his Will; Ps. 119. 97. O how I
love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day; ver. 103. How sweet are thy
words unto my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. This is a special
property of a soul that loves the Lord, to love his Word, and to delight
therein, to suck sweetness therefrom: ver. 72. The law of thy mouth is better
to me than thousands of Gold and Silver. Well, by this you may know, if you
love the Lord, you do love his Word, his Will, his Precepts, his Promises, it is
all precious to you, and your meditation is much therein; ver. 97. and Ps. 1.
2. Where you have a description of a Godly man, to be one that does meditate in
the Law of God day and night: that is, his meditations are much exercised about
the good Word of God.

2. If you love God indeed, you will 2. To do ^is Will.
love to do his Word, and Will; you will love to obey him, to submit to him in
every things. It Is a great mistake in persons who pretend to love the Word of
God, but do not love to do it; such persons deceive themselves; Joh. 14. 15.
says Christ, If ye love me, keep my Commandments. This was the voice of the
Law, and this is the voice of the Gospel; Exodus 20. 6. Showing mercy unto
thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments. God never did, nor
never will accept any service but that which is done in love to him; and he
ever did, and will, accept of those who love, serve, and obey him according to
his Word and Will: and if you serve him in love, his Commandments will be
pleasant to you. 1 John 5. 3. This is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Then we love God, when we
keep his Commandments, and they are pleasant to us, and not grievous: and if in
this spirit of love, you live to, and obey the Lord, he will meet with you, and
your souls shall meet with him, and have fellowship with him: Isa. 64. 5. Joh.
14. 21, 23. Read those Scriptures at your leisure.

3. If you love Christ, you do love what 3. Love what he loves, and hate what
he hates.
he loves, and hate what he hates; you love Holiness, Righteousness, and
Obedience, and hate sin, and iniquity, and disobedience, and every false way,
though you be hated of the wicked for so doing. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that love the
Lord, hate evil; he preserves the souls of his Saints, he delivers them out
of the hands of the wicked; i. e. Though the wicked hate and persecute the
Saints for their hating and forsaking the ways of the wicked; yet let those
that love the Lord, have evil still; for God will deliver them out of the hands
of the wicked, that do hate them for their hating of wickedness. O therefore,
ye that love the Lord, hate evil, and love goodness; Amos 5. 15. Hate the evil,
and love the good, etc. This is that which God loves; Psalm. 11. 7. And Christ
loves; Psalm. 40. 7. Heb. 1. 9. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated
wickedness; wherefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Do you love God and Christ above all, then show it
in this way; Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good: it is
to be feared, that most that bear the name of Christian in the World, do in
truth hate that which God loves, and love that which he hates; an infallible
discovery that the love of God is not in them.

4. Those who love the Lord, do love 4. They love his appearing.
his appearing, and long to be with him; surely those who talk of love to
Christ, but care not to be with him, desire not his coming, that they might
more fully enjoy him; do but talk of love, it is love but in word and tongue,
not in deed and truth: if the Bride pretend love to the Bridegroom, but desire
not the Marriage-day, could be content if that never come, it argues but little
or no love, suitable to such a relation. If the Wife pretend love to her
Husband, and when he is gone from home, care not where ever he do return, it is
but little sign of love: so, for souls to talk of love to Christ, but desire
not the enjoyment of him in the nearest relation, do but deceive themselves;
they have ground to fear their love is not right; they will be content to go to
him, and to enjoy him, when there is no remedy, when they must go to him, or to
a worse place, and to worse company: I fear this is the case of most who think
and say they love Christ; the truth of this, that they who love Christ, do love
his appearing, that they may be with him. See 2 Tit. 4. 7, 8. Tit. 1. 13. Heb.
9. 28. Rev. 22. 20. Whence it is apparent, that it is those that love his
appearing, that shall have the Crown of Righteousness. It is to them that look
for him, that he will appear a second time without sin unto salvation.

5. Those who love God, do love his 5. They love his people.
people also for his sake, (which was the second thing proposed;) because the
worth of Grace is in them, Divine Virtue is in them, the Name of God is upon
them, they are the children of the same Father, members of the same Body, heirs
to the same Kingdom and Glory; and therefore they love them; this is the
command of God; 1 John 4. 21. And this is the Commandment we have from him,
that he that loves God, do love his Brother also: And the disposition of the
Saints, Chap. 5. 1. Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that
is begotten of him.

Quest. But how shall I know that I love

Answ. It is then true love, when it is sincere, It is true when sincere.
and unfeigned love, not hypocritical, and in show only: 1 John 3. 8. Let us
not love in word, and in tongue (only) but in deed and in truth: there is much
word and tonguelove, but little deed-love; much feigned love, but little
unfeigned love: 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing you have purified your hearts in obeying
the truth through the spirit, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren, etc. Our
love to the Brethren must be of the same nature as it is to God; because, if we
love rightly, it must be for his sake. And surely we cannot rationally imagine
that God will accept of hypocritical love, word-love, tongue-love, love in
show, feigned love, no, God abhors it, and so should men. Romans 12. 9. Let love
be without dissimulation: it is sincere love to the Brethren that is right and
true: 2 Cor. 8. 8. I speak not (says the Apostle) by Commandment, but by
occasion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love.

2. It is then true, when it is spiritual 2. When it is spiritual.
love, when it is for God's sake, and for Christ's sake, because they belong to
him: This is true and sincere love, when we love for his sake: Mark 9. 41. For
whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink, because ye belong to Christ;
verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. The Lord takes well any
the least token of love showed to any, because they belong to him, because it
is a token of their love to him, in any who show kindness for his sake; Mat.
10. 42. As the greatest show of love, if it be not for his sake, is not
accounted of with him; so the least act of love for his sake shall be rewarded,
because that where little acts of love are for his sake, greater acts will be,
if opportunity and ability concur.

3. It is then right and true, when it manifests 3. It is a doing-love.
it self in action, when it is as ready to do as to speak; yet it is but word
and tongue-love. I say, true love to the Brethren is a doing love, for soul,
for body, for both, as occasion and need requires, according to ability: 1 John 3. 17. But whosoever has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother has need,
and shuts up the bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? Those that are streight-hearted, and streight-handed toward the people
of God in their necessities, have ground to suspect themselves, that they love
neither God nor his people. And suitable to the abilities that God gives in the
World, does he expect that men do in this matter: where he gives much, he
expects much; 1 Tit. 6. 17, 18, 19. And that it be done willingly, and not
grudgingly, for that is not thankworthy, nor is it any true discovery of love;
The Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. and 8. 12. Romans 12. 8. I fear
few does manifest truth of love in this matter; who though they give, do it
slackly, and grudgingly, thinking every little too much, and would gladly be
without the occasions and opportunities of doing what they do: see Isa. 32.
5-8. And read it at leisure, and meditate well upon it, and the Lord give you
right understanding therein.

4. It is then true when it will cover offenses, 4. When it will cover offenses.
and is ready to forgive: Prove. 10. 2. Love covers all sins; 1 Pet. 4. 8.
Love covers the multitude of sins. 1. There are many sins that love may, and
should cover, without reproof. As personal infirmities that attend Saints in
this mortal, sinful state, wherein Christians cannot speak, nor act, but a
quick eye may discern something amiss, which must be covered, else the life of
Christians would be uncomfortable with each other, and their time must be spent
in reproving each other. Jam. 3. 2. In many things we offend all: Ps. 19. 12.
Who can understand his errors, etc. Christians may see so much of imperfection
in each other, that needs love to cover, rather than to multiply reproofs for
common failings: who so knows themselves, can do it, and yet true love reproves
sin; that is, such things as are sinful and dishonorable, and cannot stand
with the safety of the soul, that comes not under the common infirmities of
nature, unavoidably attending gracious souls.

2. Love covers sin from others; where 2. It covers sin from others.
is cause of reproof, and gives a private reproof; according to, Mat. 18. 15.
If thy Brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault between him and thee
alone, etc. Love is no whisperer, nor back-biter; those who are so ready to
publish the failings of their brethren, that others shall know it before them,
that wait advantages to publish the failings of their brethren, without
observing the right rule, they are, in so doing, rather backbiters than lovers
of their brethren

3. Upon repentance, it covers all sin, it 3. On repentance, it covers all
sin.
forgiveth all sin; Lu. 17. 3. If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke
him; if he repent, forgive him: see ver. 4. Love is no implacable person, but
easy to be reconciled; it is like God, and Christ, ready to forgive, Col. 3.
12, 13. When persons are so much bound up in their spirits, that they with so
much difficulty forgive their brethren on their repentance, it is a sign they
live not in the sense of the need they have of forgiveness from God themselves;
and may justly doubt whether they are made partakers of the forgiveness of the
Gospel, Mat. 6. 12. 14, 15. The sense of Gospel-forgiveness, works those
rightly apprehending it, into like pitiful, merciful, and forgiving frame,
Col. 3. 12, 13.

4. True love to brethren is not easily 4. It is not easily provoked.
provoked, but suffers long; 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. It starteth not aside for small
occasions; it is not drops of water that can quench true love; Cant. 8. 7. Many
waters cannot quench love, nor floods drown it. That love that is easily
provoked, that will not bear nor suffer any thing, that is easily quenched; is
not love of the right stamp.

5. True love to the brethren is full of 5. It Is full of hope.
Hope, and full of Faith; 1 Cor. 13. 7. It hops all things, it believes all
things; that is, all things that there is ground to hope and believe; it takes
hold of every thing that may minister occasion to hope the best, to hope that
there is truth of Grace, to hope that their Faith and Repentance is true but
that love that will not believe, and hope any thing, if it come not up fully to
the mind of the party, it may be a faithless love and an ho^eless love, as to
our brethren; so may it be in respect of God; for be sure we come infinitely
more short in respect of God, than any of our brethren (where is any ground of
hope) do or can in res^ect to us.

6. It is then true love, when it is accompanie^ 6. When accompanied with love
and obedience to God.
with love to God, and obedience to his Will: for any to talk of love to the
peo^^e of God, and yet has no respect to the Commandments of God, no
conscience of living to God according to his revealed Will, they deceive
themselves: for, As he that loves God, must love his Brother also; so he that
loves the people of God, must love God, and keep his Commandments: 1 John 5.
2. By this we know we love the people of God, when we love God, and keep his
Commandments. Lest any should dece^ve themselves, the Apostle st^tes it both
ways; 1. If any love God, they love his people: He that loves him that begat,
l^veth him that is begotten of him. But lest any should mistake, and say I love
him that is begotten, therefore I love him that begat; he states it the other
way, to prevent all mistakes, that so our love may be true and right indeed: By
this we know we love the people of God, when we love God, and keep his
Commandments. That is, by this we know that our love to the people of God is
right, when it is accompanied with love and obedience to God; For this is the
love of God, that we keep his Commandments. Our love to God is not right, if we
love not his people; and our love to his people is not right, if we love not
God, nor keep his Commandments.

7. True love to the Saints is then right 7. It must be universal, to all
Saints.
when it is universal, to all Saints, as well to one as to another, as well to
the poor as to the rich, and as well to the rich as to the poor; to a poor
Lazarus, as to a rich and royal David; to an afflicted Joseph, as to an admired
Solomon: if love be right, it is no respecter of persons; For he that
respects persons, will transgress for a piece of bread: that is, upon any
occasion will wrest judgment. But this love is rare to be found, rich
professors will love them that are rich, and undervalue the poor, make them
their footstool; and too often the poor undervalue the rich, because they are
rich, have an evil eye upon the riches of their brethren, because themselves
are poor: but the love of the Lords people is (or should be) one to another for
the Lord's sake, because they are his, and so should be to the weak as to the
strong, to the poor as to the rich; partial love is no true love. Jam. 2. 1, 2.
It is the commendation the Apostle gives the Ephesians, that their love was to
all the Saints; Ephesians. 1. 15. Col. 1. 4. It Is a choice discovery of Divine love,
when it has no respect of persons, but fixes on the object purely for
spiritual causes, for Holiness, for the image and Grace of Christ: the poorest
Saints are as nigh to God, as rich in Grace and Glory as the richest: Jam. 2.
5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this World,
rich in Faith, and heirs of that Kingdom, which he has promised to them that
love him.

8. Yet, if it be divine and true, it runs 8. It is suitable to the causes of
love.
out suitable to the causes of love; for though true love be universal, and
impartial, yet it is not blind, but fixes most where it apprehends most of God,
most of Holiness, Humility, Love, and constancy in the way and work of the
Lord: for this is certain, that if we love for Godliness sake, where we see
most of Godliness, and the image of Christ, there we love most; and this need
not be stated as a duty, for it is the property of true Grace and Love so to
do: we have Christ our Lord for example in this matter, who had his beloved
Disciple above the rest; Joh. 13. 23. and 20. 2. and 21. 20, 24. Not but that
he loved all, and so must we love all the Lord's people with the same love,
although there may, and will be degrees therein: Psalm. 16. 2, 3. My goodness
extends not unto thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent, in whom is all my delight. So did Paul prize and prefer Timothy
above all the rest of the Ministers with him, for the excellency of spirit that
was in him; Phil. 2. 29. 20, 21, 22. And on this account a poor Saint may have
more spiritual cause of love in him than a rich one; he that is poor in the
World, may be rich in Grace; and a rich Saint in the World may be rich in
Grace, and have more cause of spiritual love than some that are poor: not but
that all that are truly gracious, are spiritually rich in Grace; yet God gives
differingly as he pleases; and there are differing capacities and improvings
of what is given: but this is certain, that faithful improvement shall have
addition and increase.

9. And lastly, True love to the Saints is 9 They love constantly.
constant love, not by fits and good moods, sometimes love, and sometimes hate;
like the Religion of some, who under convictions, or afflictions, will be very
religious, and make promises, but when the fit is over, their Religion is
ended; but true love both to God and his people never fails; 1 Cor. 13. 8. It
is constant in adversity as in prosperity, under weakness, ^railties, and
miscarriages, as under highest demonstrations of purity. It Is true, Saints
under sin must be reproved, and so it may be, that some strangedness may be
requisite, yet love must still continue: Gal. 6. 1, 2. Heb. 13. 1. Let
brotherly love continue, to strangers as well as acquaintance, ver. 2. Prove.
17. 17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity: Love
in adversity continues faithful in adversity; if it reprove for sin and
miscarriage, it does it love and faithfulness: Prove. 27. 6. Faithful are the
wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful: hence the Prophet
says, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness;
let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my
head, etc. Where truth of love is, it is constant while the cause thereof
continues; and in any miscarriage, it does all its works in love.

3. They that love God do love all men, 3. They love all.
as men; they love Christians as such, and they love men as men, and enemies as
enemies, persecuters as persecuters; they love them with the love of pity and
compassion; and this is their duty, and disposition in some measure, if made
partakers of the Grace of God in truth: Mat. 5. 44. to 47. If ye love them that
love you, (that is, only them) what do ye more than others? Nothing more
eminently discovers a Gospelspirit than this; for this is clear above nature,
nature never teaches this lesson, but the contrary; Nature teaches to hate,
and seek revenge on enemies; but Grace teaches to pity them, and pray for
them; and what Christ taught his Disciples, he practiced himself, both in
doing, and praying for enemies, Luke 22. 50, 51. and 23. 34. And this lesson
Stephen had lea^ned, Acts 7. 60. And to this we are exhorted by the Apostle,
Romans 12. 19, 20. and Gal. 6. 10. As much as in us lies to do good to all,
though especially to the household of Faith. This is the command of the Lord,
and then we love God when we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are
not (or should not be) grievous to us.

Quest, How shall I know that I love mine

Answ. 1. When you can pity them in Ps. 35. 13, 14. But as for me, when they
were sick, my clothing was sackcloath; I humbled my self with Fasting, and my
Prayer returned into mine own bosom: I behaved my self as though he had been
my friend; I bowed down heav^ly, as one that mourns for his Mother. This is a
suitable frame of spirit for Christians toward enemies, Mat. 5. 44.

2. When you are as ready to do them good, (as to desire their good) when
occasion and opportunity is offered; Gal. 6. 10. As you have therefore
opportunity, do go^d to all men: but on the contrary, Nature without Grace,
waits opportunity to revenge, but Grace teaches otherwise: Grace bears no
hatred nor malice, but gladly forgives, so far as God forgives: yea, it begs
forgiveness of God for them, Luke 23. 34. And is ready to do any service of
love for soul or body, as occasion, opportunity, and capacity affords.

This Divine Virtue of Love being so Use I. Of Information in three things.
choice a Virtue, and so useful, I shall for further profit, endeavor to make
some application of this truth; and that, 1. Of information* and that in three
things.

1. To inform us in the truth of the excellency 1. Of the Excellency of Love.
of this Grace of Love to God, to Man, to Saints, to Sinners; it is an excellent
Virtue, and much to be prized and pressed after by all Saints: it is the
choicest Gift, the choicest Virtue: its choiceness and excellency appears;

1. In that (as has been before mentioned) 1. It Is preferred above all.
it is preferred in Scripture above all, and before all other Virtues, before
Faith, Tongues, Prophecy, Knowledge, understanding all Mysteries, 1 Cor. 13. 1,
2. and 8. 1, 2, 3. In all which its Divine Excellency is wonderfully
discovered; it is that which puts worth and value in all other Virtues and
Duties; for all without it is nothing.

2. It Is that which does the greatest 2. It d^^h the gre^^est work.
work, and bears the greatest burdens; 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6. It bears all
things, etc. It suffers, endures, bears, never fails. Christians have
great work to do for God in the World, in matter of service and suffering, in
doing good, and eschewing evil, in mortifying sin, great burdens to bear for
the sake of Christ: and it is only love flowing from Faith, that will make all
easy, and help us through every duty, and every difficulty; for Faith works
by love, Gal. 5. 6. Faith gets victory over the World; but it is by love;
for Faith can do nothing without love, as it ought to be done, for it is
nothing; but Faith and love working together, makes the soul bold and valiant
for God, and strong, able to do, suffer, and bear for Christ, whatever he
calls us too: It is the never-failing Virtue, it will never fail us hear, as it
shall not fail us hereafter: it is the bond of perfection, or the perfect bond,
that ties us perfectly to God in all difficulties, and perfectly one to another
in every duty; holiness in life is the great concernment for every Christian to
be pressing aften, to be holy in heart, and holy in life, to be holy in all
manner of conversation and godliness, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But this we must attain in
the power of the love of God in the Gospel, if ever we attain it, Ephesians. 3. 17,
18, 19. 1 These. 3. 12, 13.

3. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, 3. It is the fulfilling of the Law.
yea, and of the Gospel too, Mat. 22. 37, 39, 40. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self: on these two
Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets; it all hangs upon love: Romans
13. 8. 9. He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law: so that Love to God,
and love to Man, is the fulfilling of the Law: not that any should suppose that
merely love without any thing else, is intended; but that, where truth of love
is to God, and to man for God's sake, it will carry on such souls cheerfully to
every duty, both to God and Man, that the Law requires; that is, the Law of
the new Covenant: for the Law, as it is holy, just, and good, is still to be
observed, as administered by Christ in the new Covenant, and is the rule of the
Believers sanctification; and he that loves truly, fulfilleth it rightly: and
the true cause why Believers live so little to the Law of Christ, is because
they love so little.

4. Where this Grace of Love is in truth, 4 It is an evidence of being born of
God.
it is an evidence that such souls are born of God, and in a state of life; it is
an Heavenborn Virtue, and they are Heaven-born Christians in whom it is; and
the contrary discovers a state of death, 1 John 3. 14, 15. And this of love, in
this Scripture, is not intended (as some imagine) only a sign to others, that
such persons are born of God, but to the persons themselves in whom it is; see
ver. 19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. It Is an high evidence to a gracious soul. that he is born of
God, and is of the truth, and that he is passed from death to life. And thus
much as to the excellency of this Virtue of Love.

2. It may inform us of the great coming 2. It informs of the great comeing
short herein.
short, and wonderful failing of Christians in this matter; every one may best
find out this in his own heart, as among all the choice Virtues of the new
Covenant, this excels: so it is to be feared, that among all, Christians
fail most in this, of love to God, to Man, to the Word, to the Precepts, yea,
to the promises of the Gospel; the Lord help souls to lay it to heart in time;
for nothing demonstrates us (to our selves, to others) to be Christians indeed,
as this of love does.

3. It inform us of the true cause of all 3. Of the cause of all miscarriages.
miscarriages among Christians, to God, to Man, both Saints and Sinners; it is
want of love; love would make us willing to every duty, it would set the soul
upon the wheels, to run the way of Gods Commandments, and to make them the joy
and delight of our souls. We should then make God's Statutes our songs in the
house of our pilgrimage; we should then be free and universal in our obedience;
love would end very much, and many of the differences among Christians, and
cause them to bear with, and forbear one another, In a word, if ever there be a
reformation of things amiss among Christians, it must begin here.

2. Use of exhortation to this great duty 2. Use of Exhortation.
of Love, the Excellency, the Beauty, the Glory thereof, should quicken the
hearts of Christians to a greater desire and endeavor after so holy, so lovely,
and desirable a Virtue: if it be so excellent, let us approve it: Phil. 1. 9,
10. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more, in all
knowledge, and in all judgment, that you may approve things that are excellent,
that ye may be sincere, and without offense, till the day of Christ. Let us
approve it in our hearts, in our lives; Let us walk in love, as Christ also
has loved us, and given himself for us. To provoke your hearts to be more
reaching after this Heavenly Virtue, consider, not only what has been already
said, which is enough to quicken any living, believing soul, with an earnest
desire of increase herein; but further consider;

1. That duty to God calls for it: see the 1. Duty to God calls for it.
many commands in Holy Scripture to this great duty of love to God, to one
another, and to all men: Mat. 22. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, etc. Ps. 31. 23. O love the Lord ye his Saints; and whoever
sincerely performs this duty, is under the Blessing of Grace in order to Glory;
Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, Amen. But
on the contrary, if any be without this Divine disposition, and so perform not
this duty; see 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
accursed, Anathema Maranatha, accursed till the Lord come: and for the duty of
Saints love one to another, see John 13. 34. A new C^mmandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another, etc. 1 John 4. 21. This Commandment we have from him,
that he who loves God, should love his Brother also.

2. The Saints relation to God, and one 2. Relation calls for it.
to another, calls for it; they are the children of God, the Sons and Daughters
of God Almighty; this is their relation to God, and their privilege; They are
all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; they are all the children of
one Father, espoused to one Husband, members of one Body: 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ye are
the body of Christ, and members in particular: and this calls aloud for love in
the highest degree, both toward God, our Father, and toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, and one toward another.

3. The blood of Christ calls for it, it being 3. The blood of Christ calls for
it,
one special end for which it was shed, to make up the blessed relation of
Peace, Unity, and Love, of Father, Son, and Saints: Christ had never died such
a cursed death, had it not been to reconcile us to God, to make up the breach
between God and us, to bring us in again to God, that we might love God, and
live to him, and to reconcile us one to another, that we might love one another
as brethren: see both these, Ephesians. 2. 13, to 16. Where our reconciling to God,
and one to another, is both by the Cross and sufferings of Christ.

4. The Prayer and Intercession of our 4. The prayer of Christ calls for it.
Lord Jesus, calls for it; he has suffered for it, and has prayed for it,
John 17. 21, 23. That they may all be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in
thee; that they also may be one in us, etc.

Beloved friends, shall our dear Lord command it, sweat, and suffer for it, and
pray for it, and shall we set light by it, and be negligent in so weighty a
matter as this is, that so much concerns the Name and Glory of Christ in the
World, that so much concerns our duty, and our spiritual and eternal welfare.

5. The souls of poor sinners call for it, 5. The souls of sinners call for it.
the littleness of love to God appearing in the muchness of self-love, and love
to the World; and littleness of love to Saints appearing by the divisions
amongst them, hardens sinners against the truth, to their destruction: when
they see such divisions, and breaches, and so little love, they speak evil of
the way of truth, and are hardened in the way of sin, to their destruction.
Love among Christians, and a lovely carriage toward all, is the way to
convince sinners, that God is with his people, and that they are in the truth,
Joh. 17. 23. Where Christ prays his Father that his people might be made
perfect in one, that the World may believe that thou have sent me. Love and
Unity among the people of God, would be a blessed means to convince the World
of the truth of Christianity, and to make them in love with Jesus Christ.

6. Your own souls abundantly need it, 6. Your own souls call for it.
and if sensible thereof, would groan, and cry out in the sense of the want
thereof, and be endeavoring an increase therein; without it you can have no
solid ground of Peace in your own souls: 1 John 4. 18. There is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment; he that
fears, is not made perfect in love: If ever you would be rightly rid of
tormenting fear, and have joy and peace in your souls, it must come in in this
way of love, living much in the love of God, in Christ Jesus, will perfect your
love to him, and to his holy ones for his sake; which will prove so high an
evidence to your souls, of the truth of Grace, that it will cast out all fears,
and establish your hearts in believing your interest in, and relation to the
Lord Jesus: so Faith working by love, will be to you sound and solid peace: no
wonder, that persons that have but little love, have so little peace in their
souls; without it you can have no true fellowship with God, nor one with
another. 7. The present time and state calls for it.


7. The present time, and state of the Church, and dispensations of Gods, calls
for it; for it is a time and state of division and breaches among the people of
God in general, one bends one way, and another bends another way, casting
contempt and reproach upon each other, as if they were enemies; by reason of
which, the way of truth is evil spoken of, and poor sinners are hardened, and
God and Christ is dishonored, and many gracious souls grieved, and
discouraged. O that all who have any bowels of love in them at all, would lay
these things to heart, and learn to love more, then they would bear with, and
forbear each other in love; then they would be content to let each other walk
according to what they have received, and not be offended at their diligent and
humble enquiring after further light, without bitterness, and wrath, and evil
speakings.

O the general coldness, and luke-warmness that has befallen the Church at
this day, and all for want of love; the earthly, worldly mindedness, and
covetousness, the streight-heartedness, and streight-handedness, the love of
back and belly in pride and voluptuousn^ss, and other abominations, that do
more than manifestly declare the great coming short in love, truth of love
would cure all; and the present dispensations of God, his frowns and
corrections by his rod, and the things he seems to be calling his people to
bear and suffer for his name and sake; which can never be rightly born and
suffered, but in the spirit and power of Evangelical love; all which calls
aloud to all gracious souls, to learn to love more.

8. Consider the sweetness and loveliness 8. It Is a sweet and lovely life.
of the life of Love, 1. To God; if you live up much with God in truth of love,
it will not only sweeten your souls to God, and he will delight in you, but
your thoughts will be precious of him, and his service will be sweet and
precious to you; His yoke will be easy, and his burden will be light.

Otherwise his service will be burdensome, and his work tiresome to the soul:
but truth of love to God, sets the heart at liberty, and carries the soul
through the most difficult services with delight: and this is the soul that God
will meet with in the* way, and manifest himself unto, John 14. 21.

And, 2. This is the true, sweet, and lovely life of Christians one with
another; Ps. 133. 1, 2. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren
to dwell together in Unity; it is next to the Divine anointings of our Lord
Jesus, and indeed an effect thereof; It Is like the precious ointment upon the
head, that run down upon the heard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garments. Aaron was a type of Christ, his anointings of Christ,
the running down of the ointment upon his beard, and the skirts of his garment;
the coming down of the spirit of Christ upon his members, which unites them to
him in the same spirit and love, and one to another by the same spirit: so that
the unity of Saints is next to our unity with Christ, John 14. 20. and 17. 23.

9. It Is that Virtue which makes us most 9. It makes us most like God.
like God and Christ, it is the most God-like and Christ-like Virtue: would you
be more like your Father, and more like your Head and Lord? O then grow more in
this Grace, love God and Christ more, love one another more, and love all men
more; when our Lord Christ sets his Disciples in the highway of being like
their Father, it is in this of love; Mat. 5. 44. and 1 Job. 4. 7. Beloved, let
us love one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves, is born of
God, and knows God; ver. 8. For he that loves not, knows not God, for God
is love. Love is an heavenly and God-like Virtue; and the more you live in it,
the more are you like God; and the more persons live without love, the more do
they live without God; and look how much they live in malice and enmity, so
much are they like the Devil.

10. And finally, that your souls may 10. And finally, live much in the love of
Christ.
grow in this Grace, (which will prove to be the growth in all Grace, and of
every Virtue) live much in the meditation of the preciousness of Jesus Christ,
of his Person, of his Virtues, of his Love and the design of good to your souls
in all that he has done and suffered for you; 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you therefore
which bel^eve, he is precious, his Person, his Blood, his Virtues, his Love is
precious; He is altogether lovely; 1 Jo^. 4. 19. We love him, because he first
loved us. The thoughts of this first and free love, this great and mavelous
love is precious: 1 Jo^. 3. 1. Behold, what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God. I say, if souls did
live more in the consideration of this mavelous love, how would it transform
them into the likeness of Christ; 2 Cor. 3. 18. O therefore, if you would grow
in this Grace, dwell deep here, live much in the meditation of the mystery of
the love of Christ to your souls in the new Covenant; Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. You
must be rooted and grounded in the love of Christ, and endeavor to comprehend
more of this unsearchable mystery; and this is the way to be filled with all
the fullness of God, the fullness of understanding and knowledge, Col. 2. 2. The
fullness of conformity to him in Love, and in every Divine Virtue.

CHAP. XX. Of the Gospel-fear of God.
THE fear of God is one (and not the least) of the Divine and saving Virtues of
the new Covenant, and planted in every gracious heart; it is a part of the new
Covenant Law written in the heart, absolutely necessary to Salvation, as other
new Covenant Virtues are, and is included in that Faith to which the promise is
made.

The fear of God is of that worth and weight, that it is impossible for a truly
gracious soul to be without it; it is a special character of a graceless person
that is without it; Romans 3. 18. There is no fear of God before their eyes. In
speaking to this, I shall mind three things; 1. That it is a Virtue of the new
Covenant, and necessary to be in the hearts of all Believers. 2. What it is. 3.
The usefulness and profitableness thereof.

1. That it is a Virtue of the new Covenant, 1. It is a Virtue of the new
Covenant.
and necessary to be written in the hearts of all true Believers. And this will
appear, if we consider,

1. That it is a promise of the new Covenant; Jer. 32. 39. And I will give them
one heart, and one way, that they may fear me; ver. 40. I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Which is a promise of the new
and everlasting Covenant, the same as is expressed, Chap. 31. 31, to 34, And is
applied to the Gospel by the Apostle, Heb. 8. 8. Where God promises to write
his Law in the heart, that is, to season the heart with a disposition to
believe, love, fear, and obey the Lord.

2. It is that Virtue with which Christ our Lord was eminently filled, and
therefore certainly it is necessary for his members to be seasoned therewith:
Isa. 11. 2. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding, the spirit of Counsel and Might, the spirit of
Knowledge, and the fear of the Lord; which was exceeding proper to the holy Son
of God: and if Christ the Lord must have this spirit of the fear of God, then
surely it must needs be necessary for all his to be partakers of the same
Spirit and Virtue; for from his fullness we all receive.

3. It is the praiseworthy Virtue of the Saints, commended throughout all
Generations: 1 Kings 18. 3. It Is said, that Obadiah feared the Lord greatly:
the effects thereof follows, ver. 4. Neh. 7. 2. It Is said, that Hanani feared
God above many; for which Nehemiah gave him the charge over Jerusalem. Job is
described to have this Virtue, Job. 1. 8. To be an upright man, and one that
feared God; and ver. 1. One that feared God, and eschewed evil. Mal. 2. 4, 5.
God made his Covenant with Levy, of Life and Peace; for the fear wherewith he
feared me, and he was afraid before my Name. It is the commendation of the
Churches, in a time of liberty, that they walked in the fear of the Lord; Acts
9. 31.

4. This is that the Lords people are frequently exhorted to, both in the old
and new Testament; by which it appears, that it is a duty as well as a Virtue;
Lev. 19. 14. But shall fear thy God, I am the Lord; and 25. 17. But thou shall
fear thy God, for I am the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 13. 4. Ye shall walk after the
Lord your God, and fear him. Eccl. 12. 13. Fear God, and keep his Commandments;
for this is the whole duty of man. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and swear by his Name. Luke 12. 4, 5. And I say unto you,
my friend^, be not afraid of them that kill the body, etc. But I will forewarn
you whom ye shall fear; fear him, that after he has killed, has power to cast
into Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him, 2 Cor. 7. 1. The Apostle exhorts
the Saints to be perfecting holiness in the fear of God. By all which it
abundantly appears, that to fear God is the special duty of every true
Christian; 1 Pet. 2. 17. Rev. 14. 7. Heb. 12. 28. Let us have Grace, that we
may serve God with Reverence and Godly fear.

5. It Is that Virtue which includes part, yea, a great part of the Gospel;
because where the fear of the Lord is, there is Faith, Love, Humility, and
Obedience; even the whole terms of Gospel-interest: Rev. 14. 6. 7. When the
Angel preached the everlasting Gospel to them that dwell on earth; the
substance or great part thereof was, Fear God, and give Glory to him, etc. and
Chap. 15. 3, 4. This shall be the song of Saints, Who shall not fear thee, O
Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art holy.

6. It Is that Virtue unto which happiness and blessedness is promised, and that
must needs be a Virtue absolutely necessary to Salvation, and is included in
true Faith; Prove. 28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always. This happy
fear must be always, never off the heart; Chap. 23. 17. Be thou in the fear of
the Lord all the day, that is, always, every day; let not the fear of God be
out of thine heart at any time; Ps. 112. 1. Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord, etc. and 128. 1, 4. By all which it appears, that persons who fear God in
truth, are under the promises of Blessedness; and therefore it is a choice
Virtue.

2. I shall endeavor to show what the 2. What it is to fear God.
fear of the Lord is, or what it is to fear God: It is to have an holy,
honorable, and reverend esteem of God, to have the awe and dread of God upon
our hearts, because Holy and Reverend is his Name; Ps. 33. 8. Let all the Earth
fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants of the World stand in awe of him: Isa.
8. 13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and let
him be your dread. It becomes the people of the Lord of Hosts to have humble,
holy, reverend, and trembling thoughts of God always; Ps. 2. 11. Serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: serve him with reverence and godly
fear. It is to be feared that Christians have too low and common thoughts of
God, which exceedingly unbecometh them, and is a great disadvantage on the
spiritual account, as well as dishonorable unto God. This holy, reverend fear,
is a lovelike fear, not a slavish fear; a spouse-like fear, flowing from, or
mixed with love: Let the Wife see that she reverence her Husband, (or fear her
Husband:) The Wives reverence of, or fear toward her Husband, is not, or should
not be slavish, but in love, and conscience of God's Ordinance: so it behooves
every true Christian to reverence, honor, and fear the Lord; and that with
this filial spouse-like fear, to love God, and fear before him.

To help on this work in the heart, I Meditations to help us to fear God.
shall propound some serious meditations of God, that may tend to beget and
increase this holy, reverend awe, and fear of God in the heart.

1. Live much in the meditation of his 1. His Greatness.
Greatness. O, God is a great God, and a great King above all Gods, and above
all men. Psalm. 89. 6, 7. For who in the Heavens can be compared to the Lord?
Who among the sons of the Mighty can be likened unto the Lord? God is greatly
to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all
that are round about him. Note, that this great fear of God in the Saints, does
arise from the consideration of the Greatness of God; Who can be compared to
the Lord, who may be likened to our God, in Heaven or Earth? Therefore is he
greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, etc. Ps. 147. 5. Great is
our Lord, and of great Power, his understanding is infinite; and 95. 3. For the
Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods. And, as an effect of
this, or a resultancy drawn from this meditation of his Greatness, above all,
ver. 6. O come, let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker: that is, seeing he is such a great one above all, even our Maker; let us
worship and bow down, and kneel before him, i. e. Let us worship him in all
humility, and holy reverence; Let us have Grace to serve our God with reverence
and godly fear. Exodus 15. 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods?
who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.
And this result the Prophet draws from this meditation; Jer. 10. 6, 7.
Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord, and thy Name is great in
might, who would not fear thee, O King of Nations; for to thee does it
appertain. That is, to be great above all, and to be feared above all: this is
the first consideration that will tend to season our souls with this blessed
Virtue, the greatness, the gloriousness of God to live upon our hearts.

2. The holiness and purity of God; He 2. His Holiness and Purity.
is Glorious in Holiness, Holy and Reverend is his Name. Serious thoughts of
Gods Holiness will beget and increase in us this holy, reverend fear; Psalm. 99.
9. Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for the Lord our God
is holy. The sight and apprehension of the Holiness of God will help us to
worship him reverendly, and awfully. This was it made Isaiah, Chap. 6. 3. 5.
(When the Seraphims cried out, as overcome with the holiness of God, Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts;) to cry, Woe is me, I am undone, I am a man of
polluted lips, etc. Thus you see, (and I hope all true Christians can
experience) that serious thoughts of the Holiness o^ God will ^ill them with
humble, honorable, and awful thoughts of him.

3. The great Goodness and Mercy o 3. His Goodness.
God, especially on the new Covenant account, will tend wonderfully to season
the soul with this Virtue; and this mixed wit^ the rest, makes it to be
Evangelical fear; tha^ son-like, spouse-like fear, that so much concerns, and
becomes the Saints: the is the promise of the Lord to his people Hos. 3. 5.
Afterward shall the children of Isra^ return, and seek the Lord their God, and
David their King, (that is Christ Jesus) and shall fear the Lord and his
Goodness in the latter days. It Is the latter day work (especially under the
Gospel) for Saints to fear the Lord and his Goodness: Ps. 130. 4. With thee is
forgiveness, that thou may be feared: the Goodness, Forgiveness and Mercy
that is with God, will make his people to fear him, and fear to sin against
him, fear to displease him: he that will sin without fear, because God is good
and gracious, may justly fear that he is without all Grace: gracious souls fear
to sin against so good and gracious a God. Shall all the Nations fear and
tremble at all the great goodness that God will do for (and show unto) his
people, Jer, 33. 9. And shall not the great goodness of God cause the hearts of
those interessed in it, to fear and tremble before him. Surely it is impossible
for a gracious soul to take a view of the Greatness, the Glory, the Purity, and
the goodness and Mercy of God, and of his own badness, but with astonishment,
holy reverence and fear: and thus they shall fear the Lord and his Goodness,
(the Lord for his Goodness) in the latter days.

4. Meditation on the Justice and Judgments 4. His Justice against sin and
sinners.
of God against sin and sinners, will tend to beget, maintain, and increase
this holy fear of God, and fear to sin against him: Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh
trembles because of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. Matt. 10. 28. ^ear
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather
fear him that is able to destroy both body and soul in Hell.

Obj. This is a slavish fear, and not the

Answ. 1. It is that which becomes, and Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. There you have the
name of the Lord proclaimed in these two Attributes, of Mercy and Justice: And
whosoever thinks this wonderful, gracious, and terrible Name of the Lord (to fear
and tremble at his Goodness, and his Justice, his Righteous and Terrible Name)
to be beneath his new Covenant calling, lives greatly below the calling of a
Christian.

2. Christians are flesh as well as spirit, and liable to temptation and
miscarriage, woeful experience teaches us this; and God, as a Father, does not
only keep his children in awe, with the knowledge of their relation, that so
love may prevail; but likewise with the rod, and threats, and danger too, of
dispossessing of the inheritance and provision on that account; and counts it
well, if all tend to effect the work: thus deals the Lord with his people,
else what means those various sayings in his Word? Ps. 89. 30, 31, 32. If his
children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my
Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes, etc. See Heb. 12. 7, to 11. And
those Judgments executed formerly on the people of God for sin, left on Record
for our learning, to the end we might fear to sin against him, lest we meet
with like Judgments: 1 Cor. 10. 1. to 11. and Chap. 11. 30. For this cause many
are weak and sick among you, and many sleep, etc. All which clearly proves
that God does afflict his people for sin; and he has recorded it, that his
people might fear to sin against him. Yea, and further, he keeps his children
in awe with threats of dispossessing them of the inheritance, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
and 4. 1. 11. and 3. 12. 14. 2 Tit. 2. 12, 13, 14. Rev. 2 and 3 Chapters; all
which confirms this truth, that God threatens for sin, and executes for sin;
and warns to watchfulness, that the Crown be not lost, Rev. 3. 11. Though it is
true, that fear flowing from love, is the most Evangelical and son-like fear:
yet a mixture, a fear of God in his whole Name, his Greatness, Holiness,
Goodness, Justice, Righteousness, etc. is the most solid, safe, preserving
fear; the soul being balanced with all the means and meditations of God
prescribed to carry on this blessed Divine Virtue, is suitable and useful for
the accomplishment thereof. Do not Parents account it well, if all lawful means
effect the end; that is, to keep their children in awe and subjection; threats
and stripes as well as love? And does not God deal with his children
accordingly? And does not Christians that will not stand in awe of his
Judgments, wonderfully dishonor him, that will fear him but in one part of his
Name? A dangerous temptation, to be shamed, and avoided of all who desire to
fear God, Mal. 2. 5. and 4. 2.

5. Meditation on the Word of God will 5. The Word of God.
tend to season souls with this holy fear, for that will help us in the four
former particulars. The truth of God in all his Names, and faithfulness in all
his Word, in his Precepts and Promises, and threats against sin and sinners,
will tend to work and increase this Grace, Isa. 66. 2. But to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
Word. In the Word of God, is declared the whole trembling Name of God in all
the parts thereof; and the meditation thereon will cause gracious souls to fear
before him. Psalm. 119. 161. My heart stands in awe of thy Word. The thoughts
of the Authority, Purity, Divinity, and truth of the Word, will beget and
increase awful and reverend thoughts of God.

3. Of the usefulness and profitableness 3. Its Usefulness.
of this Virtue: We may say of this Virtue as the Apostle speaking of
Godliness, that it is profitable to all things: it is the sum of Godliness, and
is useful to balance the soul at all times, and in all places and companies;
and to have its exercise and use in all Virtues: it is the soul-seasoning, and
soulballancing Grace; it is the beginning, middle, and end of Wisdom. But to
speak more particularly and distinctly of this Divine Virtue, in the use
thereof;

1. It Is a sin-destroying Virtue; where the fear of God is, there sin must out:
it is is impossible for the fear of God, and the love of sin, to dwell together
in the soul: Psalm. 4. 4. Stand in awe, and sin not; where the awe of God is,
there will be a fear to sin against him: Genesis 39. 9. Joseph said, How then
shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God. Fear of God occasions
fear of sinning against him; this was it kept Nehemiah from oppressing the
people like the former Governors, Neh. 5. 15. But so did not I, because of the
fear of God, Ps. 19. 9. The fear of the Lord is clear, etc. it is a purging,
cleansing Virtue; it cleanses the soul from the love, power, and practice of
sin; Prove. 16. 6. By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil; and 8. 13. The
fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride and arrogance, and the evil way, etc.
Ps. 34. 11, 12, 13. Where the love and fear of God is, there the love of sin
can have no place; and the true cause of reigning abominations in any is,
because the fear of God is wanting there: Ps. 36. 1. The transgression of the
wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. O
therefore consider this, you that can sin without fear; it argues you to be
without the fear of God, and to be graceless persons; Romans 3. 18. There is no
fear of God before their eyes. And this I fear to be the case of many, not only
of the World, but of those who pretend and profess to be called out of the
World: Job feared God, and eschewed evil, Chap. 1. 1. Fear God and sin if you
dare.

2. The fear of God, as it is a sin-destroying Virtue, so it is a God-obeying
Virtue: where the fear of God is in truth, there is conscience and care to obey
the Lord, to keep his Commandments: Eccl. 12, 13. Fear God, and keep his
Commandments; that is, keep his Commandments as your duty: and where this fear
of God is, you will keep his Commandments as your disposition, the fear of God,
and obedience to him, always dwells together: Ps. 5. 7. As for me, I will come
into thine house in the multitude of thy Mercies, and in thy fear will I
worship toward thine Holy Temple. Where sense of Mercy, and power of Love, and
the fear of God meet together in one soul, there will be sincere obedience, and
worshipping of God; there will be serving God with reverence, and godly fear:
Ps. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, rejoice with trembling. You that have no
care nor conscience of obeying the Lord, of serving and worshipping the Lord
according to his appointments, and living to him according to his will, have
just grounds to suspect that you are without the love and fear of God.

3. The fear of God is a soul-sanctifying Virtue; where the love and fear of
God is, the desire of that soul is to be more like God, and like Christ; it
does not only out with sin, but it increases Virtue: it is as truly desirous
of increase in Virtue, of conformity to Christ, as it is to be rid of sin:
outing of sin is one part of Holiness, and inning of Virtue is the other; and
it is accomplished by the fear of God: Ps. 34. 11, 12, 13. Come ye children,
hearken to me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord; and concludes all in
this, Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace, and pursue it. This is the way
to perfect Holiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. The fear of God is
a soul-sanctifying Virtue: would you grow in Holiness and conformity to Jesus
Christ (which I dare say is the desire of all gracious souls) both in the
inward and outward man, then see that you grow in this Virtue.

4. The fear of God is a soul-consolating Virtue; it affords very much ground
of consolation to the soul where it is; for where this is in truth, there are
all the Divine Virtues of the Gospel to which the promises are made, as Faith,
Love, Humility, Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, etc. The Divine saving Virtues
of the new Covenant goes not alone, they are much besides the truth of the
Gospel, that tell souls, that one Grace or Virtue of Christ in them, is enough
to demonstrate them to be in a saved condition; whereas the Gospel-saving
Graces or Virtues to which Salvation is promised, goes not alone: he that
supposes he has one alone, must suppose impossibilities; either he has more;
or none at all; For from his fullness we all receive, and Grace for Grace; that
is, of every Divine Virtue of Christ, the Believer has something thereof
within him; and where the fear of the Lord is, there is the truth of all Divine
Grace; it is laid at bottom of all, as that from whence it flows: Acts 10. 34,
35. In every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, shall be
accepted. Fear God, and the work will be done, matter of comfort to souls
possessed with this Virtue: Prove. 14. 26, 27. The fear of the Lord is strong
confidence, etc. That is, it is a ground of confidence, of interest in God,
which affords strong consolation; Prove. 19. 23. The fear of the Lord tends to
life, and he that has it, shall abide satisfied, he shall not be visited with
evil. It Is such a Virtue, so much tending to life, that affords satisfaction to
the soul that has it, that he is in the way of life. Hence the Lord says,
(speaking of such a person,) Isa. 33. 6. The fear of the Lord is his treasure;
a treasure of Grace is in it here, and a treasure of Glory shall attend it
hereafter; thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

5. The fear of God is a soul-preserving 5. It is a soul-preserving Grace.
Grace, a soul-seasoning and preserving Virtue; it tends to preserve those in
whom it is, to the Kingdom of Glory promised: it not only preserves and keeps
the soul from sin, and keeps it close to duty; but it preserves the soul from
defilements in evil times, and days of temptation: Mal. 3. 15, 16. When they
called the proud, happy; and they that tempted God were delivered; and they
that wrought wickedness were set up: then they that feared God, spoke often one
to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, etc. That is, he approved it,
and owned them, and remembered them in mercy in the day of need. The fear of the
Lord will preserve souls pure to God in profane and sinning times, and in
persecuting times, and in times of temptation: in a word, it will preserve
those in whom it is, through all difficulties and temptations; it will preserve
from the sinful fear of man: Prove. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a snare;
Isa. 51. 7, 12, 13. But the fear of God delivers from this snare, it keeps
from a wicked departing from God; Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. O therefore all ye that fear God,
seek, that ye may increase therein more and* more; it will tend to the increase
of every Virtue, and decrease of sin; and preserving you in Faith, Love and
Holiness unto the day of Redemption. I conclude this with, Psalm. 34, 9. O fear
the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Law of God, and what we are to understand thereby.
COncerning the Law of God, which has been, and is, the rule both of Faith and
Practice throughout all Ages, according to the manner of the ministration
thereof, of which it is necessary for Christians to be instructed in. In
speaking thereof, I shall endeavor, 1. To show what it is. 2. How it has been
in several times and manners given and administered since the beginning. 3. The
necessariness of believing and obeying thereof, according to the time and
manner of the administering thereof. 4. What Law it was that Christ fulfilled in
his active and passive obedience; and for what sins it was that he suffered.

1. What the Law of God is; 1. Sometimes, 1. What the Law of God is.
by Law, we are to understand the whole Word and Will of God revealed, relating
1. The whole Word and Will of God.
both to Faith and obedience, things to be believed and practiced throughout
all Ages; the Precepts and Promises comes under this Law: and hence it is, that
not only the Law given by Moses, is called the Law, that was the Law of
Commands; but the Psalms is called the Law; John 10. 34. Which relates to Psalm.
82. 6. and Psalm. 78. 1. Give ear O people to my Law, etc. And the Prophets are
called the Law; 1 Cor. 14. 21. In the Law it is written, etc. Which relates to
Isa. 28. 11. All the promises of God in his Word may come under this of Law; 1.
As it concerns us to believe them: this is the Law of Faith, and it is our
duty to believe God in all his Word. 2. As it concerns God, because he has
tied himself to us therein; that as his Precepts tieth us to obedience to him,
in matters of Faith and Practice; so his promises is the Law by which he walks
toward his people; and he would have his people to know, that as he has
brought them under the Law of the new Covenant to him, and they ought to be
obedient to him in all things, Acts 3. 22. So he has obliged himself to his
people in the Law of the new Covenant to him, and they ought to be obedient to
him in all things, Acts 3. 22. So he has obliged himself to his people in the
Law of the new Covenant, to perform all the good things promised therein to his
people, that keep Faith to him in that Covenant: and that if we fail not in our
duty, he will not, cannot fail in his Word, having bound himself by his own
Law, and Covenant of Promise in this matter; and he cannot lie, he cannot break
his own Law Covenant, Romans 3. 3, 4. 2 Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6.
17, 18. And not only so, but he has bound himself by promise, to supply the
hearts of his people with Grace, till they come to Glory, Jer. 32. 40. 2 These.
3. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Joh. 10. 28, 29.

2. Sometimes (and most frequently in 2. The Law given by Moses.
Scripture) by Law is intended the ten Precepts given by Moses in tables of
Stone, from Mount Sinai, Romans 7. 7, etc. and 13. 8, 9. Gal. 3. 17, to 22.
Sometimes it intends the whole Law, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, Ephesians. 2.
14, 15. Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4. And the Prophet, Ps. 119. So frequently speaking of
Law Statutes and Judgments, etc. Intends thereby the whole of the Law.

3. The making known of the Will of 3. The Will of God before the Law.
God before this Law was given from Mount Sinai, (and in some sense without it)
is impliedly called the Law; Romans 5. 13. For until the Law sin was in the
World, but sin is not imputed when there is no Law: and 4. 15. Where no Law is,
there is no transgression. Thereby clearly implying, that there was no time
from the Creation, in which man was left without Law, though God have had his
differing ways of bringing it forth.

4. The Will of God made known in the 4. The Will of God in the Gospel.
Gospel by Jesus Christ, is called Law; and is (indeed) the only Law Covenant
on record for Believers, called The Law of Faith; Romans 3. 27. The Law of
Liberty; Jam. 1. 25. The Royal (or Kingly) Law; Jam. 2. 8. Given to us by the
Lord Jesus, Heb. 1. 1, 2. Jo^. 12. 49, 50. Unto whom we ought to submit in
every thing; Acts 3. 22, 23. The Doctrine of the Gospel relating to Faith and
Obedience, is the Law of Christ; His Royal Law to Believers.

5. The new Covenant promised, and 5. The Law written in the heart.
written in the heart, (that is, an holy disposition and power of Grace to do
what God in his Law-Doctrine of the Gospel requires) is called the Law; Heb.
8. 10. Romans 2. 14, 15. This is the Law of God in the heart; Ps. 37. 31. The Law
of God is in his heart, his steps shall not slide.

2. How the Law of God has been at 2. How it has been delivered, 1. To Adam
several times, and in several ways and methods delivered; Heb. 1. 1. The
first was given to Adam in his state of Innocence; Genesis 2. 17. Who by nature
was the original (or root) of all mankind; though it be not in them called Law,
yet it was a Law Covenant of Command, with the penalty on the breach thereof.
Of the tree of the Knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat; for in the day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; or, in dying, thou shall die. Which
Law he transgressed, and brought in death on himself, and all mankind.

2. After this fall of man, God had his Law in the World condemning sin, till
the Law was given by Moses, (though not so clear and plain) else there had been
no sin; for Where no Law is, there is no transgression: and yet before the Law,
or until the Law (given by Moses) sin was in the World: yet not so clear a
Law; For the Law was added because of transgression, that sin might appear to
be out of measure sinful. It was sinful before, but it did not appear to be so
sinful before, as it did after by the Law: they that sinned before the Law, did
not sin after the similitude of Adam' s transgression, Romans 5. 14. That is
against a plain Precept with a threat, as those since the Law, who received it,
and lived under it as their Law Covenant, and voluntarily brake it, and in that
respect did sin after the similitude of Adam's transgression; though it is true,
in some respects none can sin after the similitude of his transgression. And
that first, as he, in a state of innocence, and yet sinned. 2. As a public
person, and so let in sin and death upon all; so none but himself personally
could sin; yet sin was in the World till the Law, which argues that there must
be some Law.

So then the question is, what that Law

Answ. It is the opinion of some, that it Moses.

Now, though I shall not altogether deny this position, yet I think it has
need to be inquired into, and to be considered with other concurring
circumstances, without which it will not hold true; for,

1. There is no such thing as a Law written in the hearts of men by nature, to
teach them that God is, and is to be worshipped, and to convince of sin against
him, distinct from all means without him. And this will appear, if we consider,

1. That all Nations in the World know, and worship according to the traditions
and customs received, and judge that to be sin, which by custom and account is
so taken to be: and hence it is, that the World generally, in many things, call
good evil, and evil good, and make conscience of so doing, having no Law
written in their hearts, that convinces them thereof.

2. This appears from the Word of Truth, Romans 1. 20. For the invisible things
of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. Where the Apostle
states the way and means of knowing God, where neither Law nor Gospel is, that
is, not singly by any Law in the heart, but by the Works and Law of Creation,
that preaches forth God to all Nations, Ps. 19. 1, 2, 3.

Obj. The Apostle, Romans 2. 14, 15. Speaking do by nature the things contained
in the Law, which shows the work of the Law written in their hearts, etc.

Answ. It Is true; but this Scripture is very much mis-understood; for it is
evident the Apostle intends not the common and unbelieving Gentiles, of them he
had spoken in the first Chapter; but here he speaks of believing Gentiles,
thereby to reprove the Jews, who boasted of the Law, and thence opposed the
Gospel, and the believing Gentiles that obeyed the Gospel; (and is the same in
substance as that, Romans 9. 30, 31, 32.) and did not walk under the Law as a
ministration, as the Jews did; and the Apostle to stop the Jews opposite
boasting, endeavors to convince them, that the Gentiles who believed, though
they had not the Law, neither were circumcised, yet being circumcised in their
hearts to God, they were safe, and should judge them that bosted so much of the
Law. That this is the true sense and meaning of that Scripture, is evident; 1.
From the occasion of the words; It Is such a doing of, or living to the Law, as
is attended with Glory, Honor, Immortality, etc. Honor, Glory, and Peace,
ver, 7. 10. And it is the same doing intended throughout the Discourse. 2. It Is
such a doing of the Law as will justify before God, ver. 13. 3. It Is such a
doing of the Law as may stand with a good conscience in the day of need; that
is, in the day of Judgment, ver. 15, 16. 4. It is such a doing as flows from an
heart spiritually circumcised to God, and shall have praise of him, ver. 28,
29. It Is the same Gentiles he was speaking of before, and is the result drawn
up from the former promises; so that by the Law written in the heart, we must
understand the Law of the new Covenant, inclining to believe and obey the
Gospel; or that the Apostle held forth another way of Salvation than by Jesus
Christ, and the new Covenant, which we may in no case imagine.

I shall return to show the ways of God in making known himself to men since
the fall. And, 1. I grant that there is a capacity left in man by nature, in
the use of means, in some measure to know God, and to know many things to be
sinful, but not without the concurrency of the use of means. I deny not what
God might work miraculously, he could make the Ass to speak, to convince the
madness of Balaam, but his ordinary way has been in the use of means. It is
with the soul of man, as it is with the body; the eye is called the light of
the body, not that there is any light in the eye more than in any other part of
the body, but a capacity of seeing, or a seeing faculty; when the light
shines, the eye sees no more than the hand, if there be no light without: So
it is in the souls of men, there is the eyes of the understanding, but it must
have something propounded from without, before it understands, or apprehends:
if it were possible to keep men from all means of light, either by seeing or
hearing, the understanding (which is the eye of the soul) would remain dark, as
the eye of the body without light.

Now the Law or Will of God might very probably, 1. Descend something by
tradition from Adam, who had converse with God, not only before, but after the
fall; and could not but retain much of the knowledge of God, and so commend it
to Posterity.

2. The discoveries of the Will of God in the matters of Worship, and the
manner thereof in offering of sacrifices, which could not (ordinarily) come by
nature, but by some way of institution. Some discoveries of his Will by Divine
Inspiration, in way of Prophecy, as is plain; Jude ver. 14. Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied, etc. And God spoke sometimes immediately to the Fathers,
and those discoveries of God were propagated to Posterity, though much
corrupted: and doubtless there is at this day much of tradition among some of
the Heathens about circumstances and ceremonies corruptly practiced by
tradition, as offering sacrifice, circumcision, offering their firstborn to
God, and owning only one God, their Priests and Prayers, etc.

The fourth and most common way of God's teaching mankind throughout all Ages,
(especially where other means has failed) has been by his works of Creation,
and Preservation, in which was, and is, a sufficiency to teach the knowledge of
God, as to his being; and from hence that capacity left in man, might learn the
substance of the Moral Law, but not without this means; that the Creation was a
sufficient means to teach the knowledge of God; i. e. That there was a God
infinite in his being, and glorious, the former of all things; and that this
was God's way of teaching, the Apostle plainly asserts; Romans 1. 19, 20. And the
Prophet, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3.

There was, and is a capacity in man, (by this means and help;) 1. To conclude
that there is a God, the Creator and Preserver of all; that he must be infinite
in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness. And, 2. From reason* conclude, that there is
but one God, not a plurality in Essence, Will, and Work; but that there must be
unity in so great and glorious a Work. And then; 3. That it is a duty to be
subject to this Creator, and that he must be honored and worshipped according
to his own will, as far as understood: that this Invisible, Powerful, Wise God,
that made all things, must needs be Holy, as Great, and Wise; and his Will must
be the Law to the Creature, and that the transgression thereof must needs be
sinful: and from hence must necessarily understand what was for common good and
society of mankind, being capacitated with reason, exercised thus in in the use
of means, might and did attain much; and I dare not but to think, that in this
means God has from the beginning wrought many souls savingly to himself.

And thus it appears that there was a Law, i. e. a means to know God, (and in
some measure to know duty, and to know sin) before the Law was given; and the
same means do the World yet enjoy, where the Gospel is not preached.

2. God made known himself, and Will, to his Servants, both before and after
the Flood, to Noah; and especially to Abraham, whom he called out from the rest
of the World, to whom he gave great and precious promises, with whom he made
the Covenants, and gave him circumcision, in which was included the whole Law,
Gal. 5. 3. And after he appeared to Isaac and Jacob, and most of all to Moses,
to and by whom he gave the Law and old Covenant to his people, in which was the
Covenant of Life and Peace darkly held forth, 2 Cor. 3. 13. And in which was
contained the duties of his people, till the anointed one promised was come;
the great Lord and Lawgiver of this new Covenant of Life, unto whom we are to
submit our selves in all things.

3. That it was, and is necessary for men to belive and obey God according to
the means and ministration throughout all Generations; and the sin of those who
lived not up to the means and light of the time and ministration.

1. As given before the Law, and where Law nor Gospel never came; if there be
any place or people in the World where its sound has not been heard, their
duty was, and is, to know, believe, and serve God, according to the means
afforded, and they shall be thereby accordingly judged, Romans 2. 12, 16. Acts
17. 31.

2. As made known in and by the Law; their duty was to believe and obey God
according to his Will made known in the Law; and has been, and shall be judged
for their disobedience and sin against the Law, Romans 2. 12, 17, to 24.

3. Those that live under the Gospel, it is their duty to believe and obey God
according to the Law of the Gospel, and new Covenant, as it is administered and
given forth by Jesus Christ the Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. And such must be judged
according to the Gospel; and receive approbation, or condemnation, according to
their believing and obeying, or not believing and obeying of Jesus Christ in
the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 7, to 10. Heb. 2. 2, 3.

Quest. Have we not that which is called And if so, in what manner are we then
to receive it?

Answ. 1. That we have the truth and substance 1. That we have the truth and
substance of the Law.
of the Law administered in the Gospel, is without all ground or reason of
question or doubt, because that Law was, and is Spiritual, Holy, Just, and
Good; and there can be no better Law than that as a rule of holiness to the
Saints; but in speaking to it, and opening thereof, I shall offer to
consideration these four following things.

1. That the Law, as a ministration in Yet, 1. As given by Moses, it is done
away.
the hand of, or as given by Moses from Mount Sinai, is done away and
abolished, as it required righteousness unto Justification, Romans 10. 4, 5.
Though of it self it never justified any, but was indeed the ministration of
condemnation: for had it not required a righteousness to Justification, it
could not have been the ministration of condemnation; and on both these
accounts it is done away to Believers, and abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 7, to 11. And on
this account (as administered from Mount Sinai) it is done away as a rule; for as
it was a rule of righteousness, so it became the ministration of condemnation,
and so Believers are dead to it by the body of Christ, being espoused to him,
as the Wife is free from the Law of her Husband, being dead, Romans 7. 4, 6.

Yet, 2. Believers are not without the 2. Believers are not without the Law.
Law, but it is to them the rule of Holiness, as given by their Lord and
Lawgiver; and so is no ministration of condemnation to Believers, being in the
hand of their Mediator, he having fulfilled the righteousness thereof for us in
his own person, actively in living up perfectly to it, and the penal part
thereof for us in his sufferings; but that it is to Believers (as his Law, and
given by him) a rule of Holiness, (is without all just ground of question) but
not of righteousness unto Justification, but of Conversation, righteousness
unto Justification being alone, by, and for the suffering sake of Christ.

Reasons why the Law, as in the hand of Christ, is a rule of Life to Believers.

1. Because it is so stated in the new Testament; 1 Tit. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11. For we
know that the Law is good, if we use it lawfully, etc. For the Law is not made
for a righteous man, etc. That is, righteous men are not under the Law, that
is, under the rule and condemnation thereof, as given by Moses, Romans 6. 14.
Because they are espoused to Jesus Christ by Faith, Romans 7. 4. And so they
perform all their obedience to Jesus Christ as their Lord and Lawgiver; and
that this is it the Apostle intends, 1 Tit. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11. is clear; ver. 10.
If there be any thing else that is contrary to sound Doctrine; that is, the Law
condemns whatever is contrary to the sound Doctrine of the Gospel; as ver. 11.
According to the glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, etc. That is, the Law of
the glorious Gospel of the blessed God condemns whatever is contrary to it.
The Law is brought forth in the glorious Gospel, and is become the rule of the
blessed God to Believers; and who-ever walks contrary to it, must be condemned
by our blessed Lord Jesus, who is the Lord of this blessed and glorious
ministration, Romans 13. 8, 9. 10. and 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law
through Faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law. God forbid that any
should have such thoughts; no, it establishes the Law; and that, 1. In its
Righteousness and Justice given in the old ministration, that it must be
fulfilled for us, that we might be (through believing) justified from its
condemnation, and so that it might be fulfilled in us, and by us, as our
Sanctification; Romans 8. 4. That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us, etc. That is, in us by believing and obeying Christ therein: and this
the Apostle states in plain words, that he was under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor.
9. 21.

2. The Law in it self, as given by God, is Spiritual, Holy, Just, and Good,
Romans 7. 12, 14. And we cannot expect a better rule of life for Sanctification,
than a Spiritual, Holy, Just and Good Law; It Is the manner of administering
makes the difference, and not the matter in the substance thereof, the manner
differs. It Is given by Jesus Christ as Mediator, he having fulfilled the
righteousness thereof, and born the penalty, by which means it is become his
Law, and he has it in his hand to give it forth as his Royal Law, as an holy
rule for his people to serve him by.

3. It Is that Law which in the substance thereof, requires that we should love
the Lord our God with all our hearts, and our neighbors as our selves, Mat.
22. 37, 38, 39. And this must needs be the Law of the Gospel, if we will have
any Law at all; it is true the Law required it, but the Gospel effects it, it
effects what the Law required, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains us,
that is, it makes us willing to love and obey the Lord.

4. The Law in the matter thereof is perpetual, therefore not to be done away
in the matter or substance, but in the manner of administering, as administered
in the old Testament; that called the Moral Law, was the foundation of the
Ceremonial and Judicial, they were both drawn out of the Moral; the Moral in
the first part thereof required the worshipping of the one true God; the
Ceremonial shows how this one God would be worshipped: the second part relates
to the duties of men each to other; the Judicial opens those duties, with the
penalty of the breach thereof, relating both to God and men.

And as it is in the hand of Christ, it is the same still; the Moral Law
substantially is the foundation of all duty, as to the ordering of the
conversation; for the duty of it was never taken away, as it tends to holiness;
and as it is in the hand of Christ, it calls for Faith in him, and obedience to
him; for the rise of all duty was from the Law, which had its rise from the
holy God, and suitable to its being opened, was to be obeyed.

And the perfection required in the holy and just Law of God, will be the
perfection of Saints in Glory; perfection in love and holiness will be the
glorious state of Saints; and (indeed) it was the great design of God in the
Gospel, by Jesus Christ, to bring up a people to the spiritual perfection
required in the Law, which is begun here by Faith and Holiness, and shall be
perfected in Glory.

So then this being the spiritual and perfect rule of Holiness drawn by God
Himself, and presented to men as a character of that perfection he designed to
bring up his people to by Jesus Christ, it remains in his hand as the
foundation of all Law and Spirit working in the heart, for the gradual
perfecting of the Saints therein.

To make this clear, that it is as to the matter thereof the same, and must be
the same in the substance thereof; for it requires the owning and worshipping
the one true God in Holiness, which is the duty of the Gospel, and will be the
eternal duty and work of Saints in Glory. And Jesus Christ the Lord of this
Gospel-ministration, and Mediator of the Gospel Covenant, gives us rules as to
the manner how God will and must be worshipped; and to him are we bound to
submit in all his Ordinances and Institutions, about the manner and matter of
his instituted Worship, and not turn back to the Mosaical Institutions: but now
Christ gives rules in the Gospel, as the Ceremonial Law did under that
ministration; and if we refuse Christ's Institutions, and go back to Moses, we
must lose our part and interest in Christ and the Gospel, Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4. And
the Judicial Law we have from Christ, to curb sin and transgression, and to
keep order in his Kingdom in this imperfect state: that is, the Order, Offices,
and Government in his Church, his House, his Kingdom, and both rules of Worship
and Discipline flows originally from the right of the Moral Law, as the
Ceremonial and Judicial did, though now as a part of the new Covenant in the
^and of Christ our Lawgiver, or Statute(...)er, who writes it in the hearts of
his (...) as in the Word of the Gospel.

^he ^ourth thing mentioned to be con(...)d is, what Law it was that Christ
ful^^lled in his active and passive obedience; and for what sins it was that he
suffered?

To this I answer, 1. That it was the Law given by the hand of Moses, and
written in Tables of Stone, that Christ fulfilled in his active and passive
obedience, for and in behalf of sinners: and then it was for the sins committed
against that Law, the truth hereof appears from Scripture; the Scripture speaks
not of any other Law, that was the Law which Christ came to fulfill, Mat. 5. 18.
That was the Covenant and Law, God made with his people, called the first
Covenant, and as a Covenant and Ministration, was to be done away, Jer. 31. 31,
32, 33. Whether this Law was given to Adam before the fall, or written in him,
I shall not dispute: It Is that in which the Scripture is silent: if we suppose
that it was written in him, we must likewise suppose it to be much inferior to
the writing of the Law in the hearts of Believers in the new Covenant; for he
fell from his estate, and all we in him; but the Law of the new Covenant is so
written in the heart, as that they shall never depart from him; it shall be
their eternal perfection in Glory; and the design of God herein is, not to
bring us back to Adam's first estate, who in his first and best estate was of
the earth earthly, 1 Cor. 15. 47. But to the second man, which is the Lord from
Heaven. Yet I shall not question but that the whole Law might be included in
that one instituted Ordinance, Genesis 2. 17. As it was in that instituted
Ordinance of Circumcision given to Abraham, Genesis 17. 10, etc. Compared with
Gal. 5. 3. And in the Gospel, the instituted Ordinance of Baptism includes the
whole Law of the Gospel, Mar. 16. 15, 16. Gal. 3. 27.

And so that instituted Ordinance being broken, the Law might be the flaming
Sword in the hand of the Angel, to keep the way of the tree of Life, that none
could enter but by the Mediator; for the Law it was which stopped all entrance
again to God, but by the Mediator; the Law it was that did curse for sin, and
was the fiery administration of death; and this is the Law that Christ did bear
the curse thereof for sinners.

2. And then it must necessarily follow, that Christ died for the
transgressions that was against this Law ever since the fall of man, and not so
properly in a meritorious way; for Adam's transgression against that instituted
Ordinance, in eating the forbidden fruit, for which death came in upon him and
his posterity, and we are all under the execution of that sentence, which was
especially the nihilating of the body, with the miseries attending that
sentence in order thereunto, and an usher (though not the cause) to eternal
misery.

For the eternal state of man is brought in by Jesus Christ, but that sentence
past no further than this, Genesis 3. 19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return. There is not a word of eternal death in misery, but the undoing of what
God had done, and the eternal estate came in by the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ; eternal Life and Glory to such as believe and obey the Gospel,
and death and condemnation to unbelievers for their sin against him, and not
accepting his Grace, although he came not into the World until the fullness of
time determined was come, Gal. 4. 4. Till then God accepted of sincerity of
Faith and service, according to the time and means both of Jew and Gentile; yet
still, as having respect to Jesus Christ; for God accepted of no man after the
fall, but relative to the promised seed; and all saved ones shall know, that
their Salvation is by him; and all condemned ones shall know that their
condemnation is for sinning against Jesus Christ, else how shall he be the
Judge of all: so that it follows, that the sins for which Christ died, was
the sins committed against the righteous Law and Gospel of God since the fall,
and not so properly for Adam's particular sin by which he fell, (for that
punishment passes on all,) unless it be, that by his death and resurrection,
he recovers all mankind out of that estate into which they fell. And this is a
general redemption, by the death and resurrection of Christ the sentence of
death past on all men; and Christ Jesus undertakes that sentence in behalf of
all men, and rises again, and so conquereth death in behalf of mankind,
recovers the Malefactors from the power of death after the execution of the
sentence, and so does no wrong to the Law, nor Justice executed in that
sentence. So that it is a truth, that the sins for which Christ suffered, was
the sins of mankind since the fall. And this does further appear.

1. That sin and trangression of Adam, by which death came into the World, is
not mentioned in the Scripture to be the cause, or any part of the cause of
Christ's suffering, unless, as was last mentioned.

2. The Scripture frequently expresses the death and sufferings of Christ to
be for the sins of the World, and for our sins, Adam's sins after the fall
being included; Joh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the World; 1 Cor. 15. 3. How that Jesus Christ died for our sins according to
the Scripture; 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, etc.
and Isa. 53. 5. With multitudes of Scriptures to this purpose that might be
produced. And he died for the sins and transgressions committed against the
first Testament, Heb. 9. 15. i. e. the first after the fall; for mankind had
done with that before the fall, except being under its execution:) for all the
sins in the World have been in some sense (as has been before showed) against
that Testament and Holy Law, and against Jesus Christ, by whom all have
subsisted since the fall; so that we may come to result in this matter.

1. That Adam's transgression of an instituted Ordinance, was the cause and way
by which sin and death came in upon all men, which should make all men tremble
in the thoughts of making light of the instituted Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

2. That the Law by which sin has continued in the World, is the holy and
righteous Will of God declared, according to the times, ways and means by
himself determined; and that men of themselves, in their own wills, have
constantly acted contrary thereunto.

3. That Jesus Christ died to save men from the condemnation of their own sins
against God, since the fall; and to recover all men out of that state of death
into which they fell by Adam's transgression.

4. That the Holy Law of God in the hand of Christ our Mediator, is the holy
rule of life to Believers; and that in which they should grow and increase till
they come to Glory: to cleave to Jesus Christ in all the Laws of the new
Covenant, as administered and given forth by him; in which is contained the
essence and substance of the Law, and that in the highest and most glorious way
of administering, till we come to Glory.

CHAP. XXII. Of Prayer.
AS God is, and is to be worshipped; so one great part of the worship of God is
Prayer, thereby we acknowledge him to be, and our want of supply from him and
his ability to help us, it is such a part of Gospel Worship which includes all
gospel virtues in it, unto which the promise is made, Rom, 10. 13. from the
Gospel-promise, Joel 2. 32. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved; in speaking distinctly to this matter, I shall endeavor to show, 1.
What Prayer is. 2. By whom it is to be performed. 3. That it is a duty of
special concernment to be performed by those concerned in it. 4. The manner how
it is to be performed. 5. The privileges thereof and the encouragements
thereunto, and the hindrances and discouragements that sometimes Christians
meet with all in this service; and in these I shall be very brief, yet as plain
and as full as brevity will permit.

1. What Prayer is. 1. More generally, What Prayer is.
Prayer includes Confession, Contrition, Petition, Thanksgiving, and may be,
and ordinarily is performed all in one, and comes under that of Prayer, Dan. 9.
3, to 20. where under Prayer is included much of confession and humble
confession of spirit, with earnest petition: and David's Psalms are called
sometimes Psalms, and sometimes Prayers, because both was contained in them,
Psalm. 72. 20. and good it is for the Saints to be much exercised in all these
parts of prayer, that so much suits our low conditions and needs, and the
greatness and majesty of him to whom we pray.

But I shall especially speak to the petitionary part of Prayer, that being
most properly and distinctly prayer, as that doctrine and rule of prayer
prescribed by our Lord does manifest, which consists especially in Petition;
and on this account, prayer is the asking or begging something of God, in the
name of Jesus Christ; that either our selves or others do want and stand in
need of, either for body or soul, in things relating to this life or that which
is to come, Mat. 7. 7. to 11. Prayer is not appointed as a complementing work,
but that the soul might therein and thereby go to God, in all holy and humble
boldness, to make known its wants, and beg supplies and help in all cases of
need; it is to come with all holy boldness to the throne of Grace, in the name
of Jesus Christ in faith and expectation, in that way to receive from the
Father what we truly need.

But more particularly as to the matter of Prayer. 1. It must be good and
according to the will of God, if we fail in this we fail in all, for we have no
promise of hearing, further then we pray according to his will, 1 John 5. 14.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us. And this is one special work of the
spirit in the hearts of Saints, to help them to pray according to the will of
God, To. 8. 27. persons may pray in their own spirits, and be very earnest, and
will have no nay for that which God would not have them, and it may be is not
good for them, and he may give it them in judgment. I believe that many have
experience of this truth at this day, as his people of old, Psalm. 78. 18. They
tempted God in their hearts, by asking meat for their lusts, v. 29. 30, 31. He
gave them their hearts desire, but while the meat was in their mouths the wrath
of God came upon them; they must have their lusts fulfilled, and their lusts
they had, but in anger and in wrath, with vengeance for their lusting; so the
same people Israel lusted for a King, and would have no nay, and God gave them
their desire, Hos. 13. 11. I gave thee a King in my anger, and took him away in
my wrath. It greatly behooves Christians to look to the matter what they pray
for, that they pray for that which is good, for which they have some precept or
promise, either generally or particularly, and that too according to the terms
thereof, either absolute or conditional, that is, of submission to the will of
God relating either to thing or time.

1. What is absolutely promised, we may and ought absolutely to pray for, as
Mortification of sin, Sanctification of Life, Preservation in the Faith,
Perseverance in Grace to the end, with profiting under the various
dispensations of God in the World, etc. All which comes under some special
command or promise, either general or particular.

2. Some things we must pray for conditionally, with submission to the will of
God, both relating to thing and time, as Health, Peace, deliverance from
Affliction, prosperity in the world, etc. because these are things of worldly
and temporary concernments, and not absolutely necessary to the life of the new
Covenant, nor absolutely promised; Christ our Lord is an example to us in this
matter, Mat. 26. 39, yet we may pray absolutely in this, so far as God has
promised, that is, Food and Raiment is promised, all these things shall be
added to you, but worldly riches is not promised, but Food and Raiment is
promised, because your heavenly Father knows that you have need of these
things; you cannot live nor subsist without them, nor serve God in the world
without them: That was it which Jacob said, that if God would give him Food to
eat, and Clothes to put on, then God should be his God, because without it he
could not live; if God would keep him alive he would live to God; so that for
Food and Raiment we ought to pray in faith, and to believe the promise, all
these things shall be added, Mat. 6. 33.

And as for Deliverance from Afflictions, Christians ought to pray absolute for
support under them, and profiting by them, and deliverance in the Lords time;
time not the deliverance, and then you may be absolute, and that because you
have the promise, Ps. 50. 15. Isa. 45. 17.

2. By whom this duty of Prayer is to be 2. By whom it is to be performed.
performed, and that is by believers, though I shall not question the common
duty of all men in this matter, but none can perform it acceptably, but
Believers, Justified persons; God first accepts the person before the service
is accepted, it is the Prayers of a righteous man that avails much, Jam. 5.
16. as for others, see what God says, Ps. 50. 16, 17. As for the wicked, God
says, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take
my Covenant in thy mouth, etc. Prove. 15. 8. The Sacrafice of the wicked is
abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight, chap.
21. 27. it behooves every one to look to it, to have some ground of a Turance of
relation to the Lord in the New Covenant, which will greatly imbolden the soul
in this duty, although souls may cry and call and obtain too, when they lie
under doubtings of interest, they may cry Abba Father; for the acceptance of
our persons does not consist in assurance of interest and relation, but in
believing the Gospel and cleaving to the Lord therein, yet the higher our
assurance of interest and relation works, the more boldness and confidence will
there be in Prayer; and sometimes sinkings in spirit on that account may
increase fervency; but it is the duty of upright ones to worship God, to pray
unto him, and to praise him it becomes them; it is suitable to their high
calling, it becomes the upright to be thankful, Ps. 33. 1. Praise is comely
for the upright; all the wicked of the Earth, whose persons are unaccepted,
their Prayers are abomination to the Lord; for without Faith it is impossible
to please him, it was by Faith, that Abels Sacrifice was accepted, by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous.

3. That Prayer is a duty of special concernment 3. That its a special duty to
be performed.
to be performed by those concerned therein, that is believing, righteous,
justified persons, the Children of God; and this appears, 1. From the
manifold commands and Exhortations thereunto, a few of which I shall mention,
Mat. 7. 7. A^k and it shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you; a plain command from our Lord, with a promise of
answer, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit, etc. 1 These. 5. 17. Pray continually, Col. 4. 2. Continue in prayer,
and watch in the same with thanksgiving; by all which, and many other
Exhortations in Holy Scripture it appears, that Prayer is the special duty of
the Saints.

2. It appears from the frequent example of the Lords people throughout all
ages, who were frequently exercised in this divine duty and work, as Abraham,
Genesis 18. 23, to 33. Moses, Exodus 32. 30, 31, 32, and 33. 13 and 34. 91.
Solomon, 1 King 8. 22. David, Ps. 5. 1, 2, 3. and 17. 1, 2, etc. and 55. 16,
17. in the New Testament, Christ himself was very often exercised in this work,
Mat. 14. 23. Luke 6. 12. and Paul, Phil. 1. 9. Col. 1. 9. 1 These. 3. 10. The
Apostles, Acts 4. 24. to 31. and the whole Church, Chap. 2. 42. with multitudes
of like examples both in old and new Testament; all which confirms the truth,
that it is the great duty and concernment of the Saints, according to the will
of God, to be frequently exercised therein.

3. It appears to be a very acceptable service to the Lord when rightly
performed, from the acceptance thereof which God has manifested, and the
returns that he has made to the prayers of his people throughout all ages,
wherein he has manifested himself to be well pleased with the faithful prayers
of his people, in his hearing and answering of their prayers; see his answer to
Abraham in his requests, Genesis 18. 21, to 33. to Moses, Exodus 32. 33, 34. and
33. 14. 17. to Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6, 15, 16, 17. to David, Psalm. 18. 6,
7, 8. and 118. 5. I called upon the Lord in distress, he answered me and set me
in a large place. In a word, the Lord never commanded his people to seek his
face in vain, Isa. 45. 19. I said not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain;
and of this his people has had experience, and must say (if they speak true of
him) as Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. What Nation is there so great who has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God in all that we call upon him for.

I may add 4. that an unpraying people are noted in Scripture to be a Graceless
and Godless people; The workers of iniquity, Psalm. 14. 4. Are a people that
call not upon God; and Psalm. 10. 4. The wicked in the pride of his countenance
will not seek after God; God is not in all his thoughts; wicked men, if they
pray, it is but in form, and for fear, or custom and tradition, and not in
faith and love with constancy, as gracious persons does, Job 27. 10. speaking
of the Hypocrite, will he always call upon God? No, he will not, it is of
custom, or for fear, or to be seen of men, if he does it at all; and as wicked
men are a prayerless people, so it is a note of a Godly man to be a praying
man. No sooner was Saul converted, but behold he prays, Acts 9. 11. which was
given as a token to Annanias that he was a converted man, and the Prophet
deprecates against an unpraying people. Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the
Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy name.
Psalm. 79. 6. by all which it appears, that prayer is the special duty of the
people of the Lord.

The fourth particular relates to the manner 4. The right manner of Prayer.
of prayer, how it is to be performed, and in this are many requisites to be
considered to the right performance thereof.

1. We must pray in the Spirit, if we pray 1. It must be in the spirit.
in a right manner, not only with our own spirits, but in the spirit of Christ;
there is a gift of prayer with large expressions, which Hipocrites may attain,
and there is the spirit of prayer, which is proper only to sincere Christians,
hence the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the spirit, and I will
pray with the understanding also, Jud. v. 20. praying in the holy spirit, and
this is the promise of God to give his people, the spirit of grace and of
supplication, Zech. 12. 10. The spirit of Christ is a spirit of prayer, it
enables those in whom it is to cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15. it helps both as
to matter and manner, for we know not what to pray for as we ought.

Quest. How shall I know that I have this

Ans. We may know it in the matt^r and in the manner of our prayers. 1. In the
matter of our prayers when we are kept to, and helped in the right matter of
prayer; the matter you have heard, it must be good, and according to the will
of God, when we are rightly lead in this matter, it is by the Spirit of Christ,
Romans 8. 26, 27. We know not what we pray for as we ought, etc. but the spirit
helps our infirmities, and make intercession for us according to the will of
God. There is much in this, to have our hearts lead in the will of God in our
praying. When persons run out in their own spirits and in their own wills, and
it may be besides the matter of prayer, there is nothing of the spirit of
Christ therein.

2. We then pray with the Spirit, when our own spirits are set at work in the
duty; prayer by the spirit is not lip labor only, but heart work, when we (as
we ought in all other services) in prayer, serve God with our Spirits, with our
whole Heart, Romans 1. 9. God is my witness whom I serve with my spirit in the
Gospel of his Son, etc. Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee,
O let me not wander from thy Commandments; then have we the spirit of Christ in
Prayer, when our whole heart is in the work, My Son give me thy heart; the
Spirit works the heart to God according to his word, and in this note, that
(ordinarily) when the spirit works in our hearts to the work, it works the
heart beyond the words; and here lies the difference between Praying in the
Spirit and without the Spirit; he that prays in the spirit, his spirit
thereby outruns his words, he is more in heart then in word, the spirit works
in us with Groanings that cannot be uttered; that is, heart groanings and
desirings beyond the expressions, but the other his tongue out runs his heart,
he is far better at lip labor, then at heart work in Prayer.

3. Then we pray by the Spirit, and in a right manner, when we pray in Faith;
beleving, that is the right spirit of prayer; then pray we by the spirit, and
in a right manner; for the spirit of Christ is the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.
13. But having the same Spirit of Faith, etc. Mat. 21. 22. And all things
whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive; so that to pray
believingly, is the right manner of praying.

Quest. When may I be said to Pray Believingly?

Answ. 1. When you believe understandingly

2. When you believe that God will give you what you pray for, because it is
according to his will, it is his will you should ask it, because it is his will
that you should have it, and that you should thus believe in asking, see 1 John
5. 14, 15.

Quest. Are there not some things that we Mat. 5. 44.

Answ. We ought to pray in such and like Ps. 35. 13. But as for me when they
were sick my clothing was Sackcloth, I humbled my self by fa^ting, and my
prayer returned into mine own bosom; so that we ought to pray and believe that
God will accept us, and make a return of our prayers to advantage; though in
this and in many other cases we have no particular ground to believe an answer
in the very thing prayed for, yet we ought to pray in Faith, not doubting the
matter, o^ Gods faithfulness in hearing and answering, either in granting the
things prayed for, or make a return to the souls advantage.

4. To Pray in a right manner is to pray 4. It is to pray fervently.
fervently (with heart fervency) and earnestly, not sluggishly and coldly, but
zealously to have the heart affected in prayer. Jam. 5. 16. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; and its the work of the spirit
to fill us with true zeal and fervency in prayer, when the soul will have no
nay, like Jacob wrestling with God, Genesis 32. 26. I will not let thee go except
you bless me. Hos. 12. 4. He had power with the Angel and prevailed, he wept
and made supplication. And this fervency consists not so much in multitudes
of expressions, or loudness of voice, but in pouring out our souls to the Lord,
and in strength of faith to prevail with him, Ps. 42. 4. When I remember these
things, I pour out my soul in me, and 25. 1. I lift my soul to thee, and 143.
8. Thus, in this and in every part of Gods service it behooves Christians to be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; hence is prayer so frequently called in
Scripture, crying from its fervency. Psalm. 17. 1. and 34. 15. 17. etc.

5. To pray rightly, is to pray humbly 5. To pray humbly.
and self-abaseingly, and this is the proper work of the spirit to discover our
own nothingness and needs unto us; this is a special requisite in prayer, Psalm.
9. 12. He forgets not the cry of the humble, and 10. 12. Arise O Lord God
lift up thine hand, forget not the humble; The fear of Gods greatness and
goodness living in the heart, will tend (very much) to humble the soul in its
addresses to him, and is very acceptable with him, Ps. 51. 17. The Sacrifices
of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a contrite heart O God thou will not
despise; its that Prayer that comes from a humble and broken Spirit that is
well pleasing to the Lord; the poor Publican that had nothing to say for
himself, But Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, was accepted, when the proud
boasting Pharisce was rejected, Luke 18. 13. 14. Proud Persons, and Proud
Prayers, are an abomination to the Lord, but he will not forget nor despise the
prayers of the humble.

6. To Pray in a right manner, is to pray 6. Sincerely and not Hypocritically.
sincerely, and not hypocritically, and this can never be without sincerity and
truth of heart to Godward, in the main of Religion, Ps. 51. 6. Thou desire
truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden parts thou have made me to know
Wisdom, and 17. 1. Give ear unto my Prayer that goes not out of feigned lips.
Unfeigned Faith, and unfeigned Love, and unfeigned Obedience, and unfeigned
Prayer, is the Lords delight, he loves that, he desires truth in the inward
parts, Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, to all that
call upon him in truth; heart and tongue must go together, yea, and there had
need be more in the heart then the tongue expresses rather then less; an empty
hearted Christian performs empty service, makes empty airy prayers, and must
expect empty returns, but truth and integrity reaches Heaven, it being the
spirits work to effect it, and truth alone is there embraced.

7. To pray in a right manner is to pray 7. To pray Briefly.
Briefly, and without Tautologies, and this has beer the practice of all Saints
throughout all Generations, and is the express command of our Lord, Mat. 6. 7,
8. But when we Pray use not vain repetitions, (or babbling or speaking idely) as
the Heathens do, for they think they shall be heard for their much speaking,
be ye not therefore like unto them; for your Heavenly Father kn^weth what
things you need before you ask them. In which are two things observable, 1. Our
Lord forbids vain Repetitions, Tautoligies, and idle Talking in Prayer. 2. Much
speaking, as if multitude of words would prevail with God; this is it he
reproves in the Pharisees as well as in the Heathen, their making of long
Prayers, Mat. 23. 14. and this he forbids in his Disciples, in warning them not
to be like the Heathen, who think to be heard for their much speaking; it is
much speaking in Prayer that Christ reproves, as well as vain speaking, and
that appears, 1. From the argument used to enforce the Exhortation, Your
Father knows the things ye have need before ye ask, therefore you need not
have much speaking about the matter. 2. The pattern of prayer presented by
Christ in the verses following, as an example of the substance and brevity in
prayer.

3. The example of Christ Himself in Prayer, Matt. 26. 39. The exhortation of
the Wise man, Eccl. 5. 2. According to which we find the Prayers of the Saints
to be both brief, and full of matter, throughout all Generations, Ex^d. 33. 12.
and 16. 2. 2 Chronicles. 20. 5* -- 12. ^an. 9. 3 19. ^ 1 King. 8. 22. -- is the
longest we read of, on a special occasion; yet without vain repetitions; Acts
4. 24. All which confirms the truth, that it is a right manner of praying to
pray briefly; and this cannot be done truly but by the Spirit: Christ would not
have his to think, that enumerating words like the Heathens, or Papists, or
Hipocrites, that pray by number, and length of time, and multitude of words, is
prevalent with God; but to pray briefly, and understandingly, according to the
word and work of the Spirit.

8. To pray in a right manner, and by the 8. In the fear of God.
Spirit, is to pray in the fear of God; as the fear of God is a choice new
Covenant Virtue to dwell in the heart always, so especially when the soul
addresseth it self to God in Prayer, to do it in the holy awe of the Lord;
Psalm. 5. 7. As for me, (says the Prophet) I will come into thine house in the
multitude of thy Mercies, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
Temple. It Is a choice frame of Spirit, to serve the Lord with fear in all the
parts of his service, and especially in this of Prayer, To serve him with
Reverence and Godly fear. They are the persons that God will accept, and answer
their Prayers, Ps. 145. 19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him,
he will hear their cry, and save them.

9. To pray in a right spirit, and so in a 9. To pray holily.
right manner, is to pray holily, with a desire of holiness, and a design for
hol^ness; 1 Tit. 2. 8. I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands,
without wrath and doubting. To lift up holy hearts, and holy hands, is well
pleasing to the Lord; Psalm. 86. 2. Preserve my soul, for I am holy; that is, I
am sanctified to thee, and am one of thine holy ones, and do love holiness, and
design holiness; this is absolutely necessary in Prayer, Ps. 66. 18. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Unholy Prayers are not
like to have any acceptance with, or answer from the Lord, to pray and sin, and
sin and pray, as if persons in Prayer did design to ask leave to sin, to be
covetous and oppressing, to be proud, vain, and profane, such Prayers the Lord
abominates, Isa. 58. 3, 4. They fasted, and prayed, but their design was not
for holiness, but for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness; this shall never cause their voice to be heard on high: No, God
hears not sinners: that is, those who held themselves servants to their
lusts, that design not holiness; Chap. 59. 2, 3. Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he
will not hear.

10. To pray in a right manner, and by 10. It must be in the Name of Christ.
the Spirit of Christ, is to pray in the name of Christ, to offer up all our
Prayers to God in his Name, and not in our own Name, or on the account of any
worth that is in our selves; this is essential to a right manner of Praying;
for there is no acceptance of our persons or services out of him; Col. 3. 17.
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus: that
must be the manner of our doing: Joh. 16. 23. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you; that is, that is good,
and according to his will; ver. 26. And this is by the Spirit of Christ, for it
is the spirit of the Gospel that leads us to Jesus Christ, and to the Father by
him: but the question will be, What it is to pray to the Father in the

Answ. 1. To come to the Father in the everlasting Covenant; so that we are to
perform this and every service in his Name, that is, in his authority, by
virtue of his commission and command, Matt. 7. 7. 8. John 16. 26.

2. To Pray in the Name of Christ, is to offer up our Prayers to the Father, as
persons interessed in Christ by Faith, according to the Word, believing and
expecting acceptance with the Father for the sake of Christ, and not for any
worth in our selves; Jesus Christ, Son to the King of Glory, being our only way
of acceptance, both of our persons and services: therefore we must by Faith in
all our addresses to the Throne of Grace, have respect to Jesus, as our way,
and as upon the Throne for us, to plead our cause, and to present the persons
and services of his people in himself to the Father; he is our friend in the
Court of Heaven, and to pray the Father in his Name, is to pray the Father for
his sake to accept us, and grant our requests; because by the Law of the new
Covenant we belong to him, and are the children of God by Faith in him. And the
reason why we must offer up all in the Name of Christ is, because we are
imperfect, and our service imperfect, and can have no acceptance but in him,
and for his sake, who is perfect, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

11. As an effect of this acceptance in 11. To pray boldly.
our dear Lord, and for his sake, a right Gospel way of praying is, to pray
boldly; an holy, humble boldness becomes Christians, and God is well pleased
therewith: He would have them come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, Heb.
4. 16. He having opened such a new and living way, so full of Grace, he would
have his children to know it, and improve it with all holy and humble boldness,
and confidence, believing his readiness and willingness to hear and answer the
prayers of his people: God would have his people to exercise so much Faith in
the way of the Gospel, that new and living way, as to command of him what he
has promised to give, because he has of his own Grace bound himself to it by
his new Covenant Law promise, and he takes it as Glory to his Name, for his
people to believe that he will not, cannot withold what he has promised:
therefore Believers ought to come to God with holy boldness, and humble
claiming their right, by Grace, in the blessings, and blessed things promised
in the new Covenant, as the Apostles, Acts 4. 24. to 31.

12. To pray in a right manner, is to 12. Be constant.
pray constantly, and not to faint and give over: if you wax weary, either
through a carnal carelessness and sluggishness, or fainting for fear of not
being answered, it is the way to lose all; and as a necessary ingredient to
constancy, and persevering herein, you must add patience; Ps. 40. 1. I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry: that is, it
was long before I had an answer; but I waited long, and patiently, and had my
desire in the end. Christ put forth that Parable, Luke 18. 1. -- to this very
end, That men ought always to pray, and not to faint; to assure us, that if we
wax not weary, God will hear and answer in the end; Romans 12. 12. Continuing
instant in Prayer; Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all supplication in the
spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance. This is a duty that
Saints must persevere in while they are in this World, it is the way in which
God will be worshipped, and they have daily need of mercy from him: as for
times of Prayer, there is public and private Prayer in Church, in Family, and
in Closet, all which ought to have its time. The Prophet fixes on the morning,
Ps. 5. 3. and 55. 17. Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry
aloud, and he shall hear my voice. O that Christians would lay this to heart,
and not bethink time to spend in this holy and heavenly service to converse
with God; but according to the exhortation, 1 These. 5. 17. To pray without
ceasing, that is, without being weary, or giving over, or neglecting so holy,
acceptable, and needful a service: it is a note of an hipocrite, that does not
always call upon God, Job 27. 10. but by fits and starts, when he has a mind
to it; or for fear, in time of danger, or the like; but it is not constant and
sincere with God in the work.

5. I come to the privileges of this duty 5. The privileges of Prayer, and
Encouragements.
of Prayer, and encouragements thereunto to those that rightly perform it. As
it is a duty, so there is much of privilege in it; and for such as are capable
to a right performance of the duty, by how much they live in the neglect
thereof, so much do they forsake their own mercy.

The first privilege is access with acceptance 1. Access with acceptance.
at the Throne of Grace, To come with boldness to the Throne of Grace, to pour
out our souls to God, to make known our weakness, wants, and wrongs, and to
obtain mercy; a privilege which no carnal, unconverted person in the World has
to do withal; Ps. 50. 16. Prove. 28. 9.

2. To have power with God, when 2. Have power with God.
rightly performed, and this have the Saints had experience of throughout all
Generations: Jacob the great Wrastler, who had power with God, and prevailed;
Genesis 32. 24. -- 28. With Hos. 12. 3, 4. By his strength he had power with God,
yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made supplication
unto him. Moses likewise had power with God, and prevailed for his people, when
God bid him let him alone; Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone, that my wrath may wax
hot against them; yet Moses would not let God alone in this matter, but
besought the Lord God, and said, etc. ver. 11, 12, 13. and prevailed with God;
ver. 14. That he said unto him, ver. 34. Go lead the people unto the place of
which I have spoken unto thee; behold, mine Angel shall go before thee, etc. I
might speak of Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 20. David, Psalm. 34. 4. Daniel, Chap. 9. 3,
to 23. With multitudes of others that I might mention in holy Scripture, that
have prevailed with God in this way, and indeed it is the privilege of all the
Saints; God will be commanded by them, when they pray according to his will
revealed in his Word; Isa. 45. 11. Jam. 5. -- 16, 17. When the Prayer of the
wicked shall be turned into sin, Ps. 9. 7. and abomination, Prove. 15. 8. and
reproach, Isa. 66. 3.

3. To have what they will of God, as 3. To have what they will.
an effect of this prevalency with him; Mat. 7. 7, 8. Ask and ye shall receive,
seek and ye shall find, etc. Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
my Name, that will I do, and 15. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in
you, you shall ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you. Here is a
privilege for praying Saints; it is but ask and have; Ask what you will, and ye
shall have it, only remember the rules before prescribed, keep in Gods will,
let his will be yours, and let this be the rule of your praying, and then ask
what you will, and it shall be done; and his will is a good and perfect will in
all things, and always wills that which is best for his people: so that a
Christian that lives in the will of God, may say truly, that he has his will
granted at all times.

4. Privilege is free converse and communion 4. Converse and communion with God.
with God in Jesus Christ, as a Son with a Father, with heart, delight and joy.
It Is said, Exodus 33. 11. That God talked with Moses face to face, as a man
talks with his friend. Prayer is a talking with God face to face, as with a
Father, and a friend; Abraham was called the friend of God, Jam. 2. 23. And
talked with God; Genesis 18. 23. And ye are my friends, says Christ, if ye do
whatsoever I command you; Joh. 15. 14. Prayer is to the Saints a son-like and
friendly conversing with God, who is a consuming fire to his enemies, but a
Father and a friend in Jesus Christ to his children, who have this privilege
to come boldly to him, to have access with acceptance at his Throne of Grace,
and to commune with him about the great things of his will, relating to his
Glory, and their own eternal welfare, according to the Gospel of his Grace in
Jesus Christ: privileges they are, unto which all carnal hearts (though wise
in the World's wisdom) are strangers too, their souls come not in sight of
these secrets. O that all sincere hearted Christians did more study, prize, and
improve this Mercy.

Though these privileges are all encouragements to this duty, and who, or what
Christian soul, interested in such Grace and favor, can neglect a duty
attended with such soul-advantages; it is the way to maintain friendship with
God: persons that are negligent in this duty, grow carnal, and estranged from
God, and liable to reproof and judgment: it was the sin that Job's friends
supposed him to be guilty of, as the cause of his affliction; Job 15. 4. Yea,
thou castest off fear, and restrainest Prayer before God. But I add to these,
as a further encouragement.

5. The great and precious promises of 5. The great and precions promises made
unto praying people.
God made to this duty, should wonderfully encourage gracious souls to a
frequent and faithful performance thereof, not only the promises of hearing and
answering of the Prayers of his people; Ps. 50. 15. Matt. 7. 7. Joh. 15. 7.
Jam. 1. 5. If any man want wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him: but the promise of
Salvation is made unto it, being performed according to the rules prescribed,
which includes all the virtues of the new Covenant, unto which the promises are
made; Joel 2. 32. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the
Name of the Lord shall be saved: which intends new Covenant deliverance and
salvation, compared with, Romans 10. 13, 14. New Covenant spirited praying people
are under the promise of Salvation; therefore let all new Covenant spirited
people be encouraged to this work and duty, as one of the most noble, Son-like
parts of Christians obedience, full of spiritual advantage to the soul, as well
as Honor and Glory to God.

6. And lastly, I shall speak something 6. Lastly of the hindrances and
discouragements of Prayer. 1. That it is not a duty but a privilege only.
to some of the hindrances and discouragements that Christians meet with all
sometimes in the performance of this duty.

1. Sometimes with some persons, a received Principle, that Prayer to God is no
duty, nor ought not so to be performed, but only as a privilege or liberty, or
at most if a duty, yet not to be performed by Christians, without some more
then ordinary movings thereunto by the Spirit of Christ; and that without this
it is but formal and fleshly, etc. And from hence they neglect this duty.

In answer hereunto, and to help the soul out of this mistake; consider and
ponder well, 1. That Prayer is a duty, and is frequently so stated in the
Scripture (as has been before proved) and ought so to be practiced, Mat. 7. 8,
9, 10. and this notion runs contrary to and thwart the law of the New Covenant,
and so cannot be of God, and whence then it is you may easily judge.

2. Its a Notion never mentioned by Christ or his Apostles in the Scriptures,
who were frequently exercised in this work according to time, place, and
opportunity, therefore an unscriptural and new foundation, and not of God.

3. The event discovers it whence it is, intending to make such persons to
become Prayerless, and so by deg^ees (if grace prevent not) graceless persons,
woeful experience has taught us the truth of this; its a temptation that
gracious persons have met withal, and have suffered much of loss thereby, on
the spiritual account, it being the Devils design under any pretense, to work
off souls from this duty. Yet fourthly, it concerns Christians to perform it as
a duty, and in spirit too, the duty destroys not, nor hinders spiritual
service, and indeed it cannot be spiritual where it is not performed to God in
conscience as duty; prayer with and in the spirit is a duty, praying always in
the holy spirit, and pray without ceasing, etc. and where it is in conscience
to God performed by believers, the holy spirit is never wanting to do his
office, if we are faithful to our duty; therefore be exhorted to be faithful in
your duty, and be sure you shall not want the Spirit of Christ to assist you in
this or any other service of his.

2. Others are discouraged in this duty The sense of sin.
from the sense of their sinfulness, their corrupt natures. O says the soul, I
see such a body of death, such a mass of corruption attending me daily, that I
am afraid to pray or to go to God as to a Father; for I see iniquity cleaves to
my best services, and I cannot pray without ^^n, and therefore better not pray
at all. To this I say, 1. That its a mercy to have the true sight and sense of
sin, with a loathing thereof, and this has been and is the case of the most
holy justified persons in the world, Romans 7. 24. O ^retched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death* to be without the sense of Sin,
that is the true misery and most dangerous condition.

2. Art sensible of thy Sin and Sinful Nature, Man, Woman, and is that thy
burden in good earnest? Why, then Pray the more, and cry the more unto God in
the name of Christ for Pardon, for Power to mortify thy sins and sin^^l
nature, and be not discouraged because of thy sinfulness; indeed if you like
and love thy sins, then tremble, God will not hear thee, but if you hate and
abhor thy corruptions, and thy self because thereof, then be not discouraged,
but go to God repentingly and believingly, and Pray God, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for pardon and power against thine iniquities; and this know, that if
thou will not pray till thou have no sin, thou art never like to pray here in
this world, nor would thou have need to pray had thou no sin. Remem^er the
Prophet made this an argument to pray the more and more earnest, because of his
sin, Psalm. 25. 11. For thy Name sake O Lord pardon mine iniquity, for it is
great.

Quest. Why did Christ Pray then who had

Answ. 1. Though he had no sin of his

2. He was a pattern to us in this matter, that we might learn of him and find
support for our souls in all difficulties by Faith and Prayer.

A third hinderance in this duty of Prayer 3. Want of expressions.
is, want of words and expressions: O says the Soul, I want the gift of
Prayer, had I words and expressions as some have, I should be encouraged in the
work, but I want words to express my mind, I am so weak on that account, that I
am discouraged in the work, etc.

Answ. To this I shall say, 1. this may come to pass through thine own
negligence and sluggishness, want of use is ordinarily attended with debility
in any duty or service, the Sluggard says, a Lion is in the way, and so
sits still, from a supposition of difficulty, but up and be doing, and the
Lord will be with thee; this the Lord foresaw, the backwardness and
sluggishness of his people, therefore has he given so many commands unto it,
and promises to the encouragement of a right performance thereof, I say set
about the work in obedience to him, and thou shall not be without his
assistance.

2. If thou have the Spirit of Prayer (as that thou have in some measure, if
thou be a Christian in truth, for if any man have not the spirit of Christ he
is none of his) Then be not discouraged though thou have but little of the gift
of utterance, men may have the gift without the spirit, although wheresoever
spirit and gift goes together, it is of choice use for the Church; yet be not
discouraged, for God accepts his children according to what they have, and not
according to what they have not; therefore if thou can make known thy wants
and weaknesses, though thy language be not eloquent, yet groan it, and cry it
out before the Lord who knows the meaning of the Spirit; for where the spirit
of Christ is, it will help to cry, Abba Father, and know that as a Father
delights more in the stammering and broken language of his little Child, then
in the most composed speech of the most excellent Orator; yea, and it may be
more then in the most accute language of his own grown Children; so does God,
the Father of all Believers, delight in the Prayers of his own poor weak
Children, coming from sincere hearts and faith unfeigned, more then in the most
excellent language of the Hypocrite or Stranger, and as much as in the well
ordered Prayers of his own more grown and gifted children; therefore be not
discouraged in this matter, and if thy Father see it best in thy faithful
exercise of what thou have, he will give you increase.

3. It may be thy Father sees that the Spirit of Prayer without much of gift
is best for thee, to keep thee humble and lowly; it may be thou would be
proud and ruin thy self if thou had such gifts as some others have, but he
knows what is best, and gives suitable to our abilities, though its true, that
abilities to a right use of gifts, are of him likewise.

4. We are to know, that God gives his gifts variously and differingly as he
pleases, and that for the use and edification of the Church, for that indeed
is the great end and use of gifts, and he never intended to give to all his
children gifts for public service in the Church; are all Prophets, etc. no,
t^^y are not, Some are Prophets or Spiritual, and others are reputed as
ignorant, that is without gift for public service, but must rather learn, 1
Cor. 14. 37, 38. of which are Women in general, and many Men likewise;
therefore be content with what God has given thee and faithfully improve that,
and in so doing, thou shall not only meet with acceptance, but (it may be)
with increase.

For there are ways for use and improvement of Christians gifts, though not in
a public way on a Church account, that is enclosed and in family duties, and
in private with Brethren and Members, Mat. 18. 19, 20. therefore note this by
the way.

1. That it is a weakness for weak Brethren, that have not a gift of public
use for edification to put themselves on public employment when it is neither
profitable to the Church, nor honorable to the Lord. 2. That its the Churches
weakness to urge Public Duty on Private Spirits.

A fourth hinderance and discouragement 4. No return of prayer.
in Prayer is, may the soul say, I have prayed often and waited long, but I do
not find that I have any answer or return of my Prayers, but rather the
contrary, God seems to go over all my Prayers, and to work contrary to my
Prayers, and to write bitter things against me; the more I pray the worse it
seems to be, and what should I do in this matter?

Answ. 1. In General, if it be so indeed, as you suppose, yet be not
discouraged, it is no otherwise then sometimes has been the dealings of God
with his people formerly, as appears by their complaint in this matter, Psalm.
13. 1, 2. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? how long will thou
hide thy face from me? how long shall I take council in my soul, having sorrow
in my heart daily? how long shall mine enemies be exalted over me? yet the
Prophet gives not off, but praye^^ still, ver. 3. Consider and hear O Lord my
God, lighten mine eyes lest I sleep the sleep of death. And further the Lord
did not only seem to forget and not hear the Prayers of his Servants, but to be
angry with the Prayers of his people, Psalm. 80. 4. O Lord God of Hosts, how
long will thou be angry with the prayers of thy people? See ver. 5. 6. and ver.
7. 14. He continues Praying still, Turn us again, O God of Hosts, look down
from Heaven and visit this Vine, etc. so that if the case be thus yet, be not
discouraged, but pray still and faint not, the Lord proves the faith and
patience of his People, for he has not said to the House of Jacob, seek ye me
in vain; and remember that it is a note of a graceless person to give off, and
to say, it is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is it that we have
walked mo^rnfully before him, Mal. 3. 14. But it often comes to pass, that God
does not answer the Prayers of his people from several just grounds which I
shall endeavor to show as follows.

1. It may be thou Prayest for that which Grounds of Gods not answering Prayer.
God will not give, or for that which he has not promised, or at least not
promised it in the way, and at the time that thou would have it; so did Moses
that servant of God pray for that which God would not give him, and then it is
in vain to pray against the will of God; see this in Deuteronomy. 3. 23, 26. Moses
besought the Lord that he might not die, but that he might live and go into the
goodly Land; but God had designed the contrary, and would not answer his
Prayer, ver. 26. The Lord was wrath with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me, and the Lord said unto me, let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this
matter, etc. So that when the people of God ask of him things that he will not
give them, but has determined the contrary, its in vain then to ask, see the
like, Jer. 7. 16. Pray not thou for this People, neither lift up cry nor Prayer
for them, neither make Intercession nor Prayer for them, for I will not hear
thee.

Or secondly, if thy Prayer be right in all things in this matter, he may
answer thee and thou not know it. For 1. God does not always answer the Prayers
of his people in the same things they pray for, and yet answer them in that
which is equivalent, that is as good and better then that which they prayed
for, for God knows what is good, and gives the best good to his people. Thus
Moses prayed, Exodus 33. 18. Lord I beseech thee show me thy Glory; he asked too
much of God, not too much for God to grant, but too much for Moses to receive;
if he should have had his desire, it would have killed him, ver. 20. And he
said thou can not see my face, for there shall no man see me and live. But
God answered him in that which was better for him in his present capacity, that
is, the sight of his goodness which should suffice him till he was capacitated
to see his glory, Ex. 34. 6, 7. So likewise Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. he prayed
thrice to be rid of the Thorn in the Flesh the messenger of Satan that buffeted
him, and the Lord answered him not in the very thing, but in that which was as
good and better, My Grace is sufficient for thee, ^ay strength shall be
perfected in weakness; and this the Apostle took for a good and full answer,
most gladly will I therefore glory in mine infirmities, that the power of
Christ may rest upon me, etc. So it may be thou have prayed over and over,
again and again, to be delivered from afflictions and persecutions, and yet
they increase daily, and thou think God has not heard thee, but if he
assure thee that his Grace shall be sufficient to bear thee up under all that
he has done, and will bless thee with strength in thy Soul, that is enough and
a gracious answer, and that he will deliver in his time, for this he has
promised; it may be thou have been wrestling and praying against thy
corruptions of nature, and crying out as the Apostle, O wretched man that I am,
who will deliver me? And when shall I be delivered, etc. and yet can not be
rid of them, but some of these Canaanites do still remain, and so thou think
that God does not hear thee, but if he lead thee thereby, the more to Jesus
Christ, to see the need thou have of him, and the salvation that is in him,
keeping up the warfare still, and keeping humble in the sense thereof,
believing the full delivering in the end; it is a gracious answer that will
fill the soul with joy, Romans 7. 25. Thanks be unto God through Jesus Christ my
Lord. The like may be said in many other cases, Christians may seek good things
of God, and he may answer them in other things, even cross to expectation, yet
best for them; they may seek Riches, and he may give them Poverty; they may
seek prosperity, and he may give them adversity; they may seek life, and he may
give them death; and yet give them that which is good and best for them.

Or thirdly, It may be thou have not prayed in a right manner, which is so
necessary a requisite in Prayer (as has been before showed) as that without it
we may not expect any answer from God, that is, to pray with the spirit
understandingly, believingly, humbly, etc. but in thine own spirit, if not in
thine own name, and then no wonder if thou have no return of thy Prayers from
God, for he regards the manner as well as the matter of the prayers of his
people, he will be sought in the due manner, or else he will reprove and cross
his people in the service; 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. The Lord our God made a breach for
that we sought him not after the due order. God has respect to manner and
order, in all his worship, and when his people miss there^n, he will meet with
them in way of reproof.

Or 4ly, it may be thou have had wrong ends in thy Prayers, and that has
hindered thy success; there are two great ends to be sought in our Prayers,
that is, the Glory of God, and the good of our selves and others; and if thou
miss in the end of seeking, thou missest of all, it may be thou have prayed for
Conquest over thy Lusts, for the increase of the gifts and Graces of Christ,
that thou may be accounted some body in Profession, gifts of Ministry, that
thou may be Esteemed and have a Name, etc. if God give them, it will be to
thy wrong; this is minded, Jam. 4. 3. Ye a^k and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, to bestow it upon your lusts. God sees that your desires granted would
^uine you; you pray for deliverance from Affliction, not that you may glorify
God, but that you may live at ease, and see no sorrow; you pray for worldly
enjoyments, when (perhaps you have enough before, and more then you do well use
for the Glory of God) to bestow it upon your lusts, like Israel of old, Psalm.
78. 18. who ever thus misses in their ends in praying, must expect to miss of
obtaining, or else if they have their desire it will be to their spiritual loss
and damage; he grante^ his peoples desi^es, when they asked meat for the^r
lu^ts, but he sent leanness into their souls. I am afraid that there are many
rich Christians that are grown fat and rich in the World, but are grown lean in
their Souls, and others like the Church of Corinth grow rich in gifts, but poor
in Grace, that he could not write to them as to spiritual, but as to carnal,
even as to Babes in Christ, and notwithstanding all their gifts had need to be
instructed in that excellent virtue and way of love; O all ye Churches and
Ministers, remember this, Gifts without grace to a right use thereof, is but
like to a Jewel of Gold in a Swines Snout.

Fifth and Finally, or else sin may be the cause why God does not hear and
answer your Prayers; Men Pray and Sin, and Sin and Pray, and wonder why God
does not hear them; but if men allow themselves in sin, God will not hear them.
I intend not the common infirmities of nature, watched over and warred against
by the Saints, that shall not hinder their Prayers; Jam. 5. 17. but sins lived
in and owned, unrepented of, surely God will not here such, Psalm. 66. 18. If I
regard iniquity in mine heart, God will not hear me; it is the iniquity of the
heart and hands that makes a separation between God and the Soul, Psalm. 49. 5.
Why should I be afraid of evil, when the iniquity of my heels do compass me
about. It is not the iniquity of our heels that should make us afraid, but the
iniquities of our hands; the iniquities of ou^ heels are such as we shun and
run from, such as we hate and war against; but the iniquities of our hearts and
hands are such as we love, follow after, catch it, and hold it fast, plead for
it, that is the iniquity that will stop your Prayers, and the influence of Gods
Grace to your Souls; Isa. 58. 3. They complained they had fasted and prayed,
and sought God, but he did not hear, nor take notice of them; the cause see,
chapter 59. 1, 2. Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor
his ear heavy that it cannot hear, but your iniquities have separated between
you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not
hear. O its sin and iniquity that puts a stop to our Prayers, and causes God
to hide his face that he will not hear, and this the Church was sensible of;
and O that we were more sensible then we are, Mich. 7. 9. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, etc. If souls once
come to be sensible of sin, that it is the cause of affliction, and of Gods
indignation against his own people, and hinders the prevalency of their
Prayers; they would certainly search out the sins which are the cause, and
humble themselves, and turn from their iniquities, and patiently to wait and
bear till he turn to them in mercy.

Quest. What Sins are they that ordinarily

Answ. 1. All sins of the heart and hands have the same effect, but I shall
mention some more remarkable sins, for which the people of God has been
afflicted, and against which he has manifested his displeasure.

1. That sin of Covetousness and worldly mindedness, the common bait by which
the Devil deceives souls, that steals away the hearts of Christians (if Grace
prevent not) to their spiritual and effectual ruin, or at best to their great
loss on the spiritual account, and often times on the outward account likewise,
stopping and hindering their prayers, and drawing down Judgment both upon
themselves and others. Isa. 57. 17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I
wrath, and smote him, I hid my face and was wrath, and he went on frowardly in
the way of his own heart, etc. O that we had not cause to say, that this
iniquity prevails at this day; and though God smites and smites at this
iniquity, as is evident by the manner of his smiting, yet whether he has not
cause to say, he went on frowardly in the way of his own heart. O who is it
that reforms and returns to him that smites, but rather quarrel at the rod,
and cry out for deliverance, but keep fast the sin that is the cause thereof;
surely God will make us sick with smiting before he has done, if there be no
reformation.

2. Pride is another crying abomination, for which God has a controversy with
his people, self conceit, pride of heart, pride in Apparel, pride of riches; O
this damnable hell born sin, is like to prove the ruin of multitudes, for its
followed after and pleaded for, rushing into the new invented and devised
fashions, to the dishonor of God, and shame of Religion, and undoing of poor
souls; the Lord may justly for these things complain as of his people of old;
Hos. 5. 5. The Pride of Israel does testify to their face; and he is at work
with his people at this day for these abominations.

O that Professors in the City of London would lay these things to heart, from
whence profaneness in this matter is come forth into all the nation; Pride was
Sodom sin, and likewise the sin of spiritual Sodom and Egypt Rev. 18. 12, 13.
and 17. 4. Let all the Sons and Daughters of Sion, tremble in the thoughts of
living in the practice of Sodoms abominations; and o^ the contrary, be ye
clothed with humillity; that is, let all your carriages and behaviors, your
words and works, your gesture and apparel, show forth humility, and prove the
Lord if he has not a blessing in store for you.

3. Loss of first love both to God and one to another, and loss of zeal for
God, his name and truth in the earth; this is it for which God has a
controversy with his people, and will not hear them cry, they never so loud,
and make they never so many prayers, Rev. 2. 4, 5. Thou have lost thy first
love, remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, and do thy first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, except you repent; it is repentance God expects, before he will hear and
answer our prayers, for it is these and the like sins that does hinder the
prevailing of our prayers, that they can have no entrance at the throne of
Grace. See these sins more fully described Chap. 29.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Perfection; and whether it may be attained in this Life.
PErfection in the new Covenant Restoration and Life, is a Glory to be
believed beyond what we do, or can yet know or enjoy. But in as much as there
are great mistakes about this matter, and the word perfect being frequently
used in the Scripture, and abused by ignorant and erring persons, by reason of
which serious souls may be (and many are) put to a loss in this matter; I shall
endeavor to clear up this truth according to the best light that I have
(through Grace attained herein, for the advantage of others: in which I shall
endeavor, 1. To clear up the various use and import of the word perfect, as
used in the holy Scripture, and how far perfection is attainable here. 2. To
prove that perfection in the highest intention, is not attainable in this life.

1. The various use and import of the The various import of the word sincere.
word perfect, as used in the Scriptures; 1. Sometimes it imports sincerity and
truth in the inward parts; he that is a sincere Christian toward God in all
his walks, is in God's account a perfect Christian, though otherwise attended
with many imperfections; uprightness and integrity is a choice virtue, owned
and approved of God, and a comfort to souls in whom it is; 2 Chronicles. 20. 3.
Hezekiah could say, Remember Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart; that is, with an upright and sincere heart,
that is the true sense and meaning of the King, for otherwise he had many
infirmities; 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; that is, a
sincere, upright, sound, and undivided heart; for the Lord desires truth in
the inward parts, Ps. 51. 6. Job was said to be perfect; that is, upright,
sincere, and so owned of God, though he saw himself to be sinful, and so
confesses, Job. 13. 23.

2. There is a comparative perfection 2. Comparative.
spoken of in Scripture; that is, some have been, and may be reputed more
perfect than others; and so said to be perfect, compared with those that are
worse than them; living in the same time and age, and it may be enjoy like
means; Genesis 6. 9. It Is said that Noah was a perfect man in his Generation; that
is, compared with the Generation in which he lived; he was a perfect man
comparatively, and upright and sincere in his Generation, and walked with God;
that is, kept close with God, and worshipped him in an evil Generation; ver. 5.
God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, etc. or compared
with others that are weaker Christians. Some Christians compared with others,
may be said to be perfect, and this I call a comparative perfection; 1 Cor. 2.
6. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; that is, perfect
comparatively with the Corinthians, Chap. 3. 1, 2. And I brethren could not
speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in
Christ, etc. not as to those that were spiritual, or perfect, which is all one
in sense and substance; they compared with others, were not so spiritual or
perfect as them: and this is it the Apostle minds, Phil. 3. 15. Let us
therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; that is, compared to others
that were more imperfect in their Knowledge, Faith and Practice, not perfect in
the highest perfection; for so the Apostle himself was not perfect; ver. 12.
Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect, etc. So that
it is evident both from Scripture and experience, that there is this comparative
perfection, and that in varieties of degrees among all Christians; which are
distinguished, 1. Degrees of this perfection among Christians. 2. Among
Churches. And, 3. Among Ministers, yet all are Christians.

1. Among Christians in general, there 1. Of Christians in general.
are varieties of degrees, in Knowledge, in Faith, and in Practice, and in all
the gifts and virtues of the new Covenant; this is abundantly cleared by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 12. to 25. Where he discovers the Church in all its parts
to have variety of members, as the body of Christ, some more honorable or
perfect than others, some weak in the Faith, and some strong; Romans 14. 1. and
15. 1. Some are comely in their spirits and conversations, and some need to
have comeliness to be put upon them; 1 Cor. 12. 23, 24. Some spiritual, some
carnal, some useful and helpful to others, others that must be helped along,
and supported; 1 These. 5. 14. Now we exhort you brethren, warn them that are
unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all. Now
it is evident, that it was not (only) the Ministers or Elders the Apostle
intended, compared with ver. 11, 12, 13. But it was the more perfect and
spiritual members of the Church, that they might know how to behave themselves
toward the more weak and imperfect ones.

2. There are degrees in this perfection 2. Among Churches.
among the Churches, some Churches are more perfect than some, being compared;
and that is it the Apostle intended in his writing to the Church of Corinth; He
could not write to them as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, etc. But he
spoke wisdom among them that were perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. But we speak wisdom
among them that are perfect, etc. that is, more perfect, and more spiritual, as
the Church of the Romans, whose Faith was famous throughout the World, Romans 1.
8. and 16. 19. The deep things the Apostle writes to them about their freedom
from the Law, and sin, by Jesus Christ, and from condemnation, by the Law of
the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, etc. So likewise the Churches of
Ephesus, Phil. etc. and Rev. 2, 3, Chapt. Some Churches were more perfect than
others, and two of them excelling all the rest; that of Smirna, Chapter 2. 8, 9,
10. and that of Philadelphia, Chap. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.

3. Among Ministers, there is a ministerial 3. Among Ministers.
perfection spoken of in Scripture; 2 Tit. 3. 17. That the man of God may be
perfect, etc. That is, the minister of God, frequently so called in the
Scripture; 1. Of the old Testament, Deuteronomy. 33. 1. Jude 13. 6. 1 Samuel 2. 17. 2
King. 1. 9, 10. And in the new Testament Paul calls Timothy, the man o^ God; 1
Tit. 6. 11. But thou O man of God, flee these things, etc. This is a
ministerial perfection; that is, to be well instructed in the Scriptures, and
have thence learned how to fulfill their ministry; 2 Tit. 2. 15. Study to show
thy self approved unto God, workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing
the word of truth. And among such are likewise diversities, and degrees of
perfection; and that,

1. In gift, 1 Cor. 12. 11. 2 Cor. 11. 5. They differ, 1. In Gift.
For I was not behind (that is, in gift) the very chiefest Apostle: which word
chiefest, implies clearly a diversity in gifts, even amongst the Apostles; for
there was no chiefdom by Office, but in Gift Peter and John seems to excel.

2. In divine disposition to the work, 2. In divine disposition.
some are more disposed thereunto than others. The Apostle Paul had upon him
the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. For which (very probably) he was
envied by false Apostles, deceitful workers, the Devils ministers, who envy
those who are more sincere, laborious and faithful than themselves; ver. 12,
13, 18, 19. with Gal. 4. 17. They would exclude you, (or rather us) that you
might affect them. And the same in substance he speaks of Timothy, Phil. 2. 19,
20. I have no man like minded, (that is, no Minister) that will naturally care
for your estate. It Is a choice virtue in a Minister to have a natural care of
the Church of Christ, such (it seems) were, and still are, very rare to be
found.

3. In labor and industry in the work, 3. In labor.
as an effect of this divine disposition; so the Apostle Paul labored more
abundantly than they all; that is, than all the rest of the Apostles: see both
disposition and labor for the Church together, in Titus, and the brother,
whose praise is in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 8. 16, 17, 18.

4. In conversation and holiness, there are 4. In conversation.
diversities and degrees of seize (and so of this comparative perfection)
in holiness, and that in the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, although it
greatly concerns all to be exemplary in this matter, 1 Tit. 4. 12. 1 These. 2.
10. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.

The reasons of these degrees of perfections and seize both in Ministers
and Members, and so in the Churches, are,

1. From the varieties and degrees of 1. Difference in Gifts.
Gifts, Graces and Virtues given by the Lord to his people; he gives to some
more, to some less, even as it pleases him; Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6,
11. All these works that one and the self-same spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will; and in Matthew. 25. 15. Is this held forth by our Lord in
the diversity of talents; and Ephesians. 4. 7. But unto every one of us is given
Grace according to the measure of the gift of God.

2. From the degrees of improvement of 2. Degrees of Improvement.
those gifts the Lord has given; for suitable to the improvement the Lord gives
increase: where persons are sluggish and negligent, whether Minister or Member,
there is but little or no increase; and where persons are diligent and faithful
improvers of the talents received, there God will bless it with increase; Matt.
25. 29. For unto every one that has, it shall be given, and be shall have more
abundantly, etc. That is, he that has improved that which he has, as is
clear, compared with the former part of the Parable, and will prove true both
here and hereafter: see Heb. 5. 12, 14. Prove. 13. 4.

3. From the due and undue ends of persons 3. In their ends.
endeavor after a greater measure of perfection in gifts and virtues; 1 Cor.
12. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal;
that is, for spiritual profit both for himself and others; but when Gifts and
Virtues are sought after for pride, honor, and self-esteem, or the like
fleshly and base ends, no wonder if God withold, see Jam. 4. 3. Or if he
answer the desire, it is in a way of wrath, as sometimes he gave his people
their desire according to their lust, but it was in a way of wrath, Ps. 88. 29,
30, 32.

3. A third sort of Perfection minded in 3. Perfestion in unity.
Scripture, is a perfection in Unity amongst the Saints and Churches, and this
is a desirable perfection, of which Christians greatly fall short at this day;
1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus, that
you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. Phil. 2. 2, 3. This is promised in the new Covenant,
Ezekiel. 11. 19. Prayed for by our Lord, Joh. 17. 21. And to be endeavored after
by all Saints, and they that are contrary, show themselves to be carnal. 1.
Cor. 3. 3.

A fourth sort of perfection spoken of in 4. In Unity.
Scripture is, when men are well instructed in the principles of Religion,
relating to matters of Faith and Practice and are truly and humbly reaching
after the knowledge of the whole will of God in his Word; when the heart is
universal for God in all his will, that is a perfect man, Col. 4. 12. It was
the fervent labor and prayer of Epaphras for the Church, that they might stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, Acts 18. 26. Apollo, though an
cloquent man, yet being a godly man, was willing to be instructed by Aquila and
Priscilla, in the way of God more perfectly, and the earnest Prayer of the
Apostle in behalf of the Church, 1 These. 3. 10. And this is such a Perfection
where it is in truth, that will afford the soul much boldness both toward God
and Men, Ps. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all
thy Commandments; ver. 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and
nothing shall offend them.

5. There is a Perfection in Justification, 5. In Justification.
which is by Jesus Christ crucified; that is, the pardon of all sin for the
sake of Christ; and this is perfect, and is the perfection spoken of by the
Apostle, Col. 1. 28. Which was the great desire and endeavor of the Apostle,
that all believers might live up in it, That we may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus; that is, perfectly justified in him; Col. 2. 13. Having
forgiven you all trespasses; that is perfect justification* where all
trespasses are forgiven, Act. 13. 39. By him all that believe are justified
from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses;
this imputed righteousness to believers is perfect.

6. As for Sanctification, that is twofold, 6. In Sanctification.
1. Imputed, that is the perfect obedience and purity in the person of the Son
of God, imputed to believers, that is made to them, and accounted theirs; 1
Cor. 1. 30. Who is of God made to be unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption: and this is perfect Sanctification.

2. Is holiness wrought in the Saints, as I minded in the matter of
Sanctification, Chap. 17. And this is both perfect and imperfect; 1. Perfect,
in respect to the parts of holiness; that is, there is something of every part
of holiness, of every virtue of Christ, in whom holiness was perfect; and so he
was the perfect pattern of holiness to his people, and from whom it comes into
us; Joh. 1. 16. And of his fullness have all we received, and Grace for Grace:
that is, of every virtue that was in Christ, have his people received a
measure, by which there is (suitable to the reception) a conformity to him, and
a bearing his image and likeness in this World: on this account it is they are
said to be Created after God in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
And in this respect the Saints are perfect in Holiness, i. e. in respect of the
parts thereof. A child when he is born into the World, has all the parts of a
man, and so is reputed a man in respect of parts, though not in respect of
growth and stature.

So believers in respect of growth up to the perfect state, so they are
imperfect, and greatly imperfect too, and are (or should be) growing daily in
all the parts of Holiness, 1 Cor. 13. 11. The Apostle presents this same truth
by the same simily, When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a
child, but when I was a man, I put away childish things: he uses this simily,
to hold forth the childish, and perfect state of Christians: they are children,
though but little ones, yet they are perfectly so; yet imperfect in respect of
the highest degree, or growth to the perfect state; and that is it the Apostle
intends, Phil. 3, 12.

2. Things propounded, that the highest 2. The highest degree not attainable in
this life.
degree of Gospel-perfection is not attainable in this life; and to demonstrate
this truth, and make it plain, let us consisider.

1. The declared experience and judgment of the Saints in Scripture record,
which the Reader may in these Scriptures take knowledge of, 1 Kin. 8. 46. Eccl.
7. 20. Jam. 3. 2. 1 John 1. 8. 10. Joh. 40. 4, 5. and 42. 6. Isa. 6. 5. All
which demonstrates the truth of this matter; the most eminent of the Saints
that lived in the World, yet were sensible of sin and imperfection, and some of
them declared it to be the state of all; Not a man on earth that lives, and
sins not: and the Apostle Paul a man of the highest attainment in
Gospelperfection, yet confesses himself not to be perfect; Phil. 3. 12. And
that we have every virtue but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11, 12.

2. We are yet in the imperfect and fallen state, only coming forth by Faith,
and the beginning work of regeneration wrought in the spirit of the mind; the
people of God after believing, are but in the way to the perfect deliverance;
perfection is for the perfect restored state of the Saints: and indeed, were it
not so, we might say as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If in this life only we
have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable; so, if our highest
perfection were in this life, we should be (comparatively) but miserable.

3. That this perfect state of the Saints will not, cannot be, till the second
coming and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus: it is true, when the body returns to the
dust, the Saints shall cease from sin, and they shall be with the Lord: but
this is not their perfection, though it would be a blessed degree, if it were
possible to be attained here; but perfection will not, cannot be, till our Lord
come again from Heaven: the truth of this appears from these Scriptures, Phil.
3. 20, 21. Col. 3. 4. 1 John 3. 2. Read these Scriptures, and understand.

2. The resurrection from the dust will not be till our Lord does come again in
Glory, 1 These. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 23. And till then we come not out of the falen
state, The last enemy to be destroyed is death. While we lie in the grave, our
bodies are in the lowest degree of the falen state; and for any to pretend
perfection while in the falen state, a state of sin, sickness, sorrow, and
death, must flow from ignorance, or wilfulness, or both.

4. That though perfection is not attainable in the highest degree, in this
falen, mortal, sinful, sorrowful, and imperfect estate; yet it is the duty,
disposition and concernment of all perfect Christians, to be pressing forward
after perfection, Phil. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Quest. To what end is it to press forward after that which is not to be
attained in this life?

Answ. In my answer to this question, I shall mention three things; 1. That
believers, if they press forward after any thing, that is of God and Christ,
that is of the new Covenant; it must be perfection, it is not imperfection they
reach after, too much of that they have already in themselves, which makes them
groan in the sense thereof; therefore if they press forward after any thing, it
must be Perfection.

2. By pressing forward after Perfection. I intend a growing up into a greater
measure of the perfection attainable in this mortal state; for (as has been
showed) there are degrees of Perfection attainable here, both in Knowledge,
Faith, Love, and an holy conformity to our Lord Jesus, in the Gifts and Virtues
of the Holy Spirit; 1 Pet. 2. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 18. And this is it the Apostle
minds, Phil. 3. 10. That I may know him, etc. That is, that I may grow and
increase in the knowledge of him, and in a conformity to him, for he knew him in
part before. O, it is a sign of a gracious soul, that is truly longing and
endeavoring after the highest degree (attainable here) of conformity to Jesus
Christ; 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is
pure: that is, makes Christ the copy and pattern after which he walks.

3. By pressing forward after Perfection, I intend that the godly soul
principled with perfection, have in his eye the highest and glorious
perfection; and that is it he would attain, if possible, though he knows it is
not attainable here, yet he reaches after it, and can do no less, if
interested in it; it is his portion, and that is it the Apostle intends, Phil.
3. 11. If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead; that
is, to that perfection that shall be attained at the resurrection of the dead;
ver. 12, 13, 14. I press forward to the mark, for the prize of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus: God and Christ is the mark we are running to* 1 Pet. 3.
18. Mat. 16. 24. And Perfection and Glory is the prize we are running for, 2
Tit. 4. 7, 8 Romans 2. 7. And he can never run right that has not both the mark
and prize in his eye: So run that ye may obtain.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Sincerity.
SIncerity being that which crowns all other virtues and duties (for without
sincerity all is nothing) and must have its place and use in all relating both
to God and Man, without which it is unaccepted with God; and although I have
occasionally given hints of this virtue in other Chapters, and particularly in
that about Prayer, in the manner how it must be performed, yet I shall in this
place speak something more distinctly, yet briefly. It being a virtue so well
pleasing to God, he desires truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. man would
not accept of hipocritical service or show of love, if he knew it so to be,;
how much less will God accept of that which is but feigned and in show; God
knows the heart, the mind, and thoughts, and he will have the heart in all,
or nothing at all, My Son give me thy heart; God will accept no gift without
the heart, let God have the heart, and he has all, but without the heart he
will accept nothing.

All the glorious shows in Religion without the heart, are but Painted sins,
and the persons but as Whited Tombs, that appeas beautiful to men, but within
are full of Dead men Bones. Sincerity must have its place in Faith, or else it
is but feigned and nothing worth, true faith must be unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
its to be feared that there is a great deal of feigned Faith in the World, that
makes men no better then Hypocrites. Joh. 2. 23, 24, 25. Sincerity must have
its place in love, (or else its nothing) and that 1. to God the Father, Mat.
22. 37. to Jesus Christ his Son, Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all those that love
our Lord Jesus in Sincerity, Amen* To the people of God for his sake it must be
sincere heart love, Mat. 22. 39. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; 1 John 3. 18. love not in Word and Tongue, but in deed and in truth; 1 Pet. 1.
22. it must be unfeigned and with a pure heart fervently. Sincerity must be in
our prayers, Psalm. 17. 1. Give ear unto my Prayers that goes not out of
feigned lips. In a word, Sincerity must be in all our services if they are
accepted of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 119. 34. Give me Understanding and
I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart, ver. 69. I
will keep thy Precepts with my whole heart, and 9. 1. I will praise thee with
my whole heart; so that whether it be faith or love, prayer or praise, or any
part of obedience, it must be with the heart, a sincere heart, a whole and
undevided heart, a heart and a heart the Lord disowneth.

I shall endeavor to show some infallible Signs of sincerity.
Characters of a sincere heart, plain from Scripture, and Saints, Experience,
not to darken truth, or leave Souls at a loss, but that he that runs may read
and understand. And in general, as the ground of the whole, a sincere heart is
an honest heart, and good heart, Luke 8. 15. this honest and good heart
includes the whole of sincerity.

1. An honest, good, and sincere heart, 1. Its an open plain heart.
is an open and plain heart; he is true in what he does, he hates and abhors
deceit, we use to say he is an honest man that deals plainly and justly, so
that he dares let all his actions come to the trial; so is it with the sincere
soul, he is honest and plain, would have all his works done in the light, he
hates darkness, he deals above board (as the saying is) he is willing that all
his actions should be brought to the trial, Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly
as in the day, etc. The honest sincere soul loves the day, he is not for night
work, nor deeds of darkness, be it never so secret. Joh. 3. 19 20, 21. He that
does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they
are wrought in God. The sincere soul loves the light, because it discovers the
darkness of sin, the sincere soul fears all sin, especially hypocrisy, he
would not be an hypocrite for the world, and therefore comes to the light. Of
the Word and Spirit of Christ, to try his spirit and actions by, that so he may
know that his deeds are wrought in God, that they are of God, and owned and
approved of him; the honest sincere heart, as he fears hypocrisy, and comes to
the light, that he may understand of what so^^ his work is, so he does it
sincerely and thoroughly; he is in good earnest in the matter, and therefore do
not only search himself, and is willing to be searched by others, but is
willing to stand to the Lo(...) searching who knows all things. Psalm. 139.
23, 24. Search me O God and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. O this is
a sincere honest heart indeed that would have all darkness discovered and
brought to his knowledge, and to that end desires the Lord to search and bring
to light any hidden way of iniquity and darkness. But the Hypocrite dwells in
the dark, and is afraid of the light, he covers himself with darkness, he
thinks men see it not, nor would he have God to see it, he dares not make a
search himself into his heart and ways, much less would he have God to do it,
lest his deeds should be reproved.

2. This honest sincere heart is a universal 2. It is a universal heart.
heart for God, it hates, abhors, and forsakes all sin, he would not have one
sin left, as he desires to have all sin pardoned, so he would have all sin
mortified, he loatheth every evil way, Psalm. 119 128. is willing to embrace
every truth of the Gospel for truths sake, to have a respect to all Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have a respect
to all thy Commandment,; the sincere soul (according to his light) do not half
it with God or with men, but as Joshua and Caleb, Number. 14. 24. and 32. 12.
Being men of another spirit they follow God fully, and what they know not they
beg light from him, as the Prophet, Psalm. 119. 33, 34. Teach me O Lord the way
of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end, give me understanding and I
shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart; a sincere heart
as he is universal in his obedience to God, so is he careful of out-running
truth, moves not sudden, but on sound and sollid ground, he would not miscarry
for a world, to take error for truth, Psalm. 119. 128. I esteem all thy
Precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way.

But the Hypocrite at best does but half it with God, and with men, leave some
sins that are most scandalous and less profitable, but keep some sins close and
fast still, as his Dallilah, that he will not part withal; touch his Darling,
beloved, profitable sin, then he startles, be it covetousness, oppression,
pride, or whatever else that must not be meddled with, like Herod who heard John
the Dipper gladly, and reformed some things; but when he touched the Darling
Lust, he must suffer for it; so it is likewise with the Hypocrite in matter of
service, he will do some duties, such as like him and may stand with his credit
and profit, but is not universal; do not desire to know, that he may do, and so
indeed is not upright and honest either with God or Men, for the Hypocrite can
sin out of sight, lie and cheat for advantage, without any conscience at all.

3. The honest plain sincere heart carries 3. Designs only the glory of God,
etc.
no design along with him in his heart, but the Glory of God, and his own and
others spiritual and eternal good. This is the design of the sincere heart in
all his undertakings both toward God and Men; and this is Gods design in all
his undertakings, especially on the new Covenant account, his own Glory and ehe
Salvation of Sinners, and this the sincere heart is principled with. Psalm. 119.
55. I have remembered O Lord thy name in the night, and have kept thy Law; that
is a good keeping of the Law of God that flows from the remembrance of his
name, Mal. 3. 16. There was a book of remembrance written for those that feared
God and thought upon his name. The sincere soul in all his seekings, seeks God
and Christ as the chiefest good, and seeks the Glory of the Name of God, and
his own and others Salvation. Psalm. 119. 94. I am thine, save me, for I have
sought thy Precepts. So Abraham and the Saints of old sought a Country, Heb.
11. 14. They that say such things plainly declare that they seek a Country. The
Saints may, yea, they ought to be seeking after the Heavenly Country, the
Heavenly City, and to have respect to the recompense of reward, ver. 26. to
their own salvation, and the salvation of others, 1 Cor. 10. 33.

But the Hypocrites design is to keep up a visible Profession for his own
honor and esteem among men, designing himself in all, making his Profession a
Cloak to cover his secret Abominations, either covetousness as Judas, they make
it a Cloak for Covetousness, 1 These. 2. 5. Or for Malitiousness, 1 Pet. 2. 16.
or at best designs his own honor and esteem with men, for they love the praise
of men more then the praise of God. But sincere souls can acquit themselves of
such things, and abhors such designs as these, but designs to approve
themselves to God, whatever men think, speak, or do against them.

4. A sincere heart is constant with God, 4. Is constant with God.
he is the same at all times, and in all places, and in all companies, time and
place changes him not, Ps. 119. 20. My soul breaks for the longing it has to
thy Judgments at all times, verse. 33. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes
and I shall keep it to the end, ver. 44. So shall I keep thy Law continually
for ever and ever.

But the Hypocrite is much for timeing his service, serve God in prosperity,
but turn away in adversity, Mat. 13. 20, 21. seem to be good in good company,
but bad in bad company; Religious with the Religious, and Profane with the
profane; the Hypocrite will be for God while it may stand with his ho^our and
profit, but when that fails, his Religion is lost, like those, Mal. 3. 14.
that said it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept
his Ordinances and walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts; they are all for
worldly profit, gain is their best Godliness, but Gracious Souls see again in
true Godlyness, though obtained in worldly loss.

5. The design of the sincere heart is to 5. Design to please God.
please God in every thing that he does, and to approve himself to God, he will
choose rather to cross the wills of the whole world then the will of God, and
yet will please men too, so far as may be, and not displease God; sincere
Christians in their nonconformity to the world, it is not to please their own
fancies and humors (as some imagine) but it is to please God, to live to his
word and will, Gal. 1. 10. Do I now please men or God, etc. If I please men, I
should not be the Servant of God, 1 These. 4. 1. That as ye have received of us,
how ye ought to walk and please God, etc. 1 John 2. 22. 2 Cor. 2. 17. That is a
Son-like frame indeed, that designs to pleas^ his Father in all things; the
Sincere Christian would not displease God for a world, he had rather displease
men, and himself too (I mean fleshly self) then displease God.

But Hypocrites design is to please men, and to please their own humors, they
do what they do to be seen of men; the Hypocrite if he pray; it is to be seen
of men, if he give, it is to be seen of men, to have applause of men, that is
his end, and if that be attained, he has his reward, Mat. 23. 5. But all their
works they do to be seen of men, chapter 6. 1, 5. The Hypocrite if he can keep but
just so much Religion as may continue his esteem among the Professors of his
way and time, he looks no more, unless it be the vain glorious, glossing,
talking, (and it may be) preaching Hypocrite.

6. The great care of a Sincere Christian 6. Look especially to the heart.
is to look to the heart, to have the heart right with God, he knows that the
heart is deceitful, and that God requires the heart, and will have the heart
or nothing; and therefore whatever he does, he does it heartily as to the Lord;
and mourns when he finds the heart wanting and wandering; he hates a divided
Hypocritical heart, he believes with the heart, loves God with the heart,
prays with the heart, obeys with the heart, Romans 16. 17. he accounts no
service well done where the heart is wanting.

But the Hypocrite is a stranger to heart work and heart service, he troubles
not himself with that work, the most he does is to bring his body to the
service, and his head it may be, but for the heart he take; no care for that,
he is a stranger to such work, Ezekiel. 33. 31. With their mouth they show much
love, but their heart goes after their covetousness, See Mat. 15. 8. Psalm. 78.
36, 37. They did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied to him with their
Tongues, for their heart was not right with him; Thus the Hypocrites in heart
heap up wrath, Job. 36. 13. For Hypocrisy lies in the heart, and Sincerity is
in the heart, it is an honest and good heart.

7. The Sincere Christian dwells most 7. Is most at home.
at home, looks most to the state of his own soul, keeps his own Vineyard,
dresseth that, and watches his own heart and his own words, and ways, and
warreth against his own sins and sinful nature, judges himself for his own
miscarriages, cries out, O wretched man that I am, (not but that sincere souls
sees, and reproves, and mourns for others sins; but his first, his great
work is at home, to keep things in order there; he says with the Prophet,
Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee only have I sinned; and with the Publican, Lord be
merciful to me a Sinner. He says with the Prophet, Psalm. 119. 5. O that my
ways were di^ectected to keep thy Statutes. But the Hypocrite is most abroad,
quicksighted to see into others failings, but blind at home, cries peace to
his own soul without ground, his great work is to be finding fault abroad, he
cries not, O wretched man that I am, but O wretched man that thou art; he is
quick sighted into the sins of others, that his own may be covered, or at least
lessened in his conscience account; an Hypocrite will sooner see a Mote in his
brothers eye then a Beam in his own.

8. The Sincere Christian as he believes 8. He cleaves to the Doctrine of
Christ.
in the Lord, and loves and obeys the Lord above all, so he cleaves (not
only in word, and in tongue, but in deed, and in truth) to the Doctrine of
Christ, the Word of the Gospel, as his alone ground of says, and rule of
obedience, and dare not for a world to swerve from it, either to his own or
others inventions, 1 John 4. 6. He that knows God hears us, he that is not
of God hears not us; hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of
error, 2 John ver. 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine
of Christ, has not God; but he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has
both the Father and the Son.

But Hypocrites whatever they pretend in word, of owning the Doctrine of
Christ, yet easily turn from it, preferring their own inventions and
imaginations equal with, if not above the Doctrine of the Gospel, Mat. 15. 7.
Ye Hypocrites, etc. ver. 9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine
the commandments of men, Isa. 29. 13. Their fear toward me is taught by the
Precepts of men.

God takes them to be Hypocrites that pretend to own him and his word, and
indeed own the Precepts of men, and their own inventions in his worship.

9. Sincere Christians love Gods things 9. They love Gods things for his sake.
for his sake, his word, his ways and Ordinances, because it is his, because it
has his stamp upon it, and spirit in it, loves his people because they are
his, and have his spirit in them, and his name upon them, and so loves all whom
the Lord loves, the poor Saints as well as the rich, they that are alive, as
well as they that are dead, they they see and know, as well as them they never
saw, etc.

But Hypocrites love is to some, for some base and by end, and not to all, or
to the dead Saints, but not to the living; Hypocrites pretend a great deal of
love to the deceased Saints which they never saw, but hate and persecute the
living Saints, who desire to be the Followers of those who through faith and
patience inherit the promise. Hypocrites will pretend to be the greatest lovers
of dead Saints, none love them as themselves, they will honor them, every one
o^ them shall have a day dedicated to him in honor, Saint Peter and Saint
Paul's day, etc. yea, and it may be adore and pray to them, make them their
intercessors, but hate and persecute them that are alive, whom they see and
know, and that too, because they walk in the steps of the deceased Saints. We
may easily judge what love such have to Jesus Christ and the Apostles (if they
were alive, they should quickly find and feal their love) that are so friendly
to their followers in Faith and Patience; thus did the Hypocrites of old Mat.
23. 29, 30, 31. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites, because ye
build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous,
and say, if we had been in the days of our Fathers we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses
unto your selves that ye are the children of them that killed the Prophets.
They witness that they are the Children of the Persecutors (not by nature, but)
by the same spirit, children in blood and persecution, therefore Hypocrites, in
pretending to love Saints that are gone, whom they never saw, but hate them
they see, and would as truly hate and persecute them they never saw, if they
were present, as they do those that are alive and present with them.

10. And finally the honest hearted sincere 10. He fruitful.
Christian is fruitful, he hears the word of God and keeps it, and brings
forth fruit with patience. He knows that hereby God is glorified, Joh. 15. 8.
and that his account shall be thereby advantaged in the day of account, Phil.
4. 17. They have their fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans
6 22. Even the fruit of righteousness that is by Jesus Christ, to the praise
and glory of God. Phil. 1. 11. Fruitful in every good work, and increasing in
the knowledge of God; it is the fruitless tr^e that must be cut down. But the
Hypocrite is a fruitless branch, an empty vine that brings forth fruit to
himself; he never goes out of (or above) himself, seeks himself in all that he
does, but brings forth no fruit to God, no fruit to men, no fruit for the good
of his own soul, unless it be the fruit of his Hypocrisy, that is woe and
wrath. The Hypocrite in heart does heap up wrath; Woe to yo^ Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites, ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape
the damnation of hell. Mat. 23. 29. 33.

2. I shall show the advantages of sincerity 2. The advantages of sincerity.
and honesty of heart, to Godward, in the New Covenant of his Grace.

1. Sincerity of heart to God, is that which renders all the weak and imperfect
services of his people acceptable to him not as the meritorious cause, that is
alone in Christ Jesus, and for his sake, both ou^ persons and services are
accepted in the bel^ved, Ephesians. 1. 6. But in him; neither are ou^ persons nor
services accepted without sincerity, feigned faith, and love, and obedience is
not accepted, it must be (as you have heard before) heart faith, heart love and
heart obedience, that God accepts i^ Christ and for his sake; this of sincerity
and truth in the inward parts, God desires and accepts in all things,
according to what we have, and not according to what we have not. Weak and
imperfect services are accepted where sincerity is, this sweetens all our
services, keeps the soul humble and holy, with a daily dependence on the Grace
that is in Christ Jesus. God (in Christ Jesus) covers the many failings, and
accepts the weak services of his upright ones; David a man of many failings,
yet being upright and sincere, he was owned of God to be a Man after his own
heart: sincerity of heart makes us after Gods own heart, he delights in, owns,
and approves of sincere souls, he takes them for his own, with all their
weaknesses and imperfections.

But Hypocrisy marrs all, it is as the dead Fly in the Box that causes all
the Ointment to stink; The Hypocrite may to visible appearance in outward show,
exceed the sincere soul, as the Pharisee did the Publican, he may preach, and
pray, and converse at such a rate, as if he were an Angel of light, or a
Minister and man of righteousness, and yet be an Hypocrite all the while, proud
and self seeking, designing himself and his own ends in all; and this spoileth
all; God owns not any person under heaven, for such external painted
excellencies, though men sometimes (through weakness) may admire them, and they
may admire themselves, yet God owns not, on any such account, see Mat. 7. 22,
23. Luke 13. 15, 16.

2. Sincerity of heart toward God in the faith, gives great boldness to the
soul before the Lord, both here and hereafter.

1. Hear the sincere heart can appeal to the Lord in the most difficult case,
when the Hypocrite must sink in his spirit, so Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 2, 3.
Remember Lord how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
etc. and Joh in his great trial was supported and bold on this account, Job.
13. 15, 16. I will maintain mine own ways before him, for an Hypocrite shall
not come before him, and 31. 6. Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God
may know mine integrity. O the boldness of a sincere soul, that dares to appeal
to the Lord in the matter, and to say as Peter, Lord thou know all things,
thou know I love thee.

But the Hypocrite faints and sinks when God deals with him, Prove. 28. 1. The
wicked flee when none pursue, but the righteous are bold as a Lion.

2. Hereafter in the day of accounts, the great day of the Lord, who may abide
it; sincerity then will be worth the world, then shall the righteous, sincere
upright ones, stand with great boldness before the Lord, 1 John 4. 17. Herein
is our love made perfect that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment.
Hypocrites shall then be ashamed and confounded, they shall be speechless, the
ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of the
Just, then they shall be ashamed and confounded in their own spirits, knowing
themselves to be Hypocrites, and the Congregation of Hypocrites shall be
desolate, Job 15. 34. See Isa. 33. 14.

3. Sincerity will preserve the soul pure to God from sin, and keep the soul
close and constant to God in duty. 1. It will preserve from sin, it is a
wonderful preserving virtue, a sincere heart would not sin against God for a
world, it not only preserves from the common sins of the time and place, but
from the sins of men's callings and relations* and from the sins that men are by
nature most inclined unto, Psalm. 18. 33. 23. I was also upright before him, and
I kept my self from mine iniquity. Sincerity will keep souls from the iniquity
of their natures, to which they are most inclined, it will pluck out the right
eye, and cut off the right hand; but Hypocrisy must have that spared and kept
alive, the darling lust must live, though in the death of the owner thereof,
Psalm. 25. 21. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee.

2. It will keep the soul constant and close to God is duty, it makes
conscience of every duty and service, private and public, and keeps the soul
in a right frame in the performance thereof, that is, holy, humble, awful,
believing, and rejoicing in the Lord, its that will tend to complete the soul
in all the will of God; sincerity goes through with the work, does not half it
with God, nor turn back in the day of trial, but the Hypocrite is fleeting, and
inconstant, will not pray always, does nothing in conscience and love to the
Lord, especially to private work and duty he is a stranger, looks not at the
frame of his spirit in the work, but is too and fro, fast and loose with God,
suitable to the time, occasion, and advantage of Profession.

Obj. Sincerity I perceive is a choice virtue,

Ans. What I have said as to the discovery

1. A sincere soul dreads to be a Hypocrite, he would not be a Hypocrite for
all the world, he fears Hypocrisy as he does any other sin; this is the
experience of all sincere Christians, they watch their hearts in this matter,
and keeps up a holy jealousy of themselves, because they know that the heart
is deceitful and treacherous; and therefore prays as the Prophet. Psalm. 1 19.
29. Remove from me the way of lying, and grant me thy Law graciously, and in a
gracious sincere heart; he knows that whatsoever is done in Hypocrisy, will
prove but a lie in the end, and therefore dreads to be a Hypocrite, and says
as the Prophet, v. 163. I have and abhor lying, but thy law do I love.

2. We are to distinguish between being a Hypocrite and Hypocrisy; Hypocrisy
is a sin of nature that all are inclined unto; there is the seed of all sin in
the nature of it, in the Saints, and but in part mortified, the difference
lies in this; the sincere heart desires and designeth truth and sincerity in
all, he would not be a Hypocrite nor have any hypocrisy to have any being in
him, but the Hypocrite designs Hypocrisy, and so professes himself to be what
he is not, and does, or easily might know himself to be a Hypocrite.

The sincere heart watches himself in the matter to find it out, and warreth
against it, and mourns in the sense of his natural inclinations on that
account; he judges it, and loathes himself for it as for any other evil: Pride
and Hypocrisy will be appearing, but its the souls grief, and his desire and
endeavor is against it.

But the Hypocrite is in his Element, let his design be answered and he has
his end, he troubles not himself about sin cerity, or if at any time conscience
accuse, he searches not to the quick to find out the truth of the accusation,
in order to deliverance, but stills and stifles convictions, and willingly
silences conscience, laying it to sleep without any cure of the malady.

CHAP. XXV. Of Election.
THough Election be first in order of time, yet not so in manifestation,
relating What it is.
either to God or man; God does manifest it in time, and man comes to
understand it after believing, 1 These. 1. 4. My manner and method of speaking
to this great truth shall be, 1. To show from Scripture what Election is;
Election is the choosing and designing of some out of the lump of mankind, for
the end by the Elector determined; I take Election, foreknowing and choosing,
to be all one in sense and substance, and these are the Scripture terms about
the matter, Romans 8. 29. and 11. 2. 5. 7. Ephesians. 1. 4.

To Elect or choose in the common sense of all men, imports a taking of some,
and leaving others, it cannot import the electing and choosing of all, as some
imagine, for in common sense, that is no choosing where all are taken, for
where some are chosen others are left, Mat. 22. 14. Many are called but few are
chosen; so that in the common sense of all men, divine and humane, we must
understand Election to be a choosing of some persons out of (or from among)
many, to the end determined by the chooser.

2. That God has elected and chosen 2. That God has elected some.
some for himself from among men, and that before the world was, i. e. from
Eternity; this appears from Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the
fore knowledge of God the Father, etc. or foreordained, as the same word is
rendered, ver. 20. or fore-decreed, or as its rendered, Romans 8. 29. Foreknow,
whom he did foreknow, etc. that is, decree or ordain, and this for knowledge,
ordaining and decreeing about the salvation of some men and women must be
before time, Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, that is, from Eternity, it is Gods eternal willing or
purposing to save some in the way by him determined.

Obj. This choice seems to be in time, for they are chosen in Christ Jesus, and
none are accounted to be in him before and without faith.

Answ. Its one thing to be actually in Christ by faith, and another to be
elected and chosen in him before the world was; faith is the demonstration, and
(in some measure) the accomplishment of this choice or election, which was in
Christ Jesus before the world began, or for his sake decreed, ver. 5. Having
Predestined us, (or before set us apart) unto the adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Where is a
Predestination unto the Adoption of Children, before the Adoption was
accomplished, and that according to the good pleasure of his will, which he
purposed in himself; and its without all question, that in all things, and in
relation to all persons, about this great work of Salvation, He works all
things according to the council of his own will, ver. 11. And why should we
not believe the truth of God in relation to Election before time, (it being so
plainly stated in Scripture) as well as believe the truth of that word, Tit. 1.
2. In hope of Eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the
world began; If God made promises to us in Christ Jesus before the world began,
why should we think it strange for him to elect or choose for himself before
the world began? 2. Tim. 9. Who has saved us and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began; all which
demonstrates this truth, that true believers are, but what they were Elected
and designed to before they were, and that they do, nor shall enjoy any thing
but what was promised them in Christ Jesus, before the World was.

But 2. If we should let it pass for current as some would have it, (which we
may not do) that is, that Elect persons were not in any sense considered as in
Christ Jesus, before and without faith, yet the choice was before the
foundation of the World; foreordained to believing, to sanctification, so that
it answers not the end for which it is objected. And further, Romans 9. 23. those
Elected chosen ones are called, the v^sse^s of mercy which he had before
prepared to glory; all which confirms the truth of Election before time.

3. That this Electing, Choosing, Decreeing, and Ordaining love of God, was (as
respecting the persons so chosen and elected) without any respect to any
foreseen faith, or grace, or good in them, as the preceding meritorious cause
of election, (if any meritorious cause at all, it must be in Christ Jesus, in
whom and for whose sake the election was) the truth hereof appears; that it was
not for our goodness, faith, or holiness, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace that was given us in Christ
Jesus, etc. And Romans 11. 5. There is a remnant according to the Election of
Grace, and if it be of Grace, then it is not of work, as the Apostle reasons
it, ver. 6.

Obj. Though it be not of works as the meritorious cause, yet it may be of
works as the conditional cause, as in the matter of Justification.

Answ. Though Faith, etc. be the condition of Justification (according to the
law of the new Covenant) which is effected in time, yet it is not the condition
of election; the reasons thereof are,

1. Because its no where stated in the Scriptures, as the condition of
Election, as Faith is the condition of Justification.

2. Because in reason it cannot be, for Election and choice was before time,
and so could not be on the condition of what we had not, we were not, nor had
not says when Elected, therefore faith would not be the conditional cause of
an act past in God before the supposed condition thereof was in being, that
could not be either the meritorious or conditional cause of such an act; so
that its evident that Election was of Grace and not of Work, whereas
Justification is not till we believe and obey the truth.

4. To what persons are elected, and that 4. To what persons are elected.
is to believe and obey the Gospel, to be holy here, and happy hereafter, 1
Pet. 1. 2. Elect, etc. Through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience:
Obedience as the end, which includes faith and love, and all the divine virtues
and duties of the Gospel, through (or by) the Sanctification of the Spirit;
hence faith is said to be, The faith of the operation of God, Col. 2. 13. Ephesians.
1. 4. The end of the eternal choice is described to be, That we might be holy,
and that we might show forth the praises of him that has called us out of
darkness into his mavelous light, 2 Thef. 2. 13. God has from the beginning
chosen you to salvation, Jam. 2. 5. By all which it appears, that the end of
God in his Electing grace was, that he might have a holy, obedient people, that
might show forth his praise, and be eternally saved and glorified in the world
to come.

5. How persons may come to know 5. How men may know their Election.
their Election of God, and that they are of the number of his Elected ones;
God has in his word opened a way by which his people may in a good and
comfortable measure know their Election, 1 These. 1. 4. Knowing Brethren,
Beloved, your Election of God. But how may we know our Election of God? Answ.
When Gods ends of Election are effected in us, by that we may and must know it,
if ever we rightly know it, when Faith, Love, Holiness, etc. is effectually
wrought in us, by that we read our Election, the effects of electing Grace
wrought in us, and this the Apostle clears, having asserted their knowing of
their Election, ver. 4. he discovers how they came to know it, ver. 5, 6. by
the effectual work of the Gospel in them, Gods shedding abroad his love in the
heart, and uniting the heart to himself in truth of faith and love, is the
alone way by which Christians may read their Election. So the Apostle for
himself, 1 Tit. 1. declares himself to be an Apostle, after the Faith of Gods
Elect. And how does he prove that? By the acknowledgment of the truth which is
after Godliness: and persons that pretend to know their Election of God any
other way, deceive themselves.

6. The Reasons why God Elected some 6. The reasons why God elected some.
to Salvation before the world was, are, 1. his love, his special love; its
true that God had a love to all mankind, for they were, and are his, he made
the nature of all in the first man, and determined the being or persons of all
in time, and loved all, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his
Son, etc. But herein is discovered his special everlasting love, Jer. 31. 3.
Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, etc. and this is the new
Covenant love, a promise of Gospel grace to the Spiritual Seed, as appears
Chap. 30. 10. to the end, and chap. 31. throughout, here is the great and
special love of God and of Christ, who loved the Church and gave himself for
it, Ephesians. 5. 25. Even the Universal Church of the First Born, whose names are
written in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23.

2. That his design of Salvation by Jesus Christ might not be altogether
frustrated, and come to none effect, for such was the Metamorphis and change
made in man by the Devil, and Sin in the Fall, being gone out from God, that he
would never be willing rightly to return to him again, and this the Lord
foresaw, and therefore it stood with the honor of his whole name to choose
some in his Son, to be made partakers of the life designed by him, that so our
Lord Jesus might not suffer in vain, but might see of the Travel of his soul
and be satisfied; it would have been infinitely below, and unbecoming an
infinite God, to have entered upon such a work of such glorious concernment to
his own name, and the good of sinners, and to be effected by so wonderful a
way, as the sufferings of his own Son; without a certain foreknowledge of its
event, yea, and without the certain accomplishing of the whole after the
council of his own will, and too low and base thoughts are they in men to think
the contrary, as if God should go about such a work as a man, not determining
the event before the undertaking, by which all his design and Christ's
sufferings might, nay, necessarily would have been in vain, that man was gone
out from God, so as not (by his own will) to return again is evident, not only
by experience, but by Scripture, Ps. 81. 11. Job 21. 14, 15. Prove. 1. 24, 25.
Romans 3. 11. to 17. with many like Scriptures to this purpose; wherefore it was
necessary that God should give some to Christ, John 6. 39. (which are his
Elected ones) that they might obtain the salvation designed, and he might not
bestow all his labor and sufferings in vain, Isa. 49. 4, 5, 6. read it at your
leisure, and consider it well.

Obj. If God has Elected some, it etc.

Answ. Its true that God is no respecter i. e. for any good by nature in one
more then another, for all were in their blood, that is, in their sin alike,
enemies alike, and alike miserable. But some he purposed to magnify his Mercy
on to life, and fixes his choice on them according to his own will, without any
respect of person; that is, of Goodlyness of Person, Beauty, Wisdom, Strength,
Honor, Riches, good Nature, or the like, but rather the contrary, See 1 Cor.
1. 26, 27, 28, 29. Jam. 2. 5. and that from his own will and pleasure, Luke 20.
21. a wonderful and hidden mystery it is.

3. That he might glorify the riches of his mercy in saving some, as well as
of his Justice in condemning others. Romans 9. 23. That he might make known the
Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before prepared to
Glory; Ephe. 1. 4, 5, 6. this was the utmost and final design of God, to
glorify the Riches of his Grace Eternally, in the Vessels of Mercy prepared to
Glory.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Reprobation.
REprobation I take to be non-election, and I dare not understand it further;
for so here is Mercy and Justice wonderfully exalted in a way of righteousness:
I do not find reprobation, as attributed to God, in this matter, in the terms
thereof in the Scripture; and (I suppose that) all the sayings in the Scripture
that seems equivalent to it, may be very safely understood in this sense; as
Prove. 16. 4. He made the wicked for the day of wrath, i. e. he knew they would
be wicked, yet he made them, and designed them for their wickedness unto wrath,
Romans 9. 21, 22. The elect he designed unto honor, and others he left to
themselves, and the means afforded, that continue impenitent, he designed to
dishonor; for God saw the end of all, and disposed all to such ends as will be
for his own Glory; Jude, ver. 4. The Apostle speaks of certain men that were of
old ordained to this condemnation; that is, God fore-knowing them in their
sins, ordained them to condemnation: I dare not think that God reprobated any,
but in relation to their obstinacy and constancy in sin; none shall be damned
from the detriment counsel, without relation to their sins; nor has any act
past in God to cause them to sin, but men are the cause of their own
destruction, though God for their sin has designed them to it; so that God
will wonderfully exalt himself in his Justice and Mercy on this account.

Reprobation has two parts in it, 1. A Two parts in Reprobation.
non-clection, that is, a leaning to the means afforded, which is full of all
sufficiency to save all, if they have hearts and grace to make use thereof: I
say they are left to the means, to believe, etc. or not believe, at their own
will and choice, and at their own peril; and so he propounds the Gospel to
all without respect, effecting the term; of life therein propounded, where and
when he pleases: but no act of God hinders any man, but according to the
public ministration of the Gospel, he wille^^ that all should be saved, by
coming to the knowledge of the truth; and this will toward all, he effects in
whom he will, and leave^ others to their own wills; though man have lost the
freeness of his will to that which is good, by his sin, yet not the power of
willing, and God leaves his will free* he may believe, obey, and be saved if ^^
will, God hinders not, unless it be by his Judicial act, as a punishment of
former acts of sin and rebellion against him, as in the case of Pharaoh of his
own people, Joh. 12. 39, 40. And of the rebellious Gentiles, Romans 1. 21, -- 24.
Which I call a Judicial hardening, i. e. a giving up to an hardened estate, in
a way of Justice, as a punishment for sin, which is the greatest judgment that
can befall persons in this World, and in this he acts according to his own
will, both in a way of Judgment and Mercy, Romans 9. 15, 17. But otherwise God
affords great and blessed means for man to believe and be saved: it is the
devil and man himself that debilitates the understanding and will, that it will
have none of God and Christ, of Grace and Life, on the terms propounded in the
new Covenant, which is, Repentance, Faith, and new obedience; this, man of
himself will not submit too, nor cannot, because he will not: see 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Joh. 5. 40. and 6. 44.

The second part of Reprobation of impenitent sinners is, they are decreed and
appointed to pain and misery, to be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power, 2 These. 1. 8, 9.

To be set on the left hand, with this sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, as a punishment for their sin against God, and rejecting Grace in the day
of Grace. O how does it concern every one then to look about themselves wh^^es
they have time and means, and not profanely to plead, that if they are elected,
they shall be saved, live as they list; if not, they shall be damned, do what
they can. But know, that you may believe, obey the Gospel, and be saved if you
will, if you have hearts to it, God hinders you not, but on the contrary,
affords you blessed means, and gives you bl^ssed invitations, and makes you
blessed offers of Life, if you will obey him; and will accept you, and perform
all his good word and promises of Life, if you come in, believe, and obey the
Gospel. But know, that if you resolve to keep your sins still, and to live as
you list, and will not accept of Christ and Life on the terms of the Gospel,
you are so far from being any of the elect ones, that you must be damned, Mar.
16. 15, 16.

Obj. But I want the power of coming to

Answ. 1. Ordinarily the defect lies in to set on the work of turning to the
Lord with the whole heart, and to trust him for strength therein, and thus the
heart is divided; like those the Lord complains of, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is
divided, now shall they be found faulty; a double heart is an heart the Lord
likes not; Jam. 1. 8. A double minded man is unstable in all his wai^s; and 4.
8. Purify your hearts ye double minded. While the will is thus divided, it is
no wonder if the power be wanting; Let not such a man think to obtain any thing
from the Lord.

2. If they will be in good earnest to turn to the Lord, to believe and obey
the Gospel, to eschew evil, and to do good, set about the work, and do not sit
still and complain for want of power, but look to the Lord, and he will not be
wanting to thee; he that has wrought the will, will not fail in helping to do,
if thou set heartily about the work: I shall say in this as David said to his
Son in another case, 1 Chronicles. 22. 16. Arise and be doing, and the Lord will be
with thee. God never did, nor never will damn any man for want of power, but
for want of will, and so men's destruction is of themselves.

Obj. But Christ says, Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him.

Answ. True, but first God draws by his the wooing invitations thereof, is the
way by which he draws sinners to himself these are the cords of his love by
which he, draws; Hos. 11. 4. I drew them with the cords of a man, with the
bonds of love, and I laid meat before them: and this kind of drawing has a
natural tendency to effect the work, if wilfulness keep not from the Grace
presented, and invited too.

2. If the work hereby be so far effected in thee, as a real desire to come to
Christ, know it is from the drawing of the Lord, therefore come to him, fall in
with him while he is thus drawing thee; the Lord calls thee, Matt. 11. 28. Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest:
dispute not the power, but an hearty and willing consent to embrace Christ
Jesus, as thy Savior and Lord, according to the Gospel, and the work is done.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Church of Christ in the new Covenant.
THE Church of God, under the ministration of the Law, or old Covenant, was the
natural seed of Abraham; and so the Nation of the Jews to them was the Oracles
and Ordinances given, and them did he own for his peculiar people to worship
him, his people in Covenant, and under his discipline and government.

The Church of God under the ministration of the new Testament, since the death
and resurrection of the Testator, Jesus Christ, are, or should be, the
spiritual seed of Abraham; that is, true Believers, both of Jews and Gentiles.
It Is now no National Church, but a people gathered out of the Nations, to the
profession of Faith in Christ Jesus, and obedience to him, Gal. 3. 28, 29. Act.
10. 34, 35. Romans 3. 29. Rev. 5. 9.

But to speak more distinctly of the Church, the word Church (or Assembly, as
the Greek word Ekklesia imports) is variously applied in the Scripture, to any
Assembly, bad as well as good; Acts 19. 32, 39, 41. The same word is so
translated, and applied to an Assembly met together for evil.

But when it intends the Church, and assembly of God, and of Christ, on the new
Covenant account, (that being it we are now about) we may consider it according
to Scripture, on a threefold considetion.

1. It intends a people gathered out of What the constituted Church of Christ
is.
the World by the ministry of the Gospel, to the visible profession of Faith in
Christ Jesus, and obedience to him, to Faith and Holiness, the Gospel
constituted Church of Christ; and this is the Church I especially intend to
speak of, the visible constituted Church of Christ; and this is distinguished
into several bodies, or congregational Assemblies, under the regal Government
of Christ their Lord, yielding professed subjection to Jesus Christ in his Laws
and Ordinances, as far as they are instructed therein; every particular
Congregation having the same power from Christ their Head and Lord; not one to
Lord it over another, but to help and assist in love: and the Church of Christ
is thus gathered into many particular Assemblies, by reason of distance of
place, number of persons, that they cannot assemble in one, or a few
Assemblies, but in as many as are necessary for their coming together, and
comfortable serving of the Lord. That the Church of Christ is, or should be
gathered thus, appears, Act. 14. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Gal. 1. 2. Rev. 1. 4. All
which proves the truth asserted; and that they had all of them the Ordinances
of Christ administered in each Assembly, as appears evidently by the Apostles
reproof and direction on this account, about matters of Order and Ordinances,
as relating to particular Churches, 1 Cor. 11. and 14. Chapt. Tit. 1. 5. Phil.
1. 1. Rev. 2 and 3 Chapt.

And this Church in all its particular Assemblies is gathered out of the World,
and from the World, to the Lord, by the Word and Spirit of Christ, Matt. 28.
19, 20. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Act. 2. 41, 42, 47. and 4. 4. and 13. 48, 49. This was
the Apostles commission, Act. 26. 17, 18. Which work was always accomplished
in this way, without, and contrary to the humane power, who ordinarily has
opposed this new Covenant work of Christ.

(And whatever Church it is that takes any other Lord or Lawgiver besides
Christ in religious things, and owns an humane head either in its constitution
by humane power, or receiving Laws in matters of Faith and Worship, is none of
Christ's Church, but an Harlot, a Sinagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews
when they are not, Rev. 2. 9. Committing spiritual fornication with the Kings
of the Earth, after the manner of the Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17. 2. and 18, 9.
Taking the humane power as Head, Lord and Lawgiver in Christ's concernments,
making them their strength, support and uphold, persuading the Magistrate to
persecute all that fall not in with them; who, although Christ has ordained
that his Church should be subject to the humane powers, in humane and worldly
concerns, yet this is that with which few are satisfied, being otherwise
persuaded by the false Church, who delights in fornication, and loves to
have another Head and Lord than Jesus Christ.)

And the Churches of Christ thus gathered and constituted under Christ, their
Head, Lord, and Lawgiver, have an equal power from him, with their distinct
offices to carry on all the administrations of his Kingdom; that is, his
Church, according to the rules by him prescribed; and in these Churches is God
to be worshipped in all his appointments, in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 24. 1
Pet. 2. 5.

And these visible constituted Churches of the Gospel are (or should be) all
Saints, true Believers; they do bad service, who, to maintain their National
Churches, and all Christendom, (as called) to be the universal visible Church,
would persuade us that the visible Church of Christ have in it multitudes of
Hypocrites; though it is true, that Hypocrites have been, and it is like are, and
may be in the true Church of Christ, yet they have no right, and must give an
account for their being there, Mat. 22. 12. Luke 26. 27. And surely they do bad
work, and draw a bad conclusion from the premises; that is, because Christ's
Church may have Hypocrites in it; they will pretend a Church for him, of openly
profane, and ungodly Hypocrites.

But to prove that the visible constituted Churches of Christ are, or should be
true Believers, this appears;

1. From the way of entrance, which is by Faith, Repentance, and Baptism, Matt.
28. 19, 20. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Act. 2. 39, 41. None must enter but in this way,
to let us to know, that none else ought to be there.

2. From the provision made for them, when they are come in, that they may find
feeding for their souls, according to the promise, Joh. 10. 9. That is, his
holy appointments that lead to him who is the true Bread of Life, for their
building up in the Faith till they come to Glory, Act. 2. 42. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
13. And truly we cannot rationally, nor religiously imagine, that he has given
such Gifts, and left us such Ordinances to build up a company of profane and
godless persons; I think they are profane thoughts in those that think it.

3. The order he has left in his Church to exclude Hypocrites, when
discovered, evidently declares that he never intended to have a Church of
Hypocrites, Matt. 18. 15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8, 13. 2 Tit. 2. 21.

4. It appears by the Titles given to the Church of Christ, they are called
Saints, that is, holy ones, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints,
holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, the body of Christ, and
members in particular, a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation,
etc. With many like expressions, all which do more than evidently demonstrate,
that Jesus Christ never intended to have his Church to be a den of Hypocrites,
and cage of unclean and hateful birds, but to be an holy people, to show forth
his praise in the World.

This is the visible Kingdom of Christ in this World, though not of the World;
and those powers on earth that oppose his rule and government, by his Laws in
his Church, are very bad neighbors to him; he is content to let them have the
outward regality, and his subjects (on that account) to be subject to them, and
is a good neighbor to them, and will do them no wrong, but good all their
days, if they would but be friendly to him and his; for by him it is that
Kings Reign: but if they will not permit him his right, what will be the issue,
is easy to be discerned, Ps. 2. 10, 11, 12.

2. The word, Church of Christ, does sometimes intend all true Believers in the
World, whether in or out of particular constituted Churches; and this is it
which is so commonly called the invisible Church, which is indeed in some sense
invisible; that is, none can certainly know the true believers, but God alone
(2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord knows them that are his) and none else, no not
themselves, some of them, and at some times; yet in some sense the Church thus
considered is visible in the world, and do visibly own the Lord, according to
the measure of means and light enjoyed; the Church thus considered I take to be
intended in these Scriptures, Romans 10. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 21, 22,
23. where the Church is called, The body and fullness of Christ, Col. 1. 24. and
as it is without question, that in all ages many of the visible Church in
profession have miscarried, being none of Christ's body truly, the Church taking
its denomination from the better part, though all ought to be such; so likewise
we are in charity to judge, that many may be out of the right constituted
visible Church and Churches of Christ (that are Members,) though its none of
their virtue so to be; God has his people in Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. and his
Church (on this account) has he had in the world, throughout all ages, Ephesians. 3.
21. although for a long while, but little of visibleness, according to Gospel
rule did appear, and that is it I understand is intended, Rev. 11. 1, 2. Where
the Worshippers are measured rather by the spiritualness of their invisible
Worshipping, then by the rule of their Ordinances, Order and public bearing up
the name of Christ in this matter, being trodden under foot of the Gentiles,
that is, of the Babylonish and Antichristian world, and this is it I take to be
the Universal (and in some sort) visible Church of Christ in the World, the
body of which all true believers are Members.

3. The word Church sometimes intends all the elect of God, and this is the
invisible Church (as to man) and this is evident from the Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.
25. Christ loved the Church (before it was visible) and gave himself for it, So
Heb. 12. 22. we read of the Universal Church of the first born, etc. the Church
in this sense includes all the Elect, but it is the bounden duty of all true
believers to get themselves into the visible Profession of Christ, and bearing
up his Name in the World, according to the rules by him prescribed, and the
highest and best light they have, or may attain therefrom in this matter, and
to be under the government of Christ, in some particular constituted Church of
his.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Ordinances, Officers, and Administrations in the Visible
Constituted Church of Christ.
OUr Lord Christ Jesus has left instituted Laws and Ordinances for his visible
Church and Kingdom, that his people by their submission to him therein, might
show their subjection to his Regal Authority, as to their Lord and King. As
there is no King but has his Laws by which he rules, so Christ our Lord and
King has his Laws by which he rules in his Church, which is his Kingdom, and a
government distinct from all humane and worldly governments, and admits not
of any mixture of humane inventions or ordinances of men, nor of any humane
power to enforce to the obedience thereof, Mat. 15. 9. Isa. 29. 13, 14. Psalm.
110. 3. Acts 2. 41. His subjects must ^e Volunteers, voluntarily subscribing to
his government, they are a willing people in the day of his power, being
wrought thereto by his word and Spirit, he is so far from foreseeing, that he
accepts none but those who serve him willingly; Christ will have his Subjects
like those, 2 Cor. 8 3. Willing of themselves; that is, without humane
constraint, and ver. 12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not; and this
is a truth in all cases of Christ's service in first listing themselves under
him, ver. 5. They first gave themselves to the Lord, etc. this is acceptable,
when souls give themselves to the Lord to be saved and ruled by him, Romans 6.
17. and 2. in their continuance with him, it must be willing, John 6. 67, 68.

God has in all his Administrations throughout all ages, had his instituted
Ordinances, by which his people, (his Church) was distinguished from others,
and in the observation of which they did visibly own God in the World, and the
truth is, that the institutions of God in matters of Worship, have been the
Badge of distinction between his Church and the world throughout all ages, and
the cause of all the woe and misery that has come on mankind, and on the
people of God, has been for the transgression of instituted Ordinances: Adams
transgression of an instituted Ordinance, brought in death and misery in all
mankind, and all the Plagues and miseries brought on Israel of old, was for
transgression of the instituted Ordinances of God in the matters of his
worship; See 2 King 17. 7. to 20. all the misery and wrath complained of in the
Lamentations of Jeremy was the effect of this very sin, the Transgression of
the Laws of God in the matters of his Worship in his Instituted Ordinances,
Levit. 1. 18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his
Commandments, and ver. 16. Woe unto us we have sinned, etc. And for this will
be the great controversy of God with the (pretended) Christian world in the
latter days, Isa. 24. 1. to 6.

The Lord Christ having appeared in the latter end of the world, to put away
sin by the offering of himself, he being the substance of all former
institutions, they leading to him, Col. 2. 17. Heb. 10. 1. and so he is become
the great Lord and Lawgiver of his Church; God speaking to us by him, Heb. 1.
1. 2. Whom we are to hear (i. e. to obey) in all things, Acts 3. 22. 23. all
his Ordinances and Laws are indespensably necessary for his Subjects to obey
him in, so far as they know his will; and ignorance will not altogether excuse
in this matter, therefore it behooves all to be dilligently inquiring, that so
they be not willingly ignorant.

The Laws, Ordinances, and Institutions of Christ for his Church, his Kingdom,
to serve and worship him in, are as follows.

1. Baptism (after believing, repenting, 1. Is Baptism.
and turning to the Lord) is the first duty required, Mat. 16. 15, 16. Acts 2.
38. 41. and is the imitating Ordinance into the visible Church and kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and is the duty of all true Believers; and there is no other way
or door of entrance declared by Christ, but by Faith and Baptism.

Not by natural generation or birth as some imagine, that is done away, as
being of the old Covenant, where the natural seed were accounted for the seed,
Genesis 17. 7. ver. 14. but in the New Covenant the spiritual seed, that is,
believers are accounted the seed and subjects of Christ's Kingdom, and are to
live under his laws, Gal. 3. 26, 28. nor by entering into Covenant as some
others imagine, which is after their own devising, mistaking and misapplying
the Scriptures, as that 2 Cor. 8. 5. They gave themselves to the Lord, and unto
us by the will of God. Hence some (and that too, men of parts and learning)
gather, That they first gave themselves to the Lord, by believing and accepting
the Gospel, and after to us; that ^s, to the Church by some Covenant, which is
a clear and palpable mistake, its true in the first sentence; that is, they
gave themselves to the Lord, may be included their giving themselves to the
Church by Faith and Baptism, for those who give up themselves to be the Lords
Sub^ects in his Church, do give themselves to the Lord, and to us by the Will
of God; that is, they gave themselves to the ministry of the Saints in their
necessities, and that beyond what the Apostles hope was, considering their
great affliction and deep poverty, that this is the true meaning of that
Scripture is so plain, that he that runs may read it; so that I know no other
way of entrance into the Church and visible Kingdom of Christ, but by Faith
and Baptism.

Neither understand I well what they mean that call Baptism a Covenant, and
talk so much of a Baptismal Covenant; its a language the Scripture knows not,
neither know I any other Covenant then the Gospel new Covenant of Grace, which
(on our part) is a willing consenting (from believing the truth of the Gospel)
to be saved by Jesus Christ, and to be ruled by him as Lord and King; which
faith and consent is to be confessed in order to Baptism, by which the believer
visibly gives up himself to the Lord, as to be saved, so to be ruled by him.
What other things are held forth in Baptism, its meet for Christians to be
instructed in, as the washing away of sin, Acts 22. 16. that is the pardon and
purging away of sin by the blood of Christ, not the washing of the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Yet the
washing of the flesh is a figure of that within, and a Conformity to Christ in
his Death and Burial, thereby signifying our Death to sin, and our natural
death likewise, to confirm our Faith in the truth of the Resurrection, Romans 6.
3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15. 29. and why Baptism and the Supper of the Lord (which is
the second instituted Ordinance that I shall mention) should be so frequently
called Seals as they are by some, I know not, because the Scripture knows no
such things; some calls themselves to Seal Gods love to the soul, and the
believers interest therein. As to this its true, the love of God and Christ is
abundantly held forth therein, and the believer exercising faith, may (and I
hope do) meet with refreshing and sealing consolations therein, and so he does
in other of the instituted Ordinances of Christ, i. e. the Word and Doctrine of
the Gospel, but without the exercise of Faith, he profits by neither, Heb. 4.
2. Others say, they are Gods Seals to confirm his truth in his Covenant to us,
and that God never sets Seal to the truth of any man's interest, that we must
look to our selves, whether we have the faith to which the Covenant is made;
God seals to that, he will not fail in performing of the Covenant on his part,
which have something* of truth in it; i. e. it behooves us to look that our
faith is right, and God will not fail in performance of his Covenant of life;
but its true likewise that God has and does set seal to the truth of his
peoples faith in the Covenant of his Grace, else they can have no seal but
their own, which must needs prove invalid in the day of need; if Gods seal and
theirs concur not in the matter. Romans 8. 16. The spirit it self bears witness
with (or to) our spirit, that we are the Children of God; the spirit of Christ
is the alone sealing evidence to the hearts of Christians, and that by his word
and work in them, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. 2 Cor. 1. 22. this is such a Sealing evidence
to the hearts of Christians, as that who so have it not, is none of his, Romans
8. 9. and to call any of his Ordinances, Seals, is besides all Scripture rule,
as for the truth of God in his Covenant, I think we cannot have more confirming
Seals then his Word and Oath, two immutable things in which it is impossible
for God to lie, Heb. 6. 17, 18. and the gift of his son from Heaven for
Salvation of Sinners that believe and obey him. What greater and surer seals
these (I know not) of the truth of God, and his Spirit working and effecting
Faith, in and by those Sealing evidences of his love to men, is the Sealing
Earnest of our inheritance.

The Supper of the Lord is an instituted 2. The Supper of the Lord.
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, to be practiced by the Church till his second
coming. 1 Cor. 11. 26. a like Figure (as Baptism) very significant and of
special use in the Church of Christ, if Faith be rightly exercised therein, and
serves especially to keep in remembrance the Death and Sufferings of our Lord
Jesus, and the benefits we receive thereby, the great love of God and Christ to
men, being therein discovered, 1 Cor. 11. 26. and the great sin in those that
partake thereof, is, in not discerning the Lords body; that is, the breaking of
the Lords body, and the shedding of the Lords blood for our sins, and the
greatness of the Lords love therein, 1 Cor. 11. 29. it being an Ordinance that
presents Jesus Christ Crucified (with all his benefits) to the eye, that the
eye may affect the heart; for all good comes to the heart, by the ear and by
the eye; the Doctrine of the Gospel comes to the heart, by the ear in hearing,
and by the eye in seeing and reading; this Ordinance is for the eye that the
heart may be affected, and for the taste and stomach, that the sense of hunger
and feeding may be of spiritual use, to learn the soul to feed on Christ, who
is the bread of Life, in which we may observe the Wisdom of God to make use of
our senses for our spiritual good, Gal. 3. 1.

This holy Ordinance is for the holy people of God, the Church, his holy
Nation, who alone (by true Faith) are interested in this Crucified Jesus, who
ever eats and drinks thereof, without interest therein, eats and drinks
damnation to themselves. What sad and bad work then do they make that will
bring in all, make up a Church of multitudes of Hypocrites to damn them, as if
the design of God and Christ in the Gospel had been to get in multitudes into
the Church on purpose to damn them; such will have a sorry account in the great
day who thus pervert the Lords end in his Death, and corrupt and defile his
Church and holy Ordinances.

3. Ordinance and Institution of Christ 3. Preaching.
in his Church is, the Preaching of the Gospel, for Building up of the Church
in their most Holy Faith, as all the Ordinances of Christ are. There is a two
fold Administration of the Doctrine of the Gospel, the first for conversion and
gathering into the Church, Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Acts 2. 37, 38. and
26. 16, 17, 18. The 2. for building up of the Church in the holy Faith after
Conversion and Gathering; Mat. 28. 20. Acts 2. 41, 42. this being the end of
Gods giving gifts to men, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. They are bad Ministers who turn
the World into the Church without repentance and Faith, and so build up a
multitude of Hypocrites and profane persons instead of the Body of Christ;
neither Jesus Christ, nor deceived poor Sinners will thank them for it in the
end.

4. Ordinance of Christ in his Church, 4. Prophecy.
is Prophecy, much spoken of in Scripture, though I fear I may say its almost
lost out of the Church; but of this I shall speak more distinctly when I come
to speak of the Officers in the Church, though I take not this of Prophecy to
be performed as an Office by an Officer as such, but by a gift.

5. Ordinance is Prayer; although its 5. Prayer.
true, this is not for the Church alone, but is the duty and property of all
believers, as such Col. 4. 2. 1 These. 5. 17. yet it is a Church Ordinance, Acts
2. 42. Where Doctrine, breaking bread, and Prayers are set together, as the
great and common Ordinances of the Church, in which they had fellowship
together, in 1 Timothy 2. 1. Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude verse 20. which in the Church (as
all other of Christ's Ordinances are) is to be performed by men and not by
women, 1 Timothy 2. 8. See more about this of Prayer, Chap. 22.

6. Praising God or singing Praises to 6 Praising.
him, is an Ordinance of Christ in his Church, as well as the duty of all
Saints at all times, See 1 Cor. 14, 15, 16. where both Prayer and Singing are
mentioned as it ought to be performed in the Church, Col. 3. 16. the manner is
expressed to be such, as in Prayer, one to speak to the Praise of God, so that
the rest may join in with him to say Amen, as in Prayer, for all to sing in
Meeter together, is that for which there is no rule (that I know) in Law or
Gospel. In the Old Testament Singers were appointed to that service, 1 Chronicles.
9. 33. Ezr. 2. 65. Neh. 5. 67. and did perform it by turn, answering each
other, 1 Samuel 18. 6, 7. Exodus 15. 20, 21; But I judge that Old Testament
Singing is ended as to the manner thereof, and I am sure there is no rule in
the New, for that which now by most is practiced.

Gospel Singing should be new Songs by a new People, suitable to the new
Covenant, Psalm. 96. 1. and 98. 1. such Songs as none can learn but the Redeemed
ones, Rev. 14. 3. no marvail if such as are for Forms of Worship in Prayer and
Praise, be for a Formal people void of the Spirit and strangers to Spiritual
Worship.

And as this is an Ordinance, so it is a gift in the Church of Christ, as
Prayer is, and is so to be performed, a hearty giving thanks for mercies
received, so as that the rest may say Amen; that is, join in praising, which is
expressed in saying Amen, as in Prayer, they are greatly mistaken who think that
there is no Singing but in Meeter, and with a Singing Tone.

7. Ordinance of Christ in the Church is, 7. Discipline.
Church Discipline, Order and Government, and the Administering Church censures
according as occasion and need calls for it; and herein is the Royal and Regal
Authority of Christ, in an especial manner kept up in his House, his Church,
his Kingdom; which consists in the execution of his Laws upon Transgressors in
all cases according to the fact, reproof, admonition, withdrawing, 2 These. 3.
6. rejecting, if there be no other remedy nor means can prevail, and this is
that which makes much for the honor of Christ, and good of his Church, to
preserve from sin, recover fallen sinners, and to preserve the Church pure from
defilements; of this the Scripture is full and clear, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8, 13. 2 Timothy 2. 21. Heb. 12. 15, 16. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.

2. Of the Officers in the Church of 2. Of the Officers in the Church of Christ.
Christ, take we the Church of the New Testament since the death and
Resurrection of the Testator, to be but one Church state, as the Church of the
Old Covenant was, from Circumcision until the Death of Christ. Then 1. Jesus
Christ is the great Officer in and of his Church, the Angel, Messenger, Bishop,
Shepherd, Prophet, Apostle, Lord, Law giver, and King of his Church, whose
lawful subjects believers are; but he being ascended up on high to do work
there for his Church, in order to its spiritual and eternal welfare, has left
in his room and stead, Gifts and Officers for the good of his Church, which are
(as enumerated in the Scripture) Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, and all for the good of the Church, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.

1. Apostles, men immediately called, 1. Apostles.
inspired, and sent for the first publishing of the Gospel, and first planting
of the Gospel Church, being endued with power for such a work, to give laws and
directions from Jesus Christ, for his Churches direction in Faith and practice,
till his second coming, but such Apostles we now have none, but they were and
are our Apostles, we being of the same Gospel Church.

Though according to the common sense of the word Apostle (that is sent) so we
have, or might or should have Apostles in the Church, it signifying a
messenger, or one sent; as I shall more fully declare in its place.

2. Prophets, now this of Prophets I 2. Prophets
take not to be a distinct ordained Office, as Pastor and Teacher, but a gift
in the Church, and so an Ordinance of Christ for the Churches Edification, not
extraordinary any more then the other Ministry that we account to stand as the
Ordinary Ministry in the Church; probably the Prophets in the Primitive times
might have more and greater gifts then any now, but that Nulls not the gift nor
use thereof in the Church, no more then that because, the Pastors and Teachers
then had greater spiritual gifts then any now have. Therefore we should have no
Pastors nor Teachers now, and so no Church, and so no Religion; those who work
Prophets out of the Church, might by the same reason and rule, work out all and
themselves too; that by Prophets were intended ordinary Prophets for the
edification of the Church (what ever gifts they then had) will appear if we
consider.

1. It was a gift to be obtained by industry and endeavor (extraordinary
prophecy was an immediate gift) 1 Cor. 12. 31. and 14, 39.

2. It was a Gift for the common good and Edification of the Church, most of
profit, ( viz. of the Gifts singly Administered without Office) in the Church,
therefore not to be lost or expulced out of the Church.

3. Yet it was (in some sense) inferlour to that of Preaching by Office,
because he that is called to Office, is not only a Prophet, but more then a
Prophet, and this will appear if we consider.

1. That all the Prophets work was to speak by way of Edification, Exhortation,
and Consolation; but the Elders or Officers work and duty, was, and is, to
Exhort, Reprove, Rebuke, with all authority, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Titus 2. 15. which
none out of Office might authoritatively do.

2. The Doctrine of the Prophets must be judged and tried, as supposing they
might speak amiss and fail (but the Officers are supposed to have attained to
such a degree of knowledge in the School of Christ, as that there is no such
rule prescribed for them) 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31. not that Officers or Elders
are without all limitation in this matter, but under the Churches judgment.

3. Prophecy was such an Ordinance in the Church of Christ, as that the Church
it self might be too apt to despise it by reason of its meanness, as is
employed, 1 These. 5. 19. 20. Quench not the spirit, despise not Prophecyings; it
seems they were all for Preaching, but despise Prophecyings, as it is too much
at this day.

4. The Prophets might through weakness bring forth something that was not good
or true, yet not to be despised, v. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which
is good. Which implies, that there might drop some things from the Prophets
that might not be good, yet it should not be despised nor they discouraged, but
that which was good embraced, and that which was bad left, and the Prophets
instructed therein, for their amendment.

All which proves that the Prophets were ordinary gifted persons in the Church
for Edification, after its first gathering, till Officers were chosen, and the
Officers was to be chosen out of the Prophets, that is to say, the best gifted
and quallified among them, and this answers the order. 1. Apostles,
Secondarily Prophets, etc. and this was the rule observed, Acts 13. 1, 2. And
out of these Prophets and Teachers, must Barnabas and Saul be taken, for more
public work and service; and if this rule were observed in the Churches, it
would be a way (according to the Lord's Order) to raise up gifts in the Church
fitted for Office, as occasion calls for it; for this of Prophecy is a constant
order in the Churches to be continued Prophets, and an official Ministry may
(and should) be together in the Church; so would not the Church be without
persons gifted and fitted for office, as need requires.

The next out of the Prophets, are Evangelists, 3. Evangelists.
Gospel cryers, or Gospel preachers, or Apostles, that is, ordinary Apostles:
this is an office of great use in the Church, though almost left out, and lost,
as if it were extraordinary, and only for the primitive times; the reason
thereof rendered, because there are no such Gifts now, nor Apostles to call them
to the work, or direct them in it. A wonderful weak way of reasoning; by the
same rule we may reason out all offices and officers out of the Church, yea,
and reason out Church and all, for want of Apostles and Gifts; and here lies
the great reason of the seekers loss, want of Gifts, and gifted persons, as the
Apostles, to administer Gospel Ordinances, and this is next of kin to it; for
the same reason that works out Evangelist will (if followed) work out all.

1. That there were such called, and authorized Officers and Ministers
belonging to the Church, not extraordinary, (as the first Apostles) but
ordinary, not infallibly inspired, but such as received all their rules,
relating to their work, from the Apostles, as the Pastors and Elders did both
in their ministerial work, and in conversation, 1 Tit. 2, 3, Chap. and Chap. 4.
11, to 16. and Chap. 5. throughout; and 6. 11, 12, 13. 2 Tit. 2. 14, 15; 16,
22, to 26. So the Epistle to Titus proves the same, with many others that might
be mentioned.

2. There is the same use and need of such a Ministry to preach the Gospel to
the World, for conversion and gathering, and to take care for the establishing
of the Churches, and Officers therein,; which, as it is Gods order in his
Churches, so would it be a mercy and a blessing to the Churches, and much loss
has befaln the Church in the neglect hereof: such a ministry (if spirited for
the work) would be of general advantage to the Churches of Christ.

3. That their call unto it was ordinary, that is, in the primitive times, by
the Apostles, and Churches; for there was no extraordinary Ministers, but such
as was immediately called, as the Apostles were, and all Officers in the Church
besides Apostles, were and are ordinary, and to continue. That they were so
called to it, is clear; Timothy was called to this office, by the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Tit. 4. 14. And these sort of Ministers were
called sometimes Evangelists, i. e. Gospel Preachers, or Cryers, 2 Tit. 4. 5.
Act. 21. 8. Sometimes Apostles, 2 Co^. 8. 23. The Apostles of the Churches, and
the Glory of Christ, Phil. 2. 25. The Apostle calls Epaphroditus his brother
and companion, etc. and your Apostle, that is, the Churches Apostle: by all
which it appears, that this official Ministry was ordinary, and should be in
the Church still, and the Church suffers much in the loss thereof; for Gods
Ordinances are not in vain; and out of the Prophets in the Church should this
and other Ministers be chosen, according to the order stated, First Apostles,
then Prophets, and then Evangelists, and Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. This
is the method of God's Order in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Where Evangelists in
the term are left out, but very probably included in that of Teachers, that
including all the official Ministry, besides the first Apostles, Paul and
Barnabas, who were not inferior Apostles, yet in as much as their call was not
from the mouth of Christ in the manner as the rest was, they mus^ (for order
sake) be taken out from among the Prophets, and sent to the work in the
ordinary orderly way of the Gospel, Ac^ 13. 1, 2, 3.

2. Out of the Prophets are Pastors and Teachers to be chosen by the Church,
and ordained; and although there be various Titles given in Scripture to these
Officers, as Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Bishops, etc. It imports not variety of
Offices, but the fullness of the work, every Title being significant, Pastor to
feed, Teacher to instruct, Elder to rule, Bishop to oversee; it is possible that
all may be in one man, but in as much as these gifts may be more eminent, some
in one, and some in another, sutably should they be exercised.

That those Titles hold not forth any distinction in Office, or variety of
Offices, or any superiority in Office one above another, in way of authority,
though in distinction by gift, does appear, Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Where the Apostle
first calls them Elders, ver. 5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou
might ordain Elders, etc. and after, ver. 7. Bishops; for a Bishop must be
blameless, etc. By which it appears, that Bishops and Elders are one and the
same Office, 1 Tit. 3. The Apostle sums up all the Ministry of the Church on
this account, under the Name of Bishop, and Chap. 5. 17. under the Name of
Elders; by which it appears, that Bishops and Elders was one and the same
Office, only Elders distinguished, by ruling and teaching, which distinguishes
not the Office, but the exercise therein, suitable to the gift, both in teaching
and ruling; the like distinction we have, Romans 12. 7, 8. distinguished by the
Gift more than by the Office. Elders may have a gift to teach well, and rule
well too; others may have a gift to rule well, and teach but little; or teach
well, and little gift to rule; and suitable should they be exercised in the
Church, Phil. 1. 1. These sorts of Officers are all included in that of
Bishops; and 1 Pet. 5. 1. They are all included in Elders, who were Pastors to
feed the flock, ver. 2. Acts 20. 17. Paul calls the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus to him; and ver. 28. Calls the same Elders, Bishops, Overseers; and
Peter calls himself an Elder, and a Witness of the sufferings of Christ, 1
Pet. 5. 1.

So that if any will suppose a superiority in Office among those varieties of
Titles, there is least ground of all for that of Bishop; for Peter himself
says, that he was an Elder, but he no where calls himself a Bishop; and
Ordination was performed by the Presbytery, not Episcopacy, 1 Tit. 4. 14. and
Hebr. 13. 7, 17. They are summed all under that of rule, and guides; and these
Officers are to carry on the administrations of the Church in an orderly way,
though the power of all is committed to the Church, Matt. 28. 20. Yet the
Church are to choose out such persons as God has gifted and qualified for the
Work, that although the gift be from the Lord, yet the authority of
administering must be from the Church electing, and Ordination of the
Presbytery, by Fasting and Prayer, and imposition of hands, Act. 13. 3. 1 Tit.
4. 14. Act. 6. 3, 6. Who were the first Officers ordained in the Church, and
were ordained Elders: though their work was to take care of the poor, yet they
were ordained Elders. 1. All Offices was in the Apostles, next to Jesus Christ,
they were Apostles, Evangelists, Elders, Deacons, did all, and were all, as is
evident in this first Church, and all other Officers and Offices came from
them, as necessity called for it; and the first Office and Officers ordained in
the Church, were those, Act. 6. and were ordained Elders; though then
especially to take care of the poor, which the Apostles did before, and Elders
still may do, if the work be not too much for them: that they were ordained
Elders, is apparent; 1. In that we read of no Officers in that Church, but
Apostles and Elders, Act. 15. 6. ver. 22. The whole are summed up in three
distinctions, i. e. Apostles and Elders, and the whole Church, ver. 23.
Apostles, Elders and Brethren; and Chap. 11. 30. The contribution was sent to
the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul: and without all controversy, it
was sent to them that had the care of that matter, and here they are called
Elders: I mind this the more for clearing, that election of Elders belong to
the Church; the Apostles, though infallible, would not rob the Church of this
right; see Act. 14. 23. When they had ordained them Elders (by election, or
lifting up of hands) in every Church, Cheirotonesai, to choose by holding up
the hand, to create by general voice of suffering; and thus all Officers, i. e.
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, must be chosen by the Churches, and by
Ordination, be authorized to the work, 2 Cor. 8. 19. 23.

And Officers when thus chosen, and se^ apart to the office and work, are to
administer all Ordinances in the authority of Christ, yet so as to have the
Church with them in the work; and the Church is to encourage them, and be
subject to their administrations in the Name of the Lord, while they abuse not
their authority; and yet they are to be accountable to the Church, in case of
male-administring, or abuse of power and authority; and the Church who
authorized them, may again divest them of their authority, without repentance
and reformation, or in case of scandalousness in conversation.

Yet not withstanding this, in matters of rule and order, they ought not to
seek so much to please men as to displease the Lord; for they are the Lords
servants, (as well as the Churches,) and must endeavor to do all things
according to the pattern and right rule, and to please the Lord, to whom they
must give an account, though men be displeased therewith, and in case they
suffer from men on that account, yet they will have Peace with God and in their
own souls.

Two things I fear are much wanting in the Churches. 1. A Spirit of Government
in the authority of Christ, as Wisdom, Impartiality, Courage, Meekness, Love,
and the fear of the Lord. 2. A Spirit in the Church to be Ruled and Governed
according to the Will of Christ, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves.

And in case of need we read of helps, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Helps Governments, in as
much as all power is invested in the Church, in case Officers be wanting, till
they may be obtained; the Church has authority to appoint such as are most
suitably gifted, either upon trial in order to Eldership, or as helps in case
of need to carry on all the Administrations of the Church, or where are
Officers, being sick, or a way, or weak with age, the Church may do the like;
i. e. appoint helps to the Officers in Government, or any other of the
Administrations of Christ in his Church.

The fourth sort of Officers in the Church 4. Deacons.
are Deacons, whose work and office is to look after the necessities of the
poor, and to make a just distribution of the Churches Treasure committed to
them on that behalf, that as it is an Ordinance of Christ, that his should be
free to communicate. 1. Privately, Mat. 6. 34. So likewise by giving into the
hands of the Deacons, who are to take a general care of the poor, and
distribute to every one as they have need.

This is an honorable service and work of the Lord, the poor being in the
Church in the room of Christ, to prove the truth of his peoples love to him,
Christ says, Me you have not always with you, the poor you have always with
you. You may show your love to me, in loving them, when I am gone, and in doing
good to them; hence Christ will say at the last day, I was naked and ye
clothed me, hungry and ye fed me, Sick and in Prison, and ye visited me, etc.
What the qualifications and work of the Deacons are, you may see, 1 Timothy 3. 8.
to 13. 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any man Minister (that is, Deacons do the work of a
Deacon) let him do it as of the ability that God gives, that is in the Church.
In a word, it is to do that which the Apostles did before and ordained the
Elders to do. Acts 6. 1, 2, 3.

I shall endeavor to answer one weighty question, and so shall conclude this
matter.

Quest. Is there no Supreme Power and if not, then to whom must the account in
Church miscarriages he given? and what way is left to regulate Church
miscarriages?

Answ. 1. That a Church may miscarry Gal. 1. 6. Manners, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21.
Discipline, either in the Non-administring of censures, 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2. or in
the evil and wrong Administering thereof, 3 John, ver. 9, 10. is very evident.

2. That every Church with their Officers have a like power from Christ in all
Administrations, without any accountableness to any one above the rest, in way
of Superiority, is likewise clear.

Yet 3. There must be an accountableness of all the Churches each to other, in
case of offense and miscarriage, though not to any one as Supreme above the
rest, yet a common accountableness must be owned, without which their
fellowship must necessarily be dissolved, the reasons thereof are as follows.

1. From the Law of Relation and unity in the same faith and fellowship, which
cannot be kept up and maintained but by a Brotherly accountableness, as Sister
Churches, for the mutual help of each other, and preservation of the whole in
the truth; if the laws of Unity in any Society be broken, the Society must
needs be broken; Christ new Covenant Laws (in matters of faith and practice)
are the ground of Christians and Churches unity and society each with other; if
any Church make a breach there, without being accountable for Reformation, the
foundation of Fellowship is broken; therefore for preservation of the
foundations of Fellowship of Churches, must this brotherly accountableness be
maintained.

2. To reason from the lesser to the greater, as in a particular Church, though
there be an equality and no Superiority among Members, as Members, but what God
makes in gifts and office, yet every Member ought to be accountable each to
other, especially in matters of offense, Mat. 18. 15. etc. and so at last to
the Church, so from the same rule and reason all the Churches in the same faith
and practice, and having the same relation one to the other, as members in the
particular Church, should have the same care of each other, which cannot be
unless there be the same accountableness to each others as Churches, as is in
the members of one and the same Church, as all the Members in a particular
Church make up the Church, so all the Churches are but so many parts and
Members of the Universal, and should have the same care and keep up the same
accountableness, and this is without all single Superiority.

3. Without this particular Churches are in worse case, then Members in
particular Congregations, who have the benefit of the Laws and Administrations
of Christ, for their preservation in the Faith; the want of which
accountableness of Churches must necessarily render them, 1. The more liable to
sin, and miscarry because not accountable. And 2. In case of sin and
miscarriage, are left miserable; that is, without any means of recovery to
repentance, which is ridiculous and perverse for any to imagine, that Christ
should be more careful of particular Members, then of particular Churches.

4. Without this accountableness of Churches and power of dealing, with a
transgressing sinning Church for Reformation, it must necessarily import a
necessity for the whole to have Fellowship with a sinning Church in their sin;
that principle that leaves sinners without any help from their sins, and so
leaves them to perish without hope or help, and leaves the whole under the gift
of their sins and miscarriages, by holding fellowship with them in that Estate,
is to be abhorred of all Christians and Churches of Christ.

Obj. These are weighty reasons for accountableness but in as much as plain
Scripture rule, is that which binds conscience, and justifies practice; some
may startle from this for want of plain Scripture rule to warrant in this case,
or at least make a plea to justify them in their no^ accountableness,
therefore Precept or President would be of use to clear and confirm us in this
matter.

Answ. 1. In cases left doubtful and dark Lev. 19. 17. 2. Without this there is
a necessity for all Churches to have fellowship with an erroneous Church, in
their sins, contrary to Ephesians. 5. 11. and so justly draw the guilt of sin upon
themselves, Ezekiel. 3. 18. Acts 18. 6. and 20. 26. 3. Without this Churches are
left in worse case then Members, without the means of help and recovery in case
of sin; Christ's Ordinances proves of advantage, sometimes to keep from sin,
sometimes to recover out of sin, when ensnared therewith; therefore those who
oppose this accountableness of the Churches, are therein no friends unto them,
nor to Jesus Christ.

4. Without this, wronged persons in matters of censure could have no redress
but must lie under their oppressions without remedy, (which is that which some
have asserted, that if a Church cast out its best Members unjustly, that there
is no help, a horrid principle to be hushed out of all Christian Society) which
would render the Church and Government of Christ more obnoxious and dangerous
then any humane Government (which in many cases admits of appeals, on
supposition of Male Administrations) and uncomfortable for any serious souls to
come into the Church, who probably some time or other may fall under a
Diotrephes, without all hope or help.

But I shall yet propound some further weighty Scripture grounds for
confirmation of this practice.

1. The many Scriptures that gives us very much light in this matter, Acts 15.
2, 3. in the case of the difference at Antioch about Circumcision, the Church
appealed to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, with the whole Church, as
appears ver. 1. 2. with ver. 23. The Apostles, Elders and Brethren, which was
the whole Church; so in the case of the Incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. 1. the
Apostle determines the matter, and they follow his advice, See chap. 7. 1. etc.
about the matter of Marriage, and putting away of the unbeliever; about which
they had written to him, he resolves the case, and that not altogether in way
of power without the Church, as is evident, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Not that we have
dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy. So he determines the
case of the disorderly Members, 2 These. 3. 6. 1 John ver. 9, 10. in the case of
Diotrephes, evil Administration of censures, casting out such as he should not,
Wherefore (says the Apostle) I come, I will remember his deeds which he does,
etc. Now what in ordinary cases the Apostles did formerly, the Ministers and
Churches may and ought to do now, in like cases, it being patterns for all
times, as occasion requires, in the Administrations of the Church, and for the
preservation of the peace and purity of the whole, Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them
(that is, the Church Baptized Believers, with their Ministry) to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. So that the Churches have as full power
from Christ for preservation of the whole, in their Loyalty to him in Purity
and in Peace, as the Apostles had, which is a full and warrantable authority in
this matter.

As an illustration of this matter, remarkable to this purpose is that of the
two Tribes, and half building an Altar; Josh. 22. 10. which was an act (in
appearance) contrary to the Law of God, and so a matter of fact to be inquired
into, Exodus 20. 24. with Lev. 17. 18. Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6. and the rest of the
Tribes sent Pheneas, and ten Princes with him, to inquire after the matter, and
to lay (as they judged) sin to their charge; and those Tribes owned their
brethren in the matter, and gave them a good account to their satisfaction,
ver. 22. those Tribes had no Lordship given them over each other, yet was it
their duty to look to each other, that the Law of God was not transgressed, and
to execute the Law in such cases. The like we read about the abuse of the
Levites Wise, Judge. 19. 20. chap. on his complaint they all, as one man, join
in the matter to avenge the sin; by all which it appears, that the Church of
God throughut all ages has had this power to rebuke sin, and maintain truth,
in dealing with either persons or assemblies, in case of sin, according to the
rule of the present ministration, under which they lived, and without
repentance, to withdraw Communion from them, and in their obstinacy in an evil
way to reject.

2. This likewise comes under that general rule, Phil. 4. 8, 9. it is just and
honest, and lovely, makes for Purity and Peace, for the Churches to be subject
one to another (as it behooves Members) in this case, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

So that then it follows, 1. That Church which refuses to be accountable of
any of their actions to their neighbor Churches (being desired on complaint of
miscarriages) on this ground, that they have no power to inquire after any of
their matters, and that they are accountable to none but God, do hereby make a
breach upon the Law of relation, and exclude all Churches from their
fellowship, and so stand by themselves alone.

2. That such a Church is no more fit for the Communion of Churches, then a
Member in a particular Church, that will not live under the Law of the
Relation, and will be accountable to none but God; a principle that makes
persons not meet to live among men, much less in the Society of the Churches of
Christ.

3. That (on the grounds stated) it is the duty of the Churches in case of
complaint of scandal, in Doctrine, Discipline, or Manners, of any particular
Church in the same fellowship, to make dilligent and speedy inquiry into the
matter, that they may thereby show their love to, and zeal for the Glory of
God, the purity and peace of his Church; the good of the offenders* and
preservation of themselves from the guilt of others sins.

4. That if any Church come under a report or complaint of miscarriage and
scandal in Doctrine, Manners, or unjust censures, and refuse to give an
account thereof, being tenderly desired, or to clear up the matter in a just
way (that is, the supposed Offenders and offended, with their witnesses, to be
heard before the Neighbor Churches, or their Ministers and Members appointed
for that service) the Churches ought to withdraw their fellowship from such a
Church, to preserve themselves pure from their sin: whatever is a just ground
for one Church to exclude a Member, is a just ground for a Church to be
excluded in like case; and this is a just ground to exclude a Member. 1.
Report, and complaint of scandalous sin. 2. It being inquired after, a positive
refusal to give an account, especially before the witnesses that accuse. 3. A
denying the power of the Church to make inquiry and to deal in the matter, etc.
If such a person be fit for fellowship in a particular Church then such a
Church may be fit for the Fellowship of Churches, Mat. 18. 17. So that in a
word its evident, that its not only the Churches sin that refuses to be
accountable to her Neighbor Sister Churches, but that the Churches do sin in
neglecting or delaying to call such a Church to account (which is under
complaints, reports, and jealousies of sin in any case) in not performing their
duty to God or men; nor can they acquit themselves before the Lord, until they
have impartially done their duty in this matter: that it is a duty, and to be
done in Christ's authority, is clear and full, from Col. 3. 17. or else they
must leave Christ's authority, or leave the work wholly undone, which is
contrary to the true sense and reason of the Scripture, as has been before
proved, or do it in their own will and authority.

CHAP. XXIX. Shows that the Estate of the Church in this World is an
Afflicted Estate.
NOtwithstanding God has called his people in the New Covenant of his Grace to
glory and virtue, and that he has made them nigh to himself, his own children
by Grace and Adoption, and interested them in Glory; yet in this world in their
following and serving him they must expect to meet with Afflictions and
Tribulations for his Name and Sake, the truth hereof appears, 1. from
Scripture, 2. from Experience.

1. From Scripture, nothing is more fully and clearly stated then this, Joh.
16. 3. 3. Mat. 16. 24. this must be the portion of every one, man and woman,
that will follow Christ, they must expect to meet with Tribulations, to meet
with shame and reproach in the world, with loss of friends, relations, and life
it self when called to it, Mat. 10. 37, 38, 39. this truth the Apostles
confirmed in their doctrine after Christ, Acts 14. 22. That we must through
much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. 2 Timothy 3. 12. That all that
will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: men may live Godly
according to the customs and wills of men, in the times and places where they
live, without persecution, but if any will live godly in Christ Jesus, that is,
according to his laws and his will, they must expect to meet with persecution.

2. This the Primitive Church, and all ages ever since, has and does by
experience witness; I need not mention particular Scriptures, or History, or
Experience in this matter, it being so obvious and clear, that he that runs may
read. Act. 20. 23. 1 Cor. 9. to 13. 2 Cor. 11. 23. to 28. 2 These. 1. 4. Rev. 2.
9, 10. History and Experience proves the same, the wonderful persecutions,
wrongs, and deaths, the Saints have met withal in all ages, abundantly
confirms the truth.

The reasons hereof are, 1. Relating to the men of the world, from whence the
persecution always comes, and that 1. From their ignorance, that is the
foundation cause men are ignorant of God and his truth; Strangers to the life
of God through the ignorance that is in them; hence flows all the mischief
ordinarily that is in the world. Joh. 16. 3. And these things will they do
unto you, because they have not known the Father nor me; 1 Cor. 2. 8. Had they
kn^wn, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Hence Christ prays
for his Persecutors, Luke 23. 34. Father fo^g^ve them for they know not what
they do; and the Apostle confesses, that while he was a Persecutor, he did it
ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Let us learn to pity poor Persecutors,
and pray for them according to the command of our Lord, and example of himself
and his servant Stephen, Acts 7. 60. for they are blind and they know not what
they do.

2. As flowing from their ignorance, is their Pride of Heart, who think their
own ways and wills best, and so hate the will of Christ, and persecute his
people for walking therein; they will have their own imaginations to be the
truth and nothing else; and this pride flows from ignorance, for all pride
flows from ignorance; for if men knew God and themselves, it would not be
possible for them to be proud, but to abase themselves and submit to him, and
would be willing that he should rule, and that his people should serve him,
Psalm. 10. 2. The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor, etc. ver. 4. The
wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, etc. Isa.
10. 12, 13. so that ignorance and pride goes together, and both brings forth
Persecution, Psalm. 140. 5. The proud has hid a snare for me, and Cords, they
have spread a Net by the way-side, they have set grins for me. And note, its
the proud that has done it.

3. As flowing from both, enmity and malice, the old enmity still remaining
and working in the Serpents seed, Genesis 3. 15. Mat. 23. 33. says Christ, ^e
Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell.
From hence it is they love violence, Psalm. 11. 5. Him that loves violence his
Soul hates, and that not only the Antichristian Heathens, but the
Antichristian and false Church walks in the same steps. Rev. 1^. 6. And I
saw the woman (that is, the Babylonish false Church) drunken with the blood of
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, etc. chap. 18. 24.
and in her was found the blood of Prophets and Saints, and all that were sla^n
upon the earth. And of this the Prophet Micah Prophecyeth, that Persecution
should be in the hand of the false Church in the latter days* Mic. 7. 10. Then
she that is m^ne enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her. O ye dreadful
state of pretended Church Persecutors, its a higher degree of wickedness in
them, then in the Heathens who deny Christ, and greater will be their Judgment.

4. Because God has called them out of the world, and made them to d^sser*
therefore do the world hate them, Joh. 15. 19. 1 Pet. 4. 4. because they dare
not run to the same excess of Riot, in matters of Worship and Conversation,
therefore does the world hate them.

^. Reasons relating to the people of God; and 1. they cannot well be without
it, they need Afflictions, and may not be without it, though like little
children they like it not, 1 Pet. 1. 6. Though now for a season (if need be,)
ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations; the Lords people has need of
manifold temptations of much tribulation.

Quest. What is the need that Christians

Ans. 1. There is need because of sin, ordinarily Lam. 3. 39. Man suffers for
his sin, it is to make his people partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. The
fruit of all is to take away the sin, Isa. 27. 9. O that ^in that does so
easily beset the Saints, is the cause of the miseries and afflictions that does
so ordinarily and often attend them, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32. 1 Cor. 1^ 30, 31, 32.

Quest. What sins are they for which God

Answ. 1. All sin, and therefore none of Jam. 3. 2. In many things we offend
all* but especially and particularly it may be,

1. For the sin of Covetousness, as I minded, chap. 22. with other sins I there
minded, which hinders the prevalency of Prayer, which are the causes o^ Gods
afflicting his people, but in this place I shall speak more full, Isa. 57. 17.
For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wrath with him, and smote him, etc.
God is wrath with, and smites his people for Covetousness and worldly
mindedness, when they set their hearts on the world more then upon him, or more
then they should, he will correct them; this was his complaint of his people,
Jer. 6. 13. That from the least of them even to the greatest, every one of them
is given to covetousness; therefore it is not in vain that our Lord warns us,
Luke 12. 15. Take heed and bewa^e of Covetousness, and the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 3.
But Fornication and all uncleanness ^^ covetousness, let it not be so much as
named among you as becomes Saints.

Quest. Is there any such thing as Covetousness in the World, or especially
among Christians, and in the Church?

Answ. Surely if the Scriptures be true, there is, and I fear that experience
too much proves the truth hereof; in this I shall note three things.

1. What it is, and wherein it consists. 1. In the lusting after and coveting
that which is none of ours, Exodus 20. 17. Thou shall not Covet thy neighbors
house, etc. Romans 7. 7. I had not known lust, except the Law had said thou shall
not Covet. Matthew 5. 27, 28.

Quest. Is it not lawful for me to Covet o^ desire what another has if I need
it, provided I am willing to buy it, and pay its worth for it?

Answ. Nay, unless the party be willing King. 1. 21. 1, 2, 3. in the case of
Ahab coveting Naboths Vineyard, who offered to give him a better for it, or its
worth in money. The effect of that covetousness may be read in letters of blood,
and should be a warning to covetous persons, who desire that which is none of
theirs.

2. An unlawful getting any worldly thing, or any unlawful gain, Jer. 17. 11.
As the Partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that gets
riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midest of his days, and at
the end shall be a fool.

Quest. When may Riches be said to be

Answ. 1. When it is stolen; Theft is the Exodus 20 15. Thou shall not steal;
Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole steal no more, etc. Prove. 9. 17. S^oln waters
are swee^, etc. Therefore God makes a Law to punish this sort of covetousness
in its own kind, Exodus 22. 1, 2, 3, 4.

2. When it is gotten by fraud, lying, couzening and cheating, then it is
covetously and wickedly gotten* Mic 6. 10, 11, 12. Lev. 6. 1, 2, 3. and 19. 11,
13. 1 These. 4. 6. Commending that which is bad for good, and discommending that
which is good, and say it is bad; see it both in Amos 8. 5, 6. Prove. 20. 14.

3. When it is gotten by oppression of the poor, grinding, and hard dealing;
when it is gotten out of the bowels of the poor, when they give not sufficient
for their labor, or defraud them of their due and right, or keep it from them
for their own advantage, to the prejudice and wrong of the poor, Isa. 3. 14.
Amos 4. 1. and 5. 11. Jam. 5. 4. Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15.

4. When it is gotten in the over eager pursuit of a lawful calling, when the
design is to get the riches of the World, Ps. 127. 2. 1 Tit. 6. 10. Prove. 20.
21. and 23. 4. and 28. 20. When men rob their bellies of what is meet, and rob
their eyes of sleep, and their families of that rest, peace and good they might
and should enjoy; and rob God of his time, and their souls of good, and all to
fill their purses, to grow great and rich in this World; it is an high degree of
covetousness, and a great sin and shame for any Christians to be sound in this
practice.

3. An unlawful keeping when men have it, and the Lord calls for it, which is
especially for his Ministers, and for his poor; 1. For his Ministers, and that
as just and due debt for their serving the Lord and his Church, that they may
live comfortably with their Brethren in the work and service; see 1 Cor. 9. 7,
14. Gal. 6. 6. 1 Tit. 5. 17, 18. 2. His poor, Gal. 6. 10. Mat. 26. 11. 1 Ti^.
6. 17, 18. 1 John 3. 17, 18. And that willingly and cheerfully; for both
Christ's Ministers, and his poor, are with the Church in his stead, though on a
differing account, one for service, and the other for trial; and look how the
Church deals with them here, so would they deal with Christ were he present,
and so he takes it, and so will he account with men at the last day.

2. The greatness of the sin and that appears, 1. From the Lords forbidding of
it, Exodus 20. 17. Romans 13. 9.

2. From the many cautions given against it, to be ware thereof, Luke 12. 15.
Ephesians. 5. 3. Heb. 13. 5.

3. From the evil effects thereof, as violence and oppression, Mic. 2. 2.
Stealing and theft, John 7. 11. 21. Deceit and treachery as in the case of
Judas, Mat. 26. 14, 15, 16. Lying, 2 Kin. 5. 22. 27. Murder, as in the case of
Ahab with Naboth, 1 Kin. 21. Merchandise of souls, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Covetousness is
fit for any abomination, to accomplish its design.

4. In that it is ranked with the worst of sins, 1 Cor. 5. 10. and 6. 10.

5. In that it has the term of the worst of sins put upon it, it is called
Idolatry, ^ph. 5. 5. Jer. Col. 3. 5. which is an abominable sin, 44. 4. 1 Pet.
4. 3.

6. By the difficulty, for a rich covetous man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 19. 23, 24.

7. By the Woes and Judgments in Scripture denounced against it, Hab. 2. 9. 1
Cor. 6. 10. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. And this woeful souldeceiving, and soul-destroying
sin, the Lords people are liable to be ensnared with it; and that appears in
that they are so often taxed for it, and accused of it, Jer 6. 13. and 8. 10.
Ezekiel. 33. 31. 2. In that they are so often cautioned against it, as I minded
before, Luke 12. 13. 1 Tit. 6. 8. 9, 10, 11, 17, 18. Heb. 13. 5. 3. In the they
pray against it, Ps. 119. 36.

In a word, to conclude, Covetousness ^ a sin that draws down judgments,
tempor^ judgments, Isa. 57 17. Spiritual and etern^ judgments, as other
abominations do, 1 Tit. 6. 9, 10. Yet such is the weakness and wretchedness of
Christians, to suffer themselves to be ensnared thereby, to be dallying
therewith, and to keep it in their bosom, as their special friend; and that
too, against all reproofs, and means of help, which, ^^ the end, if Grace
prevent not, will sting like a Serpent, and bite like a Cockatrice* piercing
them through with many sorrows, drowning them in perdition and destruction.

Or, 2. It may be for the sin of Hypocr^sie, Isa. 10. 5. 6. O Assirian, the rod
of mi^^ anger. etc I will send him against an hypocritical N^tion, etc. and 9.
17. Job 15. 34. The Congregation of Hypoc^ites shall be desolate, etc*

Quest. Wherein does Hypocrisy consist?

A^^w. Generally in making a show of that which is not, either relating to God
or man; Ezekiel. 33. 31, 33. Matt. 15. 7, 8. Love in word and in tongue only, and
not in d^ed and in truth, 1 John 3. 18. It Is not in vain that Christ gives that
caution, Luke 12. 1. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
Hypocrisy, Ps. 58. 1, 2. Sincerity is a lovely virtue, but hypocrisy, double
dealing, an heart and an heart the Lord abhors. O! let all that expect to
approve themselves to God, abhor it; grounds there are to fear, that it has
gotten too much footing in the hearts of Christians at this day.

Or, 3. It may be for the sin of Pride God may rebuke and chastise his people;
Isa. 28, 1, 3. Woe to the crown of Pride, ver. 3. The crown of Pride, the
drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under fe^t; Hos. 5. 5. The Pride of
Israel does testify to his face, therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall into
their iniquity, Judah also shall fall with them. Pride is a sin that God will
not bear with, no, not in his own people, but he will visit them, and bring
them down, and lay them low, even in the dust.

Quest. Wherein does Pride consist?

Answ. Pride is in the heart* it is an heartsin, it is a being puffed or lifted
up in the heart, Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart, is an
abomination to the Lo^d; Ps. 131. 1. (says the Prophet) Mine heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: there is pride of Parts, Wisdom, Riches,
Strength, Beauty, Honor, etc. Jer. 9. 2, 3. Pride in falsehood, 1 Tit. 6. 3, 4.
but all comes from the heart. I shall therefore endeavor to show some of the
symptoms of Pride, wherein a proud heart is discovered, which are as the flag^
or ensigns thereof.

1. A proud and lofty look, lofty eyes, and a lofty countenance and carriage,
is a discovery of a lofty and proud heart, Psalm. 101. 5. Him that has an high
look, and a proud heart, will not I suffer; an high look and a proud heart
ordinarily goes together, and the Lord will not suffer such in his Family, Ps.
131. 1. My heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; lofty eyes bespeaks an
haughty heart, Prove. 6. 17. A proud look is one of the abominations the Lord
hates, Chap. 21. 4. and 30. 13. There are a Generation, O how lofty are their
eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up! And this lofty, haughty heart, that is
discovered by a lofty and proud look, will God bring down, Isa. 2. 11. 17.

2. A lofty tongue; and that is either, 1. A ruling, lording tongue, which
discovers a proud heart, Ps. 12. 3, 4. God will cut off the tongue that
speaks proud things, etc. and 73. 8. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly,
concerning oppression, they speak loftily; great and proud words are the
discoveries of a proud heart.

2. A self-exalting, and a self-boasting tongue is a symptom of a proud heart,
and this the Hypocrite cannot avoid, Luke 18. 11, 12. The proud boasting
Pharisee by it discovered the pride of his heart; for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks: thus Jehu boasts of the rightness of his heart,
when it was but a discovery of his Pride and Hypocrisy, 2 K^n. 10. 15.
Self-praise, and self-commendation is a special character of folly and pride,
Prove. 27. 2. Let another praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and
not thine own lips: it is much better for a man's works to praise him, than his
tongue, Prove. 31. 31.

3. Lofty habit, gay cloathings, fleshly adornings, is a special symptom of a
proud heart.

Quest. Is there any such thing as pride in apparel? or any such thing
condemned in the Scripture, as pride in apparel?

Answ. I propose this question, and the same to that of covetousness, because I
perceive Christians run to excess in these things, without all care or fear, as
if there were no such sins in the World, a dangerous evil of our times,
Christians rush into it, as if riches, gay clothes, and following the fashions
of the times, were the only preparations for another World; or if not, as if
they expected no part therein, but to have their portion only in this life.

But surely it is a sin condemned by the Lord, not only in the old, but in the
new Testament; in the old, Isa. 3. 16, 17. Because the daughters of Sion are
haughty, and walk with stretched out necks, and wanton eyes, and therefore the
Lord will smite with a scab, the crown of the head, etc. ver. 18. In that day
the Lord will take away the bravery of the twinkling ornaments, etc. What they
are you may see in that which follows: by which we may see, that the Lords
people has always been addicted too much to this sin, and especially the
female Sex; and this we find at present by woeful experience amongst professing
people, though contrary to the Word of God, and the Spirit of Grace (in the
hearts of gracious ones) 1 Tit. 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 3, to 6. In both which
Pride is forbidden, and modest apparel, with shamefacedness, and sobriety, as
becomes women professing Godliness, is commanded; and the truth is, that this
sort of Pride is a shame, and a shameful sin to be found in the Church of
Christ; Luke* 7. 25. They that wear gay clothing, are in Kings houses; they
should not be in Churches. It Is the Whore of Babylon whose Beauty consists of
such deckings; Rev. 17. 4. It behooves the Churches to purge out this sin as an
abomination, (and to be clothed with humility, which adorns the new Covenant)
lest the Lord cast them out, as an abominable branch.

O, if we could, or would be every one striving who should be most like Christ,
and conformable to him, as we are striving to be like the World; how glorious
would Christians be in their profession, over now they are: but now unhappy we,
whose care is to be like the World, though thereby we are the more unlike our
Lord, and so dishonor him, and wrong our own souls: and that which adds to
this sin is, that Ministers, who should cry aloud against these abominations,
either practice the same themselves, or allow it in their Families and
Relations; are silent in the matter at best, and others shameless enough, plead
for it, and surely that is the Devils work: no wonder then if it grow to a
mighty torrent both of sin and judgment. Some it may be preach it down in word,
but allow it in practice in themselves and Families, as if they had a license
to be licentious in this matter.

I have observed this evil in Parents, that has been bread plain themselves,
(and it may be so continue) but breed their children to pride and vanity, as if
they designed them to destruction, and say (it may be) they cannot help it: let
such know, that they ought to command their children, and remember Ely in like
case, for his weak and soft dealing with his Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 22, to 27, 33.

I have observed the Husband to go plain himself, but the Wife arraied like a
Stageplayer; and the vain man it may be is proud to see his Wife so fine, or if
not, passes all by in silence, or complains that he cannot rule her; she will
have it so, say what he will.

An argument that the man knows not how to rule, and so draws the guilt of his
Wives sin upon himself; or that the Wife knows not her duty either to God or to
her Husband: and indeed, those who have no conscience of duty to God, it cannot
be expected that they should have conscience of duty to man. I would advise
such women to read, and seriously to consider, Ephesians. 5. 24. 33.

4. A lofty carriage and conversation is a symptom of a proud heart; Dan. 4. 37
Those that walk in Pride, he is able to abase: a proud walk, a proud life
discovers a proud heart, 1 Jo^. 2. 16. One of the things that is of the World,
and not of the Father, is pride of Life, which is not of the Father, but of the
World. O therefore let Christians leave it to the World, and cleave to the
Father, and the things of the Father, lest he strip and whip them from their
grievous transgression in this matter.

5. Contentions and divisions about needless and invented things, is a sign of
a proud heart, when persons form up things to themselves which the Lord never
required, and make that a ground of division for self ends; such things as
these being the cause of most of the divisions at this day, it flows from self
and pride: Prove. 13. 10. Only by pride comes contention, but with the
well-advised is Wisdom, and 22. 10. Cast out the scorner, and contention shall
go out, yea, strife and reproach shall cease. O the breaches and divisions, the
contentions and strifes which this monster (pride) has produced both in Church
and State; the Lord give repentance, or judgment must be the issue: good
Hezekah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, etc. and the wrath of the
Lord was deferred, 2 Chronicles. 32. 26.

4. Affliction may come upon the people of God for their living in the
transgression of the known Ordinances of the Lord; this is that for which God
has had (and probably has at this day) a controversy with his people; and
for these things he has, does, and will visit them, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20, 21.
Where the reason of Gods gathering his people from the Nations, ver. 17. and
giving them one heart, and putting his new spirit in them, (i. e. his new
Covenant spirit) is, that they may walk in my Statutes, and keep mine
Ordinances, and do them, etc. but those whose hearts walk after their
detestable things, and their abominations, I will recompense their own way upon
the^r own heads, says the Lord, Dan. 9. 8, -- 11. Where the Prophet
acknowledges, that the cause of all the Churches afflictions and miseries, was
for sin, and not obeying the voice of the Lord, and walking in his Laws, which
he had set before them, etc. and it is very likely that this is one cause of
God's afflicting his people; not only the things beforementioned, but the
changing of the instituted Ordinances of Christ into men's own inventions, so
slighting his commands, and his people for walking therein, for transgressing
of the Law of love to God, to men, to good men, to bad men. O the great failing
in this matter; the Law of Christ is, that his people should not speak evil one
of another, nor back-bite one another, Ephesians. 4. 31. 1 Pet. 2. 1. Jam. 4. 11. Nor
to think evil one of another, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Zec. 7. 10. Nor easily to believe
evil reports against a brother, Psalm. 15. 3. But what contrary walking to those
blessed Laws of the Gospel (in these and many other things I might name) is
found amongst us, and (that not by secret search) the Lord knows, and he will
make us to know it, or he will make us sick with smiting.

Or, 5. It may be for his peoples unprofitableness under the mercy and means
enjoyed, for the loss of first love, to God, his Name and Truth, to one
another; and this is it of which the Lord complains of his people, and warns
them to repent, and d^ their first works, lest he come against them speedily,
and remove the Candlestick out of his place, Rev. 2. 4. Jer. 2. 2, 3, 17. When
the Lord feeds his people to the full with mercy and means of life, and they
grow carnal and unprofitable, and (as it were) die away under it, the Lord will
not bear with it, either to grow careless, and lukewarm, or to be dead, or
ready to die, as the Churches, Rev. 3. 1, 2. 15, 16. For these and the like
evils it is, that the people of God need afflictions in this World, to be
emptied from vessel to vessel; and, O that the fruit of all might be to take
away the sin, and to make them partakers of his holiness.

2. The people of God need afflictions 2. They need afflictions for trial.
for trial of the truth of their Virtues, the truth of their Faith, Love,
Patience, Contentation, and Constancy in the Gospel: God did ever delight to
try his people, not that he did ever delight in their afflictions and
sufferings, but he delights in the truth of their Faith, Love, and Constancy,
etc. And on this account it is that he proves them, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial that is to try you, etc. Psalm.
56. 10. For thou O God have pro^ed us, thou have tried us as silver is tried:
God ordinarily designs the good of his people in their afflictons, i. e. trying
and purifying, to prove them, and resine them as silver; and if they are not
resined by it, but give him occasion to say of them as of his people of old,
the end will be bad and sad, Jer. 6. 29, 30. The bellows are burnt, the lead is
consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain; for the wicked are not
plucked away, reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them: that is, when men do not profit under Gods corrections, they are
as reprobate silver, and so the Founder melts in vain.

1. God tries the Faith of his people, 1. To try their Faith.
to see if that will hold out, and endure the fire; and the reason is, because
there is much temporary Faith, that will not endure the fire, Luke 8. 13. Matt.
13. 20, 21. Therefore he will try, and prove the truth of their Faith, 1 Pet.
6. 7. God will make it to be of great advantage to his people that are faithful
to him therein: Abraham the Father of the faithful must have his Faith tried,
when God commanded him to offer up his Son, Heb. 11. 17. his all; so God will
try his people, by calling them to offer up all, as a sacrifice for his sake:
and thus has he tried his peoples Faith throughout all ages, some more, and
some less, according to his Divine pleasure, and his peoples need, for their
profit.

2. God tries his peoples love, whether 2. To try their love.
they do indeed love the Lord with all their hearts, and with all their souls,
and cleave to him in all estates, Matt. 10. 37, 38, 39. He that loves Father
or Mother, etc. more than me, is not worthy of me: he will prove his people
whether they do love him indeed, or not; hence the Apostle says, Romans 35. 39.
Who (or what) shall separate us from the love of Christ, etc. It Is not death
or life that shall be able to do it, Song 8. 6. 7.

3. God tries the patience of his people; 3. Patience.
we think we have much patience when we have no trial, but when trial comes, we
shall find our weakness and want in this matter, Jam. 1. 3, 4. This of Patience
under afflictions is such a divine new Covenant Virtue, that he that has it
truly, wants nothing, i. e. to carry him through in a right suffering; and
it is impossible to have true patience without true Faith, and true love, Jam.
5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. The Apostle commends the Church of the
Thessalomans, 2 These. 1. 4. For their Faith and Patience in all their
tribulations.

4. God tries the contentation of his 4 Contentation.
people; contentation is a choice Virtue, and resignation to the will of God in
all cases and conditions, in poverty, sickness, wrongs, and persecutions, to be
contented, and to resign to the Lord; an hard lesson for flesh, but Grace
teaches it, and God expects it, and therefore proves his people, that it may
be manifest of what spirit they are in this matter, and that he may teach them
this duty, Phil. 4. 11. 1 Tit. 6. 6, 8.

And so, 5. For trial of our perseverance, whether we will hold out to the end,
in the Faith and profession of the Gospel, Matt. 10. 22. Ye shall be hated of
all Nations for my Name sake, but he that endures to the end shall be saved;
John 8. 31. Jesus said, if ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples
indeed; that is, if ye hold out in all trials and temptations, and continue in
the Word, abide in the Doctrine of Christ to the end, then are you Christians
indeed; Jam. 1. 12. Blessed are they that endure temptations, for when they
have been tried, they shall receive a Crown of Life, etc. Note, the promise of
Blessedness is to those that endure, i. e. hold out to the end, in a right,
patient, and contented spirit; if we endure not to the end, all our profession
and sufferings will be in vain, Gal. 3. 4.

A third sort of reasons are, in relation 3. Reasons such as relate to God.
to God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord, who does it for the good of his
people; God will, and does afflict his people in love, as a tender Father, for
their profit; he best knows what his people needs, and sutably he deals with
them, he does it to make them partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12. 5. He does it
in love, and in faithfulness, Psalm. 119. 75. and will issue all in their good,
and spiritual advantage, Romans 8. 28. He does it to fit them for the Kingdom and
Glory he has prepared for them, and promised to them, Romans 8. 17. If we suffer
with him, it is that we may be glorified with him: the Lord will have his
people from the Cross to the Crown, purified and refined for that glorious
estate, Rev. 6. 14, 15. Great tribulations will tend to work the Saints to the
exercise of Faith in the blood of the Lamb, and thereby to be purifying
themselves as he is pure, which will be for their comfort here, and glory in
the end.

3. I shall propound some rules for direction 3. Rules for a right suffering.
to the Saints in order to a right comfortable and profitable suffering.

1. When it is for a good cause, the name 1. A good cause.
and truth of the Lord, for any of the truths of the Gospel, for owning him in
his Offices as your Priest, Sacrifice, and Atonement, and so as your Savior,
or as your Prophet to teach you, and Lord and King to be ruled by him, in all
his Laws and Ordinances, in matters of worship and conversation; in opposition
to the commands of men though pretended Christians; and herein lies the
ordinary cause of suffering and persecutions, from Nominal Christians and the
Whorish Church, especially for the Prophetic and Kingly office of Christ our
Lord, a glorious cause for the Saints to suffer in, as ever was stated in the
World, Luke 6. 22. If it be for the Son of man's sake happy are ye; for his
words, for his laws, for his worship, Mar. 8. 38. Rev. 1. 9. John was
persecuted for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus; The Apostles
for refusing to forbear Preaching in the Name of Jesus, when commanded, and
owning Jesus as Lord in the matter, Acts 4. 19. and 5. 29. 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye
be reproached for the name of Christ happy are ye.

2. A good call to suffering is likewise of 2. A good call.
concernment, and that is, 1. When it is for worshipping God according to his
will. Or 2. for refusing to worship with those who (in our judgments and
conscience) do the contrary, when we cannot worship God in peace our selves,
nor forbear worshipping with others, contrary to the will of Christ, and the
light of our own conscience (without suffering) then have we a lawful and good
call to suffer, especially if there be no way opened by the Lord for escape,
without sinning against him, here is both a good cause, and a good call.

3. When there is withal a good conscience, 3. A good Conscience.
that is of special concernment for comfort in suffering, not only a good
conscience in respect of the cause, and clearness of the call, but also in
relation to the sincerity of our faith, and walk with God, and toward men in
the whole course of our conversation, (for when men's former conversations have
been sinful, worldly, proud, vain and unprofitable, it must needs lessen their
comfort in suffering, when they shall reflect on themselves and sins, as the
cause, let such look that they repent of the sin, that so they may have the
advantage and comfort of suffering.) For confirmation of this, see 2 Cor. 1. 8.
12. and read it at your leisure, O it will be a comfort indeed to you when you
come to suffer, the testimony of your Conscience, as to your former
conversation, it will be a continual Feast.

4. When you manage the business in a 4. A good Spirit.
good spirit, that is in the spirit of love, without which all is nothing, 1
Cor. 13. 3. love both to God and man, in the meek and patient spirit of our
Lord Jesus, who as a Lamb dumb before the Shearer, so opened he not his mouth,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23.

4. I shall propound some helps and supports 4. Encouragements in suffering.
to the Saints in their sufferings, to the end they may not faint nor flag in
the way.

1. Its presented to us in the Gospel as the way to the Kingdom; and truly if
so, though it be not pleasant to the flesh, but a rugged way, yet while it
leads to so good an end, they have no cause to be discouraged, but to lift up
their hearts and heads, Mat. 16. 24. Acts 14. 22. Jam. 1. 12.

2. Its the way in which Christ has walked before you; The Captain of your
Salvation was made perfect by suffering, Heb. 2. 10. Hence the Apostle exhorts
us to look to Jesus, and to consider him that suffered such contradiction of
sinners, least we be weary and faint in our minds, Heb. 12. 2, 3. If Jesus was
content to go the way before you and for you, how should this arm you with the
same mind?

3. He has not only gone before his people in this way of suffering, but he
has made the way plain for them, that they may walk in it safely; he has
conquered all his and his Churches Enemies, that they can do them no wrong
while they cleave to, and follow the Lord, Joh. 16. 33. ^e of good cheer I have
overcome the world: He has spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show
of them openly, triumphing over them therein* Col. 2. 15. So that there is
nothing in the way that shall hurt you.

4. And this is not all, but you have his promise that he will be with you, he
will not leave you alone in the way, but he will be with you in the fire, and
in the water, to uphold and preserve you through the most fiery trials, and
floods of ungodly men, Isa. 41. 10. and 43. 1, 2. and his Grace shall be
sufficient for your support, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

5. Its the way in which all the Saints have walked before you to the Kingdom,
as Heb. 11. and chap. 12. The Apostle calls them, a cloud of witnesses to this
truth, as an argument to encourage Saints in their sufferings; the new
Testament is full to it. and both History and experience confirms it; therefore
my Beloved* Think it not strange concerning the fiery trials which is to try
you, as if some strange thing had happened unto you, 1 Pet. 4. 13. but know its
no new thing therefore it should not be strange, its the way in which all the
Prophets and Apostles, and Saints have walked before you in, and if you will
walk in another way, you may doubtless come to some other end.

6. Consider the great advantages you shall reap thereby, which should be
encouragements to your souls in suffering; and that not only in those many
things that has been before mentioned, as to prove and try the truth of your
Faith, Love, Patience, Constancy, and Perseverance in the Truth, the purging
away of sin, etc.

But 1. It shall give you the advantage of more of Christ's Spirit and presence
in your faithful cleaving to him in suffering, The Spirit of God and of glory
shall rest upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14. The Lord will make known himself to you (it
may be) in a more glorious manner and measure then ever before; and so it shall
be to you an evident token of Salvation and that of God. Phil. 5. 28. a right
suffering frame of spirit is the gift of God, and a token of Salvation to those
in whom it is.

2. It shall work for your great glory at the appearing and Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Those light afflictions that are but for a
moment, works for us a more exceeding and Eternal weight of glory; a right
suffering for Christ will turn to wonderful advantage both on the spiritual and
eternal account; its the great wor^ of the world (and I fear of those who
profess to be called out of the world too) to be trading in the greatest ways
of worldly advantage, which does all perish in the using. O why should
Christians be so unwilling to be trading in this way of gain? there is no gain
like this, what ever you gain here, its durable, eternal, and exceeding great,
a weight of glory, Mat. 5. 11. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 13. Your reward shall be great in
Heaven, and your joy exceeding and full of glory at that day. Romans 8. 18. For I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us; bring your hearts to a right
reckoning, as the Saints of old have done, reckon the littleness of the
suffering, and the greatness of the glory, the momentariness of the suffering,
and the eternity of the glory; and you will see that there is no comparison
between them, you will then indeed see and say that sufferings for Christ is
your gain, your riches, as Moses that Servant of the Lord did, He esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, for he had
respect unto the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 25, 26.

I shall now only answer two objections or questions about this matter, and so
conclude this Chapter.

1. If it be true indeed, that God and i. e. to God as Children, and to Jesus
Christ as Espoused to him, and Members of his body, how it is possible for the
Father and the Son to permit them to pass under such oppressions and wrongs,
from men in the World?

Answ. 1. Without all controversy it To make them partakers of his holiness,
that they may not be condemned with the world.

2. He will try them (as I said before) the truth of their Faith, Love,
Patience, and Constancy; and great reason it should be so, for the truth of our
Lords love to us was tried to the purpose, and that too in the way of his
Suffering for us, and he was content to suffer and bear hard and heavy things
for us, without grudging and repining; and its meet our loves should be tried
likewise, therefore let us arm our selves with the same mind.

3. Though he in this way try and prove his people, yet he takes all the wrong
done to them as done to himself, and will judge both his and their enemies in
the end. Zech. 8. 2. He that touches them, touches the Apple of his eye, Acts
9. 4. Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me?

4. His glory ^s concerned in it, which should be more precious to us then our
lives, on your part he is glorified; it is his glory to have a people in a
sinful world, to bear up his name before men, in a way of professed obedience, in
opposition to the wickedness of the world, and it will be for the glory of his
Justice in the day of accounts, that he had a people in the world that did own
him, and bear up his name in doing and suffering, and shall silence and shame
enemies at that day, and cause them to justify, and Glorify God in the day of
visitation.

2. Christ says, that his Yoke is easy, Mat. 11. 30. how does it appear so to
be, seeing such heavy service and sufferings attend the Gospel?

Answ. 1. Its a easy Yoke comparatively, Peter says, Acts 15. 10. That
neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear.

2. Its easy and light, compared with the Yoke of Sin and Satan, which makes
men to take great pains to do wickedly, and very often destroy their bodies in
the Service of Sin and Satan, by Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and other ways in
which they willingly Sacrifice themselves to the Devil and their own Lusts, and
so to Eternal Condemnation, from which Believers are delivered.

3. To truly gracious Souls that love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, there is
nothing so heavy a burden to them as sin, nor pleasant as the service of the
Lord, and sufferings too, when they live the life of Faith and love; sin is
their burden, and the want of a suffering frame of spirit is their burden, but
Grace and Holiness, and a Heart fitted to conform to Christ in every thing, and
to follow him where ever he leads, that is the delight of the gracious soul.

Note this as a special distinguishing Character, Note this.
between a gracious Sincere Heart, and a Hypocrite, or Formalist; the burden of
the Hypocrite is, that there is such service, and that there are such duties
required, such sins to be avoided, and such sufferings to attend the Gospel;
and this is his burden. He goes on heavily, and at a hard rate, and in all
could gladly turn back again; if self esteem and credit with Professors, and
legal conscience would permit, and many poor souls waiting for a fair
opportunity of drawing back, ever and anon break through all, and return as
they were; this we see by woeful experience, according to that word, 2 Pet. 2.
21, 22.

But the Sincere Christian rejoices in the Service, and hates the sin that
does so esily beset, loves the holiness of God, and the purity of his Word and
Worship, but is burdened and grieved that he comes so short in the right
performance thereof, he quarrels not at the strictness or holiness of the
service, but with himself that has so much aversness in his nature thereunto;
He rejoices that God has accounted him worthy to suffer shame for his name
sake, but is burdened with his own carnality, and coming short in the right
suffering spirit of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXX. Of Death, and the State after Death; of the Resurrection and
Judgment.
COncerning Death I need say but little; not only the Scripture assures us of
the certainty thereof, that it is appointed for men once to die; but common
experience confirms the truth hereof, we see it daily, that all men dye, it is
the way of all flesh, great and small, noble and ignoble, good and bad, all
die, except those (of the Saints) that shall be found alive at the coming of
the Lord, they shall be changed, which will be a death to the body, though not
asleep in the grave, but a sudden change 1 Cor. 15. 51. and many of the wicked
shall not then die, but be cast alive into the Lake of Fire, Rev. 19. 2. But
alas, who is that so lays it to heart, the certainty and suddenness thereof,
so as to be preparing and prepared for it, as does concern them that prays
with the Prophet, Psalm. 39. 4. Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure
of my days, that I may know how frail I am, and Psalm. 90. 12. So teach us to
number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom; so as to be always
ready when ever the time comes.

2. Concerning the State of men and women 2. Of the State of men after death.
after Death, their bodies return to the Dust, according to the Word of the
Lord, Genesis 3. 19. and must there remain till the Resurrection; and to the
Saints its counted and called a sleeping in Jesus, and indeed its a sleep to
all, both good and bad, so called, because there is a lying down as to sleep,
and shall be a rising again as men out of sleep, Dan. 12. 2. They that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake, etc. and their spirits returns to God that
gave them, Eccles. 12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was,
and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. The Spirits of men being (by
divine ordinance) immortal, shall not die, but return to the Lord; i. e. to his
disposal until the Resurrection; and as for the State of the Spirits of men
after death, what light I understand the Scripture gives us herein, I shall
endeavor briefly to discover.

1. For the State of the Spirits of the 1. Of the Saints.
Saints, the Scripture seems clear, that the place to which they go, and where
they shall abide till the Resurrection of the body, is to a place above in
Heaven called Paradise, signifying a place of rest and pleasure, 2 Cor. 12. 2,
4. ver. 2. the Apostle calls it the third Heaven, and ver. 4. explains it to be
Paradise, which is the place of rest for the Spirits of the Deceased Saints,
and not the highest Heaven, the glorious habitation of God and Christ, which is
said to be far above all Heavens, Ephesians. 4. 10. into the highest Heaven none are,
nor may enter, at least till the Mediatory office of Christ be finished, so it
was in the Type, none might enter into the most holy place but the High Priests
only, and Christ only is entered into Heaven it self, and by himself to perform
his Mediatory Office; that this place above called the third Heaven and
Paradise, is the place where the spirits of the Deceased Saints are, seems to
be confirmed by the words of Christ to the Thief, Luke 23. 43. To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.

2. And as for the State they shall be in, it is described to be a better
estate then here in the body, and that they shall be with Christ. See both
Phil. 1. 23. that is more nearly with him, and so in a far better condition,
then while here in the body, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8. which should make all the truly
Godly willing to depart this life, and to be with Christ, although the degrees
of glory are reserved till after the Resurrection and Judgment, yet at the
departure out of this body, it will be much better.

2. As for the place and state of the wicked, 2. Of the Wicked.
as the Saints attain not the highest glory, so the wicked go not into the
place of the greatest punishment; the reason (as to both) is, because there is
a judgment to come, and God does not first execute, and then judge, but first
judge, and then execute the sentence, Mat. 25. 31. the most and best light I
find in Scripture concerning this matter is, that there is a place where the
spirits of wicked men are kept and reserved by the Lord as Prisoners, for the
judgment, 1 Pet. 3. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 9.

3. Concerning the Resurrection, and in 3. Of the Resurrection. 1. All shall be
raised.
this I shall premise six things. 1. Prove the truth thereof, and that it shall
be general of all both just and unjust, Act. 24. 15. And have hope toward God,
which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the
dead, both of the just and unjust; and this our Lord confirms, John 5. 28, 29.
and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 12, etc. where the Apostle disputes against those
that deny this Doctrine, stating the truth hereof on such plain and infallible
grounds, as might tend to satisfy Conscience in this matter, and to silence
all gainsayers; and indeed this truth is stated both in the old and new
Testament, and have been the Faith of all the Saints since the Fall, Job. 19.
25, 26. 27. Psalm. 49. 14. Isaiah 26. 19. John 11. 24. Acts 26. 6, 7, 8. Heb.
11. 35.

2. It shall be the same bodies that was 2. The same bodies.
laid down in the dust, that shall be raised again, and not another body, for
that would be no Resurrection, but a Creation; the Resurrection will be a work
of greater power and wisdom, then the Creation of other bodies. For God to
bring up the same bodies through all the difficulties and impossibilities to
reason and flesh, will abundantly magnify God in his whole name in the
Restoration work, and Jesus Christ by whom it shall be done, that it shall be
the same bodies that shall be raised, See Isa. 26. 19. It is them that sleep in
the dust of the earth that shall awake, Dan. 12. 2. And them that be in the
Grave that shall come forth, 1 John 5. 28, 29. And every seed shall have his
own body, 1 Cor. 15. 38.

3. What bodies the Saints shall be raised 3. What Bodies.
in, though the same body shall be raised for substance, yet they shall be
changed, 1 Cor. 15. 51. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed. The change must pass upon all, both living and
raised Saints shall be changed; and this change is held forth in various
expressions and terms, ver. 42, 43, 44. Its sown in corruption, its raised in
incorruption; its sown in dishonor, its raised in glory; its sown in weakness,
its raised in power; its sown a natural b^dy, its raised a spiritual body, etc,
In a word for all, the Apostle states the change in full, Phil. 3. 20, 21. and
yet it must be the same bodies for substance, changed and made spiritual; as
the Water was turned into Wine, Joh. 12. not by al^ering its substance, but its
nature and quality, so shall it be in the Resurrection. But this change is
indeed a Mystery; that it shall be, we ought to believe, but what it shall be,
is a Mystery further then the Divine Revelation has instructed us therein, it
shall be a conformity to Jesus Christ, and that will be enough, and the fullness
of the Saints Glory.

Ob. Some may say the Apostle calls those Cor. 15. 35, 36.

Ans. The Apostle calls not those Fools verse. 12. How say some among you that
there is no Resurr^ction of the dead; these it were the Apost^e supposes might
make this question, not so much for satisfaction, as for opposition, and to
strengthen themselves in their error, and such it is the Apostle calls Fools.

4. The time when the Resurrection shall 4 The time when
be; and that is at the second and Glorious coming of our Lord Jesus from
Heaven, Mat. 29. 30, 31. with 1 These. 4. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a Shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the dead in
Christ shall rise first; so that the Resurrection shall be at the coming of
Christ from Heaven, when he shall come again and receive his people to himself,
that where he is, they may be also. 1 John 14. 3.

5. The order of the Resurrection, and 5. The order of the Resurrection.
that is explained, 1 Cor. 15. 23. Christ the first fruits, afterward they
that are his at his coming, and then (or afterward) comes the end. When all
shall be raised, this is the order of the Resurrection, For every man must be
raised in his own order. What distance of time this order may admit, I shall
here forbear to speak of; but that there shall be a first and second
Resurrection is plain from Scripture, 1 These. 4. 14, 16. Rev. 20. 4, 5. and
ver. 12, 13. comes the end or general Resurrection.

6. The end of this Resurrection it is to 6. The end thereof.
the Saints, that they may be perfected in the Restoration of the new
Covenant, and receive the end of their Faith, Service, and Sufferings; and to
the wicked, that they may receive the due and just reward of their Wickedness
and Rebelion against the Lord. See both Joh. 5. 28, 29. Dan. 12. 2. from what
has ^een said in this matter.

1. Take a taste of that spirit that denies Col. 3. 1. but that is ^ot all,
nor without this will it be any thing at all, 1 Cor. 15. 18, 19 for to deny the
Resurrection of the body, is to deny all Religion, so the Apostle reasons and
explains it, ver. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. so that those who deny the Resurrection
of the body are miserable comforters, and are like to come to a miserable end,
and under this motion it was de^yed of old; that is, that all was accomplished
within, and so said, that the Resurrection was past already, 2 T^m. 2. 18. they
would not be so gross as in terms to deny the Resurrection, but said that it
was past already.

4. Of the judgment that shall be at or after ^ Of judgment.
the Resurrection. 1. That there shall be an Eternal Judgment is one principle
of Religion, and the Faith of all Saints, and the wicked do acknowledge this in
word, but if they did really belie^e it in their hearts, they durst not do as
they do, but to prove the truth asserted, that there shall be a general
judgment and account given to the Lord for all things done in the body, Eccles.
11. 9. and 12, 14. God shall bring ev^ry work unto judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Heb. 9. 27. And as it is
appointed to men once to die, and after this the Judgment, Acts 17. 31.

Quest. Must the Saints come to judgment,

Ans. Yea, all must come to judgment, Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad. The Saints
must not expect to pass in the judgment without giving an account of all their
actions, Romans 14. 10. We shall all stand before the judgment Seat of Christ, v.
12. So then every one of us shall give an account of himself to God; So that in
vain do they imagine and talk, who think and say, they shall have nothing to do
at that day, but in to Glory without passing the judgment; a dangerous Doctrine
to be asserted, and contrary to the plain testimony of the Scripture.

Reasons why the Saints must come to Judgment.

1. Because there are many bad persons, Hypocrites, under the name and
profession of Saints, both of Preachers and Hearers, that must then be
discovered and brought to light, and receive their judgment accordidgly; Then
the Sinners in Sion shall be afraid, fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrites;
then many that had high thoughts of themselves here, will be speechless, when
the Lord shall say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I never
knew you.

2. Because many Saints and such as may be saved at that day, do allow
themselves in t^ings contrary to the will of their Lord, both in Omission and
Commission, for which they must give an account; many of the Saints (it is to
be ^eared) do bad work here (or else there are but few Saints on earth) for
which they must be judged, for they must give an account for every thing done,
whether it be good or bad; good to be approved, and bad to be reproved, for all
things must come to the light and be made manifest.

3. All must come to judgment, because all must receive according to their
works, there can be no rendering according to the de^ds done in the body,
without coming to judgment, we may not imagine that the most righteous judge
will do up things in confusion, but he will do all things in righteousness and
equity; its evident that God will give diversities and degrees of rewards to
his people at that day; Dan. 12. 3. Luke 19. 17, 19. 1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. and
those diversities of rewards shall be dispensed according to their works, Mat.
16. 27. not as the Meritorious cause, that is all in Christ Jesus, both as to
Justification and Salvation; all true believers are brought into a justified
and saved state in him, and into a capacity of acceptable service for his sake,
and their works shall be all reckoned to them, and so be rewarded; so that the
less Christians have been exercised in working for God, the less will their
reward be, and thereby their negligence will be reproved; and the more they sin
against Jesus Christ in matters of Worship, the greater will their loss be; all
buildings contrary to the Lord must be accounted for, and the owners thereof
suffer the loss, though they may be saved, yet it will be so as by fire, 1 Cor.
3. 12, 13.

4. The Lords people must come to Judgment, because all^sin must be repented
of, first or last; there are many sins in the Saints that they allow themselves
in, and some it may be, they know not to be sins, but take them to be virtues;
all which they must have a time to be convinced of, and to repent. May we
imagine that God has ordered repentance for his people here, and his Church to
expect repentance for known and gross sins, and yet if any sins pass unrepented
of, that they must never be repented of; surely we cannot rationally imagine
it. In this I understand that not any sins of the Saints repented of, and
warred against, shall be accounted for at that day, but they are pardoned by
the Law of Grace, according to the word of Grace, 1 Ja 1. 9.

Object. The Scripture says, Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities I will remember no more;
this seems to contradict the present affection of an after reckoning, and
account to be given by believers.

Answ. 1. We ought not so to understand

Therefore 2. We are to understand that Covenant, to relate in its glorious and
perfect ministration, to the glorious state of the Kingdom, although it took
its entrance from the death of the Testator, and believers are now under it
(in its first and beginning ministration) for there is no other Covenant but
this new and everlasting one; yet we do find that now God does remember the
sins of his people, so as to afflict and judge them; and this they have felt
and do feel, and are like to feel in this imperfect State. But in as much as
the new Covenant is the Covenant of the new and restored state, and especially
in it is the perfection thereof intended, thoug^ it has a preparative
entrance now in wa^ of grace, it shall then be perfected both i^ Grace and
Glory, and the final doing awa^ of sin will ^ot be till after the judgment and
then God will remember their sins no more so as to judge them for it, neither
shall h^ people sin any more, Isa. 33. 24. Rev. 21. ^

And so 5ly. The Saints must come to judgment, that so God and Ch^^^ may be
admired in the pardoning Grace of the new Covenant; at that day they shall
admire and glorify his mercy more then ever they did or could before, they
shall then see how justly they might be condemned and sent away with Hypocrites
and Unbelievers, and shall admire the grace of their Salvation, beyond what
they were of capacity to do in this mortal Estate, Acts 3. 19. 2. Tim. 1. 18.
2 These. 1. 10. Jude verse 21.

6. And finally, it must be so that the justice of God may appear the more
righteous and convincing to his (and his Churches) enemies, when they shall fee
and know, that his people that have owned him here, must come to judgment, and
be scarcely saved, through the appearing difficulties; how justly must they be
condemned, 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. which is truly applicable hear, relating to the
afflictions of the Church, and so it will be then; Judgment must first begin at
Gods house, he will judge and acquit them first, Where then shall the ungodly
and sinner appear? what judgment must they expect? how will it silence them,
and cause them to justify God for ever in the righteousness of his judgment
toward them? Let the Lords people believe this truth, and so live in this world
as those that do expect to give an account of themselves, and of all their
works to God.

2. The wicked must then come to judgment, all men great and small, must then
appear to give an account of all their wickedness, their unbelief,
disobedience, persecution, hard speeches, and hard actions, spoken and done
against the Lord and his people, for all their abominations and filthiness. O!
woe will it be at that day to all the wicked of the earth; who will now forget
God and will have none of him; that bid God depart from them, they will none of
the knowledge of his ways; the Lord will bid them depart at that day into
everlasting fire. O consider this ye that forget God, least he come and tear
you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 22.

2. Who shall be the judge? and that is Jesus Christ, he shall be the great
judge of the World and of the Saints too, see both, Mat. 25. 31. Acts 17. 31.
He has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has ordained, etc. Romans 2. 26. and 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all
appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, etc. And the Father will judge in
and by the Son; so that it will be the judgment both of the Father and the Son;
God will judge the world in righteousness by that man. etc.

Quest. Why will God judge the world by Jesus Christ, and not do it himself
immediately?

Answ. 1. Because he has done all his works by him from the beginning, he at
first made the world by him, Heb. 1. 2. by him he Redeemed the world again out
of that estate into which it fell by Transgression, which shall be accomplished
in his times, Ephesians. 4. 30. Romans 8. 23. Rev. 21. 5. by him he governs the world
now, even in its fallen estate, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. and by him Believers shall be
saved, Acts 4. 12. By him the dead must be raised, J^h. 5. 28. And by him must
the World be Judged, God the Father never did nor never will do any thing
without him, but by him, he has and will accomplish all his work, especially
the Restoration work.

2. Christ must be judge of the World, because he is most suitable and fit to
judge the World; because he is the son of man, Joh. 5. 27. He has given him
authority also to execute judgment because he is the Son of man. God considered
out of Christ, is dreadful, would destroy men, none can see him and live, till
after the judgment be past, so that he alone is fit to judge, because he is the
Son of man, and able to Judge, because he is the Son of God.

3. Christ must be the judge of the world, because he dyed for the World; He
gave himself a ransom for all men, he ^^^^ed death for every man* therefore
must he judge the world for their sin against him, in neglecting and refusing
the salvation by him wrought forth and tendered to the world, and to justify
his people that have believed his love, and owned him in the world, so that he
died for the world, must be judge of the world, that all men's mouths may be
stopped in the Judgment, and that his people may admire him in his wonderful
grace.

4. Christ must be judge of the World, because therein God the Father had a
design to honor him, and to make him glorious before the world, Joh. 5. 22.
23. The Father judges no man, but has committed ^^ judgment unto the Son,
that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, etc. That
in all things he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 5. 18. That as he humbled
himself to the death for the sin of sinners* and became the contempt and scorn
of men (and is so in his members still) so he might be exalted over them all,
and be visibly manifested to be Lord and Judge of all men. Phil. 2. 7, to 11.
Isa. 53. 12. Rev. 19. 16. all which makes much for the people of God he that
dyed for them shall be their judg^ who will surely judge so, as to save all the
meek of the earth, but terrible will it be for the wicked, the Lamb slain is
become the^ judge, Ps. 76. 8. 9. Rev 6. 15. 16, 17. That he whom the nations
abhorred, and man despised is a servant of Rulers; should become their judge,
will be their astonishment; for (...) the Lamb slain be become the judge, yet
he will be very terrible to his enemies.

As for the day and time, it shall be at and after his next appearing in glory;
as for the manner it will be very terrible, honorable, and glorious, a Friday
to the wicked; as for its continuance, the time of the judgment must be
suitable to the greatness and honor of the work; probably it must take up
length of time, that all things may judiciously be done, so as to stop all
mouths, so that the day of judgment may be long, and the execution thereof
must be for ever.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Coming, Kingdom, and Reign of Christ on Earth.
THat Christ shall come again from Heaven 1. That he shall come.
the second time in Glory, is a great truth of the Gospel believed of all the
Saints, and is indeed the crowning part of the Gospel, in which I shall
endeavor to show these four things; 1. That he shall come again from Heaven.
2. The time when he shall come. 3. The manner how he shall come. 4. His end in
coming, or the work he shall do when he comes.

1. That he shall come again the second time, is a truth so abundantly held
forth in Scripture, that he that runs may read. Testimonies for proof hereof;
1. The Prophets witness to this truth, this Moses in substance speaks of,
that is, of the work that shall be done at that day, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. 43. and Dan.
7. 9. 13. speaks the very language of the new Testament, concerning the coming
of Christ, I saw in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son of man
coming in the clouds of Heaven; so Jude says, ver. 14, 15. That Enoch the
seventh from Adam prophesied, saying, behold he comes with ten thousands of
his Saints, etc.

The second testimony is Christ himself, who is truth it self, from his own
mouth, Mat. 24. 30. Then shall appear the Sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with Power and
great Glory, Chap. 16. 27. and 25. 31. Rev. 22. 20.

3. The testimony of Angels, whom God has frequently made use of, to declare
his will to men, Act. 1. 10, 11.

4. The fourth testimony is of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, after his Ascension, 1 These. 4. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the A^ch-Angel, and with the trump
of God, etc. Heb. 9. 28. To them that look for him, shall he appear the second
time, without sin to Salvation. This Doctrine was preached and believed in the
first foundation work, 1 These. 1. 9, 10. In their first conversion this was
their Faith; they turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God,
and to wait for his Son from Heaven; this was the Faith of the Saints expressed
in Scripture, to be looking for the blessed hope, Tit. 2. 13. Rev. 22. 20. And
this has been the Faith of the Saints ever since, and is and shall be till he
come, however persons who pretend to Christianity, deride and scorn this
glorious truth; and those who believe and wait for this blessed hope, calling
the promises of his coming litteral promises, and that they who look for it
shall never see it; and so fulfill the Scriptures, who foretold of such persons
to ^e in the latter days, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Well it would be for such persons,
if the Lord never come to call them to an account for their infidelity and
disobedience to him; but the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Go^pel of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. The time when he shall come; and 2. When he shall come.
in this I shall note two things; 1. That the time is (as to man) uncertain,
though the thing be certain, yet the time is uncertain; and I think it is great
weakness, i^ not presumption, in any, to pretend to fix the time* though I do
not question, but that probably, God may have discovered the time in the
Scripture; but if so, it is not so discovered, as that any man is likely to
understand it; for the Scripture lets us to know, that there are some things
recorded, that are sealed till the time of the end, Dan. 12. 9. But that the
time of the Lords coming is uncertain, as to man; I shall state on these
following grounds.

1. The Prophets did not know it, though 1 Uncertain to the Prophets.
they spoke of the restoration work, that is to be accomplished at that day,
Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. All the Holy Prophets did speak of the things to be done,
when God does send Jesus Christ from Heaven; but as to the time they could say
no more, but that it should come to pass in the last days, in the latter end
of the World, Isa. 2. 2. M^c. 4. 1. Jer. 23. Having prophesied in the former
part of the Chapter of the glorious restoration of the Church, which shall be
accomplished at that day, with the destruction of the Churches enemies; says,
ver. 20. In the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly.

2. The Apostles did not know the time, 2. To the Apostles.
though they believed, and taught the truth of the Doctrine, yet the time was
hid from them, any otherwise than signs, and probable conjectures, as Paul, 2
These. 2. 3. That day shall not come, except there be a departing from the Faith
first, 1 John 2. 18. Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard
that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we
know it is the last time. By which it appears the Apostle knew the time no more
than we, but by probable conjecture, and very probably thought it to be nearer
than it was.

3. Angels knew it not, nor probably do 3. To Angels.
not know it, Matt. 24. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no, not
the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only.

4. The Son himself did not know it, 4. To the Son.
Mar. 13. 32. But of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels that
are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only. And this secret in the
Fathers counsel only, Christ confirms after his resurrection; Acts 1. 7. It is
not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in his own
power; yet vain man would be wise above what is meet, forgetting that things
revealed belong to us, and things secret belong to God: and indeed it is
contrary to the Scripture, for any man to know certainly before hand, the hour,
day, or year of our Lord's coming, then such Scriptures as these could not be
true, as Matt. 24. 44. In such an hour as ye think not, the S^n of Man comes;
and 25. 13. VVatch ye, for ye know neither the day nor hour wherein the Son of
man comes, Luke 12. 40. and 18. 8. So that the time is uncertain, that his
people may be always, in all generations ready prepared, and waiting for it.
But let us take heed of fixing on times, in which all have, and probably must
miscarry. it is the way to destroy the Faith of the weak, in the thing it self;
and men lose themselves when they time things, kept secret in God; though good
men has failed herein, yet doubtless it has risen in part from pride,
supposing they knew more than they did; but when it is apparent they miss, there
is cause to be humbled for presuming above what they understood; yet,

2. Though the time be uncertain, (and good reason it should be so) yet we have
grounds to believe and hope, that it is not far away, but may be (for all that
we know) at the doors; for if Christ's first coming was in the end of the
World, Heb 9. 26. And if it was then but a little while before he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry, Chapter 10. 37. And our Lord Christ promises
to come quickly, Rev. 22. three times in this Chapter, ver. 7, 12, 20. We have
grounds to expect the time to be near, even at the doors.

3. The manner how he shall come, and 3. The manner of his Coming.
that will be wonderful, glorious, and terrible; his first coming was meek and
lowly, he humbled himself, and was contemptible, trampled under feet of men,
content to be abased, and vilified by sinners, and bare all meekly, as a Lamb
dumb before the shearers, so opened he not his mouth; and the reason of it was,
because he then came to save sinners, to give his life a ransom for sinners;
he then came not to condemn the World, but to save the World; but now he will
come to judge the World; and therefore he must come as the great Judge of the
World, in Power and great Glory, to the dread, amazement and astonishment of
the World; therefore he is described to come in flaming fire, to come with the
great sound of a trumpet, the trump of God, and voice of the Archangel, with
glorious attendants, Luke 9. 26. He shall come in his own Glory, and in his
Fathers Glory, and of the Holy Angels; he shall come in all the Glory of
Heaven. O wonderful glorious Judge and King, Thousand thousands shall attend
upon him, and ten thousand times ten thousand shall minister to him, Dan. 7.
10. Hence it is called the great and terrible day of the Lo^d, Joel 2. 31. Who
then may abide the day of his coming, who shall stand when he appears? That
is, it will make the Captains, and Great Men of the Earth, and all men out of
Christ, to wail and cry, and to wish the rocks to fall upon them, and cover
them from the presence of the Lamb. Why, what is the matter, that the whole
World should dread a Lamb? the World has abused him, and wickedly wronged his
Lamb-like Grace and Meekness, and now his wrath is stirred, and he is become
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and he will make all his enemies to tremble and
quake before him: this will be the manner of his coming, Mat. 24. 30.

4. The end of his coming, or the work 4. The end of his Coming.
he shall do when he comes; and that is not only to raise the dead, and judge
the World, as has been before minded.

But that which I shall especially mind in To set up his Kingdom, and Reign.
this place is, that he shall come to take to himself his great Power, and to
Reign, Rev. 11. 17. That Christ shall, at and after his second and glorious
appearing, have a Kingdom, and reign on Earth, is the great thing that I shall
from Scripture Light evince and prove in this place; it being a truth that none
is more clearly stated in the Scripture, yet by many much opposed and
contradicted.

I shall in this that follows, endeavor, 1. To prove the truth from plain
Scripture evidence. 2. By Scripture reasons; And, 3. Endeavor to answer such
objections as are made against it, and such questions as may be made about it,
for the more full clearing thereof.

1. To prove this great truth from plain Scripture evidence, Ps. 72. Which
according to the letter relates to Solomon as the type, but to Jesus Christ as
the substance, as is (I think) by all understood, and in truth must be so
understood. This Psalm discovers the Glory of Solomon's Kingdom in the type,
and of Christ's Kingdom especially as the antitype, ver. 7, 8. In his days
shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of Peace, so long as the Moon
endures; he shall Proved, 1. From Scripture.
have dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the Earth,
etc. Which must unavoidably be understood of the Kingdom of Christ, the Son of
David, the true Solomon, and King of Peace; for Solomon's Kingdom in the type
did not continue so long as the Moon endured, but was ended long since; and
ver. 17. His Name shall endure for ever, his Name shall be continued as long as
the Sun, and men shall be blessed in him, all Nations shall call him blessed;
which most properly relates to Christ, Jer. 23. 5, 6. Behold the days come,
says the Lord, that I will raise to David a Righteous Branch, and a King shall
Reign, and prosper, and shall execute Justice and Judgment in the Earth, etc.
which is so full and plain in the very terms, as cannot be avoided, nor evaded,
without open abuse to the Text; he must Reign, and he must execute Justice and
Judgment in the Earth, etc. To this agrees, Ps. 96. throughout, ver. 13. as
the sum of all, Before the Lord, for he comes, for he comes to Judge the
Earth; he shall Judge the World in R^ghteousness, and the people with his
truth; see the same. Ps. 98. 9. and 82. 8. After diverse exhortations to worldly
Governors, to do Justice to the poor and fatherless, to the afflicted and
needy, etc. and reprehensions for their wilful miscarriage in this matter, and
hopeless expectation of any redress therein, concludes the whole, (as the
comfort of the afflicted) with this petition (and assurance of Faith,) Arise O
God, judge thou the earth; for thou shall inherit all Nations; implying that
there will ^e but little (or no) righteousness in the earth till that day; and
then shall he possess the Nations, and judge them with equity and truth.

2. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, etc. that
is, free from afflictions, and wrongs, from enemies, as they had been formerly
liable to, which cannot be rationally understood otherwise than the peaceable
Kingdom of Christ on earth; suitable to Ezekiel. 37. 24. to the end; and Jer. 30.
8, 9. Which Scriptures cannot be allogorised, unless men resolve to turn all
Scripture into allegories, and so turn out all the truth of Scripture, (as some
have done) according to their own fancies; but God has put a stop in the way
of allegorising these Scriptures, and turning out this so great a truth; as
that Acts 3. 20, 21. The Heavens must receive our Lord till the times of the
restitution of all things which God both spoken by the mouth of all his holy
P^ophets since the world began. What is this restitution spoken of by the
Prophets, but the restoring and glory of the Church; and this must be when God
does send Christ again from Heaven in Glory: the first coming of Christ was a
preparative to this work, as that without it the restau^ation could not not be
accomplished, and as what the Prophets foretold of his humiliation, was even so
fulfilled, ver. 18. Why should we be incredulous, that what they have spoken
concerning his Kingdom and Glory in the restoration work, should not be even
so fulfilled likewise? And what reason there is for us to turn plain Scriptures
into Allegories, relating to the Reign of Christ on Earth, any more then for
the Jews to Allegories the Scriptures that spoke of his humiliation, and so
lost the truth thereof, I do not yet understand. B^t to proceed to further
proof of the truth, Dan. 2. 44. The God of Heaven will set up a Kingd^m (which
is this fifth Kingdom of the store) cut out of the Mountains without hands,
which shall never be destroyed; and chap. 7. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion
under the whole Heaven, shall be given unto the people of the Saints of the
most high, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall
serve and obey him; here is the Reign of Christ and Saints on Earth, so plainly
and expressly stated, as is impossible with good conscience to gainsay, it is
the Kingdom under the whole Heavens (not above the Heavens) in the greatness
and power thereof, given to the Saints, when taken by Christ, and all Dominions
shall serve and obey him, that is, Christ as the great Lord and King of the
World.

To this agrees the new Testament Testimonies, relating to this truth, and
fully holding harmony therewith, Luke 1. 32, 33. And he shall be great, and he
shall be called the Son of the highest, and the Lord shall give unto him the
Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. This fully answers the old
Testament Prophesies in this matter. 2 Timothy 4. 1, The Apostle in express terms,
states the Kingdom of Christ to be at and after his appearing; He will judge
the quick and dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, which must be the Kingdom
spoken of by the Prophets, Rev. 11. 17. The Song of the Saints was and will be,
for that thou have taken to thy self thy great power and have reigned, and the
nations were angry, etc, and no wonder, for many of his people are angry at
those who believe the truth thereof; we may not understand it to be his
providential reign over the World, as it is constantly exercised, nor his
spiritual Reign in and over his Church, which he has always exercised, but
some more higher, and glorious visible Kingdom and reign on Earth, after the
sound of the seventh Angel; and the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great
voices in Heaven saying, the Kingdom of this world are become the Kingdom of
our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. What can be
more plain in the very terms of the Prophets, they were his before, but now in
another manner then before; chap. 19. 1, to 8. it is the great Song of the
Saints, That the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns, What did he not Reign before?
Yes surely, but now in another manner, more visibly glorious, ruling the world
and saving his people, with the everlasting Salvation spoken of, Isa. 45. 17.
and to this agrees, Rev. 20. 4. Where the Saints are said to Live and Reign
with Christ a thousand years, and chap. 5 9. 10. it is the Song of the Saints,
That Christ the Lamb of God has redeemed them from the Earth, by his blood,
and made them unto God, Kings and Priests, and they shall reign on Earth; and
to this time and state do that Phil. 2. 9. 10, 11. agree thus, amongst the
multitude of Scripture testimonies to this great truth, have I mentioned some
plain, full, and undeniable testimonies for confirmation, that he that runs may
read.

2. I shall further confirm this truth from Reason^ thereof.
clear Scripture reasons and arguments, infallibly drawn from thence.

1. It is the great promise of the new Covenant, Genesis 22. 18. And in thy Seed
shall all the Earth be blessed, compared with Romans 4. 13, For the promise that
he (i. e. Abraham) should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham o^ to
his seed through the law, but through the righteousness of Faith, where
Abraham's heirship to the World, and the Heirship of all her spiritual seed, i.
e. Believers is stated to be, not by the Law, but by the Covenant of Grace in
Christ Jesus, who was the Seed to whom the promise was made, Gal. 3. 16. and is
to be obtained by the righteousness of Faith, and the Heirship is expressed to
be; Heirs of the World, both of Christ and Abraham, and all the true seed, Romans
4. 16. and by this Scripture (that is to say) that Abraham and his seed are the
heirs of the world; may we understand all other Scriptures that speak of the
Saints heirship, yet not of this world in its old estate, but in the world to
come, The new Heaven and new Earth, wherein dwells righ^eousness; see this
more full in cap. 9.

2. The Restoration work and Kingdom chap. 9. unto which I refer the Reader
for Confirmation of this Argument; and indeed Gods Covenant and design in this
matter is the foundation of this building; hence it is that he has so
abundantly filled his word with the Prophesies and promises thereof throughout,
both the old and new Testament, as has been before proved.

3. This has been the Faith of the Saints Heb. 11. 13, to 16. (speaking of the
Fathers of old) that they all died in Faith, not having received the promise,
i. e. of actual possession) but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded
of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and P^lgrims
in the earth. What promises was it which they saw and were persuaded of? Surely
it must be the promises of this glory, which made them to be as Strangers and
Pilgrims in this world, and thereby plainly declared, that they sought a
Country; that is, the Country, Kingdom, Blessedness, and Glory promised, Psalm.
37. 11. The meek shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in the
abundance of peace, verse 29. The Righteous shall inherit the Land, and dwell
therein for ever; and this Christ applies to the New Covenant, Mat. 5. 5.
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth, Rev. 5. 10. And have
made us unto God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign ^n Earth.

O! why should the people of God now be so unbelieving as to t^is truth, and
the Saints of old, so full of Faith therein.

4. It must be so, because the Earth and Genesis 1. 28. though he quickly lost it
by his sin, and immediately the second man, the Lord from Heaven, was promised,
by which it was upheld, and man to have the use thereof in the fallen state, and
in much misery, and in subordination to the Lord Jesus, in order to the
Rest^uration promised, that God might not lose his design in his work here
below, but might rai^e it up to a better and more glorious end, Psalm. 8. 4, 5,
6. The Prophet in way of admiration says, What is man that thou art mindful of
him, and the Son of man that thou visiten him, for thou ha^ made him a little
(or a little while) lower then the Angels, thou have crowned him with glory and
honor, thou made him to h^ve Dominion over the works of thine hands, thou
ha^t put all things under his feet, etc. in which the Prop^et relates, 1. To
Adam before his Fall, who was a Figure of him that was to come. And 2
Especially to Jesus Christ the second man, and Lord from Heaven, w^o comes in
to take the headship and Dominion, especially of the restored world, and all
his people with him, as is explained by the Apostle, Heb. 2. 6, 7, 8. by which
its evident, that as God made the world for man, and he by his sin lost it, so
it shall be restored to (I will not say its first and Primitive Purity) a
better estate for man, then at the first, as the Lord thereof exceeds the first
man, Who was of the Earth, Earthly, so must it be restored suitable to such a
Lord, and the Inhabiters thereof with him, it must be a Holy, Heavenly Country,
Wherein dwells Righteousness, be sure God did not make the World to destroy
it, but he will restore it, to be an habitation for men, according to the end
of its first Creation.

5. Both Christ and the Saints have had shall Reign on Earth, thus of Christ,
Isa 53 12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong, because he powered out his soul to the death,
etc. Because he suffered here, he must have a portion, divided with the great,
and divide the spoil with the strong; What in Heaven? No, the great and strong
are not like to come there, but it must be here below, according to the many
promises before mentioned, when all things shall be manifestly put under his
feet, and the Saints his followers in the Regeneration shall have their glory
with him, Matt. 19. 28. which answers Isaiah. 1. 26, 27. Romans 8. 17.

6. It must be so for the glory of God, for

But we are to understand that the design of God was (not to let such a
Creation and glorious building to fall to nothing, or die away by degrees
through age and corruption) for his own creating power and glory, to restore it
to a more glorious ^ate then at first, he will not let go the glory of such a
Creation, at so low a rate as is imagined; No, no, but he will yet once more
make the place of his feet glorious, Isa. 60 13. What that is, see Isa. 66. 1.
chap. 44. 23. Sing O Heavens for the Lord has done it, shout O ye lower parts
of the Earth, break forth into singing ye Mountains, O Forest and every Tree
th^rein, for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Is^ael.
What is the matter? Why it is for the accomplishment of the Restoration Work;
When God did send Jesus Christ from Heaven, Prophesied of by the Prophets, it
is for the New Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells righteousness; it is for
that God has made the place of his feet glorious. In a word, it is for the
Salvation of the Church, for that God has thus glorified himself in Israel,
chap. 60. 21. Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the
Land for ever, the branch of my planting, the works of my hands, that I may be
glorified. We may not imagine that God made himself such a Creation to lose the
glory thereof, but he will so order it in the Restoration thereof, as shall be
more for his glory then if it had never fallen; and thus it appears, that this
new restored Estate and Kingdom of our Lord on Earth, must be for the gaining
and augmenting of the Glory of God in the Created World, being restored by
Jesus Christ, who shall be the Visible Lord of that Estate.

7. Reason to confirm this truth is, that the Works of Creation, which includes
both the Heavens and the Earth, Jer. 31. where the new and everlasting Covenant
is stated, ver. 31. to 34. says ver. 35, 36. Thus says the Lord, who gives
the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the Moon, and of the Stars
for a light by night, etc. If those Ordinances depart from before me, says the
Lord, then the Seed of Israel shall cease from being a Nation before me f^r
ever; intimating in plain terms, that when the Creation of Heaven and Earth
cease to be, his Church must cease to be; so that those who believe the
destruction and nihelation of the Creation, and that Christ shall have no
restored Kingdom therein, do thereby (though inconsiderately) believe an end
of Church and Salvation by Jesus Christ, chap. 33. 20, 21. Thus says the Lord,
if you can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, that
there should not be day and night in their season, then may also my Covenant be
broken with David my Servant, that he should not have a Son to Reign upon his
Throne, and his name mu^t continue as long as the Sun, Psalm. 72. 17. Which
implies the perpetualness of the works of Creation, if it were possible for
these to fail; then Christ our King and Covenant of peace might fail, Psalm. 39.
29. the promise of the Saints glory being no longer then these do continue; and
if so, Christ's Reign on Earth is in it self no strange thing; For as the new
Heavens and new Earth which I will make, shall continue before me, says the
Lord, so shall your Name, and your Seed remain, Isa. 66. 22. As for the New
Heavens and the new Earth, see chap. 65. 17, 18. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1, 5.

8. I think I may say that it is the judgments

And man for sin returns to the Earth again, his matter whereof he was made,
and is as truly Earth again as any other part of the Earth is; and yet we (on
good grounds) believe that God will bring up all men anew out of the Earth
again in the Restoration; and why should it be incredible to us that the Earth
and Heavens (that fell with man and for man's sin) shall be renewed and changed
any more then to believe the Restoration and change of men, having as full and
plain promises from the same God, for the one as for the other.

The Restoration of the Heavens and Earth to be a habitat on for Christ and
the Saints, is (I answer) as authentic from Divine Revelation, as the
Resurrection and Change, and as rational to all Rational and Intelligible
persons.

9. The Scripture says expressly, that Eccles. 1. 4. One Generation passes
away, and another comes, but the Earth abides for ever. Psalm. 104. 5. who
laid the foundations of the Earth that it should not be removed; that is, it
shall abide for ever in the renewed estate, and then no wonder if the Kingdom
of Christ be for ever, in his Reign on Earth, and the Saints Kingdom with him,
according to Dan. 7. 27.

10. And finally, it must be so, because Col. 1. 16. and he shall possess it
all in another manner then yet he does, Heb. 2. 8. But now we see not yet all
things put under his feet; that is, as it shall be in his visible Kingdom and
possession; Psalm 2. 8. Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy
inheritance, und the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession; And thus
it is clear both from plain Scripture, and from Scripture Reason, that Christ
and the Saints shall Reign on the Earth; that is, in the new Heavens and new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, Isa. 32. 1. Behold a King shall Reign in
righteousness, and Princes shall rule in Judgment, etc.

3. I now come to answer such Objections Ob. Answered.
against this truth as I have met withal.

Object. 1. That Heb. 2. 5. For unto the Angels has he not put in subjection
the world to come, of which we speak, intends the present ministration of the
Gospel, that being the matter the Apostle is treating about, both in the first
Chapter, and in the verses preceding that saying, and therefore it relates not
to this Kingdom or World to come.

Answ. Its frequent in Scripture to apply c. 4. where the Apostle applies the
rest of the Sabbath to this rest in Glory, ver. 4. 9. yet he applies it to the
present time, as began to be entered into by Faith, ver. 3. For we which have
believed do enter into rest, and chap. 8. 6. to 13. the Covenant which in its
perfection relates to the State of Glory, and is the everlasting Covenant; the
Apostle applied to the present time and Ministration, and the reason is,
because it is all one Covenant, its the Gospel Covenant, and the Application of
it to the present time, no whit derogates from its being the Covenant of the
glorious state, I could give many instances to this purpose as Joel 2. 28. to
31. is a Prophecy, especially of the glorious estate, yet the Apostle makes
the Application thereof to the present time, and that truly too.

But 2. the Apostle is treating both before and after of this restored estate,
as well as of the present ministration of the Gospel; as c. 1. 10, 11, 12. and
after the Text mentioned, ver. 6, 7, 8. so that ver. 5. is a relative to that,
both before and after, it being usual in Scripture to intermix things that
wisdom may be exercised to find out the Relatives to which each matter does
relate, instance, 1 Cor. 6. 12, 13. which m^st be understood with c. 8. and 1 Timothy 5. 23. inserted without any re^ative as we find, but a sentence
intermixed, relating to Timothies health.

2. Ob. Peter in his 2d. Ep. 3. Chap. speaks etc

Ans. We must understand the Di^sol^tion, to intend the corrupted estate
thereof, Heb. 1. 11, 12. taken out of Psalm. 102. 26. and applied to the
Restoration work of Christ, they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they
all shall wax old as a garment, as a vesture shall thou f^ld them up, and they
shall be changed, etc. which explains what Peter intends by dissolving, or
burning, or changing and making new, and this Peter himself explains to be his
meaning in the same chap. v. 13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise,
look for a new Heaven and a new Earth, etc. That is, though I speak of bur^ing
with fire; yet I intend not a dissolution, but a changing and restoring, A new
Heaven and new Earth, according to his promise.

3. Object. That Christ does already Reign, and is in his Kingdom, his Church,
and in some sense his people do Reign Pet. 1. 11. So an entrance shall he
ministered to you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; And Col. 1. 13. We are said to be delivered out of the
Kingdom (or power) of darkness, into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

Answ. We have an entrance by Faith, into the Kingdom of Christ now, and are
become his subjects ( i. e. true believers) but

4. Object. The Fifth Kingdom is already that Kingdom mentioned, Dan. 2. 44.
that in the days of these Kings the God of Heaven will set up a Kingdom, etc.
That is, in the days of the fourth Monarch, the divided Kingdom, in their days
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which had its entrance at the first
publishing of the Gospel, after the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus. So that if
you will have another Kingdom state for Christ and Saints, you must find out a
sitxh Kingdom, for the fifth is already in being, and where place will be found
for the sixth is uncertain.

Ans. There is no need to find a sixth, that which is to come will be but the
perfecting of that which is already begun, its the same in substance with the
former Objection, and the answer in s^bstane must be same; it is a Kingdom
begun now in the day of grace, and shall be perfeted in the day of glory; there
is the beginning work of the stone before it becomes a M^untain to fill the
whole Earth, and break and consume all other Kingdoms; so that it is the fifth
Kingdom that is begun, and is in the world, though not of the world, and shall
be perfected and become glorious, and stand for ever, at the appearing and
Kingdom

5. Object. Christ speaks as if all should be done at his appearing on a
sudden, the Resurrection and Judgment, and the Execution thereof, M^t. 25. 31.
to 41. Joh. 5. 28, 29. and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. We shall all be
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, etc. which seems to import
that there shall be no such work as you speak of at that day.

Ans. Its the Lords usual way in Scripture to speak much in few words, as Isa.
9. 6. There is Christ presented a Child, in his birth and humiliation, then the
Government is upon his shoulders, and of the increase thereof there shall be no
end, in one breath (as it were) is the birth and Kingdom of Christ stated, as
if it were to be accomplished all at once, whereas in that Scripture is
described that which from the beginning to the perfection of his Kingdom may be
near upon 2000 years, and so for ever, and so things mentioned in those
Scriptures, may and must be done, at, and after the appearing of Christ in
their time and order, but not in so little time as is by some imagined, 1 Cor.
15. 23, 24. as to the Resurrection (which is the case in hand) Christ the first
fruits, afterward they that are his at his com^ng, then (or afterward) comes
the end; afterward more properly, for it is the same in the Greek, as is before
Translated, afterward, which includes the whole time from Christ's Resurrection,
till the finishing work at the giving up of the Kingdom to the Father, and why
the second afterward may not be as long as the first I know not.

And the hour of the Resurrection spoken of, Joh. 5. 28. may be understood by
ver. 25. which hour (doubtless) includes the whole time of Gospel Conversion,
till Christ's second coming (a large hour) and why the hour, ver. 28. should be
limited more then the other, I know not, especially the Scripture presenting us
with the order of the Resurrection as it does, i. e. First and Second, Christ
the first fruits, afterward they that are his at his coming, afterward comes
the end. When all shall be raised, and Death conquered, and the Redemption
perfected, and doubtless the change shall be in a moment, as is expressed. But
this proves not that all the work of this last and great day must be done in a
moment, because the Saints shall be changed in a moment, and I do believe that
they are very much mistaken, that will allow our Lord but a moment of time to
accomplish all his great work, at his second and glorious appearing and Kingdom.

The 6. Ob. The Scripture says, that Christ must sit at the right Hand of God,
till all his enemies be made his footstool; which seems to import that there
will be no such work for Christ to do, when he comes from heaven, i. e. to
subdue his enemies, and to set up his Kingdom.

Ans. The Scripture fully presents us with this, that he is at the right hand
of God the Father, till the Kingdom is given up, which will be during his
Mediatory Office and Work, which will not be ended till long after his coming
from Heaven to Reign on Earth, not till all his enemies be made his footstool,
for he is now at the right hand of God, and so shall be when he comes in the
Clouds of Heaven, Mat. 26. 64. Mar. 14. 62. and afterward, so shall continue
during his Reign, For he must Reign till he has put all his enemies under his
feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. And is at his Fathers right hand of power in doing
thereof, Psalm. 110. 5, 6.

7. Object It seems to be too low for

Ans. 1. As for Christ I say, 1. That it is

2. If Christ did not think it below him to come in his humiliation, and to
suffer for h^s Church on Earth, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 5. 25. why should we
think it so much to de^ogate from his Glory, to come from Heaven to Reign with
his Church in his Kingdom on Earth, especially when the Earth shall be made a
glorious habitation.

3. It will be so far from derogating from his glory, that it is indeed the top
of the glory designed, as the fruit of his Sufferings and Mediatory Office, it
is true as to personal glory, it cannot be augmented or diminished of what it
is, but as to the great New Covenant Design in the Restoration, as Head of the
Church, and over all (visibly made manifest) so it will be the wonderful
increase of his Government and Glory, which is the glory to be looked for by
the Saints, Tit. 2. 13.

And as for the Deceased Saints to lose their glory in coming from Heaven to
Reign on Earth, I answer, 1. That the Deceased Saints, though in a better
place, and in a better condition then when in the body, yet are not in their
perfect glory, though free from sin and affliction, for the spirit was fitted
to and for he body, and is not in a capacity for the glory of the restored
state without the body; if it were, no need then of the Resurrection, and the
Apostle says in vain, that we are of all men most miserable, if the dead rise
not; by which our hope of a better life would be frustrate; and the Scripture
says, That the Souls of those beheaded or slain for the testimony of Jesus,
cry for vengeance against those that slew them, Rev. 6. 9, 10. which argues
they are not in such a perfection of glory as is supposed.

2. The Scripture says that they shall come from Heaven, without any
supposition of diminishing to their glory, but rather as a part of their glory,
1 These. 4. 14. Those that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

3. It will be the Saints Glory to Reign with their Lord, and those who believe
it, look not on it as such an unglorious Estate, but triumph in it, as their
great glory, That they shall Reign on Earth, Rev. 5. 10.

4. It will no whit derogate from their glory, when they shall have the glory
of Heaven on Earth, the glorious presence of Christ, and of Saints and Angels,
Heaven upon the Earth shall be enjoyed, Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

8. Ob. The Scripture says that the Saints caught up to meet the Lord in the
Air, and so shall ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. Which seems to imply,
that there shall not be such an Earthly Reign as you speak of, but rather a
going away to Heaven with the Lord.

Ans. So doubtless they may and must be the Lord our God will come, and all the
Saints with him, Zech. 14. 15. So that they must be taken up to meet him, that
they may come with him, and that it is not only their Spirits, but their
bodies, raised and united to their spirits that must come with him is evident,
1 These. 4. 14. Those that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him; it is the
body that sleeps and not the spirit, so properly, though it intends the whole
man, body and spirit united, will God bring with him, so that our meeting the
Lord in the air is so far from weakening this truth, that it adds to it, for we
must meet him to come with him.

2. The Scripture tells us plainly of Christ's coming down upon the Earth with
his Saints, Joel 3. 11. Zec. 14. 4, 5. where is not only the truth asserted,
but the place named. And thus much in answer to the Objections.

4. I shall answer some Questions that 4. The questions about it.
may arise about the whole matter, although we may not expect to answer all
questions and doubts about it, by reason of ignorance; for we know but in part,
and in a very little part too, comparatively to the height and depth of
mystery, that is in this new Covenant Restoration, it behooves us to believe
the truth of the matter, though there be many things in it and concerning it,
that we cannot know till we come to know as we are known, till that which is
perfect is come, yet something brokenly I may offer in the matter.

1. Quest. When the beginning of this

Ans. 1. As has been before showed, it is

2. He will come in his Kingdom when he comes from Heaven, 2 Timothy 4. 1. he
will come in his Kingdom with power and great glory, and all his work at and
after his appearing shall be the Kingdom work, conquering ruling and judging
work.

2. Quest. Its said Rev. 20. 4. That the Lived and Reigned with Christ a
thousand years, when may we suppose may be the time of the beginning, and so of
the Period, of the 1000 years? and how may we reconcile that with those
Scriptures that says that he shall Reign for ever? Dan. 7. 14. Luke 1. 33.

Ans. That Rev. 20. 4. seems to import David and Solomon, the one Conquering
and preparing, the other comes in and sets up the peaceable Kingdom, and Reigns
in glory, as if he had been the person to whom the promise was made; and so
indeed he was in the Type, but Jesus Christ was the true Solomon, and King of
Righteousness, and King of Peace that shall Reign for ever. I say probably it
intens some such Kingdom State (of which Solomon's was the Type) which shall
succeed the fall and subjection of the worldly Monarcks and Enemies of Christ,
suitable to the many Prophesies and promises of such a thing, Psa. 110. 5, 6, 7.
Isa. 66. 15, 16. Ezekiel. 38, and 39. chapters, with multitudes of like Scriptures
of the Prophets, and in Rev. 19. is the same work described as a preparatory to
the 1000 years Reign, of which David was a special Type, Psalm. 18. 32. to 46.
now may be its entrance; and probably its period will be at the perfecting of
the Judgment, Death it self in the last Resurrection, being the last enemy that
is to be conquered, and so probably this 1000 years Reign is that which is
intended, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26. For he must Reign till he has put all his
enemies under his feet, etc. which probably will be at the end of the 1000
years, when Death and Hell, and the Sea shall give up their Dead, and so the
last enemy, i. e. Death destroyed; and when this period of time is over, and
this work is done, will be the time of giving up the Kingdom to the Father,
that God may be all in all; and the Son subject, 1 Cor. 15. 24. to 28. not that
the Son was not subject before, or his work was to do his Fathers will, ever
since his Incarnation, but probably it imports an other manner of Government,
after the 1000 years Reign, and the final judgment is over, more immediately by
the Father, the Mediatory Kingdom of the Son being over, and the Restoration
work is finished; not but that Christ is King still and Head of his Body, the
Church, in the perfect state, and in all things he shall have the pre-eminence,
as head of the Church, and Lord over all; and so his Kingdom shall be
everlasting, according to the distinct manners and methods determined; and
probably till this time, (that is, the end of the 1000 years and perfecting the
Judgment and conquest over all enemies, and giving up of the Kingdom to the
Father) may not the Saints be capacitated to the glorious sight of the Father,
it being Christ's work in his times, to show the Father to his members, 1 Timothy
6. 15, 16. for till this time, will not the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ be
finished, nor the immediate Kingdom of the Father take place, nor the Saints be
capacitat^d thereunto.

3. Quest. Whether the New Heavens

Ans. Very likely it may and must take its years, though probably not perfected
till after the 1000 years, and last judgment is over; God having in all his
works proceeded gradually, and not done it upon a sudden; so in the work of
Creation, and so in the work of Redemption, and Restoration, God has been
about it ever since the fall; and may we rationally imagine that he will do any
part of his great work on a sudden, but that he will (as always he has done)
work by degrees, accomplish his work gradually; that it must have its entrance
in the beginning of the 1000. years, seems clear, from the time of the new
Heavens and new Earth, must be fullfilled, some promises, which is not
(probably) proper, when the last judgment is over ( viz.) as outward
Prosperity, Building, Planting, Eating, Drinking, etc. as Isa. 65. 17, to 25.
which things are Relative to the Reign of Christ, and probably may be
accomplished in the 1000. years.

That we may without wrong to the usual way of Gods discovering his will in
Scripture, so understand it, how frequently does God (as is said before) bring
forth that in one sentence (as it were) that gathers in all the time, from the
humiliation of Christ to the glory of his Kingdom, as the new Covenant of his
grace, the promise of his spirit, etc. so that we may safely conclude that the
new Heavens and new Earth shall be perfected in the Restoration work,
according to the time or times determined.

4. Quest. Whether we may suppose that

Ans. It seems very clear from Scripture Isa. 65. 20. Zec. 14. 16. to 19. which
will be the Generation, that after the thousand years is over, Satan being
loosed to tempt them, will compass the Camp of the Saints and the Beloved City*
Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9. Which is like to be the last attempt of Satan and Men,
against the Church, though then they shall do no act to hurt them, but in their
enterprise, Fi^e shall come down from Heaven and shall devour them, and then
will be the final judgment, v. 10. to 15.

5. Quest. May we suppose that men can

Ans. 1. What the Lord has declared in

2. It is no other in substance then has been before, notwithstanding all the
judgments of God on Egypt, yet Pharaoh was hardened to his own destruction;
and notwithstanding the wonderful works of Christ when he came in his
Humiliation, yet the Jews were hardened against him to their own destruction.

3. The Scripture says, that the Devil shall be loosed for a season to deceive
them and so to harden them, and there is no question but that he will be the
same to the end that he has been.

And 4. Their nature not being changed, there will remain the same enmity
against Christ and holiness, on which Satan working, they will be ready for the
same work as other Persecutors has been before them.

6. Quest. May we not account the day of

Ans. The judgment includes the whole Isa. 9. 3, 4, 5. Zep. 3. 8. Rev. 19. 11.
to 21. And he shall judge in righteousness during the thousand years Reign, and
after it perfect the work; So that his Kingdom and Judgment shall be together,
Judgment being one great part of his Kingly work, 2 Timothy 4. 1 Who shall judge
the quick and dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom.

7. Quest. At what time may we suppose

Ans. Very probably at the entrance of

1. Because it is not likely that they should be raised before the Nations are
subdued, and the new Heavens and new Earth prepared.

2. The Scripture says, that it shall be at the sound of the last Trump, which
imports that other Trumps had sounded before, (else it could not properly be
called the last Trump) and probably it may have relation to the seven Trumpets
mentioned in the Revelation, which are all to be sounded at and after Christ's
appearing, in carrying on the work of judgment upon the Nations, and when the
seventh Angel sounded (which is the last Trump) There were great voices in
Heaven saying, the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord
(...) of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11. 15. and
chap. 20. 4. the Resurrection is stated to be at the entrance of the thousand
years, they lived and Reigned with Christ a thousand years. We may groundedly
suppose, that after Christ's appearing in the work, he may* ascend and descend
often, we may not imagine that he should be limited on Earth, and so his coming
at the sound of the last Trump, to establish his peaceable Kingdoms to be the
first Resurrection, and all his appearances and works is included in his second
coming, and probably there may be Death in the time of this Reign, Isaiah 65.
20. And if so, then there must ^e a Resurrection of some of the just as well as
of the unjust, at the end thereof.

8. Quest. May we suppose that this

Ans. I know no ground from Scripture Rev. 11. 11, 12. be before the coming of
Christ from Heaven, then some wonderful work must be accomplished in some part
of the world, called the tenth part of the City, where they Proph^cyed and were
slai^ and must be raised; whether any part of that work will be by the Lord,
time will manifest; or whether it shall be before Christ comes from Heaven, is
to me a great question, that I dare not meddle with, nor undertake to
determine; yet I suppose it not a Corporal Slaughter, by a Massacre, as some
imagine; (to be accomplished three days and an half before our Lord comes from
Heaven) my reason for it is, because I find that Christ will have his Church
visible on Earth when he comes, though it will admit of great mixture, and low
in faith, and probably under great Afflictions, Mat. 25. 1, to 13. Luke 18. 7,
8.

But otherwise, or any further then the raising of the witnesses (which I very
much question whether it will be before Christ's appearing) there is no ground
to expect such a work as has been by some supposed, and what, or when ever it
be, it will be far from Conquering the World to Christ, it must be but the
tenth part of the City, some Nook or Corner where the witnesses have most
eminently Prophesied, called, the Street of the great City, etc.

9. Quest. How are we to understand Isa. 9. 4, 5. and 41. 15, 16. with many
other Scriptures to this purpose?

Ans. We are to understand it to be performed

1. As the Prophets do foretell of such things, and we are bound to believe the
truth thereof, and neither Christ nor his Apostles mentions any thing thereof,
in the new Testament, but directs us to look for the coming of Christ, and to a
patient suffering and waiting for that day, the Apostle speaks of the
Apostasy, but not of deliverance; hence I conclude, that it must be done at
and after his appearing, done it must be, the new Testament allows no place for
it, before Christ comes, therefore it must be done at and after his coming.

2. The Scripture States the time of the Restoration work spoken of by the
Prophets, and the conquering and bringing down of the Churches enemies, to be
at one and the same time, where one is stated the other is stated likewise, and
must be done together; for the fall of the enemies will be the Churches
deliverance, Isa. 3. 3, 4, 5. and 25, 26, 27. Chapters, and 66. 8, to 16. With
multitudes of other Scriptures that I could mention: and its evident that the
Restoration Work shall be at and after Christ's coming from Heaven, Acts 3. 21.
And therefore the bringing down of enemies shall be then.

3. Because (probably) most of the things Prophesied of in the Revelation, from
chap. 4. may and must be done at and after Christ's coming from Heaven, my
reasons for such a supposition are.

1. Because the time of John's receiving of it, is called the Lords day, Rev. 1.
10. and very probably do relate to that saying of Christ, John 21. 22, 23. If I
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee; Which might be this
coming, called the Lords day, so called, because Christ did in Vision discover
all things to John, as it shall be done over when he comes, both in bringing
down of his enemies, and saving his people,

2. Because very probably that the opening of the Seals, Sounding of the
Trumpets, and pouring out of the Vials, may be all at and after Christ's coming
from Heaven, and if so, it must admit of time for the doing thereof, and must
be the time of perfecting the Restoration work spoken of by the Prophets, in
bringing down of the World, and saving of the Church.

My Reasons so to suppose are,

1. Because the opening of the first Seal, chapter 6. 1. 2. seems to be the
first appearing of Christ from Heaven, I saw and behold a white Horse, and he
that sat upon him had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth
Conquering and to Conquer. I cannot apprehend what should be here intended, if
not the coming of Christ from Heaven, and entering upon his Conquerring work;
and so fulfilling the Scriptures of the Prophets, for he shall fulfill
Scripture exactly in his second coming, as he did in his first, Acts 3. 18, 21,
and the opening of the other Seals as follows, to show the manner how he will
conquer.

I know this Riding forth on the White Horse, is understood to intend the
Preaching of the Gospel, and Christ Conquering Souls thereby to himself; but I
see no ground at all for this Conception, and that,

1. Because the highest Conquering Work on this account, was by the Apostles in
the first publication thereof, and that is not it which is here intended, for
chap. 4. 1. That voice that spoke to John said, I will show thee things that
must be hereafter. Therefore it could not intend the first Conquering Work of
the Gospel* and not likely it should intend any time since, that work having
been sinking ever since, and but weak at the best, compared with the Primitive
^ower.

2. Because I do not find any Scripture to Concord with this, that might help
to give us light in such an understanding; that is, the Preaching of the Gospel
is no where held forth in a warlike way, but in a way of meekness to persuade
and win souls to the Lord; I know the Life of a Christian is a spiritual
warfare, and that the Apostle says, The Weapons of our warfare are not Carnal,
but Spiritual, and mighty through God, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. But this in no
case answers the warlike expressions of the Scripture in hand.

3. To understand this of Christ's coming, to Conquer and bring down his
enemies, do fully agree with other Scriptures in the very terms thereof, and
why then we should turn it in such an Allegory, I know not; See the same
expressions in substance, Rev, 19. 11. -- Which I think is understood by all,
to intend the second and Glorious coming of Christ, and work which he will do
at that day, and Psalm 45. 3, 4, 5. to the same purpose, and Psalm 110. 5, 6.
which seems to clear the truth in this Scripture, and gives grounds to judge,
that it is one and the same.

4. Because there are other things mentioned in the opening of the other Seals,
which (probably) must be done at and after Christ's appearing, as at the opening
of the sixth Seal, chap. 6. 12. to the end, and chapter. 7. the Sealing of the
Tribes, which is not yet done, nor probably will be done, till after Christ's
appearing, and chapter 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. at the sound of the fifth Trumpet,
Locust, come forth, and had power as Scorpions; and was commanded to hurt none
of the Sealed ones, but only those men that had not the Seal of God in their
Foreheads; which Sealed ones relates to the sealing mentioned, chapter 7. 3, 4.
to 9. These Locusts came forth after the Tribes was Sealed, and therefore after
Christ comes from Heaven, and so do not intend any thing yet past, relating to
Turk or Pope; for if the Servants of God, be not yet Sealed in their foreheads,
then these Locusts be not yet come forth. And further, there was never yet any
wicked power that did only hurt the wicked, but their work has been to hurt
the servants of God, and chiefly to persecute them, but these shall only hurt
the wicked, but not touch the Sealed Servants of God, therefore some other (and
further) thing is intended, then what has been commonly understood.

4. Because the Pouring out of the seven last Plagues, Rev. 14. 15, 16.
chapters, seems clear, not to be done, till at and after Christ's appearing,
chapter 14. 15, to 20. The Earth is Reaped, for the Harvest was fully ripe,
verse 15. And cast into the VVinepress of the wrath of God, verse 19. 20. which
holds forth the work of Christ when he comes, (as I think all must conclude)
chapter 15. 1. The Angels have the seven last Plagues, for in them is filled up
the wrath of God, that is, the wrath mentioned, chapter 14. 19. it being a
Relative to it, so that Chapter 14. 19, 20. expresses the worlds being reaped,
and cast into the wine press of the wrath of God, chapter 15. 1. -- The pouring
out of the Vials shows the way of treading the Wine press, for in them is
filled up the wrath of God; and is the same, as chapter 6. 1, to 8. and
foretold by the Prophets, Ezekiel 38. 17. -- and Zep. 3. 8. by all which it
seems to me, that the great and wonderful Conquest of enemies spoken of by the
Prophets, is to be accomplished by the Lord, at and after his appearing.

5. It is by the Prophets in plain terms expressed to be done by Christ, as head
Lord and chief in the work, Psalm. 110. 5, 6. The Lord at thy right hand shall
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, he shall judge am^ng the Heathen,
he shall fill the places with the dead bodies, he shall wound the heads over
many Countries, see Isa. 63. 1, to 6. Now if this be so, there must be time for
this work, after Christ's appearing, to the beginning of the thousand years
Reign.

6. If the Fall of Babylon be not till Christ's appearing from Heaven, nor the
gathering of the Jews from their dispersion till then, then this work may and
must be done then, and we have very probable grounds for both.

1. For Babylons Fall, Rev. 16. 17, 18, 19. at the pouring forth of the seventh
Vial, great Babylons Name is in remembrance before God, to give unto her the
Cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath; and chapter. 19, 19. the Beast
and the false Prophet are in their power against him that sat upon the Horse;
That is, the Lord Christ; and I think all sober judgments do understand both of
these Scriptures to relate to the day of the Lord.

2. And as for the Jews being gathered from their dispersion and their
conversion, in as much as it is by some not only questioned but denied. I shall
make that to be the tenth and last question, in which I shall give very
probable grounds both for the thing and time.

10. Quest. Whether there be any grounds from Scripture to expect that the
Tribes of Israel shall be gathered from their dispersion, and savingly turned
to the Lord, and to have their part and lot in the Kingdom of Christ? and if
so, when shall it be?

Ans. That they shall be gathered in, and have their part in this glory, is to
me without all question; my grounds are,

1. From the many Prophesies and Promises thereof in the Old Testament, see
Isa. 11. 10, to 16. Jer. 31. 27. to the end, and 32. 37, to 42. Ezekiel. 36. 26.
to 38. with multitudes of other Scriptures to the same purpose, and all the
promises of this restored estate runs first and chiefly to them, Jer. 23. 5, 6.
and 33. 15, 16. and the believing Gentiles come in by Grace, to be interested
in their promise, Ephesians. 3. 6.

Ob. It is true, the promises run to them, but it is on the new Covenant
account, and so to all believers both Jew and Gentile, for they are by nature
all alike under sin, and the Gospel knows no difference; and as for the
promises to the Tribes of Israel it has been already performed to them in the
Primitive times, many thousand of them believed, and lived under the Government
of Christ their King; and James directs his Epistle to the Twelve Tribes
scattered, etc. By which it appears, that the 12 Tribes believed and owned the
Lord Jesus.

Ans. Its granted that the glory promised to Israel is a new Covenant Grace and
Glory, and that by nature only they shall obtain no more then the Gentiles; yet
it is as true that God designed Gospel Grace to multitudes of Abraham's natural
seed, though not on the account of nature only, or alone, because they are
Abraham's seed by nature, but as in Christ Jesus; in the Covenant of Grace and
Conversion to God in the Covenant, for without the birth from above neither Jew
nor Gentile may expect to inherit the Kingdom, God will do this work for them,
but not by their Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 61. but by his new Covenant of Grace.

2. The beginning work of Grace effected on some of them in the Primitive
times, was not the whole fulfilling of the promises relating to that people in
the Scriptures mentioned, and multitudes of others of like import, that might
be mentioned, not only in the old Testament but in the new, by which its
manifest that God intended that very people, and designed to do them good in
the latter end, Romans 11. 12. 15, 25, 26. where the Apostle says, That
blindness is happened unto them in part, and that but for a time, and then all
Israel shall be saved, ver. 32. I do not understand by all is intended every
individual person, but a great coming in to the Lord shall there be of all the
Tribes, I understand this, with Isa. 6. 13. Zec. 13. 8, 9. Rev. 7. 4. to 8.

And as for the Twelve Tribes mentioned, James. 1. 1. its evident that the ten
Tribes carried away by Salmaneser, 2 Kings 17. never returned. For 1. we read
not of their returns. 2. They came not into their own Land, for that was
possessed till the days of Christ, by those people sent by Salmaneser to possess
it, and they were a people with whom the Jews had no fellowship, nor would
Christ permit his Disciples to go among them. 3. Its a received truth (by
tradition) among the Jews, that they never returned, neither is it certainly
known where they are; and as for James he might well write to the twelve
Tribes, for,

1. We must understand that he writ not to the Tribes in general, but to those
that did, or after might believe and own the Lord Jesus out of all the Tribes,
which (comparatively) were but few.

2. There were some out all the Tribes that did cleave to the house of David,
when the ten Tribes revolted, very many of them did cleave to Judah. 1. Some
dwelt in Judah. 1 Chronicles. 10. 17: 2. Others resorted out of Israel to Judah,
chap. 11. 13. 14. 3. They ^ell to Asa abundantly in his Reformation of
Religion, chap. 15. 8, 9. 4. Abiah took from Jeroboam several Cities, with the
To^ns thereof, chapter 13. 19. by which it appears, that there must needs be
many of all the Tribes in Judah; and in as much as James writes but to some
that were converted out of the Tribes, its no wonder that he mentions the
Tribes in general, seeing that there were some out of all the Tribes remaining,
and some of all converted to the Faith.

But the Scripture presents us with the return of those carried away Captive by
Shahnaneser, that they shall return to, or with Judah in the latter day, and
shall have one King, viz. the Lord Jesus, Jer. 3. ^8. Ezekiel. 37. throughout, so
plainly stated, that might silence all opposition in this matter, and chapter
48. where is the glorious City, with its Borders and Suburbs, and very probably
is the same as is mentioned, Rev. 21. 10. to the end; for the name of the City
must be called, (hence forth) the Lord is there, and there is the portion of
every Tribe expressed; which City was never yet in this world, and therefore is
to come, and so the gathering in of the Tribes is yet to come, Jer. 3. 17, 18,
Isa. 11. 17. and 27, 13. Zec. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. The new Testament confirms the
same, Revel. 7. where the Tribes are Sealed, i. e. the number of the Sealed of
every Tribe, which is a latter day work; by all which it appears with such
evidence from Scripture light, that might silence all gain sayers in this
matter.

2. The time when they shall be gathered in from their dispertion, and so of
their conversion; it seems plain to me that it will be at and after the
appearing of our Lord from Heaven, Isa. 11. throughout, and chapters 25, 26,
27. Zec. 12. 10. -- Isa. 59. 20, 21. Romans 11. 26. which is an explanation of
Isaiah 59. 20. applied to this last and great work, that God will do for those
people, and must be done for them when God does send Christ again from Heaven;
So all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of Sion
the deliverer, and shall turn ungodlyness from Jacob; this is my Covenant with
them, when I shall take away their sin; so Rev. 7. with chap. 14. the Sealing
of the Tribes seems to be at Christ's coming again from Heaven, Luke 21. Christ
first speaks of their dispersion among the Nations, and after a description of
the signs of his second appearing, says, verse 28. When ye see these signs
begin to come to pass, look up, and lift up your heads, for your Redemption
draws nigh. Which is, especially a Relative to the Jews dispersion, and their
Redemption from their dispersed estate, and clearly argues that their
Redemption will be at Christ's appearing; and if so, it clearly argues that
there must be time, probably some years after Christ our Lords appearing, till
he has Conquered the World to himself, and settled his peaceable Kingdom, for
the Jews must inhabit their own Land again in Peace, for some years after their
gathering, before the Conquest of Gog, and the fatal concluding Battle of the
day of God Almighty, and settling his peaceable Kingdom, Ezekiel. 38. 39. chapters,
Revel. 16. 13, 14, 15, 16, and 19. 21. -- Which I understand to intend all one
and the same thing, and why we may not understand the time from the Types (of
these great works) that have gone before, I am not yet informed.

Moses and Joshua made up one full Type, both of the deliverer and of the
deliverance, it being compared to that Typical work, and time of Gods
accomplishing thereof, Mic. 7. 15. According to the days of thy coming out of
the Land of Egypt, will I show unto him mavelous things; from their coming
out of Egypt, till settled in the Land of Canaan, was about 45. years. David and
Solomon likewise, made one full Type both of the deliverer and of the
deliverance, it was from David's entrance to the Kingdom in the Conquering
work, and Solomon's building of the Temple, and settling of his peaceable Reign,
about 45 years; let this be compared (for confirmation) with Dan. 12. 11. 12.
where is 45 days mentioned (probably years) differing in the times there
mentioned; the first time there mentioned (is probably) may be the time of
Christ's coming, to the Redemption of Israel; but the second to which the
blessing is promised to them that wait for it, the perfecting of the work, and
settling of the Kingdom in Peace.

And thus much shall suffice in this matter, I would have none offended at what
I have said could I help it, and to prevent offense, (it may be) I say, that as
to the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, with his Saints, and the coming in of the
Jews to this glory, as first and chief) and the believers of the Gentiles as
children added to them, being interested in the same promises, Isa. 49. 18. to
the end. Ephesians. 3. 6. I do verily believe the truth thereof, and therefore have I
spoken. But as to other things and circumstances about it, I have only given
probable conjectures (as I apprehend) from Scripture grounds, not entering into
Gods unrevealed secrets, but his revealed will, but whether I do rightly
understand it in all things, I dare not affirm, but rather propound it as
probable apprehensions that may have something of truth in them, and it may be
more then the Reader may imagine, especially at first sight; however be sober,
and moderate in judging, the Scripture says, they shall run too and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.

I shall conclude the whole matter with two words of Application, as to the
whole.

1. Of Exhortation, to be preparing for this great day of the Lord, that he may
be found of him in peace, and without blame at that day. 1 These. 3. 12, 13. and
5. 23. 1 John 2. 28. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Wherefore Beloved, seeing ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace without spot and
blameless; be steadfast in the faith* and constant in the obedience of the
Gospel, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as you know that
your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: 1 Cor. 15. 58. the good works of
Saints will be of great use and advantage to them at that day, whether they are
works of Piety or works of Charity, such as do immediately relate to God, his
Worship and Service, or such as relate to men, to body or soul, and such as
ought to be performed in the whole course of the conversation, they may be all
counted works of piety, for they are such as God requires, and they ought to
be done all in obedience to the Lord, And in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the Glory of God the Father through him, and the good of our neighbor,
and God will reward the faithful and sincere works of his people at that day,
Matt. 25. 34, 35. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. its that without which our Faith is
dead, and none of the Faith of the Gospel; so that good works are honorable
unto God, John 15. 8. Herein is my Father honored, that he bare much fruit. 2
These. 1. 11, 12. And its profitable to men. Tit. 3. 8. This is a faithful
saying, and these things I will that ye affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God, be careful to maintain good works, these things are good and
profitable unto men: First they are profitable to those to whom they are done;
good to their bodies, to their souls, to supply their needs, to convince them
of the truth of love, and to engage them to the Lord, good to enlarge their
hearts in thankfulness to the Lord, for his goodness to them, in and by his
servants, 2 Corin. 8. 13.

Good and profitable to the owners thereof, who are faithfully exercised
therein. 1. Its a good evidence to themselves, that the good work of Faith is
indeed wrought in them, 1 John 3. 14. 19. 24. and 5. 2, 3. Good, because it
shall add to their account in the day of account; not as the Meritorious cause,
but its the design of God to crown the works of his people at that day, and
suitable to their works shall their reward be; no works, no reward; little
works, little reward; abounding works shall have an abounding reward; see the
truth of this, Matt. 25. 20, 21, 34, 35, 36. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. Rev. 22. 14.
I say, let Christians be preparing for this blessed day, by their constancy in
the Faith, and Obedience of the Gospel, and patient and joyful suffering for
the Name and S^ke of Christ when called to it.

2. Be much in the expectation and looking for this blessed Hope: O look for,
and love his appearing, which you can never rightly do if unprepared for it;
therefore be ye always ready, that so ye may desire it, it is to them that look
for him, that he will appear a second time without sin to Salvation, Heb. 9.
28. therefore so live before him, and to him, that when ever you think of the
promise of his coming, you may be able to say as John, Rev. 22. 20. Amen, Even
so come Lord Jesus; and then when he is come, you shall be able to say, as
Isaiah 25. 9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save
us, this is the Lord we have waited for him, we will rejoice and be glad in his
Salvation; Then will be say, Well done go^d and faithful Servant, thou have
been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter thou into
the joy of the Lord; And come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the World.

Thus, if Saints were Consious and Faithful, in their sincere, humble, and
universal walk with God, hear according to the Word of his Grace, they might be
able to meditate terror in beholding the Land that seems to be afar off, Isa.
33. 17, 18. They should be able to look Afflictions, Persecutions, Death and
Judgment, in the face, without fear, when others shall be at their wits end,
and shall wish for the Rocks and Mountains to fall on them, and to cover them
from the wrath of the Lamb, When they shall go into the Holes of the Rocks, and
into the Caves of the Earth, into the Clefts of the Rocks, and into the tops of
the ragged Rocks for fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his Majesty, when
he arises to shake terribly the Earth.

Then shall the Redeemed of the Lord return and come to Sion with Songs, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and sighting shall flee
away; Wherefore my Beloved Brethren comfort your selves and one another with
these words. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 4. for 81. 3. read 8. 33, 34. p. 13. l. last f. here, r. hence.
p. 19. l. 2. f. unbelief r. damnation. p. 22. l. 24, 25 f. there r. three and
for three r. there. p. 48. l. 4. f. vine r. Divine. p. 65. l. 5. f.
manifestations r. ministrations. p. 77. l. 20. f. should r. should not. p. 106.
l. 3. f. effectually r. eternally. p. 123. l. 5. f. 2 Cor. 15. 17. r. 2 Cor. 5.
17. p. 125. l. 5. loave out, as implied in it. p. 127. l. 30. f. Isa. 55. r.
Isa. 65. p. 131. l. 27. f. and new state, r. read seeing the state. p. 136. l.
22 f. Sam. r. Jam. p. 137. l. 7. f. satisfying, r. justifying. p. 145. l. 28.
f. nigh r. high. p. 150. l. 28. f. prophaneries r. prophanes, and l. 22. f.
unrighteous r. righteous. p. 154. l. 27. f. firmly r. Timothy p. 159. l. 30. f.
of purging r. and. p. 161. l. 22. f. and r. and our selves. p. 164. l. 6. r.
without works. p. 169. l. 24. f. with r. which. p. 176. l. 7. r. without works.
l. 8. r. with works. p. 210. l. 21. f. act 5. 3. r. 32. and f. 1 Pet. 12. r. 1
Pet. 1. 12. p. 211. l. 30. f. Ps. 89. 34. r. 3. 4. p. 214. l. 28. r. not to
Prophets, but to, etc. p. 221. l. 1. f. show r. assurance. l. 8. f. there r.
theirs. p. 223. l. 32. f. could r. would. p. 259. l. 32. leave out not. p. 268.
l. 16. r. run too far. p. 300. l. 5. f. have r. hate evil p. 303. l. 16. f. yet
r. else. p. 332 l. 5. f. Soul r. Son. p. 334. l. 16. f. shamed r. shuned. p.
342. from Act. 3, 22. to Act. 3, 22. leave out that sentence. p. 346. l. 6. f.
him r. them. p. 381. l. 30. f. held r. yield. p. 390. l. 1. f. foundation r.
new found notion. l3. r. it tending f. in p. 395. l. 2 f. enclosed r. in
Closet. p. 403. l. 9. f. effectual r. eternal. p. 445. l. 11. f. would r. could.

Let the Reader note, that very often 1 Tit. and 2 Tit. is often mistook for 1 Timothy and 2 Timothy and often you for thou, and sometimes we for ye, all which I
have not mentioned in the Errata's.


