THE Last Legacy OF HENRY CARE, Gent. Lately Deceased.

Containing A Brief SUM of CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE, By Way of QUESTION and ANSWER.

Particularly relating to Several of the most IMPORTANT POINTS controverted
between US, and the ROMANISTS.

Decided by express Testimonies of the Holy, Scripture, and evident Reason.

Published for the use of such as are unable to Purchase, or comprehend Larger
and more Elaborate Tracts.

Be ready always to give an account to every man that asks a reason of the
hope that is in you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15. LONDON: Printed for
Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, 1688.

TO THE READER.
IT was the Judgment of the great St. Augustine, That in places endangered with
Heresy, all Men should write that had any Faculty therein, tho it were but the
same things in other Words; That all sorts of People, amongst many Books, might
light upon some suitable to their Capacities, and the Enemy in all places find
one or other to oppose him. Whilst therefore our more Learned Divines, with a
most Praiseworthy diligence, by their Larger and more Acurate Discourses,
defend the Truths of God, that is, the Protestant Religion; These plain Papers
may possibly prove not altogether unuseful to the meaner sort of People, who
are in most danger of being betrayed into Error, and have neither Ability to
purchase, nor Time to read, nor Capacities to apprehend more Sublime and
Scholastical Disputes.

My Aim is no other than to Represent Christianity in its Native, Innocent
Dress, and to strengthen weak Souls, by reminding them of some evident
Scripture-Proofs of that Religion they profess, that so they may not be shaken
from their most Holy Faith, by the Sophistry of a^ insinuating Pretensions. In
order to render (...) thus effectual, I have chiefly made use of the S^cred
Text, tho not altogether omitting the Testimonies of the Ancients; especially
in the Q^^stions touching the Scriptures and Traditi^ where the same seemed
most Requisite, and sh^^ only beg of Thee (Christian Reader!) That layi^ aside
all Prejudices, and the false Bia^ of wor^ly Interest, thou would peruse
these few Li^ seriously, as treating of matters of the highest M^^ment, and
importing no less than thy Eter^^ Welfare; and that thou would be willing to
su^mit thy Soul and Conscience to the clear an^ obvious Sense of Holy
Scripture. And then, the the Brevity I design, allowed not room, partic^larly
to Answer all the little Objections that may be made; yet I am apt to hope thou will (by Gods Grace) find sufficient Cause to hold fast the Reformed Religion,
and not to be altogether u^furnisht of a competent Defense against any m^terial
Attacques.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Old and New Testament is the only Rule to direct us, how we may know and
serve God acceptably. Page 1 The Difference between the Tradition by which we
have received the Holy Scriptures from the times of the Apostles, and the Oral
Traditions obtruded by the Roman Church, which are contrary to the Scripture.
Page 3 An Exposition of that Text, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Hold fast the Traditions you
have been taught either by word or our Epistle. Page 6 The Opinion of the
Ancient Fathers about Tradition. Page 7 Reasons for the use of the Books
commonly called Apocrypha. Page 8 The Authority of the Scripture proved not to
depend on the Authority of the Church. Page 10 People of all Ranks and
Qualities ought to hear and read the Holy Scriptures; and therefore the
Translating it into the Vulgar Tongue absolutely necessary. Page 12, 13 The
Unjustness and Uncharitableness of the Roman Church in denying the benefit of
the Scriptures to the Common People. Page 14 The Plainness and Clearness of the
Holy Scriptures proved, and the Roman Objections answered. Page 15 One only God
to be worshipped in Three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Page 17 The Transgression of Adam, and the Corruptions of M^ Nature thereby.
Page ^ No Sins so small as deserve not the Wrath of God; yet the are great
differences in the degrees of Sin. Page ^ God's Mercy and Justice in sending
his Son Jesus Christ (...) our Redeemer. Page 2^ By what means we are made
Partakers of Christ and (...) Benefits. Page ^ What is meant by the Catholic
Church in the Creed. Page ^ The Church of Rome proved a Particular Church, and
(...) the only Catholic Church. Page ^ St. Peter not Prince of the Apostles,
they had all (...) Power. Page ^ The uncertainty of St. Peter's being ever
Bishop of R^^^ Page ^ Jesus Christ proved to be the only Head of the Church,
(...) Pope not Christ's Vicar on Earth. Page ^ The Church not free from Errors,
therefore not infallib^^ nor can the Romans agree where their pretended
Inf^^bility is lodged. Page ^ What is meant by Faith and Justification. Page ^
The Romish Doctrine of Justification considered. Page ^ Whether in this Life we
can perfectly fulfill the Law of G^^ and whether any Person (our Savior
excepted) did (...) fully keep all the Commandments? Page ^ The Doctrine of the
Roman Church, touching Merits, ^^^sidered. Page ^ It is our Duty with all
diligence to practice and press (...) Holiness, and Righteousness, and the
study of Good W^^ Page ^ The meaning of Works of Supererogation, where it is
pro^^ there cannot be any such Works. Page ^ How we are to understand those
words of the First ^^^mandment, Thou shall have no other Gods be^^ me? Page ^
Prayer is an Act of Religious Worship, and therefore not to be given to Angels,
or Saints departed. Page 48 ^^vocation of Saints branded with Idolatry by the
Council of Laodicea, and contrary to the Opinion of the Fathers. Page 52 ^^ges
in Divine Worship and Religious use, contrary to the Second Commandment. Page
53 (...) Romanists leave out the Second Commandment in several of their
Catechisms, and divide the Tenth into two, to make up the Number. Page 54 (...)
Design of this foul Practice in the Church of Rome. Page 55 ^^d's Glorious and
Incomprehensible Nature cannot be represented by an Image, but in a way of
infinite disparagement to him. Page 57 ^he Romanists do not only worship
Images, but are commanded so to do by some of their Councils. Page 58 ^^at
Prayer is; the using Prayers in an Unknown Tongue is a Profanation of that
Religious Duty. Page 60 ^rayers for the Dead proved unlawful. Page 61 ^he
Doctrine of Purgatory built on the Sand, and invented for secular ends. Page 62
^^dulgences are the Moral to the Fable of Purgatory. Page 64 ^he Doctrine of
Merits considered; the Wise Virgins had Oil little enough for themselves. Page
65 ^^re are but two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, of the New
Testament. Page 66 (...) five other Sacraments of the Roman Church, viz.
Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Orders, and Extreme Unction, not justified by
Scripture. Page 67 ^he Efficacy of Sacraments depend not on the Intention of
the Minister, but upon the Sacrament. Page 68 ^^e Sacraments confer Grace, not
by the Sacramental Action, but by the Power and Operation of the Spirit. Page
69 ^ransubstantiation repugnant to Scripture as well as Sense, and weakens the
Credibility of the Christian Religion. Page 70 The beginning of that Doctrine
founded on the Error of Worship. The Explanation of those words, This is my
Body. The Absurdities of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. The Roman Doctrine
of the Sacrifice of the Mass contra^^ the Scripture. The forbidding the Cup to
the Common People directly opp^^^ to Christ's Institution. The Usurpation and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome ^^ficiently proved.
A Brief Sum of Christian Doctrine, By Way of QUESTION and ANSWER.
Question.

WHO is it that Created you, and placed you in this world?

A. God.

Q. To what End?

A. To know, love and serve him, and by such means as he has appointed, to
attain to everlasting life.

Q. What Rule have you to direct you, how you may know, love, and acceptably
serve God?

A. The Word of God, or Divinely-inspired Scriptures (containing the Old and
New Testament) is the only Rule to direct us, how we may know, and serve him
acceptably, Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, they are they that testify of me. 2 Timothy 3.15. From a
child thou have known the Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus: All Scripture is given by
Inspiration, and is profitable for DOCTRINE, for REPROOF, for CORRECTION, for
INSTRUCTION in Righteousness; That the man of God may be PERFECT, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works.

Q. Is this Rule of it self, sufficient, and perfect?

A. Yes: Psalm. 19.7. The Law of God is perfect, co^^ting the soul. The Apostle,
(you heard but now) aff^^ that the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salva^^ And again, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written (...) time, were
written for our learning, that we through pat^^ and comfort, of the Scriptures,
might have hope. They (...) dictated by the Holy Ghost for that very purpose,
(...) 20.31. These things are written, that you may believe (...) Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, (...) might have life through his
name. And to say the Script^^ inspired by God, are Defective, or not sufficient
for (...) End for which he designed them, is not short of B^phemy; therefore
the Scripture is called, a Testament, (...) chief property of which is to
declare the whole will of (...) Testator; and Canonical, because they are the
Canon, (...) is the Rule, the Square of Religion, Faith, and Pi^^^ Gal. 6.16.

Q. How came you by these Scriptures, which you (...) are your Rule?

A. The Divine Truths were first Delivered (...) Preached by word of mouth; but
Almighty God, in (...) infinite Wisdom and Goodness, seeing it most
advan^^geous for his own Glory, and the good of men, for p^^venting manifold
Inconveniences, and that they might have a standing Law whereunto to resort,
did think (...) to have the same afterward committed to writing, (...) persons
Divinely Inspired; the Old Testament, at di^^ times, as he saw best, for the
Edification of his Church^ and the New Testament, all within few years after
(...) Promulgation of the Gospel by our Savior.

Which Sacred Writings he has continually pres^r^^ by his Signal Providence,
and the Ministry of his Chur^^ and they are brought down to us by an Universal
^^terrupted Tradition, that is, received and delivered o^ and witnessed unto,
as such, by the concurring Testim^^ of all Christian Churches, in all Ages,
from the Apostles times to this day.

Q. If you receive the Scriptures themselves by Traditi^n, why may you not
receive other Traditions likewise, with equal veneration, as part of your Rule?

A. The word Tradition is used in a double sense; sometimes as it signifies the
Delivery of a thing, and sometimes (...) it denotes the thing delivered. That
Universal Tradition whereby we receive the Scriptures, is no part of Doctrine
^elivered, but only the Instrument, or means of conveying that Doctrine, and
therefore tho necessary to bring the Rule to us, is yet no part of our Rule; as
the water of a remote, but excellent Fountain, which quenches my ^hirst, could
not come to me, if there were not a channel to convey it, yet it is the water
alone that refreshes me, not the Channel: Therefore if by Traditions (taking
the word in the latter signification) be understood any matters of Faith or
Practice imposed as necessary to Salvation, not comprehended in the Holy
Scriptures, nor capable of full proof from them, but said to be otherwise
derived from the Apostles by Tradition, (that is, either by word of mouth, or
in the Writings of fallible men) we think our selves not bound to receive the
same. Because,

1. That Universal Tradition which handed down to ^us the Scriptures as the
undoubted Word of God, has ^ikewise always attested the same to be our only
Rule, for the knowledge of God's will, and our Duty: By them the Primitive
Christians tried all Doctrines, by them they proved their Faith, by them they
squared their Lives, by them they confuted Heresy; thus Irenaeus (who
flourisht about the year of our Lord 180) in his Third Book, chap. 46. says,
That to lean on the Scriptures of God (which are the certain and undoubted
Truth) is to build upon a sure ^^d strong Rock; but to quit That, and depend on
any other D^ctrines whatsoever they be, is to build a ruinous house on the
(...), or shattering Gravel, whereof the overthrow is easy. Tertullian (that
lived a little after) agrees herein, calling the ^^tures, The Rule of Faith,
(Tert. cont. Hermog.) St. ^^sostom (Hom. 3. in 2 Cor.) tells us, That they are
a most quisite Rule, and an exact Square, and Balance, to try all t^^ St.
Augustine [De Bon. Viduit. cap. 1.] testifies, The Holy Scripture has fixed
the Rule of our Doctrine, that (...) not presume to be more wise than we ought.
And St. J^^ [in Matthew. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.] owns, That the Holy S^^tures are the
Limits of the Church, out of [or beyond] (...) we may not go: Abundance of like
Testimonies might brought from the most eminent Doctors in the se^ Ages since,
too tedious here to recite.

2ly, Because the Scriptures themselves (which h^ the Word of the God of Truth,
cannot deceive us) testify of their own perfection and sufficiency, as appear^
the Texts quoted in Answer to the former Quest^^ and are so far from
intimating, That there is any (...) suppletory Rule necessary for us to be
acquainted with informing us where we should find, or how we she know it, that
they declare the contrary, requiring (...) to think above what is written, 1
Cor. 4.6. What things ever I command you, observe to do it, Thou shall not add
th^^ nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 12.32. If any man shall add (...) these things
(says St. John, who closed the Sacred Ca^^ God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this (...) Rev. 22.18. Why do you transgress the Commandm^^
God by your Traditions? Matthew. 15.3. In vain do they ship me, teaching for
Doctrine the Commandments of men, (...) We have a more sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto you ^^y to take heed, as to a light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet.
1.^ Walk not in the statutes of your forefathers, neither observ^ judgments,
nor defile your selves with their Idols, I a^^ Lord your God, walk in my
Statutes, and keep my Judg^^ and do them, Ezekiel. 20.18. If ye be dead with
Christ, (...) the Rudiments of the world, why are you subject to Ordi^^ (touch
not, taste not, etc.) after the Commandments and D^^ ^f men, which things
indeed have a show of wisdom, in will^^ ship, and humility, and neglecting the
Body? 2 Coloss. ^^ 20.

3ly, Because as Oral Tradition is in its own nature most ^able to be
falsified, and mistaken; so the advancing of ^h written Traditions against, or
besides the Scriptures, has ^lways actually been of dangerous consequence. To
prevent which, seems a main cause why the Divine Wisdom consigned his Truths to
writing. Was it not Tradition by which the Scribes and Pharisees diminished the
Integrity of (...) Law, and corrupted the meaning thereof? Matthew. 5.18. Was it
not a pretended Apostolical word which first ^roubled the Church of Antioch,
which the Apostles as^embled at Jerusalem, confuted by their Epistle? Acts 15.
and so they had a written Word to strengthen them against that counterfeit
Tradition. How much the Churches were troubled with several Errors pretended to
be received by Tradition from this or that Apostle, or some of their Hearers,
is evident in Ecclesiastical History, some of which Traditions were presently
rejected, others for some time almost generally embraced, but afterward sound
to be Impostures.

4thly, Because those things obtruded by the Church of Rome as Apostolical
Traditions (at least most of them) are not only besides, but contrary to
Scripture; so that if they were true, the Scripture must be not only deficient,
but false, and the Apostles contrary to themselves. Nor were they known,
allowed, or practiced by the Primitive Churches, many of them not heard of for
many Ages after, none of them ever embraced by the Universal Church; so that
they are far from being what they pretend to, Catholic. And therefore, tho the
Fathers at Trent require he on point of Anathema, to receive their Traditions
with ^^^al reverence as we do the Holy Scripture, we dare not do (...) till we
find them confirmed with the same, or equal ^thority: And the rather, because
most of them tend not to the glory of God, or good of Souls; but ^ly to the
honor, or profit of those Persons that adv^^ them; and are too apt to draw
away men's hearts fr^ solid Faith, and Piety, to fix them on external superf^^
Performances, and to put their trust in Creatures, in^^^ of the Adorable
Creator.

Q. Does not the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. say, Hold (...) the Traditions which
you have been taught, either by word, (...) our Epistle?

A. Yes; But if the Gentlemen of the Roman Com^^nion would impartially read the
foregoing Verses, I thi^^ they would have small reason to vouch this Text for
^^stifying their unscriptural Traditions: St. Paul has b^^ there giving a
Prophetical Description of that gr^^ Apostasy, the Man of Sin, and Mystery of
Iniquity, which (...) aftertimes should overrun the Church; (And he do^^ it
in such graphical Characters, and lively Colors, the as one said wittily,
There never appeared any so fit to b^ apprehended and charged, on such an Hue
and Cry, as the Popes of Rome.) To prevent Christians from being se^^ced by
this Deceivableness of unrighteousness, the Apostle admonishes them, To hold
fast the Traditions, that is, the Fundamentals of Christianity, which he had
taught then either by word of mouth, or Epistle; For it appears by the word,
Therefore, in the beginning of this Verse, that the same is an Inference from
the Discourse foregoing, when he had been treating of the grand Doctrines of
the Gospe^ Election, Faith in Jesus, Sanctification by the Spirit, and the
Belief of the Truth, v. 13, and 14. all which are plain^^ taught us in
Scripture. And tho there might be some things which he had not expressly written
to them of a^ particular, as having now no occasion to repeat all (...)
writing, which he had formerly preached unto them; yet it follows not but the
same were written by him, (...) others of the inspired Penmen, before or
after. T^^ strength of the Objection is no more than this, All thin^ necessary
to Salvation are not contained in the First or Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, therefore not in the whole Book of God. Because St. Paul
delivered to them some Doctrines by word of mouth, therefore neither he
elsewhere, nor any other Apostle, recorded them, but they remain to this day
unwritten: which is a ridiculous inconclusive Argument. Besides, how can they
tell what these Traditions were, if nowhere written? or how will they make it
appear, that these Traditions, not written, yet taught by St. Paul to the
Thessalonians, are the same; or any of those Traditions which they would now
obtrude upon the Church?

Q. But do not Ancient Fathers frequently mention and urge Tradition?

A. Yes; But by that word, they understand, First, Oftentimes the Doctrine of
Christianity expressly delivered in Scripture, as St. Cyprian, when he says, If
either it be commanded in the Gospel, or contained in the Epistles, or Acts of
the Apostes, let this holy Tradition certainly be observed. [Cypr. ad Pomp.]

Secondly, Sometimes by unwritten Traditions, they mean no more than such
things which are not in express words found in the Scripture, but yet are
contained therein, and deducible thence by right and just consequence: Thus for
Example; They call the baptizing of Christians Children a Tradition; but yet
still they omit not to prove the same by Scripture. And therefore when Irenaeus
speaks of Traditions, he says they were, (...), all agreeable to the
Scriptures.

Thirdly, By Traditions sometimes they intend only certain indifferent Rites,
Ceremonies or Observances; And thus St. Jerome says, Every Province ahounds in
its own sense, and thinks the Precepts of their Ancestors Apostolical Laws.
[Hier. ad Lucium.]

Fourthly, Some of them sometimes by mistake, mention under the name of
Apostolical Traditions, matters which were not so; As that Infants should
receive the Sacramen^ the Lord's Supper; That Christ should reign on Earth a
th^sand years; the first of which is now wholly rejected (...) Christians; the
other maintained but by very few, (...) that too, not on the account of
Tradition, but ground^ (as they fancy) on some Texts of Scripture.

Fifthly, Sometimes the Fathers having to do with H^ties that excepted against
the Scriptures, or cavill'd (...) them as defective without Tradition; do by
way of A^gument ad hominem, appeal unto, and press them w^^ the universal
Tradition of the Church, not thereby to advance any Doctrines which were not
sufficiently provabl^ by Scriptures, but only to stop the mouths of Gainsayers
by the same medium which themselves so much pretended to.

To one of these five Heads all Testimonies which the Romanists can produce out
of the Fathers are reducible and so make nothing for their Traditions of Faith,
besides or contrary to Scripture: For so far were the Fathers from maintaining
such, that by Scripture they opposed and overthrew them, as St. Hierom teaches
us. -- As for those things (says he) which without the Authority and
Testimonies of Scripture, they (viz. any Heretics) feign and hold of their o^^
accord, as by Apostolical Tradition; the Sword of God (that (...) his Word)
cuts them in pieces; Hier. in Haggaeum, Cap. 1.

And I have the longer insisted hereon, because th^^ Fort of Traditions seems
to be one of the main Posts of Po^pery.

Q. What say you concerning the Books commonly called Apocrypha?

A. The Church (publicly as well as privately) rea^ some parts of them, for
Example of Life, and Instruction of Manners; but it does not acknowledge them to
be D^vinely inspired, so as thereon to establish any Article o^ Faith.

Q. For what Reasons?

A. Because, First, They were not received as Divine ^^ipture by the Jewish
Church (to whom were committed the ^^acles of God, Romans 3.2.) Now if they had
rejected any ^rt of the Canon of the Old Testament, Christ, who so ^ten taxes
them for misinterpreting Scriptures, and pre^^ing their own Traditions, would
no doubt, for this, ^^ch more have reproved them.

Secondly, Because all the Canonical Books of the Old ^estament were written by
Prophets, and in the Tongue ^sed by Prophets, viz. Hebrew, or Chaldee, and do
bear ^itness to Christ, and were accordingly made use of by ^im, and his
Apostles. But such are not these Apocryphal ^^ks; for all agree, That Malachy
was the last of the ^rophets, and that then began the sealing of Prophecy, as
^he Jews call it. Now that some of these Books were ^ritten after his time,
plainly appears by Ecclesiasticus and the Macchabees. And for the other, that
bear the ^ames of Prophets, there is no certainty that they were wrote by those
to whom they are attributed; nor are any of them written in Hebrew, or Chaldee,
(then the Jews vulgar Tongue) but in Greek; nor does our Lord, or his Apostles
(tho in the New Testament they cite above 120 distinct Texts out of the Old)
once cite any of them, or make use of their Testimony as Prophetical: For if
(as so^e suppose) there be in one or two places an allusion to some of their
Expressions, yet will that no more prove them Canonical, unless they had been
referred to as such, than it does the Works of Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides
(three Heathen Poets) that from each of them a Sentence is occasionally
mentioned in Holy Writ; (The first, Acts 17.28. the second, 1 Cor. 15.33. and
the third, Tit. 1.12.)

Thirdly, These Books contain some things false, superstitions, and
contradictory both to the Canonical Scriptures, and themselves; as will appear,
by comparing what is said, in Judith 9.2. with Genesis 34.30. and 49.6. or the
Baruch 1.1. with Jeremy 43.6. or 1 Macc. 6.8. with with the 2 Macc. 1.13. Or
both these last places, (...) the 9th Chapter of the same 2d Book of Macc. v.
28. the Apochryphal Esther, Chapter 11.12. with the Cano^ Esther 2.16. And Chap.
12.5. of the Apocryphal, (...) Chap. 6.3. of the true Esther; so Tobit 5.12.
the A^ makes a Lie; and the 2 Mace. 14.42. commen^ Self-murder; and Chap.
12.45. Sacrifice for the D^ even those that dyed in Idolatry.

Fourthly, Because (for all the aforesaid Reasons, (...) many others) these
Books were not received into the C^ by the Primitive Church, as the Ancient
Fathers pla^^ testify; and therefore they have been always called doubtful
Authority; nor were the same ever imposed any General Council, (for that called
the 3d of Carth^ about the year 400. was only Provincial, nor are all (...)
Canons, particularly the 26th, received by the Roman themselves) until the last
Age in that pretended one^ Trent, 1546 years after our Lords Incarnation, at
whi^^ time there were not in all of those that had Votes, ab^ fifty Persons, or
thereabouts present, and the far great part of them Italians, and all the Popes
Creatures; a v^^ thin Representative of the Universal Church through^ the whole
World.

Q. But does the Authority of Scripture depend on the Testimony of the Church?

A. No; for that were to make the words of the ^^ster to receive their
Authority from the Servant. A F^thers Letters to derive the Credit with his
Son, mee^ from the Post that brings them; and the Rule to ha^ dependence on the
thing Ruled; nor should we by t^^ Medium, be able to prove the Scriptures to be
G^^ Word against an Atheist, or Heathen, with whom (...) Authority of the
Church signifies little; nor indeed sho^^ we ever know that there were any
Church at all, or (...) least, what Authority it has, but by the Scriptures;
which (...) not therefore of Divine Authority, because the Church ^eclares them
so to be, but the Church has declared them ^^ch, because it knew them to be of
such Authority.

Q. Is then the Testimony of the Church of no ^^ice?

A. The Voice or Attestation of the Universal Church ^s a Ministerial
Testimony, which ought reverently to be ^egarded, as that which is profitable
to prepare the heart, and by raising an Historical Faith, makes room for that
which is Divine; whence the Church is called the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. But still the Kings Proclamation receives not its Authority from the
Pillar on which it is affixed, nor the Candle its light from the Candlestick
that supports or holds it forth.

The Churches Testimony is inviting, and may, and ought to be prevalent with
those who as yet know not the Scriptures, and have not received the sincere
Milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. In which Sense, that famous saying of St.
Augustine, is to be understood, I had not known the Scriptures, had not the
Church told me which were the Scriptures. But in those who have tasted the
sweetness of this Celestial Manna, the Testimony of the Scriptures themselves,
and of the Holy Ghost, is most firm and effectual; for as he that tastes Honey
himself, has a more sure knowledge of its sweetness, than he that believes
another, speaking and witnessing of it; so he knows more assuredly the
Scriptures to be God's Word, who has felt its Divine power on his own soul,
than he who only gives credit to the Church attesting the same, as the
Samaritans at first believed the woman when she spoke of Christ, but after they
had heard Christ himself, tell her, Now we believe, not because of thy saying,
for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world, Joh. 4.42.

Q. What Arguments are there, besides the Test^^^ny of the Church, to prove the
Scriptures to come f^^ God?

A. Five things (amongst many others) do especi^^ evince the same, 1st, The
Antiquity of it, far exceed the most Ancient Human Writings, and containing
(...) Discoveries as Man without Divine Inspiration could ^^ver have attained
to. 2ly, Its miraculous Preserv^^ in all Ages, against the Rage of Satan and
mali^^ Endeavors of Tyrants to destroy it. 3ly, Its wonder^^ and supernatural
Effects, in convincing, converting, a^^ comforting the Soul; The word of God is
quick and powe^ful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, a discoverer of (...)
thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12. 4ly, T^^ Marks of Divinity and
Lineaments of heavenly Wisd^^ that plainly appear in it, viz. Its Majesty,
Purity, Pe^^ction, holy and admirable Scope, profound and gloriou^ Revelations,
incomparable Promises, dreadful Threatenings, etc. 5ly, The Seals of Divine
Authority annexed to it, viz. The Spirit of Prophesy, foretelling future
Events, ( when the word of the Prophet shall come to pass, then shall be known,
that the Lord has truly sent him, Jer. 28.9.) And the Power of working famous
and illustrious ^^racles, to confirm the Doctrine therein delivered; W^ know
thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man could (...) the MIRACLES which
thou do, except God be with h^^ Joh. 3.2.

Q. Ought the Scriptures to be read and heard by People of all Ranks and
Conditions?

A. Yes: The Lord frequently commands and commends the Reading of them by, and
to the People, as Isa. 34.16. Seek ye the book of the Lord, and read. Matthew.
22.19. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. Col. 3.1^ Let the word of God dwell
richly in you: To this very e^ they were written; and therefore in the new
Te^^ment, we see some Books directed to a Noble Person, Luke 1. Acts 1. To a
Lady, 2 John v. 1. To young Men, 1 John 2.13. To old Men, v. 14. To all Saints,
or Christians, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. as likewise the General Epistles of James,
Peter, John, and Jude: We and them studied by the Ethiopian Eunuch, Acts 8.32.
Diligently searched into by the Beraeans, who are therefore entitled Noble,
Acts 17.11. Perused by godly Women, as Lois and Eunice, training up Timothy
from his Childhood therein, 2 Timothy 1. and 5. compared with Chapter 3.15. A special
and solemn Charge is given for their being publicly read, -- I charge you by
the Lord, that this Epistle he read unto all the holy Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.
When this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the Church
of the Laodicaeans, Col. 4.16.

Q. Ought not then the Scriptures to be Translated into the Vulgar Tongues, to
the end they may be heard, read, and understood of all?

A. Yes undoubtedly; for since it is the Duty of common Christians thus
diligently to peruse, and hear the Word of God, the same must certainly be in
such a Tongue as they understand, otherwise it would be a Mockery, rather than
to Edification, as is required, 1 Cor. 14.26. Thus when God gave a Law to the
Jews, it was in their own Language; and all the Prophets wrote in a Tongue that
the common People understood. And between two and three hundred Years before
Christ's coming in the Flesh, the Old Testament (as an Harbinger to prepare the
Gentiles for the Reception of the blessed Tidings of the Gospel) was by God's
Providence turned into Greek, and afterward the New Testament written in the
same Language, as being the common Tongue, or at least generally understood
through a great Part of the then known World; and yet, that none might be
destitute of these Waters of Life, soon after the Apostles times, the Holy
Scriptures, especially the Books of the New Testament, were Translated into
several other Languages, by Holy and Learned Men, who were desirous to promote
(...) Gospel in their respective Countries; of which (amo^^ the rest) the Vulgar
Latin Version, so much magnified (...) the Church of Rome, is an instance; for
Latin being the^ the Mother Tongue of the Romans, and understood by t^^ common
People of diverse Countries which they ha^^ conquered; the Bible for their Sakes
was translated ou^ of the Hebrew and Greek, into that Language; and is a not a
strange turn, and highly Unjust and Uncharitable, That what was first done for
the Benefit of common People, to let them into the Knowledge of the Scriptures,
should now be made use of, to debar them of it? That the Latin Version composed
for them that understood o^^ other Language, should be imposed on those that
understand not a word thereof, and no other Translation commonly allowed them?

Q. But are not these Holy Books, tho Translated into such Languages as the
People understand, yet so Obscure, as may Discourage Humble unlearned
Christians from perusing or hearing them read?

A. No, but on the contrary, so plain, as thereby they may reap wonderful
benefit and advantage to their Souls, Thy word is a light unto my feet, and a
lanthorn to my paths, Psalm. 119.105. And again, The entrance of thy word gives
Light, it gives understanding to the Simple. Hence St. Augustine says, [Ser.
55.] It is not sufficient that ye hear the Divine Scriptures in the Church, but
also in your Houses, either read them your selves, or else desire some others
to read them, and give diligent ear thereunto. St. Jerome on Coloss. 3.16.
Well, see here, (says he) that Lay People should have not only a competent, but
abundant knowledge of the Scriptures, so that one may be able to instruct
another. And elsewhere he writes several Epistles to Devout Women, as to Paula,
Eustrochium, Salvina, Demetria, Furia, Celantia, and others, commending them
for their reading and studying the Scriptures. Particularly he advises one
Laeta, how She should bring up her Daughter in learning the Holy Scriptures, to
read (...) the Psalter, then Proverbs, next Ecclesiastes, and Job, ^^d so to go
on to the Gospels; after those the Prophets, ^^ses and other Historical Books;
whereby the Ancient Fathers Judgment appears in this matter; and in fact,
abundance of Christians had Bibles by them, which the Heathen Persecutors would
force them to deliver up, looking upon them then to have as good as renounced
their Religion; and accordingly such as did part with them, were branded by
their Brethren, with the igno^^lous Name of Traditors, Bible-deliverers. And
indeed, the true Reason why the Church of Rome would keep the Scriptures from
the people, is not their Obscurity (whatever they pretend) but because they are
too plain, that is, do evidently condemn several Doctrines and Practices now
current in that Church; for who can seriously read the second Commandment, and
yet worship Images? Who can impartially peruse the Fourteenth Chapter of St.
Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians, and yet think Prayers in an unknown
Tongue justifiable or available? Who will not doubt of Transubstantiation, that
finds the Holy Elements in the Lord's Supper several times called Bread by the
Apostle, after Consecration, as well as before? etc.

Q. But they object, That the common Liberty for all to read the Scriptures,
does breed, or is the occasion of Heresies?

A. The Scripture it self teaches the contrary, That Ignorance thereof is the
cause of Error, Mat. 22.29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. 2ly, It gives
us another account whence Errors and Heresies do arise, as from enticing words,
vain Philosophy, and Fallacies, and Rudiments of this world, Col. 2.4, and 8.
From Counterfeit Apostolical Traditions, Act. 15.24. From pretended Revelations
of the Spirit, a feigned word, and forged writings, 2 These. 2.2. From Satan's
strange delusions in the man of sin, and his followers, and their Lying Signs
and Wonders, seducing people, 2 These. 2.9. Revel. 13.14. 3ly, Christ by the
^tures confuted the Heresy of the Sadduces; and (...) same the Apostles
convinced the Jews, and the Pri^ Fathers the several Heresies of their times;
when^ ^^tullian calls Heretics Lucifugae Scripturarum, such (...) the Light of
the Scriptures: And Chrysostom (in (...) Lazar.) says, The ignorance of the
Scriptures has b^^ ^^resies: And in Hom. 58. on John, the same Father (...)
us, That the Scriptures do lead us unto God, do drive (...) Heretics, and do
not suffer us to ^o out of the way: S^ plain, the Scriptures are so far from
being the occas^^ Heresies, that it is the only weapon wherewith to (...) and
subdue them.

Q. They do not say, That the Scripture of its self, (...) as it may be abused,
or misunderstood, is the occasion (...) Heresies; and therefore the allowing
the promis^^ reading thereof, is dangerous; for does not St. Peter (...)
notice, that there are many things hard to be understood, (...) the ignorant
and unstable wrest to their own destruction?

A. Does it follow, because there are some diff^^ passages in St. Paul's
Epistles, (for of them St. (...) speaks) therefore the whole Bible must be
locked up (...) common use? Or does he not rather write Epistles h^^self to be
read by all? Why should the Scriptures be ^fined, since the fault is in men,
and not in them? wh^ the Devil himself abused Scripture, did not our Savio^
Scripture silence him? Or why do they in this respect (...) the Scriptures
should breed Heresies more in the (...) people than in the Learned, and the
Priests? Since it is e^dent that the first Broachers of the most decry'd Her^^^
were very Learned, as Arius a Presbyter, Macedonius a ^^shop, Pelagius a Monk,
and Eutiches an Abbot of old, and ^^cinus and others of late; insomuch that St.
Jerome says ^man can (or does usually) frame an Heresy, but he the of great
parts; whilst persons of Learning and know (...) by presuming to be wise above
what is written, have (...) (...) ambition, and for Secular Ends embroil the
Church, men (...) meaner Capacities, but of more piety and humility have, (...)
the benefit of the Holy Scriptures, been preserved in the (...) ^^^th. Besides,
by reasoning thus from the abuse, either through ignorance, or wilfulness in
any thing, we ^^uld disallow every thing: we must not eat, because some (...)
Gluttons; nor taste Wine, because too many are daily (...) drunk with it; nor
use the Art of Rhetorie, because some (...) set their Tongues to sale; nor
Logic, because not a few pervert it from the Right End, to Jangling Sophistry;
Lastly, if in pure kindness, to prevent the danger of Souls, the Church of Rome
will not trust them with these Holy Books, why does she provide others for
them, viz. Fabulous Legends, Images and Pictures, (which they call Laymens
Books) in which there is much more danger, as from whence they are likelier far
to learn Superstition and Idolatry, than any thing that will promote true
Faith, and solid Piety?

Q. You have fully satisfied me, as to the Divine Auth^^ity of the Scriptures;
That they are our Rule, and fully sufficient; as also that they ought to be
translated and read ^y all Christians for their Guidance and Comfort;
Therefore, I pray, proceed, and tell me briefly what the Scriptures teach us
concerning God?

A. That he is a Spirit, having his being of himself, infinite, Eternal,
Incomprehensible, and unchangeable in his Being, Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness and Truth, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and Sovereign
Lord of all things.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. There is but one only living true God -- Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the
Lord our God is one Lord. 1 Cor. 8.6. ^^at to us there is but one God, the
Father of whom are all ^^ngs?

Q. Is God one only Person also?

A. No, There are in the Godhead Three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, and these Three (...) one God, the same in substance, equal in
Power (...) Glory. John 5.7. There are THREE that bear record (...) Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and t^^ Three are one. 2 Cor. 13.33. The
Grace of our Lord Jes^^ Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the
H^^^ Ghost be with you all. Matthew. 28.19. Baptize them in (...) name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: not in the na^^^ but in the name, to denote the
Unity of the Trinity.

Q. How did God in the beginning create Man?

A. Good and upright, after his own Image; that is endued with Knowledge,
Righteousness and Holiness, Genesis 1.27. Ephesians. 4.24.

Q. Did Man continue in that good Estate?

A. No; our First Parents being left to the freedom o^ their own Will, did
through, and by the Enticements of Satan, fall from that happy Condition, by
transgressing God's Law, in eating of the forbidden Fruit.

Q. Did all Mankind sin in Adam?

A. Yes; For we being all in his Loins, and the Covenant made with him, not as
a private Person, or only for himself, but for his Posterity too, as their
common Parent; all Mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation, fell
with him into an Estate of Sin and Misery Romans 5.19. By one Man's Disobedience
many were made Si^ners, etc. Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and i^ s^^
did my Mother conceive me.

Q. What were the Consequents of this Transgression?

A. All Mankind forfeited Original Righteousness, and became corrupt in their
whole nature (which is commonly called Original Sin) and prone to Actual
Transgressions in thought, word and deed, and consequently, lost Communion with
God, and are under his Wrath and Curse; an^ so became justly liable to all
Miseries in this life; and no^ only to death of the Body, but also spiritual
Death, an^ the pains of Hell for ever. Genesis 6.5. The whole ima^^^^n of man's
heart is evil, only evil, and that continually. ^^es. 2.3. We were by nature
children of wrath, as well as ^^rs. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death.

Q. Is the corruption of nature it self, and all the mo^ons of it, truly and
properly sin, even in those who are ^egenerated? Or has Lust and Concupiscence
of it self, the nature of sin, though a man does not consent to act and fulfill
it?

A. The motions of the mind to evil are of Three sorts, 1. Such as are rejected
as soon as they arise: 2ly, Such as remain a while, and affect the soul with
some delight: 3ly, Such as both affect the mind with desire, and a man does
resolve to put them into practice. There is no Controversy about the third
sort, but the dispute is touching the first and second only, which indeed are
forbidden in the Tenth Commandment. For motions of the third sort are forbidden
in other Commandments, as appears by our Savior's Exposition in Mat. 5.22, 28.
And motions of the first and second sort are sinful, because they proceed from
evil, and tend to it. Hence the Apostle Paul does more than once call
Concupiscence, or lust, sin; I had not known sin, but by the Law; I had not
known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet, Romans 7.7. With the
mind I serve the Law of God, with the flesh the Law of sin, v. 25. The flesh
lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. And the beloved Apostle tells us, Lust
is not of the Father, 1 John 2.16.

Q. Are there any sins of their own nature Venial, that is, so small, that they
do not deserve the wrath and curse of God, and everlasting death?

A. No; for though there be great differences in the degrees of sin, yet all in
their own nature are mortal; for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and offend
in one point, ^is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. Cursed is every one that does (...)
continue in all things written in the Law, Gal. 3.10. The ^is of sin is death,
and the gift of God eternal life, Romans 6.^ In which last Text, by Death, must
be meant Eternal Death, as appears by its being opposed to Life Everlast^^ The
Ground of this mistake about Sins Venial, seem^ (...) be, that they take the
measures of the nature of sin, from the act which is finite, and not from the
Object thereby offended, which is infinite. For all sin becomes infinite (...)
demerit, because committed against an Infinite God, wh^^ purity will not bear
with the least sin: The offense o^ Lot's Wife in looking back, or the man's in
gathering st^^ on the Sabbath, may seem small, but both proved mortal, That,
for the purging away of which the Blood of Christ is necessary, must in its own
nature be mortal, or deserve Eternal Death; But for the purging away of all and
every sin the Blood of Christ is necessary. For it is the Blo^d ^f Jesus that
cleanses us from all (or every) sin and unrighteousness, 1 John 1.7, 9. Nor is
it of any moment to say, Th^^ Venial sin is that, which although it does weaken
^^e love of God, and our neighbor in the soul, yet does not absolutely destroy
it: For there is not any sin but is repugn^^t to Charity (or the love of God
and our Neighbor); For every sin is a transgression of the Law, but the end
and sum of the Law is Charity, Mat. 22.37, 39. Can any so seem less than the
Concupiscence of the heart, suddenly arising by an object to the sight; and yet
for a man to s^^ woman and lust after her, our Savior pronounces to be
adultery, Mat. 5.28. And Whoremongers and Adulterers (...) excluded the Kingdom
of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9.

Q. Did God leave all mankind to perish in this state of Sin and Misery?

A. No, but of his infinite Love, free Grace and Mercy, has provided means,
both to satisfy his own Justice, and yet reconcile Man to himself by a
Redeemer: God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John
3.16.

Q. Who is our Redeemer?

A. Our only Redeemer and Mediator, is the (...) JESUS Christ, who being the
Eternal Son of God, (...) second Person in the Holy Trinity, did in the fullness
of ^^e, become Man, and so was, and continues to be (...) and Man, in two
distinct Natures inseparably united ^f one Person for ever.

1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God; and one Mediator be^^een God and man, the
man Christ Jesus.

1 John 1.4. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt a^^gst us (and we beheld
his Glory, the Glory as of the only ^^g^tten of the Father) full of grace and
truth.

Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as con^^^ing the flesh Christ
came, who is over all God blessed for ever.

Col. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the God^^ad bodily.

Heb. 7.24. But this man because he continues ever, has (...) ^nchangeable
priesthood.

Q. How did Christ, being the Eternal Son of God, become Man?

A. By assuming to bimself a true Body, and a reasonable Soul, being conceived
by the Power of the Holy Ghost, In the Womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, and
born of her without Sin, -- Behold! thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus, Luke 1.31. and v. 35. The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest over-shadow thee. Heb.
7.25. Such an high priest become us, as is holy, harmless, undefiled, separated
from sinners.

Q. Why was this necessary?

A. Because otherwise the mighty work of Reconcilia^^^n could not be effected,
unless he that was to be the Mediator between God and Man, were conjoined to,
and of the same nature with either party, and consequently both God and Man.

Q. Why must he be God?

A. That he might be able to bear the weight of Divine wrath, and pay a
sufficient Ransom for sin, and be the Head of the Church, and repair his Image
in us, conquering the Enemies of our Salvation, and defend us against ^^m.

Q. And why man?

A. Because the strictness of God's Justice required the the same nature that
sinned, should suffer; He there^^^ took our nature, first, That he might suffer
Death for (...) 2ly, To Sanctify our Nature: 3ly, That we might have access
with greater boldness to the Throne of Grace, H^^ 2.14. Forasmuch then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the
same, that through de^^ he might destroy him that had the power of death, which
is t^^ Devil. Heb. 4.15. We have not an High Priest which ca^^ be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in (...) points tempted as we are, yet
without sin; let us therefore (...) boldly to the Throne of Grace.

Q. What Offices does Christ execute as our Redeemer?

A. Of a Prophet, in revealing to us by his Word and Spirit, the will of God,
for our Salvation: Of a Priest, in once offering up himself a Sacrifice, to
satisfy Divine Justice, and reconcile us to God, and in making continual
Intercession for us to God; and of a King, in vanquishing Death, Sin and Hell,
by his Crucifixion, Resurrection, and Ascension, as also in subduing us to
himself by his Grace, thereby ruling and defending us, and restraining and
conquering all his and our Enemies.

Q. By what means are we made partakers of Christ and all his Benefits?

A. By a lively FAITH in him (begotten by the Word of God read, or Preached)
attended with a sincere OBEDIENCE to the Gospel, both which are increased by
Prayer, and the due Receiving of the SACRAMENTS Instituted by our Blessed
Savior.

Q. Where have you a brief Summary of the Christian Faith?

A. In that Creed commonly called the Apostles, -- I believe in God the Father
Almighty, etc.

Q. What do you mean when in the Creed you say, I believe the Catholic Church?

A. The word Catholic is originally Greek, and signif^^ as much in English as
Whole, or Universal; and so ^^^^lic Church, 1. Properly signifies the whole
Church of God Triumphant and Militant, even as many as ever shall be saved, the
Universal company of the Elect, who are all but one body, knit together in one
Faith, under one H^^d, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.28. For ye are all
one in Christ. Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are
called in one hope. And this is the sense of the word in the Creed, which we
use there to signify, That we believe, that notwithstanding all the endeavors
of Satan, this holy Elect-company shall always remain, and be completed; and
not only that there is such a Church in general, but that we our selves
appertain to it; this Catholic Church is frequently styled in Scripture, The
Body and Spouse of Christ; as also, The Universal Assembly of the firstborn
written in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all,
Gal. 4.26. Of whom therefore that famous saying of St. Cyprian is most properly
to be understood, -- How can he have God for his Father, that has not the
Church for his Mother? At least, that he meant it not of the Church of Rome is
evident, because himself at the same time stood out in opposition to Her, and
wrote against her Bishop (how justly, is nothing to the present purpose) in the
Point of Rebaptizing such as had been Baptized by Heretics, and returned to
the Orthodox Church: Of the Catholic Church in this sense St. Augustine in his
Tract de Catechizandis rudibus, cap. 1. speaks thus, All they that be holy and
sanctified, which are, have been, and shall be, are Citizens of the Heavenly
Jerusalem. And Gregory a Pope (if that will make the proof more Authentic)
Mor. in Job, Lib. 28. cap. 9. All the Elect are embraced in the Bosom of the
Church, and all the Reprobates are without.

2ly, The Epithet Catholic when joined to Church in a less proper sense, is
used to express only the whole Visible or Militant Church; and seems first to
have grown in^^ General use, (though I remember it not in Scripture) (...) the
Primitive times, to denote the Extension of the Church of God, as no longer
confined to the Jews, but the pa^^tion-wall (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
2.14.) being bro^^ down, Universally spread abroad in every Nation (Jew o^
Gentile) where the Gospel was preached and entertained: And thus it comprehends
all the several Churches o^ the face of the Earth, as of Jerusalem, Antioch,
Britain, Rome, etc. and all Christians in those Churches, whether Sincere, or
Hypocrites, that make an outward profession of Faith in Christ; as all the
Boughs of a Tree, however spread and scattered, one from another, and some dead
and withering, whilst others flourish, are united in one common stem, tho not
equally deriving Sap from the Root.

3ly, In this latter restrained signification, as it denoted all the particular
Churches in the world, so when the Donatists about the fourth Century, began to
hold Erroneous opinions, and withal to confine the Church of God to those of
their own Sect, in a corner of Africa; St. Augustine, and others, frequently
urged against them, That the Church was Catholic, (that is, Universal, not
coope up to their narrow Limits) and maintained a sounder Doctrine; whence it
came to pass, that though the more Ancient Fathers never used this term
Catholic, to distinguish the pure Church from the Heretical, but called the
former Orthodox, that is holding the right Doctrine; yet in process of time by
reason that the Orthodox Churches held and maintained the Church of Christ to
be Catholic, or Universal, these two words Catholic and Orthodox, were taken in
one and the same signification; nor was it incongruous; for if Churches did
faithfully keep the Gospel entire, which had been Preached by the Apostles
every where, both such Churches and Doctrines might justly be entitled
Catholic. And in this sense a particular Church, as pure and Orthodox, may be
called A Catholic Church, ^^^ot The Catholic Church; and is more or less
Catholic, ^^^ortionably as it is more or less pure.

Q Does the Title of the Catholic Church in any of these (...) senses belong to
the present Church of Rome?

A. No; not in the first, for then all the faithful under a^ Old Testament, and
vast numbers of Churches and Christians since, and at this day, (far exceeding
for mul^^de her members) that never were, nor are of her Com^^on, (that is,
never owned themselves subject to the Pope ^^ome, as the alone visible Head of
the Church, which (...) them is the Characteristic-mark of being of their
Church, ( Vide Extrav. C. Vnam Sanctam, and Bellarmin. de Eccles. Mil. Lib. 3.
Cap. 2. and 5.) must be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor will they (I think)
pretend, That all and every of their Members are undoubtedly saved; ^o they
offer abundance more, and easier ways for that purpose than Almighty God has
revealed in his Word.

Not in the second; Because the Church of Rome ever ^^s and is a particular
Church; and (when at best) but one member of the Church Catholic, which is so
called, not that it is always every where; but for that no Country is excluded,
nor any place privileged; so that there may be a thousand Churches besides
that of Rome, and no place being privileged, even Rome it self, may be cut off
from the Church. For particular Churches may not only be corrupted, but totally
fail and Apostatize; for tho they may be called Catholic, as long as they hold
the Primitive Faith entire, yet that imports not, That a Catholic (that is in
this sense a^ Orthodox) Church, must always be where once it has been. For in
what a condition now are the once famous seven Churches of Asia? where are the
Churches of ^^^^ge, of Hippo, etc. And therefore Vincentius Lyrinensis ^^stly
makes a difference between a Catholic in place, and (...) ^ime: If (says he)
any new Infection goes on to corrupt, not a part, but the whole Church, then
must we cleave to Antiquity. And again, 'That Chur^^ Catholic which holds that
Religion which has been (...) hitherto embraced.

Neither can the present Church of Rome in the (...) sense be properly styled
Catholic; for thereby is me^^ pure Church, that holds entire the Ancient
Primitive Doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles, without (...)
Corruptions that may endanger, or overthrow the san^ But we can prove, and it is
apparent, That she is deep guilty by altering and diminishing Christ's
Ordinan^^ adding to the Scriptures and Sacraments; Introducing, a^ imposing as
necessary to Salvation, diverse Doctrines (...) practices that have no ground in
Scripture, and we unknown to the Primitive Church. Nay, as for tr^^ Christian
and Apostolical Antiquity (the only Root and essential Character of Catholic
Doctrine) they cannot name any one Article proper to their own Roman Fa^^ that
in this sense is Ancient: And as to those Articles which they have in common
with us, it is sad to consider how they abuse them, and almost subvert the whole
design of the Gospel by the intermixture of their peculiar Roman ones.

Q. We shall have occasion further to consider this afterward in particulars;
But in the mean time are not you wanting in your Enumeration; For the Advocates
of Rome allege, That tho they do not reckon her to be the Catholic Church
collectively, or extensively; yet she (...) so virtually and eminently; because
she has Power over, and the Government of all other Christian Churches?

A. Tho this notion of calling a particular Church, Catholic, from a supposed
power of Empire over all other Churches, be very odd, and altogether unknown to
Antiquity; yet the greater difficulty is in the thing it self How it can be
made appear, That the Roman Church has any such lawful power: For 1st. There is
not the le^^ ground or color for it in Holy Scripture; And how could the
Apostle say, That he had revealed the whole co^^^^ (...) God, if so important a
point, so absolutely necessary (as they pretend) for preventing Schisms,
crushing Er^^s, and preserving Unity and Truth, were concealed and left in the
dark? But so far silent are the Scriptures herein, That the whole New
Testament, where there is mention of so many other Churches by name, contains
not any such words as The Church of Rome: For tho we are satisfied there was a
Church there, (and very famous too, for its vigor of Faith and Piety) yet this
omission of calling it so in Divine Writ, may seem designed, as a (...) to its
future Usurpations. But 2ly, As the Church or Bishops of Rome for several
hundreds of years never claimed, or exerted this power, (for as for their
swarms of pretended Decretal Epistles, they have long since by all wise men
been exploded as spurious) so it was unknown to, unheard of amongst the
Primitive Churches and Fathers; As for instance, St. Cyprian and St. Augustine,
who are all for keeping close to the Catholic Church, yet zealous at the same
time against submitting themselves, or their Churches, to the pleasure of that
of Rome. How insolent were most of the Fathers toward the Bishops of Rome of
their times, if they believed them their Monarchs, to treat them commonly in so
familiar a style as that of their Brethren and Fellow Servants, and no more?
When did St. Chrysostom, or St. Basil swear Canonical Obedience to his
Holiness? How much Money did they send to Rome, when they obtained from thence
their Episcopal Pall? Nay, Did not Pope Gregory himself, 600 years after
Christ, express his abhorrence of the Title of Universal Bishop, as a mark of
Antichrist? 3ly, We have the Testimony of another that was afterward Pope
himself -- That before the Nicene-Council, other Christian Churches little
regarded the Roman Church; [Aen. Syl. Epist. I. 1. Epis. 288.] And all the
World may know both how shamefully two Canons forged on that Nicene Council, by
the Bishops of Rome, to color their designed Usurpation in the matters of
Appeal, were detected (...) Council of Carthage, about the year 418. And how
^ous, a Traitor, Rebel, and Murderer of his Sove^^ first bestowed on them the
Title of Universal Bishops about the year 604.

Q. But they say, this Catholic Power is derived to (...) by lawful Succession
from St. Peter, who had it given (...) by Christ; and that he being Bishop of
Rome, beque^^ it to their Popes, his Successors in that Chair. Th^fore I
demand, first, Whether St. Peter were Prince of Apostles, That is, had a
Sovereign Power over them, (...) consequently over all the Churches by them any
w^^ planted?

A. Not at all: For the Apostles had all equal Po^^ and Authority -- Jesus said
(speaking to the Apos^^ themselves) the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dom^^
but it shall not be so amongst you, Matt. 8.25. The rest (...) the Apostles
sent as well Peter, as John, on a Messa^^ Acts 8.14. How improper had that
been, if he h^^ been their Sovereign? I was not (says St. Paul, 2 (...) 11.5.)
a whit inferior to the very chiefest of the Apostles, (...) And again, When
Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood (...) to the face, because he was to be
blamed: Nay St. Peter himself, in his Epistles, as he qualifies himself only
with the title of an Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. and chap. 5.1. of an Eld^^ and Witness
of the Sufferings of Christ; so in the thi^^ verse of that Chapter, he
disclaims in himself, as well as forbids in others, the Lording over God's
Heritage; -- (...).

Q. What say you to that Text, Matthew. 16.18. Thou (...) Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church; I give (...) to thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven: And that repeate^ endearing Expression, Feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep;
Joh^ 21.15, 16, 17. Was not the Government of the Vniversa Church hereby
particularly committed to Peter?

A. In no wise any more to him, than to the other Apostles. For as to the first
Text, The Rock was not the ^^son of Peter, but that good Confession he had made
in the ^^se foregoing; Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God: And the same
Power is committed to all the rest of the Apostles, John 20.23. and Matthew.
18.18. Then Jesus said (...) Them, Whose sins ye remit, etc. And as to the
second seat, The Ancient Fathers, and all sound Interpreters understand it to
be rather a restitution of Peter to his Office ^f an Apostle, which he might
seem to have forfeited by his Fall, than a Communication of any new Sovereign
Power; for he having thrice denied his Master, the Question, Whether he loved
him? was thrice proposed; and that Commandment of feeding Christ's Lambs and
Sheep, as often repeated, both to authorize and quicken him in that duty which
was equally common to the rest of the Apostles; (...) we read, Ye (that is the
Church of God) are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. The
City had twelve Foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles, Rev.
21.14.

Q. Was St. Peter Bishop of Rome?

A. St. Peter was an Apostle, and Apostles were not properly Bishops in a
strict sense, because not deputed to any certain Place, but had the whole World
for their Diocese; for so runs their Commission, Go you into all the World,
preach the Gospel to every Creature; Mark 16.15. Peter in a peculiar manner
chiefly bestowed his Labors amongst the Jews, and this too by a special
Agreement between him and Paul, Gal. 2.9. and therefore was called the Apostle
of the Circumcision: And so far are the Scriptures from intimating that he was
Bishop of Rome, or ever there, that the contrary may thence very probably be
concluded. And for the Ancient Writers that speak of Peter's being at Rome, and
suffering there, they agree not together in the Circumstances of the Story,
some are Counterfeit, some Fabulous, none that lived in that, or the next Age,
but (...) uncertain.

Q. Who is the Head of the Universal Church?

A. The Scriptures say expressly that Christ is the (...) of the Church, Col.
1.18. God has given Christ to be (...) ever all things, to his Church, which
is his Body, Ephesians. 1. As the Husband is the Head of the Wife, so Christ is the
(...) of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. and many other places. T^^ also appears from
the properties of the Head, as to (...) highest, to prescribe Laws, Jam. 4.12.
To conve^^ power of Life and Motion into all the Members, Ephe^ ^ 15, 16. and
lastly, to be the Savior of the Body, -- Ep^ 5.23. all which solely appertain
to Christ.

Q. But is not the Pope Christ's Vicar, or Supreme ^ble Head of the Universal
Church on Earth?

A. Not at all; Christ never appointed any Vicar, b^ the Holy Ghost, nor had
any need so to do; for ever Vicar is to supply the absence of him, whose Vicar
he is but Christ is always present with his Church, by h^ Word, Spirit and
Power; Peter himself had no such S^pream Headship conferred upon him above the
rest of the Apostles, as was proved before; nor was he ever Bishop of Rome,
properly so called; nor can they prove he died a Rome; or if he did, that his
pretended Supreme Headship was successive; or that the Pope is his Successor in
Life and Doctrine, or has any special Authority derived from him.

Therefore upon the whole matter we may conclude, See Dr. Brevint 's Saul and
Samuel at Endor, p. 30.
That the present Church of Rome is not the True, nor a truly Catholic Church.
Not the Catholic Church; for this she cannot pretend to, but upon the account
of an Universal Headship or Jurisdiction over all Christian Churches; which
being groundless, wherever by her wiles and outward force it does prevail,
it is a^ Encroachment; and where it does not, a Fable. Nor is she truly
Catholic; either by her own proper Doctrines, La^^ and Worship, which are all
New, Local and Vn-apostolical or by those Common Principles of Christianity
that she (...) ^ins with us, and all other Christians, since she detains them
in unrighteousness; not entire, but mangled, opposed, ^verwhelmed, oppressed,
and groaning under many heavy, massy Burdens of Superstitions and Abuses. It Is
true, If we take this mixed and confused Body (more Heterogeneously compounded,
than Daniel's Image, I mean the Roman Church) at the best side, as it holds yet
the Fundamental Grounds of Christianity which we profess, thus far we grant it
is a true Church. But if we take it at the worst, as to its proper Roman
Doctrines, wherein it differs from us, no more than from all true Catholic and
Apostolical Antiquity; then, if at all it may be said to be truly a Church, yet
a most corrupted and infected one; And if we come to join these two
incompatible parts together, in order to an absolute estimate and denomination
of the whole, I scarce know what Title it may deserve. The Samaritans, who both
feared the Lord, and worshipped their Graven Images, 2 Kings 17.41. were
without doubt Idolaters; and God threatens to cut off them that swear by the
Lord and Malcham, Zeph. 1.5. What sincere Israelite would venture his Soul on
the Religion of Dan and Bethel, tho they retained, and still professed to
reverence Moses's Law? Nor is it to any purpose, That they call themselves, or
are often called Catholics by others; for men may give themselves what Titles
they are best pleased with, and yet have no right to them; And if Protestants
now and then call them so, it is either out of ignorance (for many are not
acquainted with the true signification of the word) or a civil Complement, in
compliance with their own Custom, as sometimes we call Turks, Musulmans, (which
signifies true Believers) because we hear them generally, tho most falsely, call
themselves so.

Q. Is the Church Infallible, or free from Error?

A. No; For although the Catholic Church does not err in the Fundamentals of
Faith, so as to cease to be, in which sense Christ has promised (if that
Promise relate to the Church in general, and not only to the Apostles, as (...)
think) To be with her to the end of the World; And tha^ Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against her; yet she is not (...) exempt from Error, seeing there is no
Member of (...) perfect in this Life.

But as for any particular Church (as that of Eph^^ Thyatira, Rome, or the
like) she may both err, and bec^^^ an Harlot, that is, utterly cease to be a
true Church (...) Christ.

The Romanists that boast of Infallibility, know not wh^^ it is lodged; some, as
the Jesuits, say, in the Person of t^^ Pope, whom they call the Church virtual;
The French C^^gy, and others of their Doctors, in a General Council (wh^^ they
term the Representative Church) others in a Gen^^ Council and the Pope,
agreeing with, and confirming the same. But the Texts and Reasons alleged for
the t^^ first Opinions mutually overthrow each other; (For (...) the Assertors
of the Infallibility of Councils deny Infallibility to the Pope, further than
he adheres to such Council; so the Abettors of Papal Infallibility allow to
Councils (...) Infallibility, but what they have in dependence upon, and
influence from the Pope;) and how the clubbing of two such Fallibles should
make one Infallibility, is hard to conceive; besides, such Combination affords
no relief, b^ during the Council's sitting; for as soon as it is broken up,
their Writings must endure the same fate with wh^^ they would have those of the
Apostles subject to, viz. of being unable to judge or decide Controversies; for
on that sco^^ all Romanists most vehemently plead for a necessity of a living,
visible, Infallible Judge, that can hear both Parties and determine all
emergent Differences. Lastly, therefore, Some attribute Infallibility to the
Church diffus^^ viz. That Councils are then only infallible, and the^ Decrees
unquestionable, when they are received by, and have the tacit Consent and
Approbation of the wh^^^ Church; that is, they are not infallible till every
body thinks them so.

The Patrons of all these four Opinions in the Church ^f Ro^e militate fiercely
against each other, and yet are (...) owned to be good Catholics, and Members
of that Church which professes she alone has got an infallible way of
determining all Doubts and Controversies: It seems they are certain they have
got Infallibility somewhere in their Church; but as they know not where to find
it, so ^^^ther is she so good-natured as to inform them, and ^ut an end to
their Debates at home, tho yet they make a ^ighty noise with the Word abroad,
to inveigle others to their Party.

Q. You mentioned Faith before in general; be pleased ^^^refore to tell me what
you understand thereby?

A. Faith is a firm Assent to the truth of the whole Word of God, and therein
especially such a fiducial Re^^ption of, and Reliance on the Promises of
Reconciliation, ^^ely given through, and for the sake of Christ our Mediator,
as causes the Soul to embrace the same, and build its Eternal Happiness
thereon; Or [in the words of our Church, in the Homily of Faith] 'A true trust
and confidence of the Mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a
steadfast Hope of all good things to be received at God's hand; an earnest Trust
and Confidence in God, that he does regard us for his only Son's sake;
distinguished in kind from Historical Faith, or the Faith of mere Assent, which
is in the Devils, and the Damned; -- God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should (...) perish, but
have everlasting life, John 3.16. Believe on (...) Lord Jesus, and thou shall
be saved, Acts 16.31. By (...) all that believe are justified from all things
from which you ^^^ld not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. The
D^^ils believe, and tremble, Jam. 2.19.

Q. What then is Justification?

A. Justification is that sentence of God, whereby of (...) own Grace, for the
Righteousness of his Son, by him imputed unto us, and through Faith, app^hended
by us, B. Usher 's B. Divinity, fo. 193.
he does free us from Sin (...) Death, and accept us as righteous unto (...)
Or, [in the words of the Twelfth Article (...) the Church of England] We are
accounted Righteo^^ before God only for the Merit of our Lord and Savio^^ Jesus
Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works (...) Deservings; wherefore that we
are justified by Fa^^^ only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full (...)
Comfort; -- Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing (...) the charge of God's Elect?
It is God that justifies; Who is (...) that condemns? it is Christ that
died. 1 Cor. 1.30. B^^ of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. Romans 4.3.
Abraham believed God, and it was accounted (...) to him for Righteousness: And
verse. 6, 7. Even as David a^^^ describes the Blessedness of the Man unto whom
God will i^pute Righteousness; Saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquit^^^ are
forgiven, and whose Sins are covered; Blessed is the man (...) whom the Lord
will not impute sin. Gal. 2.16. A man is (...) justified by the Works of the
Law, but by the Faith of Jes^^ Christ. Romans 4.4, 5. For to him that works is
the Re^^^^ not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that wor^^^ not, but
believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Fa^^ is accounted for
Righteousness; as Phil. 3.8. I account (...) things Dung, that I may gain
Christ, and may be found in h^^ not having my own Righteousness, which is by
the Law, (...) that which is by the Faith of Christ, that is the Righteousness
of God by Faith.

From these and other the like Scriptures, we gather, That we are justified,
that is to say, have our Sins forgiven, and are able to appear with assurance
before the Tribunal of God's Infinite Justice, solely for, and through the
Merits and Satisfaction of Christ applied by Faith; (...) which sense we say
Faith only justifies: For tho true Faith is never alone, but always works by
love; Gal. 5.6. y^^ (...) distinguish Justification from Sanctification (or the
re^^^al of our Nature by the production of Habits of ^^ghteousness) looking
upon the latter as a necessary Effect, but not as the Cause of our
Justification; (according to St. Augustine's Rule -- Bona opera non praecedunt^
J^^^^andum, sed sequuntur Justificatum, Good Works go not ^^fore, but follow
Justification;) for the same being only begun in this Life, and imperfect, how
can it justify us in the sight of God? Therefore tho both Justification and
Sanctification go together, yet they are differently to be considered, as Heat
and Light in fire are always conjoined; and (...) we cannot say, that the Light
burns the Wood, but only the Heat: Thus the Righteousness whereby we are
justified, is inherent in Christ for us, this of Sanctification (...) us, from
him; the one follows from the Merit, the other ^^om the Efficacy, of the Life
and Death of Christ; in the one Faith is only as an hand receiving, in the
other as a Co-working Virtue; the one is in all Believers at all times, the
other wrought differently, and by degrees: and tho the End of both be Eternal
Life, yet the one is inter Causas Regnandi, a Cause of Reigning, the other only
as via ad Regnum, the way to the Kingdom.

Q. Does the word Justify in Scripture signify to infuse, (...) put
Righteousness into a man?

A. We find not one Text (at least where the Doctrine of Justification is
professedly treated of) that can allow of such a sense, as making Righteousness
by actual or habitual Righteousness inherent in us, but it generally imports,
to absolve, or pronounce a man righteous by ^^quitting or discharging from some
Guilt, or Accusation; As Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the Wicked, and he that
^^^demneth the Just, are an abomination to the Lord; It is a Judicial Sentence
opposed to Condemnation, Romans 8.34. Now as to condemn is not the putting any
evil into the Nature of the Party condemned, but the pronouncing of him Guilty,
and binding him to Punishment; so justifying is the Judges Declaration that the
Law is sat^ and the Person quitted from Guilt and Punishment.

Q. What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, tou^ing Justification?

A. Its certain Doctrine in this matter is not very ea^ found or apprehended.
For first, Their old Schoolmen to^ us of Merit of Congruity, whereby a man
disposed himself for the reception of Grace; of Gratia gratum facient, a
quality or habit of Charity, whereby a man is rendered a^ceptable to God; and of
Merit of Condignity, whereby the Regenerate by their Works deserve Eternal Life.

Secondly, Their Council of Trent refraining from those School-terms, handle
the matter cautiously, and mo^e in Scripture-expressions, but it is justly
suspected still mean^ the same. For first, Tho they acknowledge [ Sess. 6. Ca.
2.] That Christ is proposed by God the Propitiator for our Sins by Faith in his
Blood: And Ca. 4. That 'Justification is a transferring from that state in
which a man is born the Son of the First Adam (in which, Ca. 1. they confess,
we are unclean, the Sons of Wrath, Servants of Sin, and under the Power of the
Devil and Death, from which the Gentiles by no strength of Nature, nor the Jews
by the Letter of the Law could raise or deliver themselves) into a state of
Grace and Adoption, to be the Sons of God by the Second Adams; yet Ca. 5. They
speak of Man's cooperating with God's Call, or preventing Grace; of converting
himself, and being disposed to his ow^ Justification.

This manner of preparation for Justification (say they, cap. 6.) is whilst
excited and helped by Divine Grace, receiving Faith by hearing, they are freely
moved toward God, believing those things to be true which are revealed and
promised, and especially that God does justify the ungodly by his Grace
through the Redemption which is in Christ; and whilst understanding themselves
to be sinners by the fear of the Divine Justice (with which they are profitably
smitten) by converting themselves to consider Gods mercy, they are raised unto
Hope, confiding that God for Christ will be propitious to them, and so begin to
love him as the Fountain of all Righteousness; and for that cause are moved
against sins by a certain Hatred and Detestation, that is, by that Repentance
which ought to precede Baptism. And lastly, whilst they purpose to receive
Baptism, to begin a new Life, and keep the Divine Commands.

Then in the 7th Chap. they proceed to acquaint us, That after this Disposition
or Preparation, Justification it self follows, which is not only the remission
of sins, but also Sanctification, and the renewal of the inward man by a
voluntary susception of Grace, and those Gifts, whence a man of unjust is made
just, and of an Enemy a Friend, that he may be an Heir according to Hope of
Life Eternal. The causes of which Justification (say they) are these, viz. The
Final, the Glory of God and Christ, and Eternal Life: The Efficient, the mercy
of God, who freely washes and sanctifies, signing and anointing by the Holy
Spirit of Promise, who is the Pledge of our Inheritance. The Meritorious cause,
his most beloved only Son our Lord, who whilst we were Enemies, for that
abundant charity wherewith he loved us, by his most holy Passion on the Cross,
Merited for us Justification, and satisfied God the Father for us. The
Instrumental, cause the Sacrament of Baptism, which is the Sacrament of Faith,
without which never any was justified. Lastly, the only Formal cause, is the
Righteousness of God, not that whereby he himself is righteous, but by which he
makes us righteous, to wit, by which given by him we are renewed in the Spirit
of our mind, and not only reputed, but are truly righteous, receiving
righteousness in our selves, every one according to his measure, which the Holy
Ghost imparts to each person according to every man's proper Disposition and
cooperation.

Cap. 8. Whereas the Apostle says, that ^a man (...) justified by Faith only,
and that Gratis: These words a^^ to be understood, That therefore we are said
to be ^stified by Faith, because Faith is the beginning, Foundation, and root
of all Justification; and Gratis, because none of those things that precede
Justification, either Faith or Works, do deserve the Grace of Justification.
Cap. 10. Being thus justified, and made the Friends and Household of God, going
on from virtue to virtue, they are renewed (as the Apostle says) day by day;
that is, by mortifying the members of their flesh, and by exhibiting those Arms
of Righteousness unto Sanctification, by the observance of the Commands of God
and the Church, and Faith cooperating with good Works, they grow in that
Righteousness received by the Grace of Christ, and are further justified, or
made more righteous.

Cap. 14. That those who by sin are fallen from the received Grace of
Justification, may again be justified, when God exciting by the Sacrament of
Penance, by the Merit of Christ, they shall have procured a recovery of that
lost Grace.

Then they proceed to CANONS, amongst which are these, Can. 9. If any one shall
say, That a man is justified only by Faith, understanding nothing else to be
required, that cooperates to the obtaining the Grace of Justification, and that
in no behalf it is necessary for him to be prepared and disposed by the motion
of his will, let him be Anathema, (that is Accursed).

Can. 11. If any one shall say, That men are justified either by the alone
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, or by the alone Remission of his
sins, the Grace and Charity excluded which in their hearts is diffused by the
Holy Ghost, and adheres in them; or that the Grace whereby we are justified, is
only the favor of God, let him be Anathema.

Can. 12. If any one shall say, That justifying Faith is nothing else but a
trusty reliance on the Divine mercy, pardoning our sins for the sake of Christ,
or that such ^ust or confidence is that alone by which we are justi^ed, let him
be Anathema.

Can. 24. If any one shall say, That Justification received is not conserved,
and also increased before God by good works, but that the works themselves are
only Fruits and Signs of Justification obtained, but not a cause of augmenting
the same, let him be Anathema.

Lastly, Can. 33. If any shall say, That this Catholic Doctrine of
Justification, expressed by the Holy Synod, in this present Decree, does in any
respect Derogate from the Glory of God, and Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and not rather illustrate the Truth of our Faith, and the Glory of God and
Christ Jesus, let him be Accursed.

I have thus at large set forth the Doctrine of the Church of Rome touching
Justification, declared by the Council of Trent in their own words: 1. That I
might not seem to wrong them: 2ly, That our unlearned people might understand
what is by that Church Established. For though this pretended Council were
several Months in Forging, Hammering, and Filing this Decree, and have worded
it very subtly, so as to make it most taking and plausible; yet the discreet
Christian will see through all those Artifices, and be better armed against
those of their late Writers, that would yet further palliate their Doctrine
herein, even beyond what the very words of this Council will allow.

To make a Formal Answer to all these Particulars, and winnow the chaff from
the Wheat, would be too tedious, and unnecessary, as well because it has
already been done by several Protestant Divines; as for that, it is evident they
ascribe Justification, if not wholly, yet at least in part to Inherent
Righteousness, or our own works performed by Grace bestowed (thereby to leave
room for Merits, Purgatory, Indulgences, etc.) which needs only (...) compared
with the Scripture before cited. To whi^^ might be added diverse Testimonies of
the Ancient Fathers; as St. Ambrose, who on the third of the Rom^ says, Non
justificari hominem apud Deum nisi per fidem: M^ is not justified with God but
by Faith. And again, They (...) freely justified by his Grace, they were
justified freely for wor^ing nothing, neither making any recompense; they were
justified only through Faith by the Gift of God. And St. Basil, wor^thily named
the Great, [in his Homily (...) or, of Humility.] (...), etc. Perfect and so^^
rejoicing in God, is this, when a man does not boast of his (...)
Righteousness, but knows that he wants himself true Righteousness, and that
he is justified, (...)] by only Faith (...) Christ, and therefore Paul does
glory in the contempt of his (...) Righ^eousness. So St. Chrysostom in his
third Homily on Titus, If thou believe, why do thou bring in other things
to Faith, a^ if Faith only were not sufficient to justify. Nor can this
Doctrine, That we are (partly at least) Justified by Inher^^^ Righteousness, be
excused, because those that maintain it, confess they are beholden to God for
such their Righteousness; for even the Pharisee, Luke 18. who trusted in his
own Righteousness, yet ascribed it to the Grace of God; (...) thank thee (says
he) that I am not like other men: He boasted not before men, but gave thanks to
God, acknowledging his Righteousness to be God's gift, and yet Christ delivers
this Parable against him, and such as he was who trust in their own works, that
they are Righteous by Justice inherent, although they acknowledge they have it by
the Grace and gift of God.

Q. I am satisfied in this Point; yet for further illustration, be pleased to
tell me, whether in this life we c^^ perfectly fulfill the Law of God, that is,
whether any person (our Blessed Savior only excepted) did ever fully keep all
the Commandments?

A. Not I, but the Scriptures shall answer you. There (...) just man upon
Earth, that does good and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. If we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, 1 John 1.8. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. Tho
^^^th is, we are so far from keeping the Law, that even in the best of our
works we are deficient, as the Church and St. Paul confesses, Isa. 64.6. Romans
7.6. and 21. But this Inability is not from the nature of the Law originally,
but from the voluntary corruption of man, and so we are to understand the
Ancient Fathers, when they say, That God does not command things impossible;
for elsewhere they (...), That the highest perfection of a Christian is to see
his (...) imperfection. For the Grace of God never raises man in this life to
a perfect exact unsinning obedience, but in obedience sincere, all the
perfection here attainable, being when the Will habitually entertains nothing
that is contrary to the will of God.

Q. What is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome touching Merits?

A. Some of their late Writers say, That Merits according to their sense of the
word, signifies no more than a^^^ns done by the assistance of Gods Grace, to
which it both pleased his Goodness to promise a reward; not that this Merit or
Rewardableness arises from the value even of our best act^^^; and that when
they have done all those things that are commanded, they are unprofitable
servants. Now if this be truly all their Doctrine in this Point, we are
heartily ready to agree with them therein; but we think there is somewhat more
implied or understood by those Canons of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Can.
26. If any one shall say, That the Just for the good works which they shall
have done in God, ought not to expect and hope for eternal Retribution from
God, through his mercy, and the merit of Jesus Christ, if by well-doing, and
keeping the Divine Commands, they shall persevere to the end, let him be
Accursed.

And Can. 32. If any one shall say, That the (...) works of a justified person
are so the gift of God, (...) they are not also the good merits of such person;
(...) that he by those good works which are done by (...) through the Grace of
God, and Merit of Christ (...) whom he is a living member) does not truly MER^
[that is, as I conceive, deserve or Earn] increase (...) Grace, and Life
Eternal; and (provided always he (...) in Grace) both the attainment of Eternal
Life, and ^^crease of Glory, let him be Accursed.

Thus their allowed Authors teach, that good works do (...) only merit in
respect of God's Gracious Covenant, but in ^^gard of the works themselves; and
that Eternal Life is in only due from Gods Liberality, but from his just
Judgment; (...) Bellarmin, L. 5. C. 16, and 17. And they give this reason (...)
it, That because God would honor his children, he would h^ them to get Heaven
by their Merits, which is more honour^^ than to receive it by Gods free gift.
Vasquez is yet mo^^ plain, and sticks not to affirm, That the works of (...)
men do merit Eternal Life, as an equal Recompe^ and Reward; that therefore
there needs not any other condign merit, as that of Christ, to interpose that
Eternal Life should be rendered to them; therefore (says he) we never pray to
God; that by the Merits of Chr^^ the Reward of Eternal Life may be given to our
wor^ and meritorious works, but that Christ's Grace may a^ given to us, whereby
WE may be enabled worthily o^ merit this Reward.

Q. What are we to think of this Doctrine?

A. That it is false and sacrilegious, robbing God (...) his Glory, and our
Lord Christ of the sole Honor of o^ Redemption. For on the direct contrary,
the Scrip^^^ witnesses, That eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6.21 Now a
gift is free, and cannot be merited, for the^ were a purchase: To him that
works (says the Apo^^^ the reward is reckoned not of grace, but of Debt, Romans
^^ Christ alone is the storehouse of our Merits; every true ^eliever is worthy,
not by his own Works, but in Christ, and by his Merits and Righteousness, Ephesians.
2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the
gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast: Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he has saved us.
For 1st, our best Works are imperfect; nay, St. Paul says of himself, Tho I
know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. 2dly,
There Is a vast Disproportion between them and the Glory to come. 3dly, They are
Debts which we owe to God. 4thly, As good, they proceed from the Spirit of God,
and what merit can there be in paying an old Debt, especially when he to whom
it is paid, lends us at present the Money? 5thly, We do not profit God by them;
If thou be righteous, what give thou is God, or what receives he at thy
hands? Job 35.7. Why then should we qualify them thus arrogantly, with the
Title of Merits? To say, That Christ by his Death merited that our Works should
merit Everlasting Life, is to make our selves Partners with Christ, and so in
effect, our own Saviors and Redeemers.

Q. Is not the word Reward often mentioned in Scripture, as, He shall reward
every man according to his works, Matthew. 16.27. Gr^^t is your reward in heaven,
Matthew. 5.^^. He had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26, etc.?

A. There is a Reward of Mercy and Grace, and of Desert or Merit; the one may
be of bounty far above any due to the Party, but so is not the other: This is
St. Ambrose's Distinction [Ep. l. 1.] There is one kind of Reward for
Liberality, and ^^ther of the Wages of Virtues and Recompense of Labors: Thus
God rewards two ways, either in mere Justice, and ^^s he rewards the Wicked,
justly deserving Damnation; (...) i^ Justice and Mercy, and so he rewards
Believers; in Justice; both in respect of Christ's meriting Reward for such, and
that God having promised a Reward, (...) his Justice perform it; but this is
still also in Mercy, (...) in respect of our selves, deserving no such Reward,
(...) the moving Cause, which was merely his own good (...) sure. Again, the
Reward here is not promised (...) Work, but to the Person; and it is not said
for his W^^ as noting any Cause of his Reward, but according (...) Works; for
there are many other Rewards, Tempo^ and Spiritual, which God may in some
respect propa^^ Men's Virtues and Zeal, tho yet, Eternal Life, which beyond all
such Proportion, be freely bestowed for (...) alone Merit of Christ, which
being Infinite, is only of (...) adequate Value thereunto. And it is plain,
Moses had respect to the Recompense of Reward upon Gods Pr^^^ made, and not
upon the merit of his own doing, for makes not his own Act the procurer of the
Recomp^^ but the certainty of the Recompense the Excitement to (...) Work.

Q. Tho we are not to expect Justification by the L^^ or our own Righteousness,
are we not yet with all D^gence to practice and press after Holiness,
Righteous^^^ and the study of good Works?

A. Yes, by all means, for without Holiness no man (...) see God; and
therefore, when the Apostle argues v^^mently against Justification by the
Works of the I (...) yet he does press the Duty of the Law, -- Do we then (...)
void the law through faith; God forbid, yea, we establish (...) law, Romans 3.21.
The Law continues as a Rule, (...) not as a Covenant, tho not appointed to
Justify, ye^ commanded as the Way we should walk in, because G^^ Order is to
communicate the Benefits of Christ's R^teousness to none but such as shall by
Faith receive (...) and walk obediently in his Commands; he has freely (...)
graciously promised Rewards far beyond our best Wo^ but the same are not to be
bestowed on those who (...) stand Idle, or Employ themselves in Evil, but on
the (...) (...) in this Vineyard. It Is a grand and most unjust Ca^^mny of the
Romanists, That the Protestant Doctrine ^sects or condemns Good Works; for
there is no Church in the World that more earnestly presses People to an my
Life and Conversation, than the Church of England, and that too upon true solid
Scripture-grounds. And whatever the Church of Rome may boast in this matter;
^^e main reason why we reject several of her Doctrines, is Purgatory,
Indulgences, etc. is, because they apparently had to looseness of Life, and not
to that serious Mor^^fication and real Godliness, which the Christian Religion
in its Purity requires.

Q. What is meant by Works of Supererogation?

A. Doing of some good Works more than by the Law ^re required at our hands,
and thereby putting as it were ^n Obligation on Almighty God; for those that
hold that Doctrine, distinguish Gods Commands from Evangelical Counsels. The
former they make necessary, but the doing of the latter (amongst which they
place their Vows of ^^gle Life, Poverty, regular Obedience, etc.) highly
meritori^s; for that, a man is not bound to do such things; and therefore they
think that such as do them, shall have greater Glory in Heaven, and insinuate
as if they (or at least the Church for them) could Transfer such their Merits,
and thereby help others.

Q. Are there any such Supererogating Works?

A. None at all; How shall a man be just with God, if he (...) contend with
him? Job 9.2. When you have done all, (...), We are unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10. This Opion debases the Law of God, rendering it imperfect, (...)
preferring the performance of Counsels, to the fulfilling ^^ereof: If no man be
able (as appears by the Texts which we have formerly cited) exactly to fulfill
the ^^w, much less is he able to fulfill that which is heavier ^an the Law;
besides, to beg daily for Pardon of our Sins, and yet to boast of such Works,
are things in^sistent.

Q. But what say you to those Texts, Matthew. 19.^ There be Eunuchs which have
made themselves Eunuchs for (...) kingdom of God. He that is able to receive
it, let him receive^ Is not here a Counsel to a single Life, beyond a Command
So in v. 21. If thou will be perfect, sell all that thou (...) and give to the
poor: Is not here a Counsel to a volun^^ Poverty?

A. Divine Counsels are Commands, and cannot be d^spised without Sin and
Punishment, -- Psalm. 107.11. Prove. 1.25. Luke 7.30. and accordingly the Texts
(...) you quoted, are to be understood, they are Commands tho particular, and
given only to certain Persons, according to the Exigency of their Condition and
Gifts (...) In the first Text, single Life is not only counseled (...)
commanded on two Conditions, if the Kingdom of He^ven does so require it, and
if one be assured of the G^^ of Continency; now every man is bound to avoid a
hindrances in his passage to Heaven, according to the of Christ, If thy Eye
offend thee, pluck it out, etc. So be that has the gift of Continency, and
knows that M^riage would hinder him, must make himself an Eun^^ not literally
(as Origin is said to have mistaken it) be live (as an Eunuch) unmarried: And
this is not by w^^ of Counsel, but as a Duty to further his own Salvation so
likewise in a large Discourse, in 1 Cor. 7. single Life enjoined to them that
have the gift of Continency, (...) Simply, but because it was expedient in
those times (...) Difficulty and Persecution.

Neither is the second Text a Counsel, but a Comma^^ given to the young Man,
who had answered more a^gantly than truly, and gave false Testimony of himself,
the he kept all the Commandments from his youth up, wh^^ he was apparently
Covetous, Mark 10.22. To suppre^ this excess of Pride, and to try and discover
his Folly, Christ thus speaks to him; and not to set out a new Doctrine, or way
to Perfection, not contained in the Law.

Q. What is the Sum of the Law?

A. To Love the Lord our God with all our heart, and our Neighbor as our
selves, Matthew. 22.37. which is more particularly branched out into four
Precepts in the first Table, and six in the second Table of the Decalogue, or
Ten Commandments.

Q. How are we to understand those words of the First Commanment; Thou shall
have no other Gods before me?

A. That we ought not to pay Religious Worship to any Being whatsoever, but to
the Lord Jehovah; wherein is condemned, not only the renouncing or neglecting
to worship the true God, and worshipping something else, altogether in His
stead; but also the admitting of any thing else to have a share with him in our
Worship: For whoever religiously worships any thing that is not the true God,
is said to have other Gods before, that is, in the presence of, or (as some
Versions read it) besides the Lord: Because, tho there be really no other God
but He, yet whatsoever other Beings we worship, we thereby make the same our
God; Religious Worship being solely appropriated to the Almighty; Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him; Deuteronomy. 6.13. which words by our Savior's
own Interpretation, Matthew. 4.10. signify no less than Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall them serve; Which general Prohibition excludes
not only the Devilish Idols of the Gentiles, but all other Creatures, how
excellent soever, from all Religious Worship; of which indeed there can be but
one kind, since there is but ^^e only lawful Object thereof, which is God
blessed for ^^er.

Q. May we not then worship or pray to Angels, or ^^nts departed?

A. No; Prayer is an Act of Religious Worshi^ (...) therefore due only to
Almighty God, who alone (...) our Prayers, and none but he is able to supply
out (...) Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. If (...) lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all ^^rally, etc. And therefore to
him only the Scrip^ ^each us to direct our Prayers -- When ye pray, s^s^ Father
which art in Heaven, etc. Luke 11.2. There (...) the least Command, nor one
approved Example of p^^y^ to any other, whether Angel or Saint, in the whole
(...) of God.

Secondly, As for worshipping of Angels, we are ^presly cautioned against it;
Col. 2.18. Let no man (...) you in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of
Angels: (...) accordingly good Angels have always refused to accept if or admit
of any Adoration, or Worship, Revel. 19.^^ and Chap. 22.8. Touching that Text,
Genesis 48.10. (...) Angel which redeemed me from all Evil, bless the L^ds. (...)
but read the Verse before-going, you will find, that (...) not any Created
Angel Jacob there intends (for such an (...) could not be called the God before
whom Abraham w^^ nor redeem Jacob out of all Evil) but the Lord Christ, (...)
is called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. So in he f^^lowing words, Let my
Name be named upon them [the ^^manists will have it invocated on them, and
thence wo^^^ ridiculously suggest, that the good Patriarch bespo^^ hi^ self to
be prayed unto after his decease] the Sense is (...) more, than that Jacob
adopted those Children of Jes^^ born in Egypt, as His; that they should have
their N^^ from him, and be reckoned for two Tribes among his Posterity, as if
they had been his immediate Ch^^dren.

Thirdly, Praying to Saints departed, is not only (...) and to no purpose,
since those that use it cannot sh^^ how it is possible, or so much as probable,
that the Sai^^ should know their Prayers: And the Scriptures secur^ t^^ch the
contrary; (the Dead know nothing more) Eccles. ^.5. that is, none of the
Transactions of this lower World: So Job 14.21. speaking of the Dead, says,
(Whether his Children shall be Noble or Ignoble, he shall not understand:) But
the same is very dangerous, because Omniscence and Omnipresence, which be God's
peculiar Attributes, are by this practice consequentially ascribed to to those
Creatures, at least by the natural tendency of the Action, tho perhaps the
Worshipper does not apprehend it so; For how else (for Example) shall the
Blessed Virgin MARY hear a thousand Suppliants, in a thousand different Places,
calling upon her for several things at one and the same Instant?

Fourthly, We must pray to none but to whom we may do it in faith, without
doubting; and upon good grounds believing that we shall obtain, Matthew. 21.22.
Jam. 1.5. But what Faith can we have in a Practice uncommanded, nay prohibited
by God? What Faith when we are not, nay cannot be sure that the Saints do hear
our Prayers? much less that they will, or can, grant them? We do not believe in
Angels or Saints, Therefore how shall we call (...) them on whom we have not
believed? Romans 10.14.

Fifthly, The same is injurious to the Honor of Christ, who is our sole
Mediator, not only of Redemption, but of Intercession too, Romans 8.34. Heb.
7.25. He is our great and only Advocate in the Court of Heaven; who has not
only both invited and commanded us to apply our selves to none but him, but
graciously promised to answer us: John 14.6. No man comes to the Father but by
^e: And v. 3. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will do it.

To evade the force of these Arguments, the Romanists wonderfully puzzle
themselves; sometimes they alledg, They give not the Honor due to God, to
these glorious Creatures; and to that purpose they invent distinctions where
there is no difference, as between Latria, and Dulia; and tell us of Religious
Worship, Supreme and Su^ordinate, Absolute and Relative, Terminative and Trans^
But we have proved before, That there is but one (...) Object of Religious
Worship, and so the same can be but one kind; (tho Civil Honors may be
various, because t^^ Objects are so, as one sort of Respect is paid to a Fath^^
another to our Prince, another to a subordinate Ma^^strate, etc.) and so all
this smoke vanishes.

Sometimes they pretend they honor the Saints (...) Heaven, as they do good
men on Earth, and only pray^ them for the assistance of their Prayers, and that
God by so^^ means makes known such their Prayers to the Saints. To the I
answer, 1st, That this Pretense is contrary to their Practice; For in their
ordinary Prayers, Praises and Thanksgivings, they most commonly join the Virgin
Mary with God, Jesu-Maria! coming in one word out of their Mouths; and Glory be
to God, and to the Blessed Virgin, with them, makes but one complete Doxology.
2dly, Besides the vast difference between desiring the Prayers of a good Man on
Earth, and praying to Saints in Heaven, (for the former of which we have
Precepts and various Examples, but none of the latter) I say, this Suggestion
is contrary to their Council of Trent, which, Sess. 25. declares, That it is
good and profitable (it seems themselves thought it not necessary) suppliciter
Invocare, as humble Suppliants to call upon the Saints, who reign together with
Christ; and to fly not only to their Prayers, but help and assistance too, for
obtaining benefits from God, through his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our
only (they would not say Intercessor, but) Redeemer and Savior. 3dly. If the
Saints cannot know our Prayers till God acquaints them therewith. As for
Example, When a Roman Catholic Seaman prays to St. Nich^l^ (the repu^ed ^utelar
Saint of that Profession) to preserve him from Shipwreck, God must signify
first to St. Nicolas who it is calls on him, and for what, before the Saint
call use any Intercession in the Affair; why then should not the poor Creature
much rather go immediately to God, whom he is sure the Winds and the Seas obey?
Is God less kind and merciful than the Saints?

To help themselves out here, they say it is more humble to go to God by the
good Offices of the Saints, than rudely to press in upon the Divine Majesty: As
when we have to do with a Prince, we get some Favorite to facilitate our
Admission, and present our Petition: But this Comparison is dishonorable to
the Almighty; His ways are not as the ways of Men, nor his thoughts as their
thoughts. The best and greatest of Princes, tho Analogically called Gods, are
yet really but Men; To whom we cannot speak, when, and where we would: But to
God, who is everywhere, and always present, we may: Man, perhaps, sometimes
through Pride will not, or through Carelessness regards not, or through
Ignorance knows not, or through Business cannot redress the Grievances of such
as sue unto him; or his Attendants may keep off Petitioners, and not allow them
Access; but there are no such Impediments in God, therefore no such need of
making an Interest in Saints to address or pray to him; Thou art a God hearing
Prayers, therefore to thee shall all Flesh come.

Lastly, They alledg, That their praying to Saints is not injurious to God or
Christ, because they pray not to them, as to God, but address their Prayers
only as to his Mother, his Friends, and his Favorites, whom they suppose to
intercede only in his name and mediation, -- Well! But if Prayer be an Act of
Religious Worship, and so due only to God, you ought not to offer it to any
Creature, tho never so much a Friend: For suppose a married Woman accused of
lying evey night with her Neighbor, not able to deny the Fact, should go about
to justify it, by maintaing that the Act is not Adultery, because she never
lies with him as her Husband, but always as her dear Husband's special Friend,
and near Relation; would such a Plea be accepted in any sober Judicatory? It Is
the sole an^ proper Office of the Lord Jesus to offer up the Prayers (...) his
People; To be our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1^ And to appear in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. Therefore to apply our selves to any other
Mediators in Heaven to present our Prayers to God, in what manner, or upon what
pretense soever it be, is highly derogatory to the Honor and Office of the
Blessed Jesus.

I shall only add, That the Invocation of Angels was by the Council of Laodicea
(about the Year 360.) expressly condemned, and branded with the Title of
Idolatry: That many of the Fathers were of opinion, that the Souls of Saints
are not at present admitted to the Beatifick Vision, but reserved in certain
Apartments in the enjoyment of Peace, and Rest, till the General Resurrection;
on which Notion, they were so far from praying to them, that they did pray for
them, and beg of God their further Bliss and Consummation: And whereas certain
Women, near the Year 403. were wont to offer up Cakes in honor of the Blessed
Virgin (whence they were called Colliridians) Epiphanius mentioning them under
the Character of Heretics, thus reproves them, Let Mary be in honor, but let
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost be worshipped; and no less than six
times repeats these words, (...), Let no man worship or adore Mary.

Q. I confess it is very strange, That whereas neither Patriarchs, nor Prophets,
nor Apostles, or any Apostolical Holy men, in all their dangers or distresses,
ever prayed to, or worshipped any Creature whatsoever, either Holy Angel, or
Holy Soul, yet the Church of Rome at least in vulgar practice) comparatively
prays to, and worships nothing so much, or frequently, as is manifest by their
very Beads (the new Engines and measures of their perfunctory Devotion) where
there are ten Ave Maria's, for each Pater Noster! -- But let us proceed: Does
not the second Commandment forbid all Religious Adoration, and Worship, outward
or inward, to be given to any Images of God, or of the Saints, or of any
Creature?

A. Yes assuredly! its words are plain, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, or any likeness of any thing in Heaven above, or that is in the
Earth beneath, or that is in the water under the Earth: thou shall not bow down
to them, nor serve them, etc. This Commandment forbids all Images in Divine
Worship and Religious use; for as the first Commandment forbids False gods, so
this (in its primary sense) the worshipping the true God by false means, as
Images, etc. and prohibits all manner of Religious worship and honor of them,
whether absolutely, or Relatively, mediately or ultimately; for it says, Thou
shall not bow down to them, nor serve them; intimating, that the prohibited
worship of Images consists in two things, first Adoration, as by uncovering
the Head, bowing of the Body, bending of the Knee, Kissing, and such like
Gestures; 2ly, In any kind of Religious service, as when they are trimmed up
with Gold, Silver, and Jewels, when Incense is burnt to them, and they set on
high places; when Vows are made to them, when honored with Pilgrimages,
Oblations, Wax-candles, Tapers, and other such like Ceremonies.

Q. Do the Romanists in any of their Catechisms leave out the Second
Commandment?

A. Yes, in diverse; I will show you one Entitled, A Catechism or Summary of
Christian Doctrine set out by the command of Cardinal de Retz, Bishop of Paris;
and in Bellarmin; the first Translated into English by G. J. and Printed
(Clandestinely) for T. D. 1673, where Page 23d the second Lesson is in these
words:

Q. How shall we make it appear that we love God?

A. By obeying his Commandments?

Q. How many are these Commandments, and what are they?

A. I. You shall adore one God, and love him pe^fectly. II. You shall not take
his Name in vain. III. You shall keep holy the Sabbath Day, serving God
devoutly. IV. You shall honor your Father and Mother, that you may live long.
V. You shall not kill, nor have a will to do it. VI. You shall not give way to
any luxurious Ac^, nor consent to it in thought. VII. You shall not steal, nor
retain any thing th^^ belongs to another. VIII. You shall not bear false
witness, or give any way to lying. IX. You shall not covet your Neighbors
Wife, nor any thing against Chastity. X. You shall not covet your Neighbors
Goods of any kind.


Here you see the Second Commandment omitted wholly, and because the people
would not be satisfied without Ten, the Tenth is divided into Two; though that
which they here make the Ninth, is the same with the Sixth; so that to color
this Sacrilegious suppression of one of Gods Commandments, they are forced not
only to alter the words of every Commandment, written by the Finger of God, but
also to represent Infinite Wisdom as guilty of Tautology.

So in the Hours of our Lady, Printed at Paris Anno 1611, the Commandments of
the first Table are set down in these words, and no other.

First Commandment.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall not have no^ worship any other God but me.

Second Commandment.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Third Commandment.
Remember to keep Holy the Sabbath Day and Feasts, etc.

The like Artifice may be seen in a Book published in French by Francis Coster,
Entitled Chrestiennes Institutions, Lib. 3. Cap. 3.

Q. It is not difficult to guess the design of this foul practice; but was not
this Commandment Ceremonial and proper only to the Israelites? or at least, are
not Idols, or the Images of False gods only forbidden here?

A. First, this Commandment is part of the Moral Law; and cannot be Ceremonial
or binding to the Jews only, because the Reason of it is immutable; and the
same is so far from being Repealed, that it is ratified in the Gospel, Romans
1.23, and 25. 2ly, Every Image, Picture, or Statue, made for Religious Worship,
is an Idol, whether of false gods, or pretended to represent the true God.

Q. How does this appear?

A. Even by the Exposition of this Command by Moses himself: For thus he says,
Deuteronomy. 4.12. The Lord spoke unto you, ye heard the voice, but saw no similitude,
only heard the voice, Take ye therefore good heed (for ye saw no manner of
similitude) lest you corrupt your selves, and make you a Graven Image, the
similitude of any Figure, etc. Whence it is evident, the Second Commandment
forbids the worshipping the true God by Images; for his Argument is, That God
did therefore forbear to show himself in any visible shape at the delivery of
the Law, to the end that it might be better known, that the worshipping of
Images, not only as they have reference to the Creatures, or false gods, but
also as (in the intention of the makers) they might have relation to himself,
did come within the compass of Idolatry. The Scripture in sundry places
attests, that tho^ who erect Images to God, and in and by them wo^^ God, are
guilty of Horrible Idolatry: Thus the Israel^^ by making a Golden Calf,
committed Idolatry; they could not be so silly as to think that the Calf which
they made was the God that brought them up out of Egypt; but because the
Egyptians worshipped their false gods by an Hieroglyphic Representation in the
shape of an Ox, they would worship Jehovah in like manner, as appears by they
very words of the Text, Exodus 32.5. Aaron after he h^ made a Golden Calf, he
built an altar before it, and (...) Proclamation, and said, To morrow is a
Feast to the Lord (J^HOVAH.) So Micah made an Image in Honor of J^hovah, Judge.
17.3, 13. I had wholly dedicated the Silver (...) to the Lord (Jehovah.) Now I
know that the Lord (Jehovah) will do me good, because I have a Levite to my
Pri^st^ Nay, Jeroboam's Calves were made to represent, not false gods, but
Jehovah; for so we read, 1 King. 12.18. Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee up out of the Land ^f Egypt. But so far is the Almighty and
Jealous God from accepting such worship, that he declares in his Word, that
those who worship him by Images, are indeed Worshippers of the Devil; They
provoked him to Jealousy with strange gods, they sacrificed unto Devils, Deuteronomy.
32.17. They made a Calf in those days, and sacrificed to the Idol, Act. 7.41.
Where the Golden Calves are called Idols, and the Israelites are said to
sacrifice to Devils, which is not to be understood of the judgment and
intention of the men worshipping them, as if they did design to worship Devils
and false gods by them; but of the truth of the thing, and of the judgment of
God, testifying, That such worship being contrary to his command, did displease
him, and had the Devil for its Author, and so (whatever they intended) was
indeed the worshipping of Devils and false gods.

Q. We know (says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 8.4.) That an (...) nothing in the world,
whence it should seem, that (...) are of things really existent, but Idols of
things (...) existent, viz. such as never had any being in the Wo^^d, and
consequently that the Pictures of God, Christ, the Virgin Mary, Saints, etc.
tho religiously made, (...) or adored, cannot be Idols?

A. 1st, St. Paul speaks not in reference to the Object ^^ch is represented,
but in respect to the Virtue and Ef^^y of Idols, which indeed is nothing. 2dly,
We know ^^t the Heathens had Idols not only of some things (...), but also of
things truly existent. 3dly, The Images (...) God, and the Blessed Trinity,
Christ, etc. are Lies; (...) Gods glorious and incomprehensible Nature, cannot
(...) represented to Men by any Image, but in a way of in^^te Disparagement to
him; nor Christ, for he is both G^^ and Man; and if they mean it only of his
Body, from whence should they have the true Effigies? There being to Images nor
Pictures thereof, until many hundred years after his Death and Ascension; and
those Pictures they now have, are not alike in Shape, Lineaments or Co^^; and
as for the Saints (not mentioning some abroad, ^^^t never were, as St.
Christopher, etc.) it is unbecoming those glorified Spirits to represent them
in dull and senseless ^^^ges.

Q. The Honor of God seems to require the Worship of his Image, for that
redounds to God; as he that ho^ours his Prince, will honor his Picture; and we
show our Reverence to the King, by being uncovered in the Pres^^^ Chamber, tho
the King be absent.

A. I have showed, That we ought not to make any ^^^ge of God; and as to the
Comparison, I say, If a ^^ng forbid any Picture of himself to be made or set
up, and any over-officious Subject should notwithstanding set up the Kings
Picture, pretending to do it in respect to the King; the King would undoubtedly
esteem himself not honored, but highly dishonored thereby, since hi^ C^mands
are broken, and his Authority violated and ^spised. Again, if a King require
such Reverence ^u^^ given to his Presence Chamber, it is fit it should be
ob^^ed, (seeing it is only a Civil, not religious Wor^^ But since God has
severely forbidden any Religious W^ship to be given to any Images or Pictures,
there is go^^ reason that his Prohibition should be obeyed too. Not does any
more dishonor redound to God, from (...) slighting or destroying those Images
which he forbids, (...) pretended to represent him, than would to the King,
(...) cutting to pieces a piece of Adulterate Money, where^^ (the better to
deceive) false Traitors had stamped (...) Royal Effigies.

Q. But perhaps you have all this while combated only a Shadow; tho some
Christians use Images as Remembr^^cers, to put them in mind of God, Christ, or
holy Saints yet how do you know that there are any that make the^ Objects of
Worship, or think to Worship God, Christ, o^ the Saints in or by them?

A. Not only the Practices of thousands daily before o^^ Eyes, in several parts
of Europe, may assure us thereof, But the second Council of Nice, and that of
Trent, (...) command the worshipping of Images: For thus says the last, Sess.
25. The Images of Christ, and of the Virgin Ma^^ of God, and other Saints, are
to be had and retained, especi^ly in Churches, and to them due Honor and
Veneration is (...) be given; [but what that is, they would not declare only
add,] Not that there is believed any Divinity or V^^ to be in them, [the Images
themselves] for which they (...) to be worshipped, or any thing desired of them,
or any (...) reposed in them, as the Gentiles of old did, who placed the Hope
in Idols; but because the Honor which is exhibited them, redounds to their
Prototypes [or Originals] which t^^ Represent; so by the Images which we Kiss,
and before (...) we do^^ our Ca^s and Kneel, we adore Christ, and reve^^^^
th^se Saints whose Similitude they bear. -- By which Words (...) evident, the
Council retains not Images as Remem^^^cers, merely to put us in mind, (as some
would pers^^de us) but for Worship, which they Justify, because the same refers
to their Originals. But still, what is all this to the Second Commandment,
which absolutely forbids all Worship of Images, without any such Limitations?
The Heathens themselves never were so fond as to think their very Images were
Gods; but referred the Worship they paid to them, to their Prototypes, as well
as the Papists. Moreover, why does the Church of Rome solemnly Consecrate
Images? Why do they fancy greater Efficacy in one Image, (as suppose that of
the Virgin at ^^retto, or St. James at Compostella) than another of the same
Saint at Home? Besides, Azorius in his Moral Institutions, affirms it is the
constant Opinion of Divines (that is of the Church of Rome) That an Image is to
be honored and worshipped with the same honor and worship which is given to
him whose Image it is. And Bellarmin in his Treatise on this Subject, expressly
disputes for this, That Images are not only to be worshipped as Exemplars, but
also properly and by themselves, so as the worship may be terminated in them;
and consequently an Image of God or Christ, may be worshipped with the same
Adoration as we pay to God himself; and indeed, this is the true Notion of
worshipping of Images, that they are Proxies or legal Representatives, and so
must receive the same Honor as their Prototypes.

Q. However, Images are Laymens Books.

A. Our Laity (God be praised) have the Holy Bible, and other better Books to
instruct them; for want of which, not a few poor Souls abroad, have made those
^^nsless Blocks, not only their Books, but their Gods; and what kind of Books
these Idols are, and what Doctrine they teach, we may read Jeremiah 10.14, 15.
Every man is brutish in his knowledge, every founder is conf^^^ the graven
Image; for his molten Image is falsehood; and is no breath in them, they are
vanity, and the works of (...) in the time of their visitation they shall
perish. Hab. 2.1^ What profits the graven Image, that the maker thereof (...)
graven it: the molten Image, a teacher of lies, that the (...) thereof trusts
therein, to make dumb Idols? Woe unto him (...) says to the Wood, Awake; and to
the dumb Stone, (...) it shall Teach.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a Religious fiducial calling upon God in (...) Name of Christ with
the Heart, and sometimes with (...) Voice, according to his Will, for our
selves and oth^^ consisting of Confession of Sin, Petition for Grace, (...)
giving of thanks.

Q. Should any Person use Prayers that they do (...) understand? Or the public
Prayers and Services of God (...) the Church, be performed in a Tongue Unknown,
or (...) understood by the People?

A. No; such Practices are but a Profanation of (...) religious Duty; and
indeed, no more than vain Ba^^ The very Essence of Prayer consisting in the
hearty o^currence of the Understanding and Will; whence G^^ complains, This
People draws nigh to me with their l^^^ but their hearts are far from me; and
requires that we (...) with the spirit, and with the understanding also, 1 Cor.
^.15, throughout; which whole Chapter St. Paul pr^^sedly argues against Praying
and Speaking in an Vni^^^ Language in the Church, even in those on whom the O^^
of Tongues was miraculously conferred.

Q. Is it Lawful, or our Duty, to pray for the D^^^

A. No. For 1st, whatsoever is done without faith (...) sin, Romans 14.23. But
for praying for the Dead, (...) have no Command from God, nor Promise to be
he^^ nor Example in Holy Scripture; and consequently, (...) do it in Faith.
2dly, Such Prayers are vain and unp^^fitable Now the child is dead, why should
I fast and pray? ^^^h David, 2 Samuel 12.21. As the tree falls, so it lies;
^^d as Death leaves Man, so will Judgment find him; ^hey that dye in the Lord,
are blessed, Rev. 14.13. and need ^ot our Prayers; and those that dye in their
sins, can have (...) benefit by them, for out of Hell there is no Redemption.

Q. But I suppose, this practice of praying for the Dead, depends on the Notion
of a third Place, called Purgatory. What, I pray, is thereby meant?

A. I will answer you in the Words of their before cited Catechism -- It is a
place where Souls departed out of this World in the Grace of God, must make
Satisfaction for the temporal Sins for which they have not here fully
satisfied: -- For they teach that, although God freely gives to all that are in a
State of Grace, [that is, Confessed and Absolved] forgiveness of the Guilt of
all their mortal Sins, and freedom from Eternal Death; yet Satisfaction must
notwithstanding be made for the temporal Punishment due to those Sins;
wherefore, and for as much also, as Persons have much venial Sin and
Corruption, in which they oftentimes dye, therefore it is, necessary that they
should for the Expiation of those Sins, and for the Satisfaction of Gods
Justice, as to the temporal Punishments of the other, either do or suffer such
Penances, Fastings, Prayers, etc. as may effect the same here; or where those
are not sufficiently performed, suffer the Pains of Purgatory; where (as in a
Prison) they must remain in grievous Tortures, till they have made full
Satisfaction, and are completely Purged; and then they are admitted into
Heaven, which Release may be ^astened, or their Pains mitigated, either by the
Good Works of their surviving Friends, as by their Prayers, Alms, and procuring
Masses to be said; or by Indulgences obtained from the Pope.

Q. What is to be thought of this Doctrine?

A. That it is altogether built upon the Sand, a^^ vented for secular Ends.

For 1st, it is grounded on several false Doctrines, (...) that some Sins are
venial; that Good Works merit of (...) and those of the Living, avail for the
Dead, etc. all w^^ are refuted before.

2dly, It is highly Derogatory to the Honor of Ch^^ to say, That men are
purged by suffering Pains in ^^^gatory, whereby they satisfy for lesser Sins,
and for (...) temporal Punishment of the greater Sins; for the Blo^^ Christ is
the only Purgatory of all our Sins, Heb. 1.3. W^^ when he had by himself purged
our sins, sat down at the ri^^ hand of the Majesty on high; and Chapter 9.14. How
much (...) shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit off^^
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from de^^ works to serve
the living God? Whence he is called, a raus^^ for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. Christ is a
complete Savior, his Blood cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. He is able
(and su^^ he is no less willing) to save to the utmost those that come (...)
him, Heb. 7.25.

Thirdly, The Scriptures teach us no such Middle Pl^^^ of Souls after Death, as
Purgatory; but the quite contrary, 2 Cor 4.18. The things which are seen, are
Temporal; but the things which are not seen, are Eternal: Whence it follows,
That there is no Place or State after this Life which is not Everlasting,
therefore no Purgatory. Again, the Apostle says, That the whole Church, all
the Family whereof Christ is Head, is either in Heaven, or upon the Earth^ Ephesians.
1.10. That in the fullness of time he might gather togeth^^ in one, all things
in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and whi^^ are on Earth. And Chap. 3.15.
speaking of Christ, (...) says -- Of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth
(...) named: John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He th^^ hears my
word, and believes on him that sent me, has ev^^lasting Life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but is passed from ^eath unto life: If he come not into
condemnation, he cannot be cast into a Place of punishment.

Fourthly, It Is said, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead that ^^e in the Lord,
for they rest from their Labors, etc. Where (...) is, there is no Torment,
Ergo, no Purgatory; at least ^f any did ever need satisfactory-purgation after
death, sure that Thief, who was converted upon the Cross, ought (...) have
suffered the Pains of Purgatory many years; yet (...) Lord says to him -- This
day shall thou be with me in ^radise, Luke 23.43.

Fifthly, Were it necessary that Believers must satisfy God after death for
temporal Punishments, arrear, and ^r lesser (venial) Sins, then such of them as
shall be alive ^^on Earth at Christ's second Coming, must first go into
Purgatory, before they can meet the Lord in the Air, 1 Thessalonians. ^.17.

Sixthly, Since they own the Apocryphal Books for Cano^^cal, what will they say
to that of Wisdom 3.1. The Souls of the Righteous are in the hand of God, and
there shall no Tor^^^t touch them; -- Is not this one Text alone enough to
^^^ch the Fire of Purgatory for ever?

Q. Whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not ^e forgiven him,
neither in this World, nor in that which is to come, Matthew. 12.31. Therefore it
seems there is some remission of Sins in the World to come, which cannot be
^^her in Heaven, or Hell, therefore must be in Purga^^ry?

A. It Is Childish from two Negatives to infer an Affirmas^^n; as if one should
argue, Peter neither in this World, (...) in the World to come, shall be made
an Angel; Ergo, ^^me shall be made Angels in the World to come: The words
^^^nify no more than this, That that Sin shall never be re^^ed: And so is
interpreted, Mark 3.29. He that blas^emeth against the Holy Ghost, has never
forgiveness; ^^d Luke 12.10. It shall not be forgiven.

Q. He shall be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. (...) this spoken of
Purgatory?

A. Not in the least; For it is plain, this is the (...) Fire intended, v. 13.
which cannot be that of Purg^^ 1st, Because it is the Fire of the Day of
Judgment, (...) Purgatory, by those that maintain it, is confessed to (...)
2dly, This Fire burns the Works of Men only, their (...) and Stubble, not their
Persons, as Purgatory is suppo^ to do. 3dly, This Fire tries both Good and Bad,
all (...) through it, the Gold and Silver no less than the H^y (...) Stubble;
The Text is only a figurative way of speak^^ frequent in Scripture, and common
use; As the delive^ Jews are said to be as Firebrarnds plucked out of the
burni^^ Amos 4.11. So here, He shall be saved, so as by fire, (...) is, not
without difficulty; and the Fire shall consume (...) much of his Works as was
Hay and Stubble, so that (...) shall lose that part of his Reward.

Q. You mentioned but a while ago Indulgences; te^ me, I pray, what are they?

A. A late worthy Author, no less truly than witt^^ calls them The Moral to the
Fable of Purgatory: For yo^ must know, that the Church of Rome teaches, 1st,
Tha^ there have been, and are, diverse Saints, who not on^^ merit for
themselves, but a great deal to spare; all who^ superabounding Merits are
reposited into one Treasu^ 2dly, That these Merits are applicable to others; so
(...) God will pardon Peter, for Example, as to the deserve^ punishment of his
Sin, for the Merits of Stephen. 3dly, Go^ has put this Treasure into the
Church's, that is, (...) Pope's hands; and from him the disposal thereof is
de^gated in such proportions, as he orders, unto the han^ of all Priests, who
thereby have a power to apply th^^ Merits as they see fit; as by saying such,
and so m^^ Masses or Prayers, etc. which shall avail to mitigate (...) Pains,
or wholly to release such or such a Soul from the Torments of Purgatory.

Q. What say you to this Doctrine?

A. That there is nothing sound therein. For 1st, I have proved, that no mere
Man can merit of God; The Wise Virgins had Oil little enough for themselves,
and none to spare, Matthew. 25.9. 2dly, That as none of us have any Merits to
spare; so if they had, yet no Man's Merits (except Christ's) can be applied to
another; Every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.6. Every one shall
receive according to what he has done in his Body. 3dly, I have demonstrated,
that there is no such Purgatory, and so the Foundation of these Indulgences is
gone. Indeed if there were any such Treasury of Merits, and the Pope had the
disposal thereof, he must be very uncharitable not to dispense it at a better
rate. It Is an Evangelical Rule, Freely ye have received, freely give: Why then
does his Holiness take Money for his Indulgences? why does he thus Huckster
them out by Retail? and not rather generously enlarge it once all the poor
Souls out of their Purgatory Torments?

Q. What do you mean by a Sacrament?

A. The word Sacrament is variously used by Authors both Profane and
Ecclesiastical; sometimes for an Oath in general, sometimes for that particular
Oath Soldiers entered into at their Listing; sometimes for any sacred Mystery,
or Religious Secret, not to be commonly divulged; Or for that, whereby any
thing Divine was represented, shadowed out, or signified: But in a strict and
special sense, the word is by Christian Writers, and the use of the Church,
appropriated to those Signs of Grace, whereby God seals to us the Benefit of
his Promises, and binds us to a mutual Testification of the Covenant entered
into with him: So that by Sacrament here, I mean, An holy Ordinance, consisting
of an outward visible Sign of an inward Spiritual Grace given to us, ordained
by Christ himself, as a ^^ens whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to
assure us thereof; Or a Divine Institution in the Gospel, wherein by sensible
Signs, Christ, and the Benefits of the New Covena^^ (...) represented, sealed,
and applied to Believers.

Q. How many Sacraments are there of the New ^stament?

A. Two; Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; and (...) more.

Q. Are not Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Or^^ and Extreme Unction,
Sacraments?

A. No; Not in the proper sense before explain^^ for as such, there are five
Conditions required to a ^crament of the Gospel. 1st, That it be instituted
(...) Christ himself immediately. 2dly, That it have some ^^sible Sign. 3dly,
That it have the Promise of God ^cerning Saving Grace and Eternal Life added to
the (...) 4thly, That it represent, seal, and apply Christ, and (...) Benefits
of the New Covenant to Believers. 5thly, Th^^ it be given to the whole Church,
to continue to the end (...) the World; all which agree only to Baptism, and
(...) Lord's Supper; nor were any other esteemed as proper S^craments of the
Gospel by the Primitive Churches, (...) Fathers. Peter Lombard, the Schoolman,
who flou^^ about the Year 1143. being the first man that ever (...) the number
Seven; nor was the same established by a^^ Council, till that of Florence, which
ended but in (...) Year 1439. Therefore tho with Antiquity we do not o^ the
other Five as proper Sacraments, yet as to the th^^ themselves, The Protestant
Church of England retains (...) makes use of them (all but one) to such good
ends a^^ purposes as they serve for; -- For, as touching C^^^mation, see the
Office appointed for it in the Liturgy, which duly observed, does tend much
more to the pr^moting of Knowledge and Godliness, than as it is pr^^^ in the
Church of Rome; where, if I am not misinform^^ it is (at least sometimes)
administered to Infants, not (...) after Baptism: But tho we use it as a
laudable Anci^^ Rite, we do not reckon it to be a Sacrament, because (...)
(...) no such express Institution by our Savior in the Gospel, as of Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper, no^ such ^^omises made upon the use of it.

Nor do we attribute the Title of Sacrament to H^ly Orders, since they belong
only to one sort of Men, who are thereby devoted, not simply to Christianity,
(for that ^as done at Baptism) but to the Work of the Ministry: And with what
Gravity and Solemnity she confers Orders, ^^pears in her Public Forms
appointed for that purpose. ^ouching Marriage, tho we grant that it carries a
signi^^cation of the Mystical Union between Christ and his church, as we are
taught by St. Paul; And that it is an ^onourable state instituted by God in
Paradise; yet do we (...) call it a Sacrament, for then a Sacrament of the
Gospel ^ould be common to Heathens as well as Christians; but ^ith the Apostle,
we judge it to be Honorable in all men, and particularly in Priests as well as
other Christians, Saint Peter himself being a married man, and other of the
Apostles, as St. Paul intimates; Have not we power to lead about (...) ^^ter, a
wife, as well as other Apostles and Cephas? 1 Cor. 9.5. (...) Bishop must be
blameless, the husband of one wife, 1 Timothy 3.2. Their wives must be grave and
sober, 1 Timothy 3.11. Forbidding ^o marry is branded as a Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.3. and we cannot but admire the Church of Rome should at ^o same time
advance it to a Sacrament, and yet so severely ^bid all her Clergy the use of
it, and reckon them a ^^re holy sort of persons that make vows against it.

As for Penance, tho we do not with the Church of (...) exact from men a
particular Confession to the Priests, (...) all their private faults, as
absolutely necessary to Sal^^^^on, nor send them on long Pilgrimages, to this,
or the ^er Image, nor to give themselves so many Lashes, or ^^ble over so many
Pater-Nosters, or Ave-Maria's (which ^^^ie nothing to amend the soul) yet we
press them to (...) great duty of sincere Repentance and Reformation, with
(...) which they cannot be pardoned (...) and that they should confess their
sins to God, with shame and sorro^ and speedily and thoroughly forsake the same.
And in so^^ cases of notorious, open, scandalous offenses, a Publ^^^ Penance is
injoined, and a general Confession and Absol^tion prescribed in our Liturgy.

Touching Extreme Unction, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome, it has no
warrant from Scripture, for the Anointing mentioned Mark 16.13. or Jam. 5.14.
was intended for the health of the body, and the usage seems to have ceased
with the Gift of Miracles; but the Extreme Unction of the Romanists is
pretended for the benefit of the soul, and therefore not commonly used, till
they perceive no hopes of recovery. For which Ceremony a^ there is no command
of God, so neither any promise of spiritual benefit thereby, but the same is
attended wit^ much superstition, and we fear betrays many poor souls (...)
destruction.

Q. Does the Efficacy of the Sacraments depend upon the Intention of the
Minister?

A. No, the Ordinances of God depend not upon the Holiness or intention of the
person that does administ^^ them, but upon the work of the Spirit; and the wo^^
of Institution, containing a precept for the use of them and a promise of
benefit by them, 1 Cor. 3.7. Neither (...) he that planteth any thing, nor he
that waters, but God t^^^ gives the increase. Phil. 1.18. Notwithstanding
every w^^ whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached, I ther^
rejoice. The Romanists by this Doctrine suspend their Fai^^ and Salvation upon
great uncertainties. For as they hol^ That they cannot be saved without
Baptism: So th^^ also hold, That Baptism is no Baptism if the Priest (...) not
intend to make it a Sacrament. And how can the be sure of the Priests
intention? Nay thus, they can^^^ be sure that they have any Sacraments or
Priests amo^^ them; for they must be certain that he is a Priest (...)
Consecrates, and that he has an Intention to make a ^^crament; but how can
they be assured of his Priesthood? they must first be assured of the Priesthood
of him that Baptized him, and of the intention of the Bishop that Ordained him,
and of the intention of the Archbishop that Ordained that Bishop; all which is
impossible; so that according to their own Principles, the people can have no
certainty that they are Christians.

Q. Do the Sacraments confer Grace by the mere work done, or Sacramental action?

A. We grant the Sacraments are not mere signs, but efficacious to work Grace,
if they be rightly used, not by the mere work done, but by the power and
operation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. Mat. 3.11. As Elisha's bough made Iron
swim, Moses's Rod divided the Red Sea, not by inherent force of it self, but by
the power of God; nor is the efficacy of Sacraments tied to that moment of time
wherein they are administered, Joh. 3.8. but they become effectual means of
Salvation to such only as by Faith receive them, 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism does
save, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup. It Is false and absurd to think that the
Sacramental Signs, as Water in Baptism, etc. when received, have in themselves
inherent virtue to work and produce Grace, as Physic to cure, or fire to burn:
For first, it is injurious to God, for he only who made the heart, can sanctify
it; the cleansing of the soul by Grace infused, being as great a work as
Creation. 2ly, The Word preached does not profit without Faith, therefore not
the Sacraments. 3ly, Did the Sacrament confer Grace upon Judas, or did Simon
Magus receive Grace by Baptism? St. Peter testifies to the contrary, Act. 8.13.
compared with v. 23.

Q. What say you to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper? Is the whole Substance of the Bread and Wine by the words of
Consecration, converted into the Substance of the Body and (...) of Christ
which was born of the Virgin Mary, (...) suffered upon the Cross?

A. The same is repugnant to Scripture as well as (...) contrary to the nature
of a Sacrament, weakens the c^^dibility of the Christian Religion; was never
thought (...) much less believed by the Primitive Church for several hundred
years; has given occasion to many scandals and most gross Idolatry, and does
contain manifold Contradictions and Absurdities.

Q. How then came so strange a notion to be entertained at first by any
Christians?

A. Abyssus Abyssum invocat, one Error drew on another you must know that in
the beginning of the Eight Centu^^ a fierce Dispute arose about Images; the
Church of R^^^ and a Council held there, were for Images; but the Greek Church
and a Council at Constantinople condemned them. The Popes were so hot and
violent in this worthy quarrel, That Gregory the Second Excommunicated the
Emperor Philip, and Gregory the Third the Emperor L^^ the Third, because they
opposed Images. And at last in the Second Council of Nice about the year 788.
got Image Worship established. Now one of the great Arguments of the
beforementioned Synod of Constantinople, (held in or about the year 737.)
against Images, was this, That our Lord Christ having left us no other Image of
himself but the Sacrament, in which the Substance of Bread is the Image of his
Body, we ought therefore to make no other Image of our Lord. To avoid the force
of this Argument, the Fathers of the following Nicene Council, who were for
Images, did declare, That the Sacrament after Consecration, is not the Image or
Antitype of Christ's Body and Blood, but is properly his Body and Blood. This
was in or about the year 788. which Doctrine being first broached on this
occasion, one Paschasius Abbot of Corbey about the year 818. did much propagate
and advance it in the Latin Church; tho not without vigorous opposition; first
by Rabanus Maurus ^^shop of Mentz, one of the most Learned men of that Age; and
afterward by Berengarius, Bertram and others: But the Doctrine making much for
the Honor of Priesthood, was greedily embraced by most of the Clergy, and poor
Berengarius forced to Recant, first in a Council held at Rome, by Pope Nicholas
the Second, and afterward again under Pope Gregory the Seventh, in or about
the year 1079. And to declare, That the Bread and Wine are Substantially
changed into the true and proper Body of Christ; and after Consecration, are
the true Body which was born of the Virgin, and which did hang on the Cross.
But tho they had invented the thing, I do not find they had yet got a name for
it till the Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent the Third, in the year
1215. became its Godfather, and called it Transubstantiation; so that from the
first starting, to the completing of the opinion, and establishing it for an
Article of Faith, was above 400 years, and that too the most wretched time for
Blindness and Ignorance that ever the Church labored under; and no wonder if
whilst Christians were generally asleep, the evil one took advantage to sow his
Tares; for in this dark period it was that not only this, but most other Popish
Errors, (as Image Worship, Purgatory, Indulgences, Auricular Confession, etc.)
received, if not their Rise, yet their main growth and reputation in the world.

Q. But the Romanists affirm this Doctrine of theirs is founded on the plain
positive words of our Lord and Savior, This is my Body.

A. First, If they will abide by the strict Literal words, they make nothing
for their Transubstantiation; for he that says, This is my Body, does not say,
This is Transubstantiated into my Body; for if in any usual Intelligible sense
it may be his body without this notion of Transubstantiation, then cannot
Transubstantiation be from thence inferred. Now the sense will be very usual
and intelligible if the words be taken Figuratively, as much as to say, This
bread s^^^^ or represents, or exhibits my Body; for such Figur^ Expressions are
frequent in Scripture, as Christ is ca^ a Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. a Door, Joh. 10.9.
a true Vine, (...) 15.1. Believers are said to be all one Bread, 1 Cor. 10 and
Chap. 12.27. Ye are the Body of Christ. Will any (...) argue from these Texts,
that our Savior was substanti^ a Rock, or a Vine, or that the Corinthians were
Trans^^stantiated into the Body of Christ? If not, why will (...) strain this
one Text to a sense alike absurd? especi^^ since this Figurative way of
speaking is the rather to (...) expected in the Institution of a Sacrament, the
very nat^^ of which is to represent and exhibit some invisible Gr^ and benefit,
by an outward sign and figure. Nor can it (...) denied but Christ in the
Institution of this very Sacram^^^ uses Figurative Expressions, which cannot
be taken stri^^ly and literally, as, This Cup is the New Testament in (...)
Blood, etc. It is impossible that the Disciples should ^^derstand these words
of our Savior literally, because th^^ not only saw, that what he gave them,
was Bread a^^ Wine; but saw likewise as plainly that it was not h^^ Body which
was given, but his Body which gave th^^ which was given; not his Body broken,
and his Blo^^ shed, because they saw him alive at that very time, and beheld
his Body whole and unpierced, therefore they mu^^ needs understand them as we
do, Sacramentally.

Secondly, St. Paul diverse times calls it Bread, even after the Consecration, 1
Cor. 11. As often as ye eat this Bread, (...) drink this Cup, ye do show forth
the Lords Death till he co^^ Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup
of the Lo^^ unworthily, etc.

Thirdly, Christ's Body remains in Heaven, and therefore is not here on Earth.
-- Christ sits at the right hand if God, Col. 3.1. Whom the heavens must
contain till the resti^^tion of all things, Acts 3.21.

Fourthly, The Primitive Church knew nothing of this, ^he Fathers mention it
not, nay, rather explode any such conceit; nothing can be more express, than
that saying of St. Augustine in his Book De Doctrina Christiana, where
delivering several Rules for the right understanding of Scripture, he gives
this for one, -- If any Sentence of Scripture seems to command any heinous
Wickedness or Crime, it is Figurative; for Example, Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you; this seems to
command an heinous Wickedness and Crime, therefore it is Figurative; commanding
us to communicate of the Passion of our Lord, and with delight and advantage to
lay up in our Memory, that his Flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

Fifthly, It includes monstrous Absurdities, as that Christ held his whole Body
in his hands, yea, did eat himself, whilst he sat whole and entire with his
Disciples at the Table; that his Body must be in a thousand places at once, and
his whole Body be much less than the least Limb of his Body, etc.

Sixthly, It subverts the whole Credibility of the Christian Religion; for that
is mainly built on the Miracles wrought by our Savior and his Apostles, which
depended on the Senses of those that saw them; but if our Senses may not be
credited touching their proper Objects, but I must believe what my Eyes, Taste,
Feeling, informs me to be a Wafer or Wine, to be really substantially Flesh and
Blood, where is the certainty of any Miracle? for a Miracle is only a
supernatural effect, evident to the Sense.

Seventhly, It introduces Idolatry, for the Romanists adore and give Divine
worship to the Sacrament, and require the same of all who have Communion with
them; now if this Opinion of Transubstantiation be not true, (as we have showed
it to be false) it is plain, and themselves cannot deny, but they are guilty of
gross Idolatry; nor will it excuse them, to say, They worship not the Bread,
Christ, supposing the Bread to be Christ; for those (...) then that worshipped
the Sun or Jupiter, did supp^^^^ them to be Gods; and if such a Plea were good,
m^^ Idolaters would be excused; but the Apostle teach^ otherwise, When you knew
not God, ye did service to (...) which by nature are no gods, Gal. 4.8.

Q. What do the Romanists mean by the Sacrifice of the Mass?

A. Their common Doctrine is, That at the Sacra^^^^ of the Lords Supper (which
they call the Mass) there (...) a true sacrifice offered by the Priest, which
is Propitia^^ both for the Quick and the Dead ( viz. such as are (...)
Purgatory); that is, tends to procure the Expiation (...) their Sins, or at
least the Punishment due to them, and this they call an unbloody Sacrifice, to
distinguish it fr^^ that which our blessed Savior offered on the Cross, when
he shed his Blood for us; but how it can be (...) bloody, whilst the natural
Substance of the Blood is there, according to their Principles, is not easy to
understand* Nor yet, how it can fitly be called a Commemoration of his Death,
which they say is a Sacrifice of Christ, who is the^ corpo^ally Present.

Q. Is this Tenet agreeable to Scripture?

A. No, but directly contrary, and highly injurious (...) that All-sufficient
Sacrifice of Christ; who was once offered to hear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28.
Christ after he had offered one Sacrifice for Sin, sat down at the right hand
of God, Heb. 10.12. By one offering Christ has ^^^fected for ever them that
are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Christ has once suffered for sins, that he might
bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Where Remission of Sin is, th^^ is no more
offering for sin, Heb. 10.18. Either the^ Remission was not obtained by
Christ's once offering, (...) there must be no more offering; that is, Either
Christ's offering upon the Cross was insufficient, or thi^ of the Romanists in
the Mass (to say no more of it) unnessary.

Q. Is it lawful to exclude Christian People from receiving the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper in both Kinds? Or to give but half the Sacrament, viz. the
Bread, but not the Cup of the Lord?

A. No, it is unlawful; for Christ instituted it in both ^^ds, with a Command
to keep up the Celebration thereof, till his second Coming, Matthew. 26.27. He
took he Cup, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, and for ^hen this
Legacy and Command with a strong Reason, For this is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins; so Mark 14.23. He
took (...) Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and ^hey all
drunk of it. And it is remarkable, that he does not say, Eat you all, (tho they
were to do so) but Drink (...) all, as foreseeing the sacrilegious Attempts of
taking (...) away from the People.

Q. The Apostles only were present, and they were Priests?

A. First, It Is evident that eating and drinking be^ong to the same Persons;
and if one he restrained so ^ust the other; and since it is confessed that
Eating be^ongs to the People, by Virtue of this Precept, (eat of it) (...) the
same Reason, does Drinking belong to them, by Virtue of that Precept, (drink
all of it).

Secondly, Tho the Apostles were Ministers, yet in this (...) they were in the
Peoples stead, and Christ was the ^inister, or Dispencer of this Sacrament; and
as they were ^inisters, he commanded them, Do this in remembrance of (...);
that is, take and distribute Bread and Wine to the ^^ople, as He had to them.
And if they had commanded (...) give the Bread to the People, they are
commanded to (...) the Wine also.

Thirdly, St. Paul clearly expounds this, and applies it (...) ^ll Believers;
for having recited our Lords words, thus he writes to all the Corinthians, Let
a man examine (...) and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that (...) 1
Cor. 11. where in four Verses, he inseparably (...) Eating and Drinking
together. Remarkable are the wo^^ and prodigious the confidence of the Council
of ^^^stance (held 1417.) who first forbad the Cup to the ^^ty. -- Although (say
they) Christ did Minister this Sacra^^ under two Forms of Bread and Wine, and
although in the Pr^^^tive Church, this Sacrament was received by the Faithful
(...) both Kinds; yet we [for most trivial Reasons by the mentioned] Decree
that it shall be received under one K^^^ only.

Q. I am weary of such a Church, as will take u^^^ her plainly to contradict
Christ in so great an Ordin^^^ and therefore shall release you of your present
trouble, (...) you please only to give me a brief Answer to those t^^ common
Questions, By what right did the Church of England separate from the Church of
Rome? And where (...) your Church before Luther?

A. To the first I Answer, First, That the Gospel w^ preached in our Britain
very early (well nigh as soon, (...) some say before it was at Rome) by
Apostolical Men, (...) and Churches planted here, over whom the Church (...)
Rome had no Jurisdiction.

Secondly, That although Rome did afterward insinuate (...) self, and usurp
Authority over our English Church, (...) she had never any Right so to do.

Thirdly, That the Church of Rome in process of (...) becoming very corrupt in
Doctrine and Practices, end^voured to impose such Corruptions and Innovat^^^
upon all those of her Communion, which yet w^^ from time to time opposed, and
complained of, by ^vers of her own Pious and Learned Members, (...) great
numbers by her Cruelty put to death for such o^^sition.

Fourthly, The Case being thus, and the Church of Rome, after all Admonitions
and Entreaties, not only refusing to reform her self, but on the contrary,
cutting off all hopes, by proclaiming her self Infallible, and to be not a part
of, but the whole Catholic Church, the Mistress of all other Churches, etc.
Hereupon the Church of England, with Sovereign Authority, and in an orderly
manner, did cast off Rome's usurped Authority, and reform it self, reducing all
Doctrines and Practices to the Holy Scripture, and Pattern of the pure
Primitive Times: In doing which, she did but her Duty, and was far from being
guilty of any Schism, for that is a Causeless Separation, whereas here were
important and sufficient Reasons; nor did she depart from the Catholic Church
(being her self a considerable part of it) but only from the depraved Opinions
and Practices of the Church of Rome; who is notoriously guilty of Schism, that
is, of a groundless sinful Separation from other Faithful Christians, whilst
she makes such unlawful Terms of Communion, that no Man well informed, can with
a good Conscience comply with; And whilst she sets up her self above all other
Churches, and will hold Communion with none but those that will enslave
themselves to her: By which means she broke off from the Eastern Church, which
would not submit to this her Usurpation; and by the same means made it
necessary for the Western Churches to withdraw from her, that they might not be
defiled with her Errors and Corruptions, and to reform themselves so far as
they had been defiled.

To the Second Question, you may answer your self out of what has been said;
The Protestants pretend not to bring in a new Religion, or erect a new Church,
but to restore the true Ancient Religion of Christ, and vindicate it from the
Rubbish which ill Men had cast upon it, and to reform it to the Primitive
Constitution; so that (as one says well) to ask, Where our Religion was before
Luther? is as impertinent, as to ask a Husbandma^ (...) his Corn was before it
was weeded. Our Religion w^^fore Luther, in Christ and the Apostles, and in a^
Saints and Holy Churches; It was afterward (the conspicuous) yet really
existent in all those that held the true Ancient, Catholic Doctrine; and so far
in (...) Roman Church it self, but more eminently in all t^^ good Christians,
who both retained the Foundation, (...) also opposed Rome's Innovations, and
prayed and (...) for a Reformation; of whom (although the same be not ^solutely
necessary, yet) our Learned Writers have gi^^ in Catalogues, and vouched
Testimonies in every Ag^ will only give you one Instance; The Waldenses, called
contempt by their Adversaries, the poor men of Lions (...) Leonists (of whom
Histories inform us, that Fur^^ St. Dominick, in the 13th Century, with his
Zealo^^ butchered several hundred thousands) held the same Doctrine in the main
Points with us, as we may justify (...) their Confessions yet extant. Now
Rainerius himself, their cruel Inquisitor, who made Bonfires of them, and who
flourisht about the Year of our Lord 1254. gives the Account of these People;
The Leonists (says he) are the most pernicious of all Sects that are, or ever
have bee^; and the for these three Causes.

First, Because they have been of the longest standing, for s^^^ say, they have
continued ever since Pope Sylvester, others s^ from the time of the Apostles.

Secondly, Because it is more general than any Sect, for the^^ is no Land in
which they are not.

Thirdly, That whereas all other Sects, by the horridness of their Blasphemies
against God, strike horror into those that b^^ them: This Sect of the Leonists
has the face of Piety, in the they lead a righteous life; and believe all
things well of God, (...) they blaspheme the Church of Rome. [Rainerius contra
Valdenses, Cap. 1.]

Q. Certainly a notable Testimony, especially proceeding from a professed
Enemy! -- I thank you heartily, for the Satisfaction you have given me.

A. If you desire further Information, consult the Works of our Learned
Protestant Writers, Ancient and Modern; particularly the Treatises of several
able Divines yet living, who have lately with great Clearness, and exact
Judgment discoursed of the Principal Points in Controversy.

To whose worthy Pains, -- I beseech God to give a Blessing, and to inspire all
that call upon his holy Name, with a Love and Zeal for his Truth, a due
Reverence for his Sacred Word and Ordinances, a Spirit of Charity and
Obedience, that so persisting in true Faith and Piety, they may advance his
Glory, adorn the Religion they profess, and finally obtain the Salvation of
their Immortal Souls. Amen.

FINIS.

