THE OFFICE Of a CHAPLAIN Inquired into, and Vindicated FROM SERVILITY And
CONTEMPT.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University: For Henry
Dickinson Bookseller in Cambridge. And are to be sold by Sam. Smith Bookseller
at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, London. 1688.

The Office of a CHAPLAIN Enquired into, etc*
JUVENAL observes Sat. 7. that the Practice of the Lawyers in his time was
usually proportioned to the Figure they made at the Bar; where he that appeared
in the best Equipage was supposed to have the greatest share of Law and sense
in him: so that had the Vulgar had any Power in determining Right, a good Cause
might oftentimes have been lost for want of fine clothes to plead it in.
Whether any part of this vanity prevails with us, I shall not dispute; however
this inference may be fairly allowed, that the Success of Truth depends very
much upon the Reputation of its Advocate. For the generallity of Mankind, in
regard they are not judicious and impartial enough to penetrate the bottom of
things, are more influenced by show and appearance, than by substance and
reallity. And therefore if a man's Person or Office happens to wear an
uncreditable Name, and falls under a general disesteem, though never so
undeservedly, he must not expect to be persuasive with others, though the
nature and proof of what he recommends, may appear sufciently evident and
weighty to an unprejudiced mind. For besides that men are not willing to learn
Rules of Wisdom and Conduct from those they contemn, because this looks like a
disparagement of themselves, and sets the despised Person in some measure above
them, besides I say, they are not over-willing to be informed by such
Instructors; it is not often that they think they can: For it is generally taken
for granted that Discourses cannot rise much above the Character of those that
make them; and that it is scarce possible for an inconsiderable man to say any
thing that is worth the taking notice of. So that when men have entertained a
little opinion of any Person, he is under a mighty disadvantage of fixing any
good advice upon them. The contemptible notion they have of him gives their
judgments an ill tincture, and makes them unindifferent, so that they neither
see things in their true colors, nor allow them their proper weight; but are
apt to conclude the reasonings of those they disesteem resemble the
insignificancy of their Authors, and so many a good well-meaning argument is
turned back and discountenanced, only for keeping suspected unreputable company.

Of the truth of this observation ill men are very apprehensive, who being
desirous of enjoying the pleasures of vice, without coming under the discipline
of ignominy and restraint, make it their business to misrepresent the Ministers
of Religion, depressing their Authority, and decrying the usefulness of their
profession; being well assured that when they have disarmed their adversaries
(as they reckon them) of their Reputation, they need not fear any considerable
disturbance from them.

In pursuance of this design they would fain persuade the world, that the
Clergy are so far from deserving any additional esteem upon the account of
their Office, that for this reason they ought to forfeit part of what they had
before; as if Orders supposed some antecedent crime, and were rather inflicted
than given, and that those who receive them ought to pass for persons Degraded
from the privileges of Birth and Education, or at least not to enjoy them
without stain and abatement.

Now that there are some Persons, and those not all of the lowest Rank, who
seem to be of this unreasonable opinion, is too apparent; and therefore I shall
desire them to consider, that those who account the Priesthood a lessening of a
man's Quality, must either believe all Religion to be an Imposture, or if they
do own the Being of a God, their apprehension of him is so scandalous and
unworthy, that I think it would be a kindness to them to suppose them Atheists:
For it is not so monstrous and provoking to deny the Existence of a Deity, as to
suppose him void of Excellency and Perfection: To imagine him to be so far from
being the Fountain of Honor, that He is rather to be accounted a discredit to
those who belong to him, and that a person of Condition ought to be ashamed of
his service; such a Notion of God Almighty as this, besides the absurdity of
it, looks like a malicious acknowledgement of his Being, only to make him
capable of contempt.

But besides, the Function of the Clergy in general is too often misunderstood,
(which in such a skeptical and licentious age we need not wonder at,) those who
officiate in private houses lie under particular disadvantages: Here the Master
of the Family usually expects an extraordinary observance from the Priest, and
returns him less notice in exchange, than to others of the same order and
condition. Now one would think in point of reason, that an Ecclesiastical (as
well as a Civil or Military) Officer should be more considered within the
limits and extent of his employ than elsewhere, both upon the account of the
Jurisdiction he has there, and because of the advantage those he is concerned
with, do or may receive from the execution of his Office.

Now the reason of this unaccountable practice must be resolved into one or
both of these pretenses; either 1. That a Clergyman officiating in a Family,
ought to be entertained no otherwise than under the notion of a servant: or 2.
Because it is in the Patrons power to oblige the Priest with Church-Preferment.


It will be therefore the design of these papers to show, 1. That a Priest, or
Chaplain in a Family is no servant. 2. That whatever fair expectations the
Patron may have given the Priest of future advantage, those are no sufficient
grounds to justify an Imperious deportment on the one hand, or a servile
submission on the other.


1. I shall prove that a Priest or Chaplain in a Family is no servant, the
contrary of which I believe he is often thought to be, though it is not always
spoken out. Now in order to the removing this mistake, I shall in the

First place answer those objections, which seem to have given the most
probable occasion of its rise.

Secondly, I shall give a short description of the Office of a Chaplain; and
show how much it differs from that of a Servant.

1. I shall answer those Objections, which have given the most probable
occasion to this mistake; among which we may reckon the Priests being
entertained with Diet.

But that eating at another Table does not make a man a Servant is plain; for
if it did, then every one that visits his friend, if he happens to eat or drink
without paying for it, must immediately forfeit his liberty. If it be said that
it is not eating now and then upon a visit which brings a man into the Condition
of a servant, but doing it constantly, and with the same person: To this I
answer, That if eating by the year makes a man a servant for a year, then
eating by the day must make him a servant for that day; the only difference in
this case is, ^^at the one who eats but a meal or two comes into his Liberty
sooner than the other.

But possibly it is the Priests contracting for Diet which makes him mistaken
for a servant to him that affords it; and here it is supposed to come under the
notion of Wages, because the Priest is to do something for it. Now because a
consideration of this nature, whether it be received in money or diet, or both,
is the same thing; I shall prove that a man's receiving money in consideration
of bestowing his time and pains upon another, does not make him a servant to
him that returns him a recompense for his trouble. For example, Lawyers and
Physicians have their Fees, or their Wages if you please, and yet I suppose
none will say that they are servants to all the Clients and Patients that
employ them, and if not to all, then for the same reason not to any: The Judges
have a Fee for every Cause which is tried at the Nisi prius Bar, and a Justice
of Peace has money allowed him for making a Warrant, which both of them may
receive without forfeiting their Authoty. The House of Commons likewise have
Pensions from their Electors, during the Session of Parliament; I confess it is
not usually paid now, but if they did receive it as formerly they have done, I
hope no one would say a Knight of a Shire was servant to a man of Forty
shillings per annum, because he contributed something toward his maintenance.
On all these cases a man is engaged in the business of others, and receives a
consideration for his employment, and yet has no reason to be accounted a
servant for his pains.

If it be said, that in most of these instances the Salaries are assigned by
Law, and consequently that there is no contract between him that receives and
him that gives the consideration; I answer, that there is a vertual, though not
an express contract, because the people have agreed to consent to whatever
their Representatives shall determine.

2ly, As to the case of the Lawyers, though their Fees are stated by Law, yet
every one chooses whom he will make use of, so that the voluntary Retaining any
one, is no less than a plain Contract, and the giving him so much money upon
condition that he will plead for him.

3ly, It Is not the contracting for money in lieu of some other exchange which
makes a man a servant, for then every one that sells for money would be a
servant to the buyer, and consequently a Pedlar might make himself Master of
the best Merchant in London, if he should happen to be so ambitious as to be
his customer: and which is most to be lamented, if a man could not by way of
Contract receive money with one hand, without parting with his Liberty with the
other, then the Landlord must be a servant to the Tenant; for the bare
contracting for Rent, though he never received a penny, is enough to bring him
under; so that according to this opinion, a man cannot let his Farm without
Demising and Granting away himself.

But further, That the entertaining the Clergy with Diet and Salary is no
argument of their subjection, will appear, if we consider that we are bound to
contribute toward the support of our Parents, if they stand in need of it; and
yet I suppose it does not follow that this makes us their Superiors: It Is so
far from it, that our assisting them is accounted part of that honor which the
Fifth Commandment enjoins us to pay them, and is so interpreted by our Savior
himself, St Matthew. 15.4, 5, 6. The communication therefore of part of our
wealth to the Clergy officiating in our houses, is in reason nothing but a due
respect to their Function, and a grateful acknowledgement of their care; What
the Priest receives from us is in effect offered to God Almighty, because it is
given upon the account of the Relation he has to him, and the advantages we
receive from thence. This is honoring God with our substance, who in regard he
stands in need of nothing himself, has ordered those persons (whom he has set
apart to keep up his Service and Worship) to receive what men present to him in
token of his Sovereignty and Providence. Thus what was offered to God under the
old Testament (except what was spent in sacrificing) was the Priests portion,
assigned by the Divine appointment, Numb. 18.8, 9. and in the 20th verse of
that Chapter the reason why the Tribe of Levi was to have no Inheritance in the
Land which was to be divided, is given, because God promised to be their
Inheritance, that is to give them those offerings which were made to him; and
that this was a very liberal assignment, and much exceeded the provision which
was made for the rest of the Tribes, might easily be made good, were it not
foreign to the present argument.

There are many other places in the Old Testament which may be alleged for the
confirmation of this Truth, as Deuteronomy. 18.2. Josh. 13.14. Ezekiel. 44.28, etc. And
that this practice did not depend upon any Ceremonial Constitution, but was
founded in the unalterable reason of things, will appear if we look into the
New Testament; where St. Paul tells us that God has ordained that those that
Preach the Gospel (which every Priest does who reads the New Testament) should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. Our Spiritual Governors are Ministers of God
to us as well as our Temporal, Romans 13.4. and therefore the Apostle's
inference, v. 6. may, in a qualified sense at least, be applied to them, For
this cause pay you Tribute also. And that the same Apostle did not believe that
a Consideration of this nature, ought to subject the Clergy to Distance and
submissive behavior, is beyond question; for he plainly tells the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if
we shall reap your carnal things? It seems he did not believe this Favor so
extraordinary, or to have any such commanding quality in it, as to make him
their servant, or dependant, if he had received it. Nay he tells them that he
had power to eat and to drink; that is, God had given him a right to a
Competent maintenance out of the Estates of those he instructed; which without
question, where the circumstances of the person will permit, ought to be
proportioned with respect to the person Represented, and to the nature and
quality of the Employ. It Is plain therefore that the Apostle thought that if
Gods Ministers lived out of the Fortunes of their charge, yet they were not so
mightily indebted beyond a possibility of Requital; but that the Obligation was
full as great on the other side: and the reason why some men now a days are not
of the same mind is, because the concerns of the other world have none, or a
very slender consideration allowed them; for otherwise without question men
would look upon those as none of their least beneficial Friends, who are
appointed by God to guide them securely in their passage to Eternity: but now
it is the Mode with too many to live as if their souls were the most
inconsiderable thing they carried about them.

5. It may be Objected, that every Family ought to be under the Government of
one single person, and because the Priest is confessed not to be the Master,
therefore he must be under command, and consequently a servant. Now this is so
slender an Objection, that I should have waved the mention of it, but that some
people seem desirous of being imposed upon in this matter; and we know when men
are in love with a mistake, the least appearance of a reason is apt to entangle
their understandings, and make them overlook the evidence of an assertion they
are prejudiced against.

To what is objected therefore I answer, that this Argument proves all Boarders
servants, though their Office or Quality be never so much above those they
sojourn with. I grant the Priest is not to disturb the Master of the house in
the Government of his Family, nor to intermeddle in his Affairs, (to do this
were an unreasonable incroachment) but the living under his roof makes him no
more his servant, then his Father or Mother are, when they reside with him.

There may be several other things urged against the truth of the Proposition I
am to defend, but the solving the remaining Objections will fall in more
conveniently, after I have given a short description of the Office of a
Chaplain, and shown how much it differs from that of a servant, and how
inconsistent it is with it; which I shall proceed to.

1. Therefore, The Office of a Clergyman in a Family, is to Pray for, Bless,
and give Absolution to those he is concerned with; which are all Acts of
Authority and Jurisdiction. He is to Counsel, Exhort, and Reprove the Master of
the Family himself, upon occasion (though with respect to his station) which
Offices are inconsistent with the condition of a servant, and must be very
unsuccessfully performed by him, as will further appear afterward.

2. He does not receive this Commission from the Master of the Family, or from
any humane Authority, but from God himself, whose Deputy he is in things
pertaining to Religion: He is not entertained upon any secular account, or to
manage any other business but what relates to another world; and is Consecrated
to this Function by the Divine Warrant and appointment, and consequently he is
Gods Minister not man's. The place in which he is engaged is his Parish, and the
difference between a Parochial Priest and him lies in this, that the extent of
his Charge is not so large as that of a Parish Priest; the one having but only
one single Family to take care of, and the other a great many: but the Office
is the same, and therefore the one has no more reason to be accounted a
servant than the other.

3. However pride, ignorance, or inconsideration may sometimes bias men's
minds, yet if they would but attend to their own practice, they would see that
the concern of a Priest in a Family is no servile employment; because in the
absence of a Priest the Master of the Family supplies his place, as far as
lawfully he may, that is, in praying and giving thanks at meat; which is a
plain confession that men are satisfied that it is very improper to employ any
of their servants in the performance of Holy Offices; the doing of which would
be dishonorable to God, and weaken the force and Majesty of Religion; and
therefore when one Consecrated to Holy Ministrations is not present, God ought
to be addressed to by a person of the greatest consideration in the Family;
which implicit confession of theirs, is both agreeable to the reason of mankind
in general, and the practice of the first Ages of the world, when the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Authority were united, the same Person being both Priest and
Prince in his Family; as appears from Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job's erecting
Altars, and offering sacrifices: and before the Institution of the Mosaic Law
(in which God chose a distinct Tribe to serve him in Holy Offices) the
Firstborn, among other considerable privileges, had the Priesthood annexed to
his Birthright.

4. This notion of a servant destroys the end and design of the Priestly
Office, it renders his Person cheap, and his Discourse insignificant, it causes
his Reproofs to be looked upon as presumptuous, and makes a generous freedom
and impartial plainness, to be interpreted a forgetfulness of Distance: and yet
this sort of plain-dealing is not more necessary toward any sort of people than
those who are wealthy and Honorable, the nature of their circumstances being
such as make them much more apt to flatter themselves, and to be flattered by
others; which made St. Paul command St. Timothy, to charge those that were rich
that they should not be high-minded: The Apostle well knew in how great danger
such persons were of taking the height of their condition amiss, and confiding
too much in it; for to this unhappy mistake they have not only the common
artifices of self-love to betray them, but several confederate circumstances
from without strike in to carry on the imposture, and to cheat them into a
wrong opinion of themselves. They see how they are reverenced and admired by
almost all sort of people, and that men frequently resign their ease, their
Liberty and conscience too, to purchase fewer conveniences than they are
already possessed of: They find that wealth and Reputation puts them into a
capacity of gratifying their senses, and their humor, gives them many
opportunities of obliging their friends and crushing their enemies, and makes
their will a kind of Law to their Inferiors and Dependants. Now these
Advantages, when they are not thoroughly examined, but rated according to the
value which Vulgar estimation sets upon them, are apt to swell them into an
unreasonable conceit of themselves; which vanity is still fed and inflamed
because they are often so unfortunate, as not to attend, that these worldly
accommodations are things really distinct from their owners; that these
ornamental privileges are but a decent varnish which enriches no deeper then
the surface; and an Impression, which though Royal, cannot alter the metal:
but on the contrary they are apt to fancy their Fortunes and themselves to be
all of a piece, that this glorious outside grows out of some intrinsic
Prerogative, and is the genuine luster and complexion of their nature. And
since a flourishing condition is thus apt to impose upon men, and has such a
natural tendency to give them a false Idea of their own Excellency, have they
not need of a prudent and conscientious Friend, to insinuate that they have no
Essential Advantages above the rest of mankind, to awaken them into right
apprehensions of things, and rescue them from that delusion which their own
vanity, and the ignorance or design of others often puts upon them. Therefore
if men would have their Lives correct and happy, they ought to encourage their
Friends (especially those who are particularly concerned in the Regulation of
their Conscience) to tell them of their faults; they should invite them to this
freedom, if not by express declaration, yet by affable Deportment, always
receiving the performance of the nice Office with demonstrations of pleasure
and satisfaction. Did men consider how slippery and difficultly manageable an
Elevated station is, they would easily discern that it was not the safest way
to trust altogether to their own Conduct, but to take in the constant
assistance of a Religious Person, that so their miscarriages might be
represented, their Consciences directed in doubtful cases, and their minds
fortified with defensatives proper to the temptations of their condition and
temper. Indeed the very converse of such a Guide, if his character were rightly
understood, and prudently supported, would help to keep them upon their guard;
and by striking a kind of Religious awe upon their spirits, make their
conversation more staunch and regular, and often prevent their falling into any
remarkable excesses: But these advantages are all lost upon those who
misapprehend the Priests Office, and entertain him upon the same account they
do their Footmen, only to garnish the Table, and stuff out the Figure of the
Family. When a man has received such a disparaging notion of the Priest, and
ranged him amongst his servants, there is small likelihood of his being the
better for his company; for this conceit will make his carriage lofty and
reserved; his words, gestures, and silence, will all carry marks of Neglect and
Imperiousness in them: which are plain and designed Intimations that the Priest
must not insist upon the privileges of his Function; that he must not pretend
to any Liberty, but what his Patron is pleased to allow; with the Direction of
whose actions he is not to intermeddle, nor remonstrate against the
unreasonableness of any practice, nor show him the danger of continuing in it:
for though all this be done with caution and tenderness, and respect, yet he
must look for nothing but disdain and disappointment in requital, for presuming
to admonish his Superiors; which is such an Usurpation upon Dominion and
Quality as is not to be endured; being neither agreeable to the servile
Employment of the one, nor consistent with the Honor of the other.

5ly, This degrading the Priesthood into a servile Office, takes off from that
Veneration which is due to the solemn Mysteries of Religion, and makes them
look common and contemptible; by being administered by Persons not sui juris,
but obnoxious to the pleasure of those who receive them: God therefore to
prevent his Ordinances from falling into contempt, and to make them effectual
to procure the happiness of Mankind, has given his Priests Authority over all
they are concerned with; they are to bless the people in his Name, and the
Author to the Hebrews tells us, that without contradiction the less is blessed
of the better, Hebr. 7.7. They are called the Lords Priests, 1 Samuel 22.17. The
Messengers of the Lord of hosts, Mal. 2.7. and in the New Testament, they are
styled the Stewards and Ambassadors of God; and made Overseers of his Church by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 5.20. Acts 20.28. The sense of which Texts, and partly
the words, are by the appointment of our Church applied to those who are
ordained Priests, to put them in mind of the dignity of their Office, and the
great Care they ought to take about the conscientious discharge of it.

I confess it is possible for a Priest to make himself a servant; he may it is
likely be Steward or Clark of the Kitchen if he pleases, (as Bishop Latimer
complains some of the Clergy were forced to be in his time, Heylin Hist. Refor.
p. 61.) but as long as he does not engage in any Employment which is intended
for State, or the convenience of Life, as long as he keeps to his Priestly
Function, so long he may be assured he has no Master in the House; and for any
to suppose he has, is an unreasonable and absurd mistake; (to say no worse of
it) it is an inverting that Order which God made between the Priest and people,
and denies that Authority which God has granted for the Edification of his
Church. It endeavors to destroy that Honorable Relation which the Priest has
to the Divine Majesty, (to whose service he is appropriated) which God is
pleased to dignifie him with, that he might have the greater Influence upon
those he is concerned with, and be successful in the Execution of his Office:
and therefore for a Patron to account such a Consecrated Person his Priest, as
if he belonged to him as a servant, is in effect to challenge Divine Honors,
and to set up himself for a God: for if he is any thing less, he must own that
the service of the Priest does not belong to him; for that in the very terms
and notion of it, is intended for no Being inferior to that which is supposed
to be Divine.

If it be Objected that the Priest has obliged himself to remove with the
Patron, when and whither he thinks fit, and therefore seems to be in the same
condition with the rest of the Attendants; to this I answer, that this makes
him no more a servant than the traveling and ambulatory way of living among
the Tartars, would make the Priests servants to the people, provided they were
Christians: To make it plainer, suppose a Bishop Ordained over the Company of a
Ship, and that his Dioecese lay only in one Bottom; can we imagine that he
would lose his Episcopal power, and fall into the Condition of other Seamen, as
soon as the Ship was ordered to weigh anchor, and began to make its Voyage from
one Port to another: At this rate a man may call a Guardian Angel one of his
Domestics, because for the security and protection of their Charge, these
benevolent Spirits are pleased to accompany us from one place to another. I
grant the Scripture tells us they are sent forth to minister for those who are
Heris of Salvation, Hebr. 1.14. but then we must allow them to be Gods
Ministers not ours; and so likewise are those of whom I am speaking, as among
other places may be seen from 2 Cor. 6.4. God has pleased to put the Clergy in
joint Commission with the Angels themselves, for the Guidance of, and
superintending his Church. When St. John would have worshipped the Angel which
appeared to him, he is forbid to do it, and the reason alleged is, because I
am thy fellow servant, Rev. 19.10. that is, as Grotius expounds it, we are both
Ambassadors of the same King. And although St. John and the rest of the
Apostles had privileges peculiar to themselves, both in respect of the extent
of their Jurisdiction, the infallibility of their Doctrine, and other
miraculous Gifts with which they were endowed, to which Bishops themselves,
much less inferior Priests have no reason to pretend; yet though God was
pleased for the more speedy and effectual planting of Christianity, to qualify
the Apostles in an extraordinary manner, and to give them a larger Commission
than to the Clergy of succeeding Ages, yet they all act by the same Authority,
and for the same End; therefore the unfix't and moving Nature of a Cure, does
not alter, and degrade the Office of a Priest: He is not less a Shepherd,
because the Flock happens sometimes to wander unaccountably, from one Pasture
to another: He is bound to attend the Charge he has undertaken, and must
answer the Neglect of it to God; and when it does not continue in the same
place, to accompany its motion, is no more a diminution to his Office, than it
is to that of a Judge to go the Circuit, whose Commission is as considerable,
though it travels with him from one County to another, as if he had been always
fixed in Westminster Hall.

If it be farther Objected, that the Patron appoints the hours of Prayer, which
seems to imply something of command; To this I answer, That in his choosing the
time of Prayer, he does not appoint any service for himself, but only declares
when he and his Household are ready for Gods worship, and desirous of the
Priestly absolution, and blessing; which is proper for him to do, because the
Family is employed in his business, and under his command; and therefore
without his permission, they have not many times an opportunity of meeting
together for Divine Service: Which is still more reasonable, because the Priest
is suppos^d only to intend the affairs of Religion, and to be always ready for
the performance of his Office, and consequently that time which is most
convenient for those under his Care, and in which the assembly is like to be
most numerous, he is by virtue of his Office bound to observe, whether his Cure
lies in a private Family, or a whole Parish.

But lastly it may be urged that the 33 of Hen. 8. cap. 28. calls the Patrons
of Chaplains their Masters; and will any man be so hardy as to question the
Judgment and determination of the Parliament? But here we may observe that
this Act calls only those Patrons Masters, who can give Qualifications for
Pluralities. Having premised this observation, I answer, with all due
submission and respect to this Legislative Council; that if the question was
concerning any Civil Right, then it is confessed it is in the Power of the
Parliament either to limit, or take it away, because the whole Power and
Authority of the Kingdom is there, either personally, or by Representation; and
therefore they may deprive any Person of his Honor or Estate (the Right of the
Succession to the Crown excepted) as far as they please: not that it is
impossible for them to act unjustly, but only that what they Determine has the
force of a Law, because every man is supposed to have given his consent to it.
But here we must observe, that the Church is a distinct Society from the State,
and independent upon it: The Constitution of the Church is founded in the
Appointment of Christ, in that Commission which he gave the Apostles and their
Successors, and consequently does not derive its Authority from any Earthly
Power. The Civil Magistrate never yet made Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, nor ever
can; and therefore we may safely affirm without any injury or disrespect to
him, that he cannot make these Spiritual Offices greater or less than they are;
therefore if God has made the Priests Office (as nothing is plainer in
Scripture then that he has) an Office of Government, Direction, and
superintendance over those he is concerned with, then it is not in the Power of
the Parliament to make his Condition servile: because no Person, or Society of
Persons can take away that Power which they never gave: The Parliament may with
equal Right Enact that Parents shall be subject to their Children, and that the
wife shall be her husband's Mistress without a Complement, as make the people
the Priests Masters, and give the Flock a Jurisdiction over the Shepherd; they
may with the same justice repeal the most Established Laws of Nature, and
invert the Right of the two former Relations, as of this latter; for this has
its Establishment from the same God that the other have, and for Ends, at least
equally weighty, and momentous. This Power of their Spiritual Governors they
have no more Authority to destroy, than they have to vote down the Canon of
Scripture, or to decree Sacrilege to be no sin: It Is granted, that all
Ecclesiastical Persons, as they are Members of the State, are subject to its
Authority; and that a Priest or Bishop, may properly be a servant to the
Magistrate, if he holds any Secular Employment under him; because in this case
he acts by a Commission from the Civil Government; but this only concerns him
as he is a Member of the State, and does not in the least affect his Spiritual
Capacity: The Power which results from that, flows from another Fountain; and
is given by our Savior himself, and therefore cannot be weakened or recalled
by any State-Constitution whatever. Men should do well therefore to consider,
that as a Prince has no reason to take it well, if the people should look upon
his Officers as their servants; so it is not over-respectfull to God Almighty to
suppose his Ministers stand in that inferior Relation to those they are
concerned with.

I shall now proceed to the 2d thing at first propounded, viz. to show, that
whatever fair expectations the Patron may have given the Priest, yet these are
not sufficient Grounds for an Imperious Carriage on the one hand, or a servlle
submission on the other.

1. This sort of Deportment were unreasonable, supposing the Patron had as full
and absolute a right in Church-Preferment, as he has in any other part of his
Estate. For what can be a more ungenerous and ungentlemanly practice, than to
require that a man should resign up his Liberty, and forfeit the privileges of
his Station, only upon the probability of receiving some sort of consideration
for it afterward? How unlike a Benefactour does he look who sets an Excise
upon his bare word, and clogs the expectation of future Advantage with present
Inconvenience? Thus to anticipate the Revenues of a favor, is like taking
Usury for money before it is lent, which certainly is one of the worst sorts of
extortion, because here a man not only pays for that he has not, but for that
which possibly he may never have.

But 2ly, Let us suppose the Priest in actual possession of some considerable
Preferment, yet being it is pretended to be given, it ought certainly to come
disencumber'd from all Conditions which may abate the kindness of it. He that
pretends to give, should chiefly respect the Advantage of him to whom the
Favor is granted. He should demean himself toward the obliged party, as if
the obligation had never been; that it may plainly appear, that his intention
in conferring it, was disinterested; that he had no little Designs of Profit or
State, to serve in it; but that it proceeded purely from a generous inclination
to promote the Happiness of another. Whereas on the contrary, to part with any
thing out of a selfish Design, is an exchange, not a Gift, which when it is done
by a Person of Estate, is an argument of a mean and mercenary spirit. But then
to pursue a Benefit with superciliousness and contempt, to expect a compliance
with the most unreasonable humors; to give upbraiding and contumelious signs
of the dependence and unworthiness of the Receiver; to require a man to
relinquish the necessary Freedom of one of the most solemn and honorable
Professions; this turns an obligation into injury, and affront, and looks like
a malicious trap set to catch a man's Reputation. Who that has either Sense or
Honesty would turn his Canonical Habit into a Livery, and make himself useless
and ridiculous for the greatest consideration whatever? A worthy Person would
scorn a Kingdom proffered upon such dishonorable terms.

3ly, If we put the case as it is determined by Law, this practice will appear
still more unreasonable. It Is sufficiently known, and were it not for the
overgrown prejudices of some Persons, it were superfluous to mention, that the
Patron is so far from having a full Propriety in Churh-Preferments, that his
Right only consists in a power to Nominate who shall enjoy them. Which very
Nomination must be made within six Months, and fixed upon a Person Canonically
qualified, otherwise it is wholly invalid. His Interest in Church Livings only
enables him to give them away, not to keep them. He has no power to enter upon
any part of the Glebes, or Tithes, or so much as to sequester the profits for
the next Incumbent. He is only a Trustee authorized under certain conditions,
to dispose of the Patrimony of the Church, which is settled upon it by as good
Laws as any he holds his Estate by. That Right which he has was originally
granted in consideration of works of extraordinary Piety, in building or
endowing of Churches: which is a Title very few (except the King) can pretend
to, either upon their own, or their Ancestors accounts. From all which it
appears, that the Patrons giving an Annuity out of his Estate, is a quite
different thing from his Presenting to a Living, and therefore his expectations
of gratitude and observance, should not be set so high in this latter case. For
here neither Law, nor Religion allow the Donor to be a penny the better for what
he disposes of; he cannot detain the least part of it without Injustice and
Sacrilege, nor confer it upon exceptionable Persons without breach of Fidelity.

The Trust indeed is honorable and weighty, it being in the power of those to
whom it is committed to encourage Learning, and to provide the people with
prudent, and conscientious Guides: but then I must add, that it ought to be
discharged accordingly, and that those who do not chiefly aim at these Ends in
the exercise of it, have little either of Conscience or Honor in them.

We have reason to believe that when the Church gave this right of Presentation
to Lay-Patrons, (for that the Bishops had originally the right of judging the
Qualifications of Priests, and fixing them in their respective Cures, without
being accountable to a Quare impedit for their refusal of the peoples choice,
might be made evident were it pertinent to the business in hand) When the
Church I say parted with this Right, she had no suspicion of the degeneracy of
after Ages; but imagined that the integrity, and conscience, if not the
Munificence of the first Patrons might have been transmitted to the Heirs, or
Purchasers of their Right. The Piety of those times would have made it look
uncharitable to have been apprehensive of Resignation Bonds, of forced
Compositions, and Contracts for Farms, or Women. But some people have now
learned to make bold with God Almighty, beyond the imagination, as well as the
example of their Predecessors; and to be guilty of those sacrilegious Frauds,
which by the late Provision of our Laws against some of them, seem not to have
been so much as thought on, in those more Primitive and Religious days.

And here in point of Charity I think myself obliged to desire those who are
concerned in the Rights of Patronage, to consider before it is too late, how
great a sin it is to abuse their Power; and through Covetousness, or some other
unwarrantable principle, to betray the Church, which has in some measure made
them her Guardian: It imports them very much to reflect how unworthy and
unchristian it is to play upon the indigence or irresolution of another; and
take an advantage from the unfortunateness of his Condition or Temper, to
oblige him to mean and sinful compliances! And what an open and undisguised
Affront it is to the Divine Majesty, to endeavor to make his Ministers cheap
and insignificant; both before, and after the conferring our pretended favors
upon them. To create servile Dependances, and raise our private Grandeur upon
the Endowments of Religion, is a perfect contradiction to the End and design of
them. This makes the Church contemptible by the strength of her own Revenues,
and causes the Monuments of our Forefathers Piety to be instrumental in
undermining, and exposing that Faith they thereby intended to secure and
advance* which whosoever is guilty of, he may be assured he has a right to the
Imprecations, as well as the Patronage of the first Endowers of Churches, which
dreadful Legacy they were generally very careful to settle upon such
irreligious Posterity. Spelman de non temerand. Eccl.

In short, to prostitute so sacred a Trust as this is, to pride and ambition,
is in effect to sacrifice to the Devil with that which is consecrated to God
Almighty, and looks like a more provoking impiety, than Belshazzer's debauching
to the Honor of his Idols, in the Vessels of the Temple, Dan. 5.3, 4. for here
is not only an abuse of Holy things but persons too, and God is dishonored in
those that Represent him upon a most solemn and important account.

I shall now at last crave leave to desire those of the Clergy, who are engaged
in the Families of Secular Persons (for I mean no other) to reflect of what ill
consequence it is to Religion for them not to assert their Office in a prudent
defensible way: and how cheap in their persons, and unsuccessfull in their
Employment, they must necessarily be, if they betray the privileges of their
Function, by servile compliance and flattery. People will be apt to imagine
(and not without reason) that those who will cringe below the gravity of their
Character, to gain a little of this world, can scarce have any great and
Religious apprehensions of the other. Overmuch Ceremony in a Clergyman is
frequently misinterpreted, and supposed to proceed not from his Breeding or
Humility, but from a consciousness of his meanness; and others are willing to
allow him so much sense, as to be a competent judge of his own
inconsiderableness; and since he confesses himself contemptible by his
carriage, they think it but just to treat him accordingly. For Men of Figure,
excepting those who are very understanding and Religious, are apt to have
misapprehensions conveyed into them by over-proportioned respect; and to
imagine the Distance between him that gives it, and themselves, to be much
greater than really it is. Since therefore as things stand, there is some
danger lest Churchmen should complement away the usefulness and Authority of
their calling; they would do well to decline superlative observance, for fear
they give others a wrong notion of their Employ, or be thought to have Men's
persons in admiration because of advantage. It would be no more than requisite,
if they would reserve their Duty for their King, their Bishop and their
Parents, and express their gratitude to their Patrons in Language less liable
to misconstruction, and more proper to the Relation between them. For as they
should not be unwilling to own the Distinctions which the Kings Laws have made,
as they ought to make some particular acknowledgements for the favors, and
civilities of those they are more immediately concerned with, and by
inoffensive and agreeable conversation, prevent all reasonable suspicion of
their being displeased with the superior Quality, or Fortune of others; So
likewise are they obliged not to be so officiously, or rather parasitically
mindful of the Condition of any Person, as wholly to be forgetful of their
own. For notwithstanding the disadvantages they may sometimes happen to come
into the world with; the Constitution of the Government has set them upon the
same Level with the inferior Gentry, as a reward of their Education, and out
of regard to their Function: Now that the Laws were not Priest-ridden and
superstitiously lavish of their Honor in this case might, were it necessary,
be abundantly proved from the reason of the thing, and the general practice of
other Countries, both with respect to ancient and modern times. These
privileges therefore being conferred upon just and public accounts, a man is
sometimes bound to maintain; and to surrender them up to the superciliousness
of every assuming or ignorant Pretender, is a Reflection upon the wisdom, and
ingratitude to the Religious Bounty of those Kings who granted them: and which
is worse, a Churchman by making himself contemptible has parted with his power
of doing good; and consequently disappointed the great End of his Calling.
Whereas without doubt it is part of the design of these privileges to exact a
suitable Resolution and presence of mind in those that have them, that so their
spirit being raised up to their civil station, their character and deportment
may be the better proportioned, and their actions keep a truer decorum with the
Nature of their Office; that they might not be overawed, and almost struck dumb
with the glitterings of Title, or Fortune; but retain a graceful Freedom in
conversation, neither Idolizing Greatness, nor neglecting it. The intention of
the Laws in distinguishing the Clergy from the Vulgar, besides the
consideration of their Merit; was to put them into a better Capacity to
maintain the Honor and Interest of Religion among all sorts of Persons; that
the rich as well as the poor might be advantaged by their Ministry, and when
Persons of Condition were to be told of their faults, the Priest might be
fortified with a convenient courage to give the reproof, and the others
disposed to receive it without disgust and impatience. Now to be ready upon all
occasions to resent any dishonor done to Religion with a prudent gravity and
assurance, carries such a noble Air of greatness and undesigning honesty in it,
that it forces a secret Veneration from Enemies themselves; and though a man
may happen to be unjustly hated for speaking unacceptable truths; yet he is
sure never to be despised. Whereas a diffident and unsupported behavior in a
Clergyman, is often supposed to proceed from ignoble qualities, and
consequently will be sure to weaken the force of his public Instructions; it
being natural for Ill men especially, to disregard, if not to deride the
admonitions of those they believe are afraid of them; and he that cannot talk
without concern before a Sinner of Quality any where but in the Pulpit, might
almost as good say nothing to him there. For if a Churchmans conversation be
servile and designing all the Week, his appearing with a new Set of Notions
upon the Sunday, will be interpreted only a formal compliance with his
Profession: His pressing those Doctrines which his Practice contradicts, will
signify little either to his own advantage, or theirs that hear him: For
though men ought to mind what is said, and not who says it; yet the prejudices
of the generality are such, that a good cause usually suffers very much when
it is pleaded by an improper and exceptionable Advocate: How fulsome an
Entertainment is it to hear a Coward harang upon Valor, or a Covetous Miser
preach up contempt of the world? The man might better have spared his
Rhetoric; for his commending those good Qualities, he neither has the
honesty, or courage to be Master of, is in effect but a Satyr upon himself, and
serves only to make him more despicable and ridiculous; and which is worse, the
secret disdain the Audience has for such a Panegyrist, often insensibly slides
from his Person to his subject; which makes his exhortation nauseous, and helps
to bring Virtue it self into Disgrace.

If it be objected that the poverty of some of the Clergy forces them to
suppress their sentiments in some things, and to suffer whatever an Encroaching
Spirit shall think fit to put upon them: To this I answer, that the temptation
to this sin ought to have been prevented before their going into Holy Orders:
For those who cannot be supplied with a competent Fortune by themselves, their
Relations, or at least by some creditable independent Preferment, had much
better choose some other inferior Employment, than expose themselves to such
apparent danger in this: But if their own or their Friends imprudence, has
sent them unprovided into the Church, it is more reputable, conscientious, and
to a generous mind, more easy too, to submit to the inconveniences of their
own poverty, than to the Pride of others; and to prefer a homely, unornamented
Liberty, to a splendid Servitude. And as for those (if there be any such) who
do not discharge their Office with that plainness, and discreetly managed
Resolution which God and the Church expects from them; it will not be improper
to remind them of what Mr Herbert has written upon this occasion, Country
Parson p. 5. where he tells us, "That such persons wrong the Priesthood,
neglect their duty, and shall be so far from that which they seek by their
oversubmissiveness and cringing, that they shall ever be despised." Indeed they
have no reason to expect any better Usage; for as Flattery is deservedly
accounted one of the most contemptible Vices, so a Clergyman when he is guilty
of it is the worst of Flatterers. To which we may add that it is hard to
conceive how the Oath against Simony can be fairly taken by such persons; for
certainly he that purchases his Preferment with the prevarication of his
Office, does no less contradict the design of this Oath, then if he had paid
down the full value in money for it: He that has bartered away his Freedom and
Usefulness, (and as much as in him lies the Reputation of his Order) cannot in
any reasonable construction be said to be Presented Gratis.

Those therefore who are this way concerned, should do well to consider how
mean it is to be overawed, and how mercenary, to be bribed into an Omission of
their Duty! What a sordid and criminal persidiousness is it, to betray the
Honor of their Function, and the Happiness of their Charge, For handfulls of
barley and pieces of bread? Ezekiel. 13. How ill do they Represent the God of
Faithfulness and Truth; who either by verbal or silent Flattery, deceive men
into a false persuasion of security, and dissemble their apprehensions of
danger, when the mistake is likely to prove Fatal to those that lie under it?
Can they that pretend (and that truly, a Commission from our Blessed Savior,
That Good Shepherd, who laid down his Life for the Sheep; Can they have so
little Charity for the Souls of Men, as to let them miscarry out of Ceremony
and Respect, and rather venture their being damned than disobliged* How such a
Treacherous Observance will be looked upon in the Great Day of Accounts, is not
difficult to foretell, were it not too sad an Argument to dilate upon: However
something of the Guilt of it may be conceived by a remarkable Sentence of the
forementioned Author, p. 6. which seems to be no less true than severe. "They
(says he) who for the hope of Promotion, neglect any necessary Admonition or
Reproof, sell, with Judas, their Lord and Master."

FINIS.

