A PERFECT GUIDE FOR Protestant Dissenters, IN CASE OF PROSECUTION UPON ANY OF
THE PENAL STATUTES Made against Them. TOGETHER WITH. The Statutes of 35 Eliz.
and 22 Car. 2. at large.

To which is added, A POSTSCRIPT ABOUT Ecclesiastical Courts, And PROSECUTION
in Them.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin. 1682.

The Preface.
It Is the Common Practice now adays, for base and mercenary Pens to pass the
worst Censures upon the best Intentions of Men. The Arguments that follow are
all grounded either upon Scripture and Reason, or upon Equal Justice and
Prudent Morality; and those not enforced with Heat and Passion, but with all
the Mildness and Submission imaginable; which argues the Fairness and Honesty
of the Design, viz. to procure, if it may be done, a happy Union between
Protestants and Protestants; whom it rather mainly concerns to join their
Forces against the Common Enemy of their Profession, than to make themselves
the Scorn and Triumph of Popish Cunning, by a needless Separation; which, if
duly considered, would soon be found unhappily fomented and increased by the
encouraged Emissaries and Scribbling Bravo's of Rome. Is it not apparent, how
they already begin to undermine and blow up the Truth of the late Horrid Plot,
so miraculously discovered? To which purpose, is it not likewise apparent what
daily Affronts they put upon the King's Evidence, to the end that by rendering
their Persons, and whatever they have said or sworn, ridiculous, they may be
the better able to raise a Mist before the Eyes of the People, and then totally
withdraw the Plot from their Belief? Is it not apparent how vigorously they
assail the whole Body of the Dissenters, Men of Religious, Serious, Upright,
and most Loyal Principles, under the scandalous Names of Fanatics and Whiggs;
and by throwing the Failings and Misdemeanors of some few upon all (this Earth
not affording that Happiness to the most Holy Society in the World, of being
without some Hypocrites and bad Men) to cast an Odium upon above a third part
of the most Industrious and Wealthy Part of the Nation, on purpose to enervate
and impoverish the Protestant Interest, and make the softer and more easy way
for Popish Intrusion? Enormities much more deserving the Punishment of Penal
Laws, than Public Meetings for the Worship of God.

Upon which Considerations, it cannot be looked upon certainly by Persons of
truly pious and cordial Affection for the Good of their Country, as a Design
either dishonest or factious, to vindicate, so far as may stand with Equity and
good Conscience, the Protestant Dissenters from the heavy Imputations of
Schism, Sedition, and Disloyalty, every day cast upon them, though most
undeservedly, by the Pope's Weekly Drudges here in this City. To which end, the
Design of these few Sheets is to more than to plead their Cause, with all
modesty and submission, before the Tribunals of Justice and Divine Charity; to
rectify the Judgments of Persons misguided by Mercenary Scriblers, by setting
forth the Nature and Ends of these Meetings, and the dangerous Consequences of
setting up a Protestant Persecution, to the encouragement of those Pests of the
Kingdom, ignorant and greedy Informers.

And because a Sight of the Statutes themselves may be necessary to those that
have them not, they are hereunto annexed; there being nothing more Moral than
the Reason of Self-Preservation in a Legal and Orderly Way; which they that
seek by no other Means than by those of Duty and Allegiance, no other being
here propounded, cannot be thought to deviate from the Laws of God or Nature.

A Guide for Protestant Dissenters, etc.
THere is nothing that seems a greater blemish to Christianity, than that
little Differences about the Exercise of Divine Worship, should cause such
Heats and Animosities among Men: And for them whose Business it should be to
Preach Unity, Love, and Charity, under the Notion of Church Government, to
instigate and animate the Civil Magistrate to make rigid Penal Laws, to enforce
the Consciences of good People, seems in some measure contradictory to the
easy Yoke of Christian Obedience. It seems somewhat hard, when a poor Man has
by his Industry and Frugality got together a small Subsistence for himself and
his Family, that because he is dissatisfied with some few Indifferent
Circumstances, that are imposed upon their Consciences, he should be presently
laid at the mercy of Rapacious Informers and Officers; that his Goods should be
at the disposal of Persons many times fuller of Heat and Passion, than of true
Charity; that he should be excommunicated, and consequently under the lash of a
Civil Writ, because he will not come to the Parochial Church: as if the Place
were so material where God were worshipped, so in any Place he be adored in
Spirit and Truth. Nor is this spoken in the least in reference to the Civil
Government, but only in point of Divinity. It is apparent by the very Prefaces
of the Acts themselves hereby intended, that the Civil Magistrate aims at
nothing but what is Right and Just; to prevent Sedition, for the Good and Quiet
of the Kingdom. But it is to be feared, that want of Charity in others, and too
much addictedness to Opinionated Severity, sways others to extend the lawful
Pretense of the Civil Power beyond the Bounds and Limits of the Legislaters
Intention; in regard that for the Ministry to aggravate Civil Crimes upon their
Brethren, and incence the Sword of Justice, appears no where in Scripture
agreeable to Christian Doctrine.

There are two Statutes, that of the 35th of Elizabeth, and the 22d. of His
present Majesty, that create the loud Complaints that run through the whole
Nation: And yet the Proems of neither of those Acts seem to allow that Rigor
which is at this time meditated by some Persons, and desended perhaps with too
much heat in the Pulpit.

The Preamble of 35 Eliz. runs thus: For the preventing of such great
Inconveniences and Perils as might happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous
Practices of SEDITIOVS SECTARIES and DISLOYAL PERSONS.

The Preamble of the 22d. of His present Majesty runs thus: For providing
farther and more speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous Practices of
SEDITIOVS SECTARIES, and other DISLOYAL PERSONS, who, under pretense of tender
Consciences, have or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late
Experience has shown.

Here are two Statutes, by which most Lawful and most Necessary Provision is
made for the Preservation of the Peace and Quiet of the Government. Now, if it
should be asked, What the Civil Magistrate requires from hence? It is to be
answered, in general, Obedience, Passive and Active; Tranquillity, Public and
Private: and particularly, That no Disloyal Persons, nor Sectaries, shall meet,
under pretense of Tender Consciences, to contrive Insurrections. Hence it is
submissively presumed, That if the Subject live dutifully toward his Prince,
free from giving occasion of Civil Disturbance; amicably toward his Neighbor;
pay those Duties and Taxes which the Law or Custom imposes; and actively, if he
be always ready with his Sword in his hand to defend his Prince and Country;
the Prince does not regard the inward Consciences of such Subjects, nor their
inconsiderable Differences in Matters of Ceremony; so that the Religion which
they profess be not contrary or opposite to the Established Law and Government
of the Kingdom. And it is plain, that the Law extends it self no further than
Sectaries and Disloyal Persons, as being looked upon by the Law to be the most
likely Persons to contrive Insurrections, and disturb the Peace of the Nation.

Leaving then the Civil Power to its self, the Question is between the
Dissenters and their Opposers, What a Sectary is? For it is supposed, That if
the Ecclesiastical Wrath were appeased, the Displeasure of the Civil Power
might the more easily be atton'd.

Now then Sectaries must either be Heretics or Schismatics. Heretics the
Dissenters cannot be; for they do not err in Fundamentals; for such a one is a
Heretic. The next Question then will be, Whether they be Schismatics? What is a
Schismatic? A Schismatic is one that holding firm the same Foundation of
Faith, departs from some Ceremony of the Church, obstinately, and out of
ambitious Ends. Thus it appears, that Obstinacy and Ambitious Ends are the
Distinctions that make a Schismatic. From whence it is apparent, that there may
be some Grounds and Reasons why a Man may dissent from some Ceremony of the
Church, and yet be no Schismatic. For example: Obstinacy is the opposite to
Constancy; Ambitious Ends, or Self-Interest, as being a Contempt of Conscience,
the Opposite to Integrity. So then if a Man dissents from any Ceremony of the
Church out of Integrity, which is a Virtue by which we yield up our Obedience
to God, though imperfect, yet without Hypocrisy; or out of Constancy, by which
a Man resolves to persist in the Knowledge of God and his Worship to the end,
he can be no Schismatic. For the Di^senters and their Opposers agree in the
same Knowledge of God, in the same Sacraments, and the same Worship; only the
Dissenters disallow some outward adiaphorous Ceremonies of their Church. Again,
To make them Schismatics, that is, Obstinate or Ambitious Dissenters, there
must be Conviction and Contumacy: But in regard that neither the one nor the
other appears against them, it follows, That they dissent out of Integrity and
Constancy, and consequently are no way liable to the Severity of the Statute,
especially if the Preamble, as it is taken in Law, be the Key of the Statute.
Seeing then that the Dissenters, where there is no proof of Petulancy or
Ambitious Ends, cannot be said to be Schismatics, and consequently not
obnoxious to the Law, it remains, that they must be Brethren, professing the
same Fundamentals of Doctrine and Worship. And then it seems very hard, That
the Severity of Persons who call themselves Divines, and Teachers of the
Doctrine of Charity, should stretch and strain a Law to encourage Accusers of
the Brethren, and to lay violent hands upon those, to whom it never meant any
disturbance. And it is looked upon as a strange and unhappy disagreement between
the Common Lawyer and the Divine, that the one should take it for a Charitable
Maxim, That Summum Ius est summa Injuria; while Men that pretend to be actuated
by Divinity, and the Example of Christ, pressing Summum Ius yet with so much
inveteracy, advance Summam Injuriam, to the prejudice of Brethren, for
inconsiderable Differences. Blessed are the Peacemakers, says our most
charitable Savior. Which Sacred Truth of his, from his own Lips, creates a
just Appeal to all Rational Men, how far dissonant from this Doctrine of their
Head and grand Instructor those Persons are, who avoiding the healing Doctrine
of Unity, make their Pulpits ring with nothing but corrosive Invectives and
Satyrs against Friend and Foe, Brethren and Schismatics, under the general
Notion of Fanaticism; forgetting the constant Rule, That he only teaches well,
that well distinguishes. Certainly it can never be thought that it should
proceed from the Dictates of Reason and Conscience, that they who ought to come
with Healing in their Doctrine, should make it their Business to exasperate and
incence the Civil Power, merely to establish an unlawful Hierarchy over the
Consciences of their Brethren. They that first shook off the Roman Took,
thought it expedient not to make a total and absolute Change; but guided by
Reasons of State, left several of the Ceremonies, Popish Ceremonies, untouched,
which remain among us to this day; as, the Surplice, and with some the Railed
Altar, Second Service there performed, Tapers, with this difference, that the
Papists are lighted, and ours not; and lastly, a particular Reverence to the
East, as if God were more individually present in the Chancel, than in the
Belfry. But now that the State has no occasion for those Fears, now that the
People universally desire to be freed from these Relics of Superstition, for
some Persons to insist upon it, and with so much obstinacy impose as a Duty,
what was only retained for State-convenience, as to raise a Persecution of
Tender Consciences for the sake of pure Ceremony, it is believed, that were
those famous Reformers now alive, they would not have been angry with those
that so readily sought the Accomplishment of what they left imperfect. The Law
was made to punish Mutiny, Rebellion, and Insurrection, against the State and
Civil Government; not to harrase the Liberties and Properties of Men for not
conforming to the Impositions of Ecclesiastical Ambition. What tho the Civil
Magistrate have been so careful to make Provision for the Repose and Quiet of
the Kingdom? it may be thought a hard Chapter, that the peevishness and choler
of some Men should turn the Stream of that Rigor, where no Proof is made, upon
pretense of Breach and Disobedience. How ill will it sound in the Ears of
Posterity, when they shall hear of Protestants being so severly dealt with for
Trifles of Difference? How much does it at present advance the mirth of Popery,
to see the Protestants doing their Business, and by some ^^ing Disunion among
themselves, opening a way for Self-destruction, and the Inroads of
Superstition, which otherwise the Papists were never able to hope for.
Certainly the Profession of Divinity teaches Men to be of another Temper, and
to have a Chancery of Charity always open in their Hearts, to mitigate and
compose, not to exasperate and provoke the Civil Magistrate, especially in
Concerns not of the Government, but of their own Interest. Some People will not
have their Children signed with the Cross; others meet about five together in a
place; and therefore let them be fined, let their Goods be seized and
embezel'd, and their Persons imprisoned: For the Law is of our side, and we
will not remit a Tittle of its utmost Rigor. A severe way of Proceeding, that
can never be thought agreeable to the Examples or Doctrine either of Christ or
his Apostles. If such Persons did but consider how much more fragrant the
Memory of a Cranmer smells in History, than that of a Bonner, they would surely
steer another Course. Nor can they be thought well to weigh with themselves
that of Vis unita est fortior, and the Doctrine of the divided House, while by
a fatal disagreement with their Brethren about outward Forms and unnecessary
Circumstances, they render themselves less able to withstand the Impetuosity of
daily- menacing Popery. That is nothing, the Decree is gone forth, and must be
obeyed; and though the Preamble of the Law may be avoided, the Body of it, more
explanatory of it self, admits, no Evasion. For the Law positively says, That
if any Person or Persons, above the Age of Sixteen years, etc. shall be present
at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under color or pretense of any
Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the Liturgy and
Practice of the Church of England, etc. Where there shall be Five or more
Persons assembled, over and above those of the Household, etc.

As to the first part of the Words, Whoever shall be present at any Assembly or
Meeting, under pretense or color of any Exercise of Religion, etc. some
Questions do arise upon the fair account of Reason and Policy.

1. Whether the meaning of the Words extend themselves to such an Exercise of
Religion which is truly Christian, and according to the direct Interpretation
of Scripture?

2. Or whether only such a Religion as carries only a pretense and color,
without any truth and sincerity?

As to the first, it is most certain, That the most pure and Christian Exercise
of Devotion carries with it a pretense and color, as well as the false one,
though it be only that of serving and performing our Duty to God.

Now then it can never be imagined, that the Intention of this Law was ever to
prevent the Exercise of Devotion and true Piety. let the Place or the Number be
more or less, in a rational Proportion. For, if so, the Statute would be void
in it self; in regard that all unbiased Casuists, Lawyers, and Divines agree,
That all Humane Laws made against the Law of God, are ipso facto annulled as to
any Obligation upon the Conscience.

Seeing therefore it cannot be thought, that this Law intends the Destruction
of it self, there must be a looking backward to the Reason and Policy of the
Law, which from the Preamble is apparent to be only the prevention of
Disloyalty and Insurrection, for the Repose and Tranquillity of the Kingdom.

Now then let a Meeting be supposed, though of more than Five or Ten; yet if at
this Meeting there be nothing done that tends to Disloyalty, Insurrection, or
disturbance of the Public Peace, the Law has its End, and can take no farther
notice, there being no Breach of the Law, and consequently no occasion of
Punishment.

And this is collected from Reason it self; for, should any other Construction
be put upon the Words, it would be contrary to the Law of God, as intended to
prevent the true and real Worship of God, under pretense of Innovation and
Disloyalty. A Thought, an Intention, which it were a Crime to imagine such
Worthy and Pious Legislators ever dreamed of, however the meaning of the Law
may be strained in the absence of its Makers.

Now that such a Meaning of the Act, as it is enforced, is contrary to the Word
of God, is apparent from the Scripture it self: Acts 28. And Paul dwelt two
years in his hired house, and received all that came to him, preaching the
Kingdom of God, no man forbidding him. 1 Timothy 2. I will therefore that men pray
every where; with several others. Nor will it serve as an Objection, to say,
That the Times are otherwise, now that there are such plenty of Public
Churches: For, if they be possessed by such as will not admit their
Fellow Christians to come together, without prejudice to their Consciences,
it is the same thing to them, as if those Places were not at all.

Which being a clear confirmation, that God may be Worshipped in Spirit and
Truth in any Place, or at any Time; it is as clear, that the Meaning of this Law
cannot reach the Exercise of Real Piety. For, if the Worship in it self be
Evil, it is not to be endured in Four; if consonant to the Word of God, the
Number of Fourscore cannot render it criminal.

But here in regard there is so much insisting and stress put upon the word
Conventicle, it will be much to be clearing the meaning of the Act, to enquire
in to the Nature of the word, and whether it be not taken too unwarily in an
ill sense, by those that would extend the reason and meaning of this Act beyond
its limits?

A Conventicle then in the general sense is a certain place appointed for the
Assembling and coming together of People to some purpose or other; In the
particular sense it signifies the Assembly it self there met. If then the
purpose be for the sake of Divine Worship, it will be fit next to enquire the
Difference between a Church-Assembly and a Conventicle-Assembly. That which
constitutes a Church, is an Assembly or Congregation of people called to the
state of Grace by Prayer, by Teaching and Hearing the Word, and the due
administration of the Sacraments. The Efficient cause of this Assembly is the
Holy Trinity, in general, particularly Christ. The form of this Assembly
consists in a double Communion of the Assembly with Christ as the Head, and of
the particular Members among themselves. The matter of this Assembly are the
persons or several Members called to the Covenant of Grace. The end of this
Assembly is the glory of God, and their own Salvation. The marks of the real
Christianity and legality of this Assembly are the true Preaching the Word, and
due Administration of the Sacrament? If then the same substantial Efficient
cause, the same substantial matter, the same substantial Form, the same
substantial end, the same substantial Marks of a truly Christian Assembly be
found in a House or any other convenient place, though not adorned with
Steeples or Stone Arches, call them Presbyterians or Dissenters, or what you
please they center the main fundamentals of Faith and Doctrine, differ only in
some slight and outward Ceremonies, and are therefore an Essential Body of the
Protestant Religion. And if there be any External Circumstances in dispute,
they are to be argued and determined among themselves, not by the Arbitrary
Power of a Justice of the Peace, who is an Officer only of the Peace, and not
of the Conscience. So that it can never be thought that the determination of
Christian Prudence will ever grant it to be rational that this Law was ever
made for the prevention of such Conventicles, which must prove the suppression
of much true Piety and Devotion. This makes some people think that
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is in a very weak condition and most deficient of
it self, when it is so earnest and clamarous after the Assistance of the Civil
Magistrate. And indeed it is easily demonstrable in Story, that there was
nothing more advanced the beginnings of the Reformation of England than the
weakness which Henry 8. perceived in the Arguments which the Papists brought
against the Reformers in all their Disputes. And therefore a Convocation
Dispute had been much more proper for this Controversy than the destructive
Arguments of Distresses and Crown Office Writs. Which, if it were put to the
Test, there are many that question, whether the Law-Provokers might not come by
the worst. For as to those things which are called the Rites and Ceremonies of
true Worship, true Religion has none but what God has prescribed in His Word;
and they are looked upon, either as parts or helps to our Devotion. As parts of
Devotion, they consist in promulgation of the Word, the Administration of the
Sacraments and Prayer, which requires also decent composure of gesture and
posture. As helps to Devotion, they are divided into Fasting and Vows. And
these are all the Rites or Ceremonies of true Worship. Ceremonies of Form, are
apt to wander into Superstition if not plain Idolatry. And therefore it is,
that some unbyassed person, not without Reason, fear, That the Dissenters who
have abandoned all, would have much more Argument on their side, than they
whoretain some.

It being thus apparent, that the Law was never intended to prevent such
Assemblies, whose only end of Meeting is to Worship and Glorify God, and that
too according to the same Fundamentals which the Statute enforcers profess, it
now remains to examine, whether the Evidence offered be sufficient to make the
Dissenters guilty of the Crimes assigned by the Law, viz. Disloyalty and
Insurrection. First then as for color and pretense, they are only
Non-Appearances lodged in the Heart of Man; which are only disclosed to the
Omniscience of God himself. And therefore to judge of color and pretense
appertains only to God, and not to any Law: from whence arose that common
Maxim, that De non apperentibus, the Law takes no Cognizance. Much less is in
the power of an Informer to make Oath of color or pretense, until color and
pretense break forth into some overt and apparent act which may afford matter
for Testimony and proof. From whence it is plain, that unless there be due and
sufficient proof made of false Doctrine, seditious words, or contrivances
tending to Insurrection and Disloyalty, which are the breaches of the Law; and
Law can never punish, where there is no breach committed. Nor does the
Conscience of any Magistrate oblige him to sine and levy upon the bare
Information of color or pretense. As for the addition of those words, Do or
may contrive, it seems somewhat repugnant to reason, that Plots and
Contrivances should ever be carried on in the Public Assemblies of Women and
Children; so that the fear seems only to be of the Teachers moving the people
to Sedition. But as for that, one would think it should be an Argument rather
for the permission of Conventicles, it being a thing far more easy to discover
a man that Preaches open Sedition, than one that goes from House to House,
clandestinly insinuating the same Doctrine. Nor is this branch Independent, but
casts its influence into the whole Crime described and intended by the Act thus
embodied.

If any person or persons shall be present at any Conventicle, etc. under
color or pretense of any exercise of Religion, in other manner than according
to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England. Perhaps some persons
carry away with the present torment of unwary Passion, may from hence assent
that there is no other exercise of Religion, that can be truly real and
sincere, but only colorable and pretended, which is not performed in the very
words of the Liturgy, according to the Common acceptance of the Word in
England. To which though there were no other answer to be given, yet the
consequent words, and the practice of the Church clearly contradict such an
uncharitable Paraphrase, for that in all Parochial Churches it is the general
custom to Pray both before and after Sermon. But if the nature of the word
Liturgy be duly considered, that (...) or Liturgy is not more than the Office
of Prayer: the Compilers themselves call the English Liturgy, an order for
Morning and Evening Prayer, or a set Form of Prayer, whereby it becomes only a
Species of the Grand Genus Prayer or Oration, by which with a true and humble
contrition of Heart, we address our selves to God, concerning such things as
are consentaneous to his Holy Will; and this divided into two parts Invocation,
and Thanksgiving. Now suppose that the Liturgy of England, now the most exact
Liturgy in the World, as most certainly it is not, it cannot be thought that
the Dissenters are obliged by this Statute to use no other Prayers than what
are set down in the Liturgy, For then the Law enforcers may be presumed to lie
under the Penalties of the Statute themselves. Who after the full performance
of all the duties of Prayer, which is ordered in the Liturgy both for Morning
and Evening Service, if it may not be said, out of a contempt of the Liturgy,
yet somewhat to the discredit of the Liturgy, are never satisfied till they
have given it the supplement of their tedious and vainly Ostentatious additions
of super-excellent and super-fine: which after a full performance of all the
duties of Innovation and Thanksgiving, seems in them a kind of Tautology
forbidden in Scripture. However because the Dissenters using the same form of
Prayer, though not in the same words, avoid that inconvenience, therefore they
must be reduced into obedience to something not well considered what it is, by
Constabl^s and Informers. But there is a more exquisite Liturgy yet, the (...)
or Liturgy prescribed by our Savior himself; which though out of Veneration it
be reduced into one Prayer for general use; yet is no other than a set form of
Prayer, teaching heedless Mortals, who might else be extravagant in their
Petitions, the true matter of Prayer; that is, what we are to implore from God,
and what we are to give thanks for, as enjoyed. Examine then the Prayers of the
Dissenters, and if they differ either in the Cause, the Matter, the Form, or
end from the English Liturgy of Men, mentioned in the Act, or the Heavenly
Liturgy of Christ, let them be delivered over to all deserved punishment; but
if their Prayers be agreeable to the prescribed forms of both; nay, if they be
agreeable to the Celestial Liturgy, though not according to the Verbatim of
the Established Liturgy of England; it is a hard case that they should by any
Statute be adjudged not to exercise such a Religion. If it be objected, that
the Notions of many are Abortive, and through weakness may deserve
Reprehension, there is an easy way to remedy those Errors by imposing a more
equal Injunction by the Authority of Church Discipline, that no person should
presume to ascend the Pulpit with ex tempore Raptures.

For confirmation then that there is no need of using of Form and Order, so the
matter be the same, there are many of the Disciples Prayers recorded in
Scripture, and there is no question to be made but that they were acceptable to
God; and yet we do not read they used the absolute Form prescribed by our
Savior, but expressed themselves in other words, though altogether agreeing
for matter.

Upon the whole, suppose this Question should be put, Whether the Apostles did
use any other Form than that which was taught them by Christ? There is, no
doubt, but the Answer will be, They did not.

Put then this Question to the Informer; Did the Dissenters use any other
Prayers than what were agreeable to the Church of England? In the first place,
it is ten thousand to one, whether he be a Competent judge. If he be not, he
stakes his Conscience at a dreadful hazard; for it behooves him to Swear
positively in the Affirmative, or else in justice his Information, and all his
hopes of Gain, are lost. And thus by a rigid Prosecution of uncharitable
severity, a necessitous and greedy wretch is brought to this tempting Dilemma,
either to Perjure himself, or lose his Expectation.

Again, The Liturgy it self is not always read altogether; but on some days
more, on some days less. The Dissenters perhaps use least of all, yet they use
some, for they read the Reading Psalms, A first and second Lesson, and
afterward make use of Singing Psalms: So then it being apparent that the
degree of Comparison does not annihilate the subject of the Comparison, it may
be presumed that the Dissenters are present at their Conventicles, positively
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England. Which things not being
considered, how uncharitably do they fall under the censure of Lavish and
Inveterate Pulpits?

In the last place, though it would be very unreasonable to disallow what has
been already said; yet should it be contradicted, the next words, or the
practice of the Church, will certainly give relief. For it is the practice of
the Church of England, to Read and Sing the Psalms of David, to read the first
and second Lesson, and so do the Dissenters; many of them also militate under
the same Ordination: And if there be any that do not, it is presumed they might
soon be better advised, the refusal deserving reproof if they may be admitted,
being certainly to be looked upon as an obstinate piece of weakness. But which
is more, as to the Harmony of practice, they use the same Sacraments, though
perhaps with some small difference in the Form and Ceremony of Administration,
which one would think might be easily reconciled without all this Combustion.

There is one thing more to be considered upon the account of Moral Equity:
That though the Act of Uniformity made in this His Majesty's Reign, it is here
expressly declared, That no other Form or Ceremony shall be used, but what is
prescribed in that Act, or in the Book of Common Prayer: Yet both by the Act
and the Book it plainly appears, that the Prosecutors of the Dissenters make no
scruple to dissent from what is there Enacted, while they use several
Ceremonies that are not there, and omit much of what is there, as their going
up and bowing to the Altar, and reading second Service there. Their coming out
of the Pulpit, and reading Part of the Communion Service in their Desks, or at
the Altar again, and giving no Blessing at all in Pulpit: Their setting the
Communion Table Altar-wise, Richly adorned at the East end of the Church,
whereas it ought to be placed either in the Body of the Church, or in some
convenient place, Covered with a clean Linnen-Cloath. Their Turning their Faces
all of a Sudden to the East, and bowing to the Name of Jesus, and not at the
Name of God or Christ.

These Dispensations argue an apparent Nonconformity, or Over-Conformity; the
same thing in strickness and partiality one among another: So that it seems a
Transgression not only against Charity, but against Common Justice, to
prosecute those that do no more than only Non-Conform to those very Ceremonies
which they themselves regard less of a public Statute, either neglect, or over
act at their own will and pleasure.

And for a further confirmation of the Nonconformity of our most Regular (so
pretending themselves) Conformists, point blank even against the very Law of
the Land; let them that please but consider, how many there are that dispense
with Non-Residence, and Pluralities, to the deteriment of many deserving
persons that want, and positively against the Statute of the 21 of H. 8. and
yet no question but they would think it hard measure to be prosecuted upon that
Law. So Partial is a man to forgive those failings in himself, which he
Prosecutes in others.

However, because all the meekness of Persuasion and Argument will not stop the
Career of some men's Impetuosity in the Prosecution of this Act, it will not be
from the purpose to cast an Eye upon the Executive part of the Statute. In
order to which the most considerable Instructions are couched in the first and
eleventh Section. The Instructions of the first Section run thus.

That it shall and may be lawful to and for any one or more Justices of the
Peace within the limits, etc. Where such Offense shall be committed, or for the
Chief Magistrate of the Place or Corporation, and upon proof of such Offense,
either by the Confession, or Oath of two Witnesses, or by Notorious Evidence
and Circumstance of the Fact, to make a Record under their Hands and Seals,
which Record shall to all intents, etc. be taken to be a full Conviction, that
thereupon, the said Justices, etc. shall impose the sum of, etc. From which
words it is clear, that by this clause no power is given to any Magistrate to
make out any general Warrant upon this Act till after Conviction by two
Witnesses, or Confession of the Offender. Neither has any Constable to do with
any such general Warrant in reference to this Act, unless the Warrant grounded
upon such a Record as is mentioned in the Act, upon confession or proof and
conviction of the Party by two Witnesses be given into his hands. Whence arises
this Question, Whether any Constable or Head-borough that acts in relation to
this Statute, by virtue of a Power not Authorized by the literal words of the
Law, do not act at his own peril?

2. Whether he shall incur any penalty for not doing that which the Law
requires not at his Hands?

For by this part of the Law it is required only that the Witnesses should be
the Informers. But by general Warrants the Constables, etc. are compelled to
turn Informers themselves, and to find themselves work to accuse their
Neighbors on purpose to find themselves yet more work to disturb and distrain
upon their Goods and Persons: A duty which the literal sense of this Paragraph
does not in the least impose upon them.

But the Eleventh Section is more particular in these words:

And be it farther Enacted, etc. That if any Constable, etc. who shall know or
be credibly informed of any such Meetings held within his Precinct, and shall
not give Information thereof, etc. according to his duty, and endeavor the
Conviction of the Parties, but shall wilfully omit the performance of his duty
in the Execution of the Act, and shall be convicted thereof, shall forfeit the
sum of five pounds.

By this Paragraph it is very plain indeed, that if the Constable do either
know of himself, or be credibly informed, and do not do his duty he forfeiteth
5 l. but still if he neither know nor be credibly informed, he is not bound to
be so sedulous as to go upon the Hunt. But suppose the Constable, etc. should
either know of himself, and be credibly informed, and should do his duty, that
is, give Information, and should receive a Warrant to break open the House and
enter: yet finding nothing of Resistance, he is still but where he was, in
regard that not having been there from the beginning to the end, he cannot be
positive, whether the Persons there Assembled did exercise a Religion according
to the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England or not, which if they did,
he has no power either to take their Names, or apprehend their Persons, unless
they should be so imprudent as to make resistance, and give an occasion for
their Military Power to be raised for their suppression, for then as Mutineers
and Seditious persons, they break their own peace by disturbing the Kings, and
by making it appear they are the Persons intended by this Act, render
themselves obnoxi us not only to the Penalties of this but of much more severe
Laws. From which enjoining of the Military Officers to be aiding and assisting
to the Constables with armed Force, Reason may not improperly collect the sense
and meaning of the Act to be no other than what has been already presumed. For
Armed Force and Constabl^s, could never be intended by the Law against Passive
submission and obedience. Naked Swords and Constables Staves could never be
intended by Christian Legislators to compel the compliance of sincere and
upright Conscience, to things of small concernment in respect of those
Fundamentals wherein the Prosecutors and the Prosecuted both agree. And
therefore while the Civil Magistrate has taken such extraordinary care for the
public safety and tranquillity of the Nation, it should not be the aim of
others to carve out for them their Care, the support and maintenance of any By
Interest whatever: An aim too apparent, by their public dissatisfaction, and
open exclaiming against that noble Act of his Majesty's most Royal Goodness,
His Declaration for Liberty of Conscience (too unhappily severe those Counsels
that removed the Landmark of his Regal Benignity. A presumption that they
believe themselves more worthy or more able to manage that part of Prerogative
themselves, and grutch him the exercise of his Right. Whereas the Legislators
with more Duty provide that nothing in their Act shall extend to invalidate or
avoid his Majesty's Supermacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs. But the Dissenting
Protestants acknowledge their Sovereign to be both King and Priest: A King as
he is the Supreme Head of the Government; a Priest as the Supreme Head of the
Church. To whom, as their lawful Sovereign and Head of the Government, as they
have been always ready to yield the utmost of their obedience, so shall they
never withdraw from him the utmost of their Fidelity. And from whose Priestly
Office they have yet hopes to feel the influences of his former Grace and
Mercy, when their Cause shall be better examined. For it is not the Exasperation
of the Pens of Wicked men continually scribbling Division, nor the Subornations
of Popery to fix imaginary Plots, and load their Innocence with the guilt and
Villainies of others, but the Truth of their Profession, and their upright
walking before God and Man, which they hope will at length turn the Reproaches
and Calumnies of their Enemies upon their own Heads. It Is Union which all True
Protestants desire, which they daily implore from God. There is nothing but
Union wanting in this Rich and Plentiful Land. Which as it is only obstructed
by Papists, or persons papistically affected, as it is apparent by their daily
Machinations and contrivances to unsetle and weaken the true Protestant
Interest; so there can be no greater Argument for Protestants to unite with
Protestants against the Common Enemy of their Religion. From these and Grounds
of the same Nature, there are some who have drawn this general Conclusion, That
it would be more conducing to the good of the Kingdom, and the Benefit of the
Protestant Religion, that the Penal Laws against Non-Conformists, in reference
to differences of Religion, might not be put in Execution, but forborne, till
our most Gracious Sovereign, and his great Council the Parliament, should take
the state of Divided Protestants into their wise Consideration, and reduce
things to a happier Legal Establishment.

Eor proof of which it may not be altogether improper to give a short
Recapitulation of the Reasons brought in defense of the Position.

1. That it cannot be good to execute the 35 of Eliz. which the whole
Parliament thought dangerous to the whole Protestant Interest in England, and
did as far as in them lay disannul.

2. It cannot be proper to execute that Law upon them who cannot properly be
guilty of the Crime at which the Law aims.

3. It cannot be proper to execute any Law upon Dissenting Protestants, which
was promoted by men Popishly inclined, and which since appeared to be Papists,
as was the Five Mile Act.

4. Because it seems somewhat preposterous to rid the Land of Dissenting
Protestants, persons professing true Religion and Loyalty, yet leave the
Papists the Enemies of the King and Church to stay behind.

5. Because the Penal Laws are to be inflicted upon the proper objects, as
Seditious Sectaries, disloyal persons, Hypocrites, that make Religion a cloak
and pretense to install principles of Schism and Sedition, not upon Meetings
where there is no tendency to any such Designs.

6. A sixth Argument is drawn from the Piety of the Non-Conformists Principles,
and the Peaceableness of their Behavior, found so to be from the Experience of
many years.

7. Because they are Protestants; and it seems not so well done to use
Protestants, the Kingdoms Friends, and Strength worse than Papists, the Enemies
of the Kingdom and Protestant Religion.

8. Because it is not good to execute the Law with a heavy Hand upon all and
every Offender, without making a difference between one man and another,
between one Offense and another.

9. Because by their public Preaching their judgments and practices are best
discovered, and being in the Head of the younger Dissenters, they are as
Directions and Examples to them, to keep them from dangerous Excursions.

10. Because that when pious and good men have their public Liberty, and make
use of that Liberty only to instruct the People in their Duty to God and the
King, etc. one chief end of the Magistrates care of the State is obtained,
which is to maintain sound Doctrine.

11. Because thereby they will be better enabled and encouraged to perform
other good Offices to the King and State.

2. Then in Reference to the Church, these Reasons are added:

1. Because agreeing in Fundamentals with their Prosecutors, they are a great
Addition of Strength against the force and subtleties of Rome.

2. Because thereby Schism will come to a greater closure, when the Church
shall be satisfied in their profitable Doctrine and peaceable Behavior, which
will create a greater desire of Peace and Union.

3. Because by this public Preaching, Multitudes of poor Souls that will go no
where else, are in the way of Salvation and Profession of the Gospel, of which
some Divines of the Church of England are so deeply sensible, that they Treat
the Non-Conformists as Friends and fellow Laborers.

All which Reasons are more at large discussed in the Conformists Plea for the
Non-Conformists, to which the Reader is referred.

There remains now no more than only the humble Proposal of some few Queries,
and so to conclude. First in Reference to the Church.

1. Whether a Dissenter may be lawfully prohibited from Preaching the Word of
God in truth and sincerity, at any time, or in any place?

2. Whether by the blessings and rewards that are promised to those that
propagate the Doctrine of Christ, they are not obliged to do it?

3. Whether the Example of Christ and his Disciples does not admit of Preaching
in Houses, Streets and Fields to more than five in a Company?

4. Whether it be not something Erroneons for the Law of Man to contradict the
Law --

5. Whether the Passive Obedience of Persons prohibited by a Law from preaching
the Word of God, be not destructive to the propagation and maintenance of the
Gospel of Christ?

2. In reference to the Law of the Land.

1. Whether the Opinion of the Commons of England, That the prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters, upon the penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the
Subject, a weakening of the protestant Interest, and an encouragement to Popery,
and dangerous to the peace of the Kingdom, ought not to be taken into a more
serious Consideration?

2. Whether the prosecution of Dissenters does not seem a little strange, as to
the present timing of it, when the Papists lie under several Convictions of
seeking the Ruin of the protestant Religion in the Kingdom, and when the
Kingdom is under such fears and Jealousies of the Predominancy of their
Abettors?

3. Whether it be not more proper to begin with Popery before they go about to
extirpate Nonconformity?

4. Whether they who have with so much inveteracy raked into the forgotten and
pardoned Miscarriages of the Presbyterians, had not better have spared their
pains, as nothing at all to the purpose, except to what is unbecoming either
peaceable or wise men?

5. Fifthly, Whether a Law that creates Arbitrary Distresses and Imprisonments,
be not contrary to the Fundamentals of Magna Charta.

3. In Reference to the Law of Scripture and Nature.

1. Whether the proceedings of the Law enforcers be not contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even
the same unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets?

2. Whether it be according to Scripture; For Protestants acknowledging the
same Jesus, the same Scripture, and agreeing in the Fundamentals of Religion,
only for differences in human Ceremonies to tear and devour one another?

3. Whether in point of Appeal to make Parties themselves Judges, be a thing
usual?

4. Whether in the prosecution of Protestants by Protestants, to make use of
Informers and Promooters, which the Lord Cook calls, Turbiolum Hominum Genus,
instead of Christian advice and solid Arguments, be according to Scripture?

4. In point of Policy.

1. Whether it be not against the Rules of Policy, for Englishmen of the same
Religion, by cruelties and severities to destroy one another, which must of
necessity weaken the Force, and destroy the Trade of the Nation? It being one
of the Lord Cook's Maxims, That a King can never be poor when his Subjects are
Rich; And therefore,

2. Whether it be not against the Rules of Policy to set up a Law for the
encouragement of vexatious Informers, who under the reverend Mantle of Love and
Justice (to use the Lord Cook's own words) instituted for the protection of the
Innocent, and the good of the Commonwealth, vex and depauperize the Subject
for malice and private ends, never for love of Justice?

3. Whether it be not contrary to the Rules of prudence to make attempts in
fruitless undertakings, since it is found by Experience, that persecution
rather increases than appeases Enmity, and the common Maxim is, that Sanguis
Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae?

4. Whether forbearance and mildness would not absolutely remove the scandal
given to the protestant Churches abroad, and endear us to our Foreign
protestant Alliances?

5. Whether it be prudence to afflict Protestants at home, when we entertain
afflicted Protestants from abroad?

6. Whether by these unnatural Divisions the necessary Leagues and Ties of
Friendship and acquaintance, common Trust and Confidence among men, may not in
time be broken, to the ruin of all Society?

7. Whether the wicked distinctions of Tory and Whigg, etc. were not set on
foot to increase the Dissentions between Protestants, and whether the Invention
and the Malicious continuance of them, do not deserve a punishment equal to the
worst of Felonies?

5. In Reference to the Executive part.

1. Whether the Issuing out of general Warrants by the Justices of the Peace
not Authorized by the Statute, do not render them obnoxious to other Laws.

2. Whether it be not almost morally impossible to Swear a Dissenters Meeting
to be contrary to the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, where there
is no overt act of public Disturbance, or seditious Doctrine?

3. Whether the prosecution of this Law do not afford several advantages to the
spiteful and revengeful to reck their Spleen upon their Neighbors upon every
slight disgust or falling out?

4. Whither it do not afford great opportunitis of Combination between some
needy Justice of the Peace, and their more needy Associate the Informer, to
prosecute unlawful Gain; it being the general complaint of treble distresses
made without any Return?

5. Whether the Constable not being authorized to break open any door, or force
and Gate or Hedge, if the Informer be so foolhardy as to do either, and the
Constable follow him, the Constable and the Informer are not liable to the Law?

6. Whether there be any Penalty above 5 l. (directed by this Act) to be laid
upon a Constable that shall be negligent in making Distresses pursuant to his
Warrants, it being a tried Case at Bury Assizes in Suffolk, 1678. or 1679.
before the L. C. J. Scroggs, where no more was recorded, although the Warrants
were for some hundreds of pounds?

7. Whether it be not positively against the Statute for the Observation of the
Lords Day, by which it is expressly Enacted, That no Warrants shall be served
upon that Day, but in Cases of Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace, to
serve a Warrant upon a Religious Meeting?

This being the State of the Dissenters Case, there nothing remains behind, but
for that most Sacred and Heavenly virtue Charity, to give up a true
determination, accroding to the Precepts of Scripture, Reason and Morality, and
the Rules of Christian Government.

Although I cannot think but that most men are satisfied, that the Act of the
35 of Eliz. is expired, yet I thought it might not be amiss to subjoin hereunto
the said Act at large, with all other Statutes made since that Act that have
any Reference to it; there have been so many solid Arguments given, by men
understanding in the Law, to prove the expiration of it, that I shall not
adventure to say any thing after them.

The most material Act upon which Dissenters, are likely to be prosecuted, is
that of the 22 of his present Majesty, which has been the Subject of most of
the preceding Discourse, therefore I have also inserted that at laage.

VESTIGIA VERITATIS, etc.
An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience.
FOr the preventing and avoiding of such great inconveniences and perils Rast.
Stat. vol. 2. c. 1. fo. 397.
as might happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of Seditious
Sectaries and disloyal persons, Be it enacted by the Queens most excellent
Majesty and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, This Parliament began the 19 of February, in the
35th of the Queen, and was dissolved the 10th of April following.
and by the authority of the same, That if any person or persons above the age
of 16 years which shall obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel,
or usual place of Common Prayer, to hear Divine Service established by her
Majesty's Laws and Statutes, in that behalf made, and shall forbear to do the
same by the space of a Month next after, without lawful Cause, shall at any
time after 40 days next after the end of this Session of Parliament by
Printing, Writing, or Express Words or Speeches advisedly and purposely
practice or go about to move, or persuade any of her Majesty's Subjects or any
other within her Highness Realms or Dominions, to deny, withstand, and impugn
her Majesty's Power and Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical united and annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or to that end or purpose shall advisedly
or maliciously move or persuade any other Person whatsoever to forbear or
abstain from coming to Church to hear Divine Service or to receive the
Communion according to her Majesty's Laws and Statutes aforesaid, or to come to
or to be present at any unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meetings; under
color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, contrary to her Majesty's said
Laws and Statutes, or if any person or persons which shall obstinately refuse
to repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, and shall
forbear by the space of a Month to hear Divine Service as is aforesaid, shall
after the said forty days either of him or themselves or by the motion,
persuasion, entertainment or allurement of any other, willingly join in or be
present at any such Assemblies, Conventicles or Meetings, under color or
pretense of any such Exercise of Religion contrary to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm as is aforesaid; That then every such person so offending as
aforesaid, and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall be committed to prison,
there to remain without Bayl or Mainprise, until they shall conform and yield
themselves to come to some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer and
hear Divine Service, according to her Majesty's Laws and Statutes aforesaid,
and to make such open Submission and Declaration of their said Conformity as
hereafter in this Act is declared and appointed.

Provided always and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
any such person or persons which shall offend against this Act as aforesaid,
shall not within three Months next after they shall be convicted for their said
offense, conform themselves to the obedience of the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm in coming to the Church to hear Divine Service, and in making such
Public Confession and Submission as hereafter in this Act is appointed and
expressed, being thereunto required by the Bishop of the Diocese or any Justice
of the Peace of the County where the same person shall happen to be, or by the
Minister or Curate of the Parish, that in every such case every such offender
being thereunto warned and required by any Justice of the Peace of the same
County where such Offenders shall then be, shall upon his and their corporal
Oath before the Justices of the Peace in the open Quarter Sessions of the same
County, or at the Assizes and Jail-deliver of the same County before the
Justices of the same Assizes and Gaol delivery, Abjure.
Abjure this Realm of England and all other the Queens Majesty's Dominions for
ever, unless her Majesty shall license the party to return; And thereupon shall
depart out of this Realm, at such Haven or Port, and within such time as shall
in that behalf be assigned and appointed by the said Justices before whom such
abjuration shall be made, unless the same offender be let or stayed by such
lawful and reasonable means or causes as by the Common Laws of this Realm are
permitted and allowed in cases of abjuration for Felony. And in such Cases of
let or stay, then within such reasonable and convenient time after as the
Common Law requires in case of abjuration for felony as is aforesaid. And that
the Justices of Peace before whom any such abjuration shall happen to be made
as is aforesaid, shall cause the same presently to be entered of Record before
them, and shall certify the same to the Justices of Assizes and Gaol delivery
of the said County, at the next Assizes or Jail-deliver to be holden in the
same County. And if any such offenders which by the tenor and intent of this
Act is to be abjured as is aforesaid, shall refuse to make such abjuration as
is aforesaid, or after such abjuration made, shall not go to such Haven and
within such time as is before appointed, and from thence depart out of this
Realm according to this present, Act, or after such his departure shall return
or come again into any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions without her Majesty's
special license in that behalf first had and obtained: That then in every such
Case the person so offending shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer as in
case of Felony without benefit of Clergy.

And furthermore be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament.
That if any Person or Persons that shall at any time hereafter, offend against
this Act, shall before he or they be so warned or required to make abjuration
according to the Tenor of this Act, repair to some Parish Church on some
Sunday or other Festival day, and then and there hear Divine Service, and at
the Service time before the Sermon, or reading of the Gospel, make Public and
open Submission and Declaration of his and their Conformity to her Majesty's
Laws and Statutes as hereafter in this Act is declared and appointed; that then
the same offender shall thereupon be clearly discharged of and from all and
every the Penalties and Punishments inflicted or imposed by this Act for any of
the Offenses aforesaid. The same Submission to be made as hereafter follows,
That is to say:

I. A. B. Do humbly confess and acknowledge, The form of the Submission.
that I have greivously offended God in contemning her Majesty's Godly and
lawful Government and Authority, by absenting my self from Church, and from
hearing Divine Service, contrary to the Godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
and in using and frequenting disordered and unlawful Conventicles and
Assemblies, under pretense and color of exercise of Religion; And I am
heartily Sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and testify in my Conscience
that no other Person has or ought to have any Power or Authority over her
Majesty. And I do Promise and protest without any dissimulation or any color
or means of any dispensation, that from henceforth I will from time to time
obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and Statutes, in repairing to the Church
and hearing Divine Service, and do mine uttermost endeavor to maintain and
defend the same.

And that every Minister or Curate of every Parish where such Submission and
Declaration of Conformity shall hereafter be so made by any such Offender as
aforesaid, shall presently enter the same into a Book to be kept in every
Parish for that purpose, and within ten days next following, shall certify the
same in Writing to the Bishop of the said Diocese.

Provided nevertheless, that if any such Offender after such Submission made as
is aforesaid, shall afterward fall into Relapse, or eftsoons, obstinately
refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, to
hear Divine Service, and shall forbear the same as aforesaid, or shall come and
be present at any such Assemblies, Conventicles, and meetings, under color or
pretense of any Exercise of Religion, contrary to her Majesty's Laws and
Statutes. That then every such Offender shall lose all such benefit as he or
she might otherwise by virtue of this Act, have or enjoy by reason of their
said Submission, and shall thereupon stand and remain in such plight, condition
and degree to all intents, as though such Submission had never been made.

And for that every Person having House and Family, is in duty bounden to have
special regard of the good Government and ordering of the same; Be it enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Person or Persons shall at any time
hereafter, relieve, maintain, retain or keep in his or their House or
otherwise, any person which shall obstinately refuse to come to some Church,
Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service, and shall
forbear the same by the space of a Month together, contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, that then every Person which shall so relieve,
maintain, retain, or keep any such Person offending as aforesaid, after notice
thereof to him or them given by the Ordinary of the Diocese, or any Justices of
the Assizes of the Circuit, or any Justice of Peace of the County, or the
Minister, Curate, or Churchwardens of the Parish where such person shall then
be, or by any of them, shall forfeit to the Queens Majesty for every person so
relieved, maintained, retained or kept after such notice as aforesaid, Ten
Pounds for every Month, that he or they shall so relieve, maintain, retain or
keep any such person so offending.

Provided nevertheless, that this Act shall not in any wise extend to Punish or
impeach any Person or Persons for relieving, maintaining, or keeping his or
their Wive, Father, Mother, Child or Children, Wards, Brother or Sister, or
his Wives Father or Mother, not having any certain place of Habitation of their
own, or the Husbands or Wives of any of them, or for relieving, maintaining, or
keeping any such person as shall be Committed by Authority to the Custody of
any by whom they shall be so relieved, maintained or kept, any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the more speedy levying and recovering for and by the Queens Majesty
of all and Singular the Pains, Duties, Forfeitures and Payments, which at any
time hereafter shall accrue, grow or be payable by virtue of this Act, or of
the Statutes made in the 23th. year of her Majesty's Reign concerning
Recusants: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every the
said Pains, Duties, Forefeitures, and Payments, shall and may be recovered and
levied to her Majesty's use, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, Information, or
otherwise in any of the Courts commonly called Kings Bench, Common Pleas, or
Exchequer; in such sort and in all respects as by the ordinary Course of the
Common Laws of this Realm, any other Debt due by any such Person in any other
Case should or may be recovered or levied wherein no essoign, Protection or
Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always that the Third Part of the Penalties to be had or received by
virtue of this Act, shall be employed and bestowed to such good and charitable
uses, and in such manner and form as is limited and appointed in the Statute
made in the 28th year of her Majesty's Reign touching Recusants.

Provided also that no Popish Recusant or Feme-covert shall be compelled or
bound to abjure by virtue of this Act.

Provided also that every person that shall Abjure by force of this Act, or
refuse to Abjure being thereunto required as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose
to her Majesty all his Goods and Chattels forever, and shall further lose all
his Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, for and during the life of such offender
and no longer; And that the Wife of any offender by force of this Act shall not
lose her Dower; Nor that any Corruption of Blood shall grow or be by reason of
any offense mentioned in this Act; But that the heir of every such offender by
force of this Act shall and may after the Death of every offender have and
enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such offender, as if this Act
had not been made. And this Act to continue no longer than the end of the next
Session of Parliament.

Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 18.
An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation, perfecting and repealing of
diverse Statutes. And amongst others it is there thus expressed, viz.
ANd wherein the Parliament holden at Westminster the 19. 39 Eliz. c. 18.
day of February in the 35th year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is,
there was an Act made, Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience; Be it enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament that this Act ( viz. 35 of Eliz.) as well as the other there recited
Statutes and Acts, shall be by Authority of this present Parliament revived,
continued, and endure in force and effect until the end of the next Parliament
next ensuing.

The next Parliament was begun and holden at Westminister the 27th day of
October in the 43th of Eliz. 43. Eliz. c. 9. Sect. 18.
and there continued until the Dissolution thereof, being the 19th of December
next following, Anno 1601. And there in the 9th Chapter, Sect. 18. this 35
Eliz. is again continued by the Statute Entitled, An Act for continuance of
diverse Statutes, and for repeal of some others. As the 27. Sect. Sect. 27.
of the said Act does make to appear. The words are these, Be it enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament that the same shall be continued and
remain in force until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 19th day of March, King
James began his Reign Anno 1602 March the 24th. 1. Jacobi. ca. 25. Sect. 13.
and 24.
the first year of King James, and there continued until the 7th of July, Anno
1604 and then prorogued until the 7th of February next following, which ended
that Session.

In the 25th Chapter Entitled, An Act for continuing and reviveing of diverse
Statutes, and for repealing of some others, in Sect. the 13th and the 24th this
35 Eliz. and among diverse Acts, is again continued in these words, viz. Shall
be continued and remain in force until the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.

At the Second Session of Parliament begun and holden by Prorogation at
Westminster, Sessio. 2. 3. Jacob.
the 5th day of November, in the Third year of King James, and there continued
until the 27th of May, and from thence Prorogued till the 18th of November next
following, there is no mention at all made of any continuance of this 35 Eliz.

Neither was there any mention made of this said 35 Eliz. 3. Session. 4. Jacobi.
at the next Session of the said Parliament, begun and holden at Westminster,
by Prorogation the 18th day of November, in the 4th year of King James, which
Session ended the 4th of July, Anno 1607. and then was Prorogued until the 16th
day of November next following.

Nor during all the Fourth Session of the said Parliament, 4. Session. 7 Jacobi.
begun and holden by Prorogation at Westmimster, the 19th day of February, in
the 7th of King James, and there continued until the 23th day of July, (and
then Prorogued until the 16th day of October next following. Anno 1610.) was
there any the least mention of a continuance of this said 35 Elizabeth.

The Vacation after Hill. 20. Jac.
MEmorand. Huttons Rep. fol. 61.
That on Monday the 17th of February at Serjeants-Inn, upon the Assembly of all
the Justices to take Consideration upon the Statute of 35 Eliz. c. 1. for the
Abjuration of Sectaries; Resolutions upon the Statute of 35 Eliz. c. 1.
concerning Sectaries.
the Attorney General and Sergeant Crew being there, after the perusal of the
Statute, and the continuances thereof, it was first upon debate considered,
Whether this Statute was in force or discontinued, and upon the perusal of the
Proviso in the Statute of Subsidy, and upon reasoning the matter, these Points
were resolved.

1. What shall be said a Session of Parliament.
If a Parliament be Assembled, and diverse Orders made, and a Writ of Error
brought, and a Record delivered to the higher House, and diverse Bills agreed,
but no Bills Signed; That this is but a Convention, and no Parliament or
Session; as it was Anno 12 Jac. in which (as it was affirmed by them which had
seen the Roll) it is entered that it is not any Session; or Parliament, because
that no Bill was signed, vide 33. H. 6. Brook Parliament. 86. Every Session in
which the King signs Bills is a Parliament.

2. It was agreed, that if diverse Statutes be continued until the next
Parliament or next Session, and there is a Parliament or a Session and nothing
done therein as to continuance, all the said Statutes are discontinued and
gone. And then it was moved whether this Statute was discontinued, and
seriatim, Jones, Chamberlain, Hutton, Denham, Haughton, Dodderidge, Winch and
Bromley declared their Opinions, This Statute was Anno 18 Jacobi, and Printed,
but is not in any of the Statute Books.
that this Statute is discontinued, and that the statute of Subsidy is a
Parliament, and that every Parliament is a Session, but not e converso, for one
Parliament may have diverse Sessions as the Parliament 1 Jac. had four, and
ended 7 Jac. vide 33. H. 6. Bro. Parl. 86. and that this Proviso is not to any
other purpose but to continue their proceedings in the same estate as if this
Act had not been made, and if this Proviso had not been, then this statute had
been discontinued by this Act of subsidy, but when this ends and is determined,
then is the Session ended, then it is a session, scil. a Parliament, which
ought to be pleaded, at the Parliament holden, etc. and all the Commissions of
subsidy are accordingly and the proviso call it a session; Then this being
done, the Lord Chief Baron did not deliver any Opinion, for he said, that he
had not considered the statute, and afterward it was desired that the Lords
would deliver their Opinions, and thereupon the Lord Hobart declared his
Opinion accordingly, That it seemed to him that it was a Session, and that it
was not safe to meddle with such Law; and that he would never refuse to declare
his Opinion with his Brethren. After the Lord Chief Justice Ley made a long
discourse concerning the purpose and intent of Parliament, Scilicet, That it
was not their purpose to destroy so good Laws, and therefore it was not any
such Session, as was within the intent of the preceding Parliament, which was,
that these should determine when it is a Parliament or Session, in which good
Laws are made.

And Doderidge said, that it was fit to see the Commission, and that that which
has been said, was not to bind any one, but every one spoke what then he was
advised of, and peradventure might change upon better consideration. And
afterward, upon Tuesday on an Assembly of the two Chief Justices, the Chief
Baron, Justice Haughtom, Baron Denham, Hutton, Chamberlain, and Jones the
Attorney General brought the Commission de 12 Eliz. June 1. and that had these
words; Pro eo quod nullus Regalis assensus, nec responsio per nos Praestat.
fuit nullum Parliamentum nec aliqua Sessio Parliamenti lata aut tent. fuit.
They have power to adjourn this Parliament thus begun, and the Commission to
Dissolve this Parliament 28 Feb. Anno. 19 Jac. had the same words, saving that
he recite that he had given his Royal assent to an Act of Subsidy, by which was
intended, that it should not be a Session; and upon view of the Commission, the
Lord Chief Justice moved that the King was mistaken in this, that he had given
Power to Dissolve this Parliament, which had not any Session, and if it be a
Session, then he had no power to Dissolve it, and then it is as it were a
recess, and a Parliament cannot be discontinued or dissolved, but by matter of
Record, and that by the King alone; and if the Parliament yet continue, then
this Statute also continue during the Parliament by the Proviso; but that would
not serve: For first it is against the intent of the King, and against his
Proclamation: And also the Case is truly put in the Commission, as to the
matter in Fact; and he is not misinformed, but mistaken in the Law, and then
the Commission for the Dissolving is good, semblable to the Lord Chandois Case,
and other Cases, vide in Cholmley's Case; but because that all the Judges were
not at this Conference, therefore it was deferred until the next term; and in
the interim the Grand Secretary and the Attorney General were to inform the
King, that the Statute is obscure, and had not been put in ure, and that we
could not agree.

si diverse Sessions sont in un mesme Parliament and le Roy ne sign bille tanque
al darren, la tout nest que un mesme jour, and tent avera relation al primer
jour del primer Session and le primer jour and le darren jour nest que un mesme
Parliament and un mesme jour in ley, nisi special mention soit fait in Pact
quant ceo prendra force; mes chescun Session in que le Roy sign les Bills est
un jour a per lui, and un Parliament a per luy and navera auter relation, mes a
mesme le Session: quod not a diversitatem (33. H. 8.) Bro. Tit. Parl. Fol. 119.
b. number. 86. That is in English, if there be diverse Sessions in one and the same
Parliament, and the King Signeth no Bill until the last day, there all is but
one and the same day, and all shall have relation to the first day of the first
Session, and the first day and the last day is but one and the same Parliament,
and one and the same day in Law, unless there be special mention made in the
Act when that shall take its force; but every Session wherein the King Signeth
any Bills, is a day by it self, and a Parliament by it self, and shall have no
other relation but to the same Session; wherein note the diversity 33. H. 8.

When a Parliament is called and does sit, and is Dissolved without any Act of
Parliament passed, or Judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a
Convention, Coke 4. Inst. fo. 28. vide also 2. Bulstr. fo. 237.

In Hobart's Rep. p. 78. Saint-John versus Saint-John.
It is St. John's Case, there was an Action brought on the Statute 21. H. 6.
for not returning one Burgess, etc. And there it is said, the Parliament was as
none, because there was no Act nor Record of it.

And in p. 111. Hobart says, the 12 Jacobi (which if you be judged by the
Journal, was a large, and well occupied Parliament) because no Act Passed, nor
Record is of it, was resolved by all the Judges to be no Parliament.

And now we are come to the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, the 19
of February, in the 21 Year of King James, which was there continued until the
29 day of May following, and then Prorogued to the second day of November, Anno
1624. 21 Jac. c. 28
and there, in the 28 Chapter, is an Act Entitled, An Act for continuing and
reviving of diverse Statutes, and Repeal of diverse others. wherein are these
words, viz. And so much of one Act made in the 35 Year of the Reign of the said
late Q. Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in
their due Obedience, 58 Statutes in this Act revived and continued.
as has not been sithence Repealed by any other Statute ( and the other 57
Statutes which are there mentioned) shall, by virtue of this Act be judged ever
since the Session of Parliament in the 7th. Year of His Majesty's Reign of
England to have been of such force and effect as the same were the last day of
that Session, and from thenceforth until the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament. 1 Car. 1. cap. 7. This Session of Parliament (by reason of the
increase of the Sickness and other inconveniences of the Season requiring a
speedy Adjournment nevertheless) shall not determine by His Majesty's Royal
Assent to this and some other Acts.


Well, in the next Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 18 day of
June, Anno 1625. in the first Year of King Charlis the I. and there continued
until the 11th. day of July following, and then Adjourned until the first day
of August following unto Oxford, several Acts Passed and by a special Bill then
Past, It was Enacted as follows, (it is the 7th Chapter in Keeble) viz. And
all Statutes and Acts of Parliament which are to have continuance unto the end
of this present Session shall be of full force after the said Adjournment,
until this present Session be fully ended and determined, and if this Session
shall determine by Dissolution of this present Parliament, then all the Acts
aforesaid, shall be continued until the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.

At the next Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 17th day of March,
Anno 1627. 3 Car. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 21.
in the 3d Year of King Charles the I. there is an Act in the Fourth Chapter,
Entitled, An Act for repeal and continuance of diverse Statutes, among which in
the 21 Section this 35 Eliz. is mentioned thus, viz. And so much of one Act
made in tho 35 Year of the Reign of the late Q. Eliz. Entitled an Act to
retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience, as has not been
since Repealed by any other Statute; Sect. 22.
and in the 22d Section it Enacts, that this 35 of Eliz, by virtue of this Act
shall be and continue until the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament, holden in the first Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the
King that now is.

From that 3d Year unto the 16 there is no mention made ( in his History of the
Life and Death of the 35. Eliz. c. 1.
as the Observer has truly Remarked) of any thing relating to the 35. Eliz. But
in the 16 (at the Parliament begun at Westminster the 3d day of November, Anno
1640. c. 4.) it is Enacted as follows, viz.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, An. 16. Car. 1. cap. 4.
that the Passing of this present Act, or of any other Act or Acts, or His
Majesty's Royal Assent to them or any of them in this present Session of
Parliament, shall not be any determination of the said Session, and that all
Statutes and Acts of Parliament which have their continuance, or were by an Act
of Parliament made in the 3d Year of the Reign of His Majesty that now is,
Entitled, An Act for the Continuance and Repeal of diverse Statutes continued
until the end of the first Session of the then next Parliament, shall, by
virtue of this Act be adjudged ever since the Session of Parliament in the said
Third Year to have been of such force and effect as the same were the last day
of that Session, An. 16. Car. 2. This 35. Eliz. c. 1. was continued, but that
Act (it seems) is since expired.
and from thenceforth until some other Act of Parliament be made, touching the
continuance or discontinuance of the said Statutes and Acts in the said Act of
the Third Year of His Majesty's Reign continued, as aforesaid.

And from this Statute we find nothing of the 35 Eliz. cap. 1. till we come to
the 16 of his now Majesty, and that Act I have recited here at large, as
follows, Viz.

An Act to Suppress Seditious Conventicles.
WHEREAS an Act made in the 35th. Keeble St^. fo. 1293. c. 4.
Year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady the Queen Elizabeth, 35. Eliz. c.
1. declared to be in force. Statutes are of two sorts. Those that are
introductory of a New, and those that are declaratory of an old Law. Further
remedy against Seditious Sectaries.
Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience, has not been put in Execution by reason of some doubt of late made
whether the said Act be still in force, although it be very clear and evident,
and it is hereby declared, that the said Act is still in force, and ought to be
put in due execution.

2. For providing therefore of further and more speedy Remedies against the
growing and dangerous practices of seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal
persons, who under pretense of Tender Consciences do at their Meetings contrive
Insurrections, as late Experience has showed:

3. Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Unlawful Conventicles
and Meetings under pretense of Exercise of Religion forbidden.
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same;
That if any person of the Age of 16 Years or upwards, being a Subject of this
Realm, at any time after the first day of July, which shall be in the Year of
our Lord 1664, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under
color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed
by the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England, in any place within the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; at which
Conventicle, Meeting, or Assembly, there shall be Five Persons or more
assembled together, over and above those of the same Household; then it shall
and may be lawful to and for any two Justices of the Peace of the County,
Limit, Division, or Liberty, wherein the Offense aforesaid shall be committed,
or for the chief Magistrate of the place where such Offense aforesaid shall be
committed, (if it be within a Corporation where there are not two Justices of
the Peace) and they are hereby required and enjoined, The punishment and manner
of proceeding against them for the first Offense.
upon proof to them or him respectively made of such Offense, either by
Confession of the Party, or Oath of Witness or notorious Evidence of the Fact,
(which Oath the said Justices of the Peace and chief Magistrate respectively,
are hereby empowered and required to administer) to make a Record of every such
Offense and Offenses, under their Hands and Seals respectively; which Record so
made as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be in Law taken and
adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such
Offense. And thereupon the said Justices and chief Magistrate respectively,
shall commit every such Offender so convicted as aforesaid, to the Gaol or
House of Correction, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, for any time
not exceeding the space of three Months, unless such Offender shall pay down
to the Justices or chief Magistrate such Sum of Money, not exceeding 5 l. as
the said Justices or chief Magistrate, (who are hereby thereunto authorized and
required) shall fine the said Offender at, for his or her said Offense; which
Money shall be paid to the Churchwardens, for the relief of the Poor of the
Parish where such Offender did last inhabit.

4. Second Offense.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender so
convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offense
contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid convicted, then such
Offender so convict of such second Offense shall incurr the penalty of
Imprisonment in the Gaol or House of Correction, for any time not exceeding six
Months without Bail or Mainprise, unless such Offender shall pay down to the
said Justices or chief Magistrate, such Sum of Money, not exceeding 10 l. as
the said Justices or chief Magistrate (who are thereunto authorized and
required as aforesaid) shall fine the said Offender at, for his or her said
second Offense, the said Fine to be disposed in manner aforesaid.

5. Third Offense.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such
Offender so convict of a second offense, contrary to this Act in manner
aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like offense contrary to this
Act, then any two Justices of the Peace, and chief Magistrate as aforesaid
respectively, shall commit every such Offender to the Gaol or House of
Correction, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, until the next General
Quarter Sessions, Assizes, Jail-deliver, Great Sessions, or Sitting of any
Commission of Oyer and Terminer in the respective County, Limit, Division, or
Liberty which shall first happen, when and where every such Offender shall be
proceeded against by Indictment for such Offense, and shall forthwith be
arraigned upon such Indictment, and shall then plead the General Issue of Not
Guilty, and give any special matter in Evidence, or confess the Indictment. And
if such Offender proceeded against shall be lawfully convict of such Offense,
either by Confession or Verdict; or if such Offender shall refuse to plead the
General Issue, or to confess the Indictment; then the respective Justices of
the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions, Judges of Assize and
Jail-deliver, at the Assizes and Jail-deliver, Justices of the Great Sessions
at the Great Sessions, and Commissoners of Oyer and Terminer at their Sitting,
are hereby enabled and required to cause Judgment to be entered against such
Offender, that such Offender shall be transported beyond the Seas to any of His
Majesty's Foreign Plantations, ( Virginia and New Engl. only excepted) there to
remain seven Years; and shall forthwith under their Hands and Seals make out
Warrants to the Sheriff or Sheriffs of the same County where such Conviction or
Refusal to plead or to confess as aforesaid shall be, safely to convey such
Offender to some Port or Haven nearest or most commodious to be appointed by
them respectively, and from thence to embarque such Offender, to be safely
transported to any of His Majesty's Plantations beyond the Seas, as shall be
also by them respectively appointed, ( Virginia and New England only
excepted.) Whereupon the said Sheriff shall safely convey and embarque, or
cause to be conveyed or embarked, such Offender to be transported as
aforesaid, under pain of forfeiting for default of so transporting every such
Offender the Sum of 40 l. of lawful Money, the one moiety thereof to the King,
and the other moiety to him or them that shall sue for the same, in any of the
Kings Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt, or Information; in any
of which no Wager of Law, Essoin, or Protection shall be admitted. And the said
respective Court shall then also make out Warrants to the several Constables,
Head-boroughs, or Tythingmen of the respective places, where the Estate Real or
Personal of such Offender to be transported shall happen to be, commanding them
thereby to sequester into their hands the Profits of the Lands, and to distrain
and sell the Goods of the Offender so to be transported, for the reimbursing of
the said Sheriff, and such reasonable Charges as he shall be at, and shall be
allowed him by the said respective Court for such conveying and embarquing of
such Offender so to be transported, rendering to the party, or his or her
Assigns, the Overplus of the same if any be, unless such Offender, or some
other on the behalf of such Offender so to be transported, shall give the
Sheriff such Sureties as he shall approve of for the paying all the said
Charges unto him.

6. How seditious Sectaries being convicted may be transported.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in default of
defraying such Charges by the parties to be transported, or some other in their
behalf, or in default of Security given to the Sheriff as aforesaid; it shall
and may be lawful for every such Sheriff to contract with any Master of a Ship,
Merchant, or other person, for the transporting of such Offender at the best
rate he can; and that in every such case it shall and may be lawful for such
persons so contracting with any Sheriff for transporting such Offender as
aforesaid, to detain and employ every such Offender so by them transported, as
a Labourer to them or their Assigns, for the space of Five Years to all intents
and purposes, as if he or she were bound by Indentures to such person for that
purpose. And that the respective Sheriffs shall be allowed or paid from the
King upon their respective Accounts in the Exchequer all such Charges by them
expended for conveying, embarquing, and transporting of such persons, which
shall be allowed by the said respective Courts, from whence they received their
respective Warrants, and which shall not have been by any of the ways
aforementioned paid, secured, or reimbursed unto them as aforesaid.

VII. How the Offend^r (...) discharged ^p^n payment of ^f (...) p^und
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That in Case the Offender so
indicted and Convicted for the said third Offense, shall pay into the hands of
the Register or Cler of the Coart or Sessions where he shall be Convicted
(before the said Court or Sessions shall be ended) the sum of 10 l. That then
the said Offender shall be discharged from Transportation, and the Judgment for
the same.

8. Punish (...) of Offend^rs (...) the t^ird Offense
And be it further Enacted, That the like Imprisonment, indictment, Arraignment
and Proceedings, shall be against every such Offender, as often as he shall
again offered, after such third Offense, nevertheless is dischargeable and
discharged by the payment of the like sum, as was paid by such Offender for his
or her said Offense next before committed together with the Additional and
increased sum of 100 l. How the s^id Penalty of (...) po^^d shall be dispos^d.
more upon every new Offense committed, the said respective sums to be paid as
aforesaid: and to be disposed of as follows ( viz.) the one moiety for the
Repair of the Parish Church, or Churches, Chapel, or Chapels of such Parish
within which such Conventicle, Assembly, or meeting shall be held, and the
other moiety to the Repair of the Highways of the said Parish, or Parishes (if
need require) or otherwise for the amendment of such High ways as the Justices
of the Peace at their respective Quarter Sessions shall direct and appoint. And
if any Constable, Head orough, or Tythingman, shall neglect to Execute any the
said Warrants made unto them for sequestring distraining and selling any of the
Goods and Chattels of any Offender against this Act, for the levying such sums
of money as shall be imposed for the first or second Offense, he shall forfeit
for every such neglect the sum of 5 l. of lawful money of England, the one
Moiety thereof to the King, and the other Moiety to him that will sue for the
same in any of the Kings Courts of Record as aforesaid. And if any person be at
any time su^d for putting in Execution any of the powers contained in this Act,
Pers^n sued f^r exec^ting this Act may plead the gene^^ral Issue* and recover
^reble C^sts. Felony to esc^pe after Convictim, or to ret^rn after
Transportation.
such person shall and may plead the General Issue and give the special matter
in Evidence. And if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit. or a Verdict pass for the
Defendant thereupon, or if the Plaintiff discontinue his Action, or if upon
Demurrer Judgment be given for the Defendant, every such Defendant shall have
his or their treble Costs.

9. And be it further Enacted, That if any person against whom Judgment of
Transportation shall be given in manner aforesaid, shall make escape before
Transportation or being Transported as aforesaid, shall return unto this Realm
of England Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick upon Tweed, without the
special License of his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, in that behalf first
had and obtained. That the party so escaping, or returning, shall be adjudged a
Fellon, and shall suffer Death, as in case of Felony without benefit of
Clergy, and shall forfeit and loose to his Majesty, all his, or her Goods and
Chattels for ever; and shall further loose to his Majesty all his, or her Goods
and Chattels, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, for and during the Life of
such Offender, and no longer. And that the Wife of any such Offender by force
of this Act shall not lose her Dower, nor shall any corruption of Blood grow,
or be, by reason of any such Offense mentioned in this Act, but that the Heir
of every such Offender by force of this Act, shall and may after the death of
such Offender have and enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such
Offenders as if this Act had not been made.

10. Seditious and tum^ltuous Mettings and Conve^ticles.
And for better preventing of the mischiefs which may grow by such seditious
and tumultuous Meetings, under pretense of Religious Worship. Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lieutenants, or
Debuty-Lieutenants, or any Commissioned Officers of the Militia, or any other
of his Majesty's Forces, with such Troops or Companies of Horse or Foot, and
also the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace and other Magistrates and Ministers of
Justice, or any of them jointly, or severally, within any the Counties or
places within this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, with such other Assistance as they shall think meet, or can get in
readiness with the soonest, on Certificate made to them respectively, under the
hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate as
aforesaid; of his particular information, or knowledge of such unlawful
Meetings, or Conventicles, held or to be held in their respective Counties or
places, and that he (with such Assistance as he can get together, is not able
to suppress or dissolve the same) shall and may, and are hereby required to
repair unto the place where they are so held, or to be held, and by the best
means they can, to dissolve and dissipate or prevent all such unlawful
Meetings; and take into their Custody, such of those persons so unlawfully
Assembled, as they shall judge to be the Leaders and Seducers of the rest; and
such others, as they shall think fit to be proceeded against, according to Law
for such their Offenses.

11. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who shall
wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conveticle, The penalty of suffering
Conventieles in private houses.
unlawful Assembly or Meeting aforesaid, to be held in his or her House,
Out-house, Barn or Room, Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds, shall incur the
same Penalties and Forfeitures as any other Offender against this Act ought to
incur and be proceeded against in all points in such manner as any other
Offender against this Act ought to be proceeded agianst.

12. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authhrity aforesaid, That if any
Keeper of any Goal or House of Correction, Goalers may not let Prisoners
committed upon this Act to go at large.
shall suffer any person committed to his Custody for any Ossence against this
Act, to go at Large, contrary to the Warrant of his Commitments, according to
this Act, or shall permit any Person who is at Large, to join with any Person
Committed to his Custody, by virtue of this Act in the exercise of Religion
disfering from the Rites of the Church of England. Then every such Keeper of a
Goal or House of Correction, shall for every such Offense, forfeit the sum of
10. The Penalty.
l. to be levied, raised, and disposed by such persons and in such manner as
the Penalties for the first and second Offenses against this Act are to be
Levied, Raised and disposed.

13. Provided always, That no person shall be punished for any Offense against
this Act, Within what time Offend^rs must be pr^s^cuted.
unless such Offender be prosecuted for the same within three Months after the
offense committed; and that no person who shall be punished for any Offense by
virtue of this Act shall be punished for the same Offense by virtue of any
other Act or Law whatsoever.

14. Provided also and be it Enacted, Married women how to be punished.
That Judgment of Transportation shall not be given against any Feme Covert
unless her Husband be at the same time under the like Judgment, and not
discharged by the payment of money, as aforesaid; but that instead thereof she
shall by the respective Court be committed to the Goal or House of Correction,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, for any time not exceeding 12
Months, unless her Husband shall pay down such sum not exceeding 40 l. to
redeem her from imprisonment, as shall be imposed by the said Court, the said
sum to be disposed by such persons, and in such manner, as the Penalties for
the first and second Offense against this Act are to be disposed.

15. How Justices of the Peace may enter into houses suspected for Conventicles.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices
of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate respectively, empowered as aforesaid, to put
this Act in Execution, shall and may with what Aid, Force and Assistance they
shall think fit for the better Execution of this Act, after refusal or denial,
enter into any House or other place, where they shall be informed any such
Conventicle as aforesaid is or shall be held.

16. Provided, The houses of Peers.
That no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, whilst he or his Wife shall
be there Resident, shall be searched, by virtue of this Act, but by immediate
Warrant from his Majesty, under his Sign Manual, or in the prefence of the
Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieutenants, or two Justices of the Peace,
whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding, nor shall any
other Dwelling House of any Peer or other person whatsoever, be entered into
with Force by virtue of this Act, but in the presence of one Justice of the
Peace or chief Magistrate respectively, except within the City of London, where
it shall be lawful for any such other Dwelling House to be entered into as
aforesaid, in the presence of one Justice of the Peace, Alderman,
Deputy-Alderman, or any one Commissoner for the Lieutenancy for the City of
London.

17. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, What persons
may not be committed to the house of Correction.
That no person shall by virtue of this Act, be committed to the House of
Correction, that shall satisfy the said Justices of the Peace, or chief
Magistrate respectively, that he or she (and in case of a Feme Covert that her
Husband) has an Estate of Freehold, or Copyhold, to the value of 5 l. per
Annum, or personal Estate to the value of 50 l. any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

18. And in regard a certain Sect called Quakers, and other Sectaries are found
not only to offend in the matters provided against by this Act, Persons served
with Process Refusing to take au Oath. 14. C. 2. ca.
but also obstruct the proceedings of Justice, by their obstinate refusal to
take Oaths lawfully tendered unto them, in the ordinary Course of Law,
Therefore be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person
or persons, being duly and legally served with Process or other Summons, to
appear in any Court of Record except Court-Leets, as a Witness, or returned to
serve of any Jury, or ordered to be examined upon Interrogatories, or being
present in Court, shall refuse to take any Judicial Oath legally tendered to
him, by the Judge or Judges of the same Court having no legal Plea to Justify,
or excuse the refusal of the same Oath, or if any Person or Persons being duly
served with Process to answer any Bill, exhibited against him or them in any
Court of Equity, or any Suit in any Court Ecclesiastical shall refuse to answer
such Bill or Suit upon his or their corporal Oath, in cases where the Law
requires such Answer to be put in upon Oath, or being summoned to be a Witness
in any such Court, or ordered to be examined upon Interrogatiories shall for
any Cause or Reason not allowed by Law, refuse to take such Oath, as in such
Cases is required by Law, That then and in such Case the several and respective
Courts wherein such refusal shall be made, shall be and are hereby enabled to
Record, Enter, or Register such refusal; which Record or Entry shall be and is
hereby made a Conviction of such Offense, and all and every person and persons,
so aforesaid offending, shall for every such Offense, incur the judgment and
punishment of Transportation, in such manner as is appointed by this Act for
other Offenses.

19. Provided always, That if any person or persons aforesaid, shall come into
such Court, and take his or their Oath in these words.

I do swear, How such persons may be acquitted.
that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawful, nor refuse to take an
Oath on that Account.

20. Which Oath, the respective Court or Courts aforesaid, are hereby
Authorized, and required, forthwith to tender, administer and Register before
the Entry of the Conviction aforesaid, or shall take such Oath before some
Justice of the Peace, who is hereby Authorized and required to Administer the
same to be returned into such Court, such Oath so made shall acquit him or them
from such punishment, any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

21. Provided always, That every person convicted as aforesaid, in Courts
aforesaid (other then his Majesty's Courts of King's Bench, or before the
Justices of Assize, or General Jail-delivery) shall by Warrant containing a
Certificate of such Conviction, under the Hand and Seal of the respective Judge
or Judges, before whom such Conviction shall be had, be sent to some one of his
Majesty's Goals in the same County where such Conviction was had, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize, until the next Assizes or
General-Goal-Delivery, where, if such person so convicted, shall refuse to take
the Oath aforesaid, being tendered unto him by the justice or Justices of
Assize or Jail-delivery, then such Justice, or Justices shall cause Judgment of
Transportation to be executed in such manner as judgment of Transportation by
this Act is to be executed; But in case such person shall take the said Oath,
then he shall thereupon be discharged.

22. Provided always, Peers offending how to be proceeded against
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Peer of this Realm,
shall offend against this Act, he shall pay 10 l. for the first offense, and 20
l. for the second offense, to be levied upon his Goods and Chattels by Warrant
from any two Justices of the Peace, or chief Magistrate of the place, or
Division, where such Peer shall dwell; and that every Peer for the third and
every further Offense against the Tenor of this Act, shall be tried by his
Peers and not otherwise.

23. Provided also and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforsaid, That
this Act shall continue in force for three years after the end of this present
Session of Parliament, The continuance of this Act
and from thence forward to the end of the next Session of Parliament, after
the said three years, and no longer.

Since this was finished, I found in the London Gazette Published Thursday
April 21. 1681. this Paragraph, viz.

To undeceive the Kings Loyal Subjects, who may be misled into Error by a
Pamphlet called The History of the Life and Death of 35 Eliz. These are to
inform them, that that Act amongst others, was continued 1 Jac. until the end
of the first Session of the next Parliament, There were four Sessions in that
Parliament, the last whereof ended 7 Jac. but the Act was to continue to the
first Session of the next Parliament; and though every Session to some purposes
be as a several Parliament, yet it is no such Parliament which can have a first
Session, and is never in Acts of Parliament styled the next Parliament. The
next Parliament summoned was 12 Jac. but because nothing was done therein, it
was held no Parliament. Then a Parliament was summoned 18 Jac. wherein passed
only Subsidies Granted by the Spiritualty and Temporalty. Hence a question
arose 20 Jac. whether 35 Eliz. was not discontinued upon this ground, that 18
Jac. was a Session by passing the Subsidy Act, which being referred to all the
Judges, nine of them were of Opinion, 35 Eliz. with the other Laws continued 1
Jac. were thereby discontinued. To prevent which mischief, The Parliament 21
Jac. not only revives 35 Eliz. and those other Laws in all 58. but Enacts that
they shall be ad udged ever since the Session of Parliament 7 Jac. to have been
of such Force and Effect as the same were the last day of that Session. And
it is undoubted they all were then in force, by Virtue of 1 Jac. and the latter
continuance run clear without the aid of the Declaratory Law of 16 Car. 2. And
though this Conventicle Act of 16 Car. 2. be expired, yet there is another of
greater Force 22 of the King yet in being.

And having therein mentioned the Act of the 22 of his Present Majesty, I
thought I could not justly acquit my self of what I had undertaken ( viz.
impartially and fully to let down all that might any ways have Relation to this
35. Eliz. c. 1.) without giving you that Statute at Large, whereby the
Judicious Reader may fee how far it proves the 35 Eliz. still to be in force.

An Act to Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles.
FOR providing further and more speedy remedies against the growing and
dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries and other disloyal persons, Keeble
St. A. 12. Car 2. c. 1. fol. 1. 61.
who under pretense of Tender Consciences, The Preamble 16 Car. 2. c. 4.
have or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections (as late experience has
shown) Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, Conventicles* etc. forbidden after the Tenth of
May 1670.
and by Authority of the same, That if any Person of the age of 16 years or
upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the Tenth day of May
next, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color or
pretense of any exercise of Religion in other manner then according to the
Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which
Conventicle, Meeting or Assembly, there shall be five Persons or more assembled
together, over and besides those of the same household; if it be in a house
where there is a family inhabiting, or if it be in a house, field; or place
where there is no family inhabiting: Then where any five persons or more are so
assembled as aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for any one or more
Justices of the Peace of the County, How the Offenders must be Convicted.
Limit, Division, Corporation or Liberty, wherein the offense aforesaid shall
be committed, or for the chief Magistrate of the Place where the offense
aforesaid shall be committed. And he and they are hereby required and enjoined,
upon proof to him or them respectively made of such offense, either by
confession of the party, or Oath of two Witnesses (which Oath, the said Justice
and Justices of the Peace and chief Magistrate respectively are hereby empowered
and required to Administer) or by notorious Evidence and circumstance of the
Fact, to make A Record of every such offense under his or their Hands and Seals
respectively; which Record so made as aforesaid, shall to all intents and
purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of
every such Offender for such offense; and thereupon the said Justice, The
penalty for the first Offense. The Record and Conviction to be returned to the
next Quarter Sessions The Penalty for the second offense
Justices, and chief Magistrate respectively, shall impose on every such
Offender so Convict as aforesaid, a Fine of 5 s. for such first Offense, which
Record and Conviction shall be Certified by the said Justice, Justices, or
chief Magistrate, at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County or
Place where the Offense was Committed.

2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender
so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offense or
Offenses contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid Convicted:
Then such offender so convict of such like offense or offenses, shall for every
such offense incur the penalty of 10 s. which Fine and Fines for the first, and
every other offense shall be levied by distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods
and Chattels; or in case of the poverty of such Offender, The Penalti^s how to
be levied.
upon the Goods and Chattels of any other person or persons who shall then be
Convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense at the same Conventicle, at
the discretion of the said Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate respectively,
so as the sum to be levied, or any one person in case of the poverty of other
Offenders amount not in the whole to above the Sum of 10 l. upon occasion of
any one meeting as aforesaid, Constablet, and c. to levy the same and pay it to
^he Justice immediately.
and every Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwardens, and Overseers of
the Poor, respectively, are hereby authorized and required to levy the same
accordingly, having first received a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the
said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate, respectively so to do; the said
Moneys so to be levied, to be forthwith delivered to the same Justice,
Justices, or chief Magistrate, and by him or them to be distributed. The one
third part thereof to the use of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Succssors,
How the penalties are to be divided.
to be paid to the High Sheriff of the County for the time being, in manner
following, That is to say, the Justice or Justices of the Peace, shall pay the
same into the Court of the respective Quarter Sessions, which said Court shall
deliver the same to the Sheriff, and make a memorial on Record of the payment,
and delivery thereof, which said memorial shall be a fufficient and final
discharge to the said Justice and Justices, and a charge to the Sheriff, which
said discharge and charge shall be certified into the Exchequer together,
Certificate into the Exchequer
and not one without tho other. And no Justice shall or may be questioned or
accomptable for the same in the Exchequer or else where, then in Quarter
Sessions. And other third part thereof to and for the use of the Poor of the
Parish where such Offense shall be Committed. And the other third part thereof
to the Informer and Informers, and to such person and persons as the said
Justice, Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively shall appoint, having
regard to their diligence and industry in the discovery, dispersing, and
punishing of the said Conventicles.

3. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The penalty of such
as Preach or teach in a Conventicle how to be levied and disp^sed.
That every person who shall take upon him to Preach or Teach in any such
Meeting, Assembly, or Conventicle, and shall thereof be Convicted as aforesaid,
shall forfeit for every such first offense, the sum of 20 l. to be levied in
manner aforesaid, upon his Goods and Chattels. And if the said Preacher or
Teacher so Convicted be a stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, or
is fled and cannot be found, or in the judgment of the Justice. Justices, or
chief Magistrate before whom he shall be Convicted, shall be thought unable to
pay the same; the said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively are
hereby empowered and required to levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid, upon the
Goods and Chattels of any such persons who shall be present at the same
Conventicle; Any thing in this or any other. Act Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding. And the Money so levied, to be disposed of in manner
aforesaid: And if such Offender so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time
again commit the like offense or offenses, contrary to this Act, and be thereof
convicted in manner aforesaid, then such Offender convicted of such like
offense or offenses, shall for every such offense incurr the penalty of 40 l.
to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

4. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The forfeit re of
such as suffer Conventicles i^ their Houses.
That every person who shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such
Conventicle, Meeting or unlawful Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her
House, Outhouse, Barn, Yard or Backside, and be convicted thereof in manner
aforesaid, shall forseit the sum of 20 l. to be levied in manner aforesaid upon
his or her Goods and Chattels; or in case of his or her povetry or inability as
aforesaid upon the Goods and Chattels of such persous who shall be convicted in
manner aforesaid of being present at the same conventicle, and the money so
levied to be disposed of in manner aforesaid.

5. Provided always, Prov^so.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person shall by any
Clause of this Act, be liable to pay above 10 l. for any one Meeting in regard
of the Poverty of any other person or persons.

6. Provided also, And be it further Enacted, That in all Cases of this Act
where the Penalty or sum charged upon any Offender exceed the sum of 10 s.
Appe^^s way be and to whom and in wh^t Cases.
and such Offender shall find himself agrieved, it shall and may be lawful for
him within one week after the said penalty or money charged shall be paid or
levied, to appeals in writing from the person or persons convicted to the
Judgment of the Justices of the Peace in their next Quarter Sessions, to whom
the Justice or Justices of Peace chief Magistrate or Alderman that first
convicted such Offender, shall return the money levied upon the Appellant, and
shall certify under his and their Hands and Seals, the Evidence upon which the
Conviction past, with the whole Record thereof and the said Appeal; whereupon
such Offender may plead and make defense, and have his Trial by a Jury
thereupon. And in cafe such Appellant shall not prosecute with effect; or if
upon such Trial he shall not be acquitted, or Judgment pass not for him upon
his said Appeal, the said Justices at the Sessions shall give treble Costs
again such Offender for his unjust Appeal; And no other Court whatsoever shall
intermedle with any Cause or Causes of Appeal upon this Act, but they shall be
finally determined in the Quarter Sessions only. Appellant to enter into a
Rec^gniza^ce.


7. Provided always, And be it further Enacted, That upon the delivery of such
Appeal as aforesaid, the person or persons Appellant shall enter before the
person or persons convicting into a Recognizance to present the said Appeal
with effect, which said Recognizance the person or persons convicting is hereby
empowered to take, and required to certify the same to the next Quarter
Sessions; and in case no such Recognizance be entered into, the said Appeal to
be null and void.

8. Provided always, That every such Appeal shall be left with the person or
persons so convicting as aforesaid, at the time of the making thereof.

9. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Justices of Peace
C^^stab^es, etc (...) refusal, may break upon do^rs.
That the Justice, Justices of the Peace, and chief Magistrate respectively, or
the respective Constables, Head-boroughs, and Tything men, by Warrant from the
said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively, shall and may with
what aid, force and assistance they shall think fit, for the better Execution
of this Act, after refusal or denial to enter, break open and enter into any
house, or other place, where they shall be informed any such Conventicle as
aforesaid, is or shall be held, as well within Liberties as without, and take
into their Custody the persons there unlawfully assembled, to the intent they
may be proceeded against according to this Act. And that the Lieutenants or
Deputy-Licutenants or any Commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of
his Majesty's Forces with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot, and also
the Sheriffs and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenan^s, and (...) Officers ^f the Mili^ia, ^ust. disperse
Conventicles either with Horse or Foot.
or any of them, jointly or severally within any the Counties or places within
this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales or Town of Barwick upon Tweed, with
such other assistance made to them respectively under the hand and Seal of any
one Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate of his particular information or
knowledge of such unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held in their
respective Counties or places, and that he with such assistance as he can get
together, is not able to suppress and dissolve the same, shall and may and are
hereby required and enjoined to repair unto the place where they are so held,
or to be held, and by the best means they can to dissolve, dissipate or prevent
all such unlawful Meetings, and take into their Custody, such and so many of
the said persons so unlawfully assembled as they shall think fit, to the intent
they may be proceeded against according to this Act.

10. Provided always, Proviso for Peers of the Realm.
That no dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm where he or his wife shall
then be resident, shall be searched by Virtue of this Act, but by immediate
warrant from his Majessiy under his sign Manual, or in the presence of the
Lieutenant, or one Deputy-Lieutenant or two Justices of the Peace, whereof one
to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding.

11. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The penalty of all
Justices of Peace, Constables and other Officers Civil and Military, that omit
their duty in p^rfor^i^g this Act.
That if any Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Church-wardon, or Overfeer of
the Poor, who shall know ^r be credibly informed of any such Meetings or
Conventicles, held within his Precincts, Parishes or Limits, and shall not give
information thereof to some Justice of the Peace, or the chief Magistrate, and
endeavor the Conviction of the parties, according to his Duty, but such
Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden, Overseers of the Poor or any
person lawfully called in aid of the Constable, Headborough, or Tything-man
shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his duty in the execution
of this Act, and be thereof convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for
every such offense the sum of 5 l. to be levied upon his Goods and Chattels,
and disposed in manner aforesaid. And that if any Justice of the Peace or chief
Magistrate shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his duty in the
execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of 100 l. the one moiety to the
use of the Informer to be recovered by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plaint in any of
his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of
Law shall lie.

12, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, All persons
inde^pri^ied that put this Act in execution.
That if any person be at any time sued for putting in execution any of the
Power contained in this Act, otherwise than upon Appeal allowed by this Act,
such person shall and may plead the general issue and give the special matter
in Evidence: and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Vordict pass for the
Defendant, or if the Plaintiff discontinue his Action, or if upon demur
Judgment be given for the Desendant, every such Desendant shall have his full
treble Costs.

13. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act and
all clauses therein contained, This Act to be interpreted ^ost beneficially for
the suppressing Conventicles.
shall be construed most largely and beneficially for the suppressing of
Conventicles, and for the justification and encouragement of all persons to be
employed in the execution thereof: and that no Record, Warrant, or Mittimus to
be made by virtue of this Act or any proceedings thereupon shall be reversed,
avoided, or any way impeached by reason of any default in form. And in case any
person offending against this Act shall be an Inhabitant in any other County or
Corporation, or fly into any other County or Corporation after the offense
committed, the Justice of Peace or chief Magistrate before whom he shall be
convicted, as aforesaid, shall certify the same under his hand and seal to any
Justice of Peace or chief Magistrate of such County or Corporation wherein the
said person or persons are Inhabitants, or are fled into; which said Justice or
chief Magistrate respectively is hereby authorized and required to levy the
penalty or penalties in this Act mentioned, upon the Goods and Chattels of such
person or persons, as fully as the said other Justice of Peace might have done
in case he or they had been Inhabitants in the place wlfere the offense was
committed.

14. Provided also, Offe^d^rs to be pr^secuted within three months after the
offense. Aldermen within London have the same power there, as Justices of Peace
elsewhere.
That no person shall be punished for any offense against this Act, unless such
offender be profecuted for the same within three months after the offense
committed; and that no person who shall be punished for any offense by virtue
of this Act, shall be punished for the same offense by virtue of any other Act
or Law whatsoever.

15. Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Alderman of London, for the time being, within the City of London and the
Liberties thereof, shall have (and they and every of them are hereby empowered
and required to execute) the fame power and authority within London and the
Liberties thereof for the examining, convicting, and punishing of all offenses
within this Act, committed within London and the Liberties thereof, which any
Justice of Peace has by this Act in any County of England; and shall be
subject to the same penalties and punishments for not doing that which by this
Act is directed to be done by any Justice of Peace in any County of England.

16. Provided, Feme-Covert.
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the person offending and
convicted as aforesaid be a Feme-Covert cohabiting with her Husband, the
penalty of 5 s. or 10 s. so as aforesaid incurred, shall be levied by Warrant
as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Husband of such Feme-Covert.

17. Provided also. Peers of the Realm.
That no Peer of this Realm shall be attached or imprisoned by virtue or force
of this Act, any thing, matter, or clause therein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

18. Provided also, Proviso f^r the Kings Supremacy.
That neither this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to
invalidate or avoid his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs; but that
his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors, may from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authority in Ecclesiastical
affairs as fully and as amply as himself or any of his Predecessors have or
might have done the same, any thing in this Act notwithstanding.

FINIS.
A Postscript touching Prosecutions in the Ecclesiastical Courts.
HAving thus done with the Temporal Prosecutions, it may not be amiss to add a
word concerning the Spiritual Persecutions now on foot, by Citations and
Excommunications, not only to the great perplexity and trouble, but to the
great expense of the people. In reference to which, Men are to consider whether
the present Ecclesiastical severity be according to Law or no: For what ever is
done to disturb the quiet and repose of particular Subjects, contrary to Law,
is down right Oppression. That the exercise of the Punishments of
Excommunication and an Anathema is allowable against obdurate Heretics and
Schismatics, is apparent from Scripture; and the same Scriptute directs both
by whom, how, and upon whom these Sentences ought to be pronounced. On the
other side, as there is no part of Scripture that erects any Ecclesiastical
Courts of Judicature, or Warrants the formal Processes of Citations, Pleas and
Answers, or the extravagant Fees of Proctors, Apparitors and Promooters; so it
appears, that since the Reformation, they have been abrogated by the Law of the
Land, as being looked upon merely to be the effects of Popish Usurpation: For
Episcopal Authority consists not so much in keeping Courts, as in a true
Inspection and Care over the Flock of Christ; the Weapons of their Authory are
only Admonition and Reprehension, and then Excommunication comes of course, a
more Regular and Apostolic way, than by Processes and Citations As to all
other Jurisdiction comprehending Force and Compulsion, it is vested solely in
the King, who is by all true Protestants accounted the Defender of the Faith,
and the supreme Head of the Church. The Law it self runs thus.

And whereas the Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Spiritual persons in this
Realm, do use to make and send out their Summons, Citations and other
Processes, in their own names, and in such form and manner as was used in the
time of the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to the form and order
of the Summons and Process of the Common Law used in this Realm (seeing that
all Authority of Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Temporal, is derived and deducted
from the Kings Majesty as supreme head of these Churches, and Realms of England
and Ireland, so justly acknowledged by the Clergy of the said Realm, that all
Courts Ecclesiastical within the said two Realms) be kept by no other power or
authority, either foreign or within the Realm, but by the authority of his
most excellent Majesty. Be it therefore further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that all Summons and Citations, or other Process Ecclesiastical, in
all suits and causes of Instance betwixt party and party, and all causes of
Correction, and all causes of Bastardy or Bigamy, or enquiry, de jure
patronatus, Probates of Testaments, and Commissions of Administartions of
persons deceased, and all Acquittances of, and upon account made by the
Executor, Administrators, or Collectors of goods of any dead person, be from
the first day of July next following, made in the name, and with the style of
the King, as it is in Writs Original or Judicial at the Common Law: And that
the Test thereof be in the name of the Archbishop or Bishop, or other, having
Excclesiastical Jurisdiction, who has the Commission and grant of the
Authority Ecclesiastical immediately from the Kings Highness, and that his
Commissary, Official or Substitute, exercising Jurisdiction under him, shall
put his name in the Citation or Process, after the Test.

Further be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all manner of person or
persons, who have the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have from
the first day of July before expressed, in their Seals of Office, the Kings
Highness Arms decently set, with certain Characters under the Arms, for the
knowledge of the Diocese, and shall use no other Seal of Jurisdiction, but
where His Mejesties Arms be engraven, upon pain, that if any person shall use
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (after the day before expressed) in this Realm of
England, Wales, or other his Dominions or Territories, and not send or make out
the Citation of Process in the Kings name, or use any Seal of Jurisdiction
other than before limited; that every such Offender shall incur, and run in the
Kings Majesty's displeasure and indignation, and suffer Imprisonment at his
Higness will and pleasure.

Provided that no more, nor other Fees be taken or paid for the Seal and
Writing of any Citations or other Process than was heretofore accustomed.

Which being true, what power the Bishops have to hold their Spiritual Courts,
and send out Process in their own Names, and to make Citations and Executions
of Judgments under their own Seals, is an enquiry not improper for them that
believed themselves wronged.

This Act is said to have been repealed by the 1. and 2. of Philip, and Mary,
c. 8. though no mention be made of it among the repealed Acts of that time.
However, though it were, it was again revived by the 1. of Eliz. c. 1. in these
words,

Most humbly beseech your most Excellent Majesty, Sect. 1.
your faithful and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this your present Parliament assembled, That where in the time of
the Reign of your most dear Father of Worthy Memory, King Henry the 8th. diverse
good Laws and Statutes were made and Established, as well for the utter
extinguishment and putting away of all Usurped and Foreign Powers and
Authorities out of this your Realm, and other your Highness Dominions and
Countries, as also for the restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, the Ancient Jurisdictions, Authorities, Superiorities and Preheminencies
to the same of right belonging and appertaining, by reason whereof, we your
most humble and obedient Subjects, from the Five and twentieth year of the
Reign of your said dear Father, were continually kept in good order, and were
disburdened of diverse great and intolerable Charges and Exactions before that
time unlawfully taken and exacted by such Foreign power and authority as
before that was usurped, until such time as all the said good Laws and
Statutes, by one Act of Parliament made in the first and second years of the
Reigns of the late King Philip, and Queen Mary your Highness Sister, entitled
an Act Repealing all Statues, Articles and Provisions made against the Sea
Apostolic of Rome, since the Twentieth year of King Henry the eight; and also
for the Establishment of all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Possessions and
Hereditaments conveyed to the Laity, were all clearly repealed and made void,
as by the same Act of Repeal more at large does and may appear; by reason of
which Act of Repeal, your said humble Subjects were eftsoons brought under an
usurped Foreign Power and Authority, and yet do remain in that bondage, to the
intolerable charges of your loving Subjects, if some redress (by Authority of
this your High Court of Parliament, with the assent of your Highness) be not
had and provided.

May it therefore please your Highness, Sect. 2.
for the repressing of the said usurped Foreign Power, and the restoring of
the Rites, Jurisdictions and Preheminencies appertaining to the Imperial Crown
of this your Realm, that it may be Enacted by Authority of this present
Parliament, That the said Act. made in the first and second years of the Reign
of the said late King Philip and Queen Mary, and all and every branches,
Clauses and Articles therein contained (other than such branches, Clauses and
Sentences, as hereafter shall be excepted) may from the last day of this
Session of Parliament, by Authority of this present Parliament, be repealed,
and shall from thenceforth be utterly void and of none effect.

And to the intent that all Usurped and Foreign Power and Authority Spiritual
and Temporal, Sect. 16.
may for ever be clearly extinguished, and never be used or obeyed within this
Realm, or any other your Majesty's Dominions or Countries, May it please your
Highness that it may be further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, Spiritual or Temporal,
shall at any time after the last day of this Session of Parliament, use, enjoy
or exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority,
Pre-eminence, or Privilege Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or
within any other your Majesty's Dominions or Countries that now be, or
hereafter shall be, but from thenceforth the same shall be clearly abolished
out of this Realm, and all other your Highness Dominions for ever; any Statute,
Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions, or any other matter or cause whatsoever to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that also it may please your Highness that it may be established and
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Sect. 17.
that such Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities and Preheminencies
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or
Authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully be exercised or used for the
Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order
and Correction of the same and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Scismes,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities, shall for ever, by Authority of
this present Parliament, be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm.

And that your Highness, Sect. 18.
your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have full
Power and Authority by virtue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, to Assign, Name and Authorize, when, and as often as your
Highness, your Heirs or Successors shall think meet and Convenient, and for
such and so long time as shall please your Highness, your Heirs or Successors,
such Person or Persons being natural born Subjects to your Highness your Heirs
and Successors, as your Majesty, your Heirs or Successors shall think meet to
exercise, use, occupy, and execute under your Highness, your Heirs and
Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Preheminencies in any
wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within
these your Realms of England and Ireland, or any other your Highness Dominions
and Countries, and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such
errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities
whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority
or Jurisdiction, can, or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed,
corrected, restrained, or amended to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase
of Virtue, and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm. And that
such person or persons so to be named, assigned, authorized and appointed by
your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him
or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall have full power and
authority, by virtue of this Act and of the said Letters Patents under your
Highness, your Heirs and Successors, to exercise, use and execute all the
premises, according to the Tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents; any
matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

By which branches of this Statute, it seems to be most demonstrable, that all
manner of Jurisdiction in Causes Spiritual and Ecclesiastical is invested in
the Crown, and that no Spiritual Courts may be holden, but by the Kings
Commission.

Lastly, By the 16. Car. primi, the very branch of the Statute for granting
Commissions is also repealed, which left the Ecclesiastical Courts no power at
all.

Seeing then that all Power both Temporal and Ecclesiastical is vested in the
King, it seems to be a high point of disobedience, for Subjects to hold Courts
of Judicature to disturb and punish the Kings Liege People, without any Legal
Authority.

From whence may arise these few short Quaeries.

Qu. 1. Whither it be not proper for the persons cited, to demand the sight and
hearing of the Commission, by which the Judges claim their Jurisdiction? 1st.
for their own safety? 2dly, In point of Loyalty to the King? 3dly, As being
obliged by the Oath of Supremacy to renounce ^^l Foreign Jurisdictions?

Qu. 2. Supposing the said Judges produce no Authority from the King, yet
proceed to Excommunication, whether the said Excommunication be not void?

Qu. 3. Whether the said Judges be not Indictable upon a Pramunire? or liable
to an Action, as Counsel shall direct?

For what remains, the parties concerned may take their measures as they find
most necessary for self preservation, from Mr. Cary's True Guide for all
persons concerned in Ecclesiastic Courts.

FINIS.

