Let this be Printed,

WHITE HALL, Febr. 25th. 1687. Sunderland P.

THE Legality of the Court HELD BY His Majesty's Ecclesiastical Commissioners,
DEFENDED. Their Proceedings No ARGUMENT Against the Taking Off Penal Laws and
Tests.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley
in Paternoster Row. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE Legality of the Court Held by His Majesty's Ecclesiastical Commissioners,
DEFENDED.
THE Manifest Design of our Churchmen's Outcries against His MAJESTY'S
Ecclesiastical Commission, being to insinuate into the Mobile, That the KING,
notwithstanding the solemn Promises he has made to the Church of England,
intends nothing less than Her Ruin; I cannot forbear adding some Considerations
to what the Vindicator of the Proceedings of His MAJESTY's Ecclesiastic
Commissioners has said on this Subject. And thus much I the rather do, because
I find, that the Last thing they aim at, is the setting the Nation against the
Taking off Penal Laws and Tests. But, that I may the more Successfully go
through this Province, it will be necessary, that I examine what has been
opposed to the Legality of the Court.

His MAJESTY has Promised to Protect the Church of England, as by Law
established, and hitherto has done Nothing that interseres with this most
Gracious Promise; for, it must be acknowledged, that a Correcting the
Disobedient Members of a Church, is not a Destroying, but rather an using
proper methods to preserve and secure it.

The Church of England is a Body-Politick, compact, and compounded of many, and
almost infinite several, and yet well-agreeing Members, of which the KING is
Head, instituted and furnished with plenary and entire Power, Prerogative, and
Jurisdiction, to render Justice and Right to every part of this Body, of what
Estate; Degree, and Calling soever he be.

The Exercise of this Power and Prerogative, according to the Ecclesiastic
Laws of this Realm, is the Great Engine, used for the Defense and Security of
this Church. The Distribution of Justice, whether by encouraging those that do
well, or punishing the Offenders, is the true way to support a Body-Politick.

Thus much, I presume, all men of Sense will yield, from whence it is easily
inferred, That on my Clearing the Legality of the Commission [for nothing has
been (that I do know) objected against the Defense of its Proceedings] it must
be moreover granted, that His Majesty has done the Church of England no harm.

My present Work then, is, to consider, What has been urged against the
Legality of this Court? The Author of a Letter to the Vindicator will have the
Question to be, Whether or no by the Laws of this Nation, as they now stand,
the KING's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may be delegated to Commissioners? Or,
Whe-Ecclesiastical Commissioners derived their Authority from His Majesty, by
virtue of the First Elizabeth only, and not upon the score of any Prerogative
in the Crown, preceding to that Act, whereby our Kings might appoint
Commissioners in such Cases, ad libitum, is the single Question, upon which the
Validity or Invalidity of the present Commission will turn?

To this the Author answers, That it is not an Expression that might drop from
my Lord Coke's Pen, that will determine so weighty a point as this, especially
it being a question that depends upon some knowledge of Antiquity, which my
Lord Coke was very little acquainted with: Besides, he adds, That my Lord Coke
never tells us, that our King's, by virtue of their ancient Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, could appoint any Commissioners.

After this, the Author goes on to let us know what the ancient Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical was, boldly affirming, that no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was
anciently delegated to Commissioners; For, says he, Commissioners are not such
Arbitrary things as some mistaken Men do fondly imagine. And how plausibly
soever it be said, That what Power a Man has in himself, he may delegate unto
another; Yet this difference must be admitted betwixt Persons Commissionated by
the KING in Matters of Government, and Persons authorized by private men, to
act for them, and in their stead, viz. That private men may by Law do those
things in Person, which they empower others to do for them. But the KING
Commissionates Persons to do what Himself cannot by Law do in Person.

This is the Substance of what our Author opposes to what the Vindicator had
said of the Legality of this Court. And in my Reply, no more is needful, than
to show, 1. That in the Sense of the Church's great Archbishop, the KING may do
by Law those things in Person, which He impowers Commissioners to do for Him.
2. That before the 1 Eliz. the Kings of England, by the Common Law, might grant
out Commissions. 3. That notwithstanding any thing contained in the 16 Car. 1.
or 13 Car. 2. be KING may do so still. 4. That His Majesty may exercise this
Prerogative in Matters Ecclesiastical, in a more ample manner than yet He has
done; and therefore seeing he does not, it is manifest, That His Majesty designs
no Hurt to the Church of England.


To the First, I will only insist on what is affirmed by Archbishop Bancroft,
the Malleus Puritanorum, the great Champion of our English Church, who was
President of the Convocation called in the First year of K. James 1. and stiffly
insisted on the imposing the three Articles, and on a Depriving all that
disobeyed. This Great man, the Church of England's Darling, expresses himself
most fully in these Words, Lib. 12. Mich. 5 Jac. Prohibitions de l'Roy.
as Sir Edward Coke reports.

Upon Sunday the 10th. of November, the KING, (upon Complaint made to him by
Bancroft Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning Prohibitions) was informed, That
when question was made of what Matters the Ecclesiastical Judges have
cognizance, either upon the Exposition of the Statutes concerning Tithes, or
any other thing Ecclesiastical, or upon the Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning the
High Commission, or in any other case, in which there is not express Authority
in Law, the KING Himself may Decide it in His Royal Person, and that the Judges
are but the Delegates of the KING; and that the KING may take what Causes he
please to determine, from the Determination of the Judges, and may determine
them Himself. And the Archbishop said, It was clear in Divinity, that such
Authority belongs to the KING by the Word of GOD.

Nothing can be more expressly opposite to what the Author of the Letter
affirms: He says, that The KING cannot by Law do that in Person which He
impowers others to do. But the Archbishop is positive, That the KING can do it
in Person, yea, that thus much is ratified by the Holy Scriptures, and
therefore is out of the power of humane Laws to alter. If then there be any
Truth in this Church-man's Divinity, there is no force in what the Author
offers for Law. But,

Secondly, The thing I chiefly insist on, is this, That before the First of
Elizabeth, the Kings of England might grant out Commissions.

In Caudries Case, Coke Rep. Lib. 5.
after great and long Deliberation and Consultation, the Judges resolved, That
the Act of the First year of the late Queen, concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, was not a Statute Introductory of a New Law, but Declaratory of
the Old; which appears as well by the Title of the said Act, viz. An Act
restoring to the CROWN the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, etc. As also, by the Body of the Act, in diverse parts thereof.
For that Act does not annex any Jurisdiction to the CROWN, but that which in
truth, or of Right, ought to be by the Ancient Laws of the Realm, parcel of the
KING's Jurisdiction, and united to his Imperial Crown, and which Lawfully had
been, or might be exercised within the Realm.

Thus you see the Judges are clear in their Opinion, that the First of
Elizabeth is not Introductory of a New Law, but Declaratory of the Old: And
thus much in the General the Author of the Letter will grant me, but then he
will by no means yield, That our KINGS, by virtue of their Ancient, Inherent,
and Primitive Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, might Delegate to Commissioners the
Exercise thereof: However, if we observe what was further resolved by these
Judges, we shall find that 'twas thus:

If that Act of the First Year of our late Queen, had never been made, it was
Resolved by All the Judges, that the King or Queen of England, for the time
being, may make such an Ecclesiastical Commission, as is before mentioned, by
the Ancient Prerogative and Law of England.

Thus you have the Resolution of all the Judges, against the Opinion of one
unknown Gentleman, whether Lawyer, or no, is not clear; but had he been (though
he discovers no such thing) Learned in the Laws, I presume, his Opinion is not
to be regarded, in a Matter wherein the Judges are so plainly against him. And,
though this be enough, yet ex abundanti, I will add one Resolution more of our
Judges. Coke Rep. Lib. 12.
Mich. 4. Jacob. post Prandium; There was moved a Question amongst the Judges
and Sergeants at Serjeants-Inn, If the High Commissioners in Ecclesiastical
Causes may, by Force of their Commission, imprison any man, or no? First of
all, it was resolved by all, that Before the Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 1. The KING
might have Granted a Commission to Hear and Determine Ecclesiastical Causes.

To return to our Author, on this Question, Whether our KINGS, by virtue of
their Ancient Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, might Grant out Commissions, or
Delegate the exercise of their Power to Commissioners? I say, on this Question
(as this Gentleman grants) the Validity or Invalidity of the present Commission
will turn: that is to say, If by the ancient Laws our KINGS might Grant out
Commissions, then the present Commission is valid; But it has been Resolved by
all the Judges again and again, that by the Ancient Law before the First of
Elizabeth, the KING might Grant out Commissions. Ergo, the present Commission
is valid, the Court is a Legal Court.

Though this be so very clear, yet our Gentleman is still of the Opinion, That
the Statute of 16 Car. 1. has taken away the Commission it self, Root and
Branch. I will therefore proceed to the Third point, viz.

Thirdly, That notwithstanding any thing contained in the 16 Car. 1. or 13 Car.
2. the KING may still Grant out Commissions. For, if the Power of Granting this
Commission be, as our Church-of- England-Lawyers declare, a part of the Ancient
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, it is, notwithstanding any thing in the 16 Car. 1.
or 13 Car. 2. still so. For it is expressly declared in this 13 Car. 2. c. 12.
That Neither the said Act, nor any thing therein contained, DOES, or Shall take
away any Ordinary Power from the Arch bishops, Bishops, etc. but that they, and
every Person abovenamed, exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may proceed,
and execuce all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, belonging to the same
before the making of the 16 Car. 1. And if we look back, and observe who those
Persons are that are abovenamed, we shall find them to be not only Archbishops,
and Bishops, but Vicar-Generals, or any other person or persons whatever,
exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power by any Grant, License, or
Commission of the KING's Majesty; and if the Ecclesiastical Power be restored
to Vicar-Generals, and to the KING's Commissioners, then the Power
extraordinary is restored too, for 'twas an Extraordinary Power that belonged
to them, which can no sooner be yielded, but 'twill follow, that no more Power
is taken from Vicar-Generals, and the KING's Commissioners, than what was taken
from Archbishops, Bishops, etc. which is further confirmed by that Clause, in
which it is Declared, That the KING's Supremacy in Ecclesiastic affairs shall
not be abridged or diminished; On which I thus argue: That that Sense of this
Law, by which the KING's Ecclesiastic Supremacy is abridg'd or diminished, is
not the true Church of England Sense. But the holding that all extraordinary
Jurisdiction is taken away, abridges the KING's Supremacy; For, as our
Churchmen will have it before this Statute was Enacted, it is most manifest,
that the Power of making Vicar-Generals and Commissioners, for the exercise of
Extraordinary Jurisdiction, and summoning Men out of their own Diocese,
belonged to the King's Supremacy Ecolesiastical, and therefore it still does
appertain to it, which cannot be satisfied by Commissioners of Delegates, and
Commissioners to visit in places exempt; For as I have already observed,
Vicar-Generals, whose Jurisdiction is Extraordinary, are named amongst the
rest. But to follow our Author,

If we enquire after the Special Reason that moved Queen Elizabeth to set up
the High Commission Court, we shall find, that though it was to the end she
might Deprive the Popish Priests, yet, by the Instigation of the Clergy, it
was, for many years together, turned against the Protestant Dissenters; and,
according to Church-of- England-Law, it may as well be turned against
themselves: For the Powers, Authorities, and Jurisdictions annexed to the
Imperial CROWN of England, were for the Redressing, Ordering, Correcting,
Restraining, and Amending any Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities whatsoever,
which by any manner of Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction, ought to be
reformed; and therefore, if a Church-of- England-man be guilty of any such
Offenses, Contempts, or Enormities, he falls under the Ecclesiastic Censure,
as well as a Roman Catholic, or Protestant Dissenter; and for the same Reason,
One Prince exercises this Authority against Offenders of one sort, another
Prince may use the same Power, for the amending the Offenders of the other
Denomination.

And, Who can consider how our Churchmen, that they might the more severely
handle the Protestant Dissenter, have exalted the Prerogative, and not wonder
that they should complain on the milder Exercises of it? But whatever they may
think, it is impossible for them to open their Mouths in this matter, unless
they bring upon themselves the greatest Odium and Contempt imaginable; for when
they blame the present Commissioners for what they have done against the Bishop
of London, and Magdalen College, they do condemn themselves for exercising the
greatest Severities against the Puritans, contrary (as now they themselves will
have it) unto all Law; For from what has been already said, it is apparent,
That the same Power His Majesty's Predeceffors exercised, belongs unto His
Majesty, and that gives Strength to each Horn of the Dilemma.

In a word, then our Churchmen must confess, they have been guilty of a very
great error, in turning the Royal Thunder against the Old Puritans, in Q.
Elizabeth's and K. James the First's days: Or, that they acted very Righteously
in what they have done against them. If the Former, why do they not publish so
much to the World? Why do they not confess, that their Forefathers have sinned,
and gone astray, and that the Puritans were most Unjustly persecuted by their
beloved Mother? If the Latter, if the Church of England in those days did but
what was Just, seeing many Hundred of the Puritans were spoiled of their
Benefices by the Royal Power, the KING may as Righteously proceed on the same
bottom.

Fourthly, The Fourth thing to be done, is this, viz. That His MAJESTY may
exercise His Prerogative in Matters Ecclesiastical, in a more ample manner than
yet He has done.

The Author of the Letter affirms, That the Power of making Canons, for the
Government of the Church, was no otherwise in the CROWN than the Power of
making Temporal Laws; But the mistake in this place is as great as some others
he is fallen into, about Appeals and Investitures; the first of which,
notwithstanding what he says to the contrary, is to the KING without a
Parliament, and decided by his Delegates or Commissioners of Review; the Last
by the KING solely, who, by the delivery of the Staff and Ring, did usually
invest, as our Histories abundantly confirm. In like manner touching Laws about
Rites and Ceremonies, it lies in the KING's Power, without a Parliament, to
make 'em. So says Dr. Zouch, and Dr. Cousin, and there is an Act of Parliament,
Rex possit novas Leges condere circa ceremonias and ritus cum confilio
Metropolitani vel Commissariorum in Causis Ecclesiasticis. Zouch. Descrip. Jur.
Eccles. Par. 1. Sect. 3. Cos. T. 6.
expressly recognizing this Power to be in the KING; the Words of which are, If
there shall happen any Contempt or Irreverence to be used in the Ceremonies or
Rites of the Church -- the Queen's Majesty, with the Advice of Her
Commissioners in Causes Ecclesiastical, or Metropolitan, may Ordain and
Institute such further Ceremonies or Rites, as may be most for the Advancement
of GOD's Glory, the Edifying of His Church, and due Reverence of Christ's Holy
Mysteries and Sacraments. 1 Eliz. c. 2.


And as the KING, with His Ecclesiastical Commissioners, may make New Laws
about Ceremonies, so, without a Parliament, He may make Orders or
Constitutions, for the Government of the Clergy, and deprive the Disobedient.

Thus much is affirmed by those Protestant Divines, who have Written in Defense
of the KING's Supremacy, particularly by Dr. Harris, in Answer to Becanus the
Jesuit, where he is express in assuring us, That the Right and Power by Regal
Authority to make Church-Laws, as, that GOD should not be Blasphemed; that GOD
should be pacified in a Fast, and Honored in a Festival-day, and all such as
we read to have been made in the Code, Authenticks, and Capitulars by
Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, and Carolus Magnus, belongs to our Kings.

Moreover, to Delegate such as should judge of the Laws so made,

Touching Persons

To administer Justice to all of all sorts -- To deprive the High Priest (if he
do deserve) of his Priesthood.

These by Divine Right, are the Rights -- of Regal Primacy, viz. whereby the
KING may
1. Be called the Supreme Head of the Church. 2. Call Councils, and preside in
them. 3. Make Laws Ecclesiastical. 4. Constitute, and Depose the High Priest.
5. Bind His Subjects, by Oath, to Keep the Laws by Him made.
To conclude, Hereby may the Adversaries see that Regal Primacy is founded on
the Scriptures, and propagated from the First Religious Kings under the Old, to
the First Religious Emperors and Kings, and so to Our Sovereign Lord K. JAMES,
under the New Testament, and in that long distance of time nothing impaired or
diminished. So far Dr. Harris.

But before many Noblemen, Archbishops, and Bishops, and the Justices and
Barons of the Exchequer, it was agreed, That the KING, without a Parliament,
may make Constitutions for the Government of the Clergy, and that such a
Deprivation, Ex Officio, without a Libel, is good.

Besides, it must be further observed, That as it was held both by the
Church-of England-Divines, and Lawyers, Noyes Reports, Fol. 100.
to be in the Power of the KING to make Constitutions for the Government of the
Clergy, and Deprive the Disobedient: In like manner our KINGS acted
accordingly, and imposed a Subscription to the Three following Articles.

I. That the KING's Majesty, under GOD, is the Only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other His Highnesses Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; and that no Foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, have or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or
Spiritual, within His Majesty's said Realms, Dominions and Countries.

II. That the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordering of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the Word of GOD, and that it may
Lawfully be used, and That He Himself will use the Form in the said Book,
prescribed in public Prayer; and none others.

III. That He allows the Book of Articles of Religion, agreed upon by the
Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden in London, in the Year of our Lord God, 1562. And that He
acknowledges all and every the Articles therein contained, being in number
Nine and Thirty, besides the Ratification to be agreeable to the Word of GOD.

To these three Articles all Persons received into the Ministry, were bound to
Subscribe in these Words;

I N. N. do willingly, and ex animo, Subscribe to these Three Articles
abovementioned, and to all things that are contained in them.

This Subscription was imposed by the Regal Authority, without a Parliament,
and many Hundreds who could not Subscribe, were, to the Ruin of them and their
Families, actually deprived. And although this Subscription was exacted, during
the whole Reign of James I. and Charles I. yet until the Restoration of
Charles the 2d. it had never a Parliamentary Establishment.

Seeing then, it is past doubt, That His MAJESTY's Supremacy is as ample as that
of any of His Royal Predecessors, what Q. Elizabeth and K. James the First have
done, that His present MAJESTY may now do, and without a Parliament, Command a
Subscription to other New Articles, and Deprive the Disobedient.

To instance in one Article: His MAJESTY may Command all the Clergy throughout
this Kingdom, to give in their Assent, and Consent to every thing contained in
His late Gracious Declaration of Indulgence, and Deprive all that Disobey.

The power of Making new Articles, and requiring Subscription, His MAJESTY'S
Royal Predecessors have exercised, and the same His MAJESTY may as well now do.
For the Matter of His Majesty's Declaration has greater Countenance from
Scripture, than the Ceremonies can pretend to. Ay, the very Dispensing Power it
self, is no more than what many of our Clergy have, for many Years together,
preached up for Sound Doctrine.

Thus you see how the KING may stretch His Prerogative to an higher Peg than
yet he has done; but, Would there not then be a Brave Work among our Clergy,
who, on such an occasion, would be obliged to give in Assent and Consent to
Liberty of Conscience, or submit to a Deprivation! I will say it again, If His
MAJESTY by His Regal Authority, should impose a Subscription to His late
Gracious Declaration, He might most Righteously, according to Church-of-
England-Law, Deprive all that refuse to Obey.

I know that of late, some have very confidently said, That Deprivation is no
Ecclesiastical Penalty, for the Benefices of which they are Deprived, is a
Property, and by Magna Charta, no one can be disseized of it, without a Trial
by a Jury of his Peers; I will therefore, in short, give you the Resolution of
our Judges in this matter, and leave it to the impartial Reader to judge, as he
shall see cause.

Robert Cawdrey, the Parson of the Rectory of North-Luffenham, in the County of
Rutland, was, by the Queens Ecclesiastical Commissioners, deprived of his said
Benefice, for preaching against the Book of Common Prayer, as also for that he
refused to Celebrate Divine Service, according to the said Book; which said
Sentence of Deprivation was given by the Bishop of London cum assensu A. B. C.
D. etc. collegarum suorum. But whether the Deprivation was void in Law, was
solemnly and oft-times debated at Bar by Council, and at the Bench by the
Judges, and after great and long deliberation and consultation had with the
rest of the Judges, the Case was in the Term of St. Hilary, in the 37 Year of
the Queen, adjudged. It was argued by Cawdrey's Counsel, That the Deprivation
was void, for his Offense was against the First of Elizabeth, and therefore
ought to be punished according to the moderation of that Act, which was not for
the First Offense an ipso facto Deprivation, but only the Loss of the profits
of his Ecclesiastical Livings for One year, and Six months Imprisonment. But
Deprivation was for a Second Offense, committed after he had been judicially
convicted of Record by Verdict of Twelve men, or by Confusion, or notorious
evidence of the Fact. But although this was the method prescribed by the
Statute of 1 Elizabeth, yet, because there was a Proviso in the said Act, [
That all and singular Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries having any peculiar
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, should have full Power and Authority, by virtue of
that Act as well to enquire in their Visitation, etc. -- of all and every the
things abovementioned, done and committed, or perpetrated within the limits of
their Jurisdiction and Authority, and punish the same by Admonition,
Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation, and other Censures and Process,
in like Form as heretofore had been used in like cases by the Queens
Ecclesiastical Laws,] It was adjudged, That the Ecclesiastical Judges might
Deprive such Person, Vicar, etc. as shall deprave or not observe the said Book,
as well for the First Offense, as he might have done by the Censures of the
Church, and the Ecclesiastic Laws, as if no form of punishment had been
inflicted by that Act, and are not bound to pursue the Form prescribed by the
said Act, which is to punish the Offender, according to the Temporal Law.

Thus the Judges have Resolved it, That Deprivation is one sort of
Ecclesiastical punishment, and may be inflicted without an Observing the Form
prescribed by the Temporal Laws: Which is enough to silence the Clamours of
those Churchmen, who now cry up Benefices to be such a Property, that the
punishment by Deprivation cannot be justly inflicted, unless the process be in
like Form as is used by the Temporal Laws.

Furthermore, as His Majesty may exercise this ample Power, and not recede the
least from Church-of- England Law; even so, his Doing it would not interfere
with his Promise: And, if we may judge of things by the Sentiments our
Churchmen have heretofore had of Deprivations, no hurt is hereby done unto
their Church. For when the old Puritans, in Q. Elizabeth's and James the First's
days, and the Nonconformists in Charles the Second's Reign, were Deprived,
these Deprivations were esteemed by the Governing Clergy, no Damage, but a
great Advantage to the Church; for, by them She was delivered from all those
that differed from Her in a Ceremony. On the other hand therefore, if His
Majesty should impose Subscription to the Late Declaration, though many be
thereupon Deprived, yet no more harm can be done the Church of England now than
by the former Deprivations. And if the Opinion of a very Learned and Moderate
Churchman may be of any value, the Difference between these and the Old
Deprivations, must be only this: By the Old, the most Pious, Learned, and
Peaceable, that scrupled the Ceremonies, were turned out, to the prejudice of
Religion; But by this New one, none but the Debauched, and Persecuting part of
the Clergy, to whom we may impute all our Late Miseries, will be laid aside, to
the advancing the Nations Peace.

If then the KING may exercise his Prerogative, and go so far, as is here said,
without doing any hurt to the Church, What ground is there for the present
Noise? His MAJESTY's Commissioners have indeed suspended One Bishop for his
Disobedience, toward whom they have exercised the greatest patience, in not
proceeding to a Deprivation; And what have they done more, than amove the
Fellows of one College for their insolent oppugning His Majesty's Supremacy,
and a making 'em incapable of compassing their bad designs? Where then is the
least Color for the Jealousies these men endeavor to beget in the minds of
His Majesty's Subjects?

On the whole, Whoever will consider how much, according to Church-of-
England-Law, the KING may do, and yet notwithstanding the many Provocations
some Hot-Church-men have given Him, How little He has done? I say, whoever will
carefully observe thus much, will see cause enough to conclude, That His
Majesty's Clemency in the Exercise of His Supremacy, bears proportion to His
Greatness.

It Is amazing to observe, how industriously some of our Clergy, and their
Creatures, struggle; how strenuously they labor to misrepresent His Majesty's
most Glorious Designs, how many Seditious Pamphlets they do daily emit, and at
what charges they are to propagate 'em. But yet His Majesty, with the greatest
steadiness pursues His Royal Purposes of Grace to the whole Kingdom, to all
Parties in it, even to the Church of England, that She continue in the
Enjoyment of all that is dear unto Her, so far as it is consistent with the true
peace and quiet of the other great parts of the Nation.

Let things be restored to the Ancient Constitution, let all Englishmen, as
such, enjoy the Privileges that belong unto 'em: Let them all sit down with
peace under their own Vines, and be equally concerned in the Services the
Government calls for, and Encouragements it gives, and His Majesty is satisfied.

The enclosing the Government, and narrowing it so, that none but Men of one
Religious Persuasion can have a share in it, has (as woeful experience teaches
us) proved fatal to this Nation. It has spoiled our Trade, depopulated the
Kingdom, and exhausted the Nation's Treasure, carrying it unto a neighboring
People.

Let us then be content, that His Majesty brake down the Enclosures, and set
the Government on a larger bottom, that all True Englishmen may have a share
in it. Let Liberty and Property, and every man's Religion, be secured, and we
shall soon be the happiest People under Heaven.

I say, Let every man's Religion be secured, as much from Violence, as the most
Sacred part of our Civil Liberties, for this is the thing His MAJESTY Desires;
and, Where then is our danger?

His MAJESTY offers to do what never any of His Royal Predecessors ever did
before him, toward the establishing his Peoples Peace, And shall we be so
unsensible, as not to Bless GOD, and accept of the Offer?

Here is no Trusting in the Case. His MAJESTY discovers so much Sincerity and
Integrity in what he says, that he will leave no room for Trust.

It is but to accept of a Magna Charta, in which our Religion is secured from
all danger, (which can never be so long as Penal Laws, and those Tests, whose
matter is merely Religious, be kept up,) and we are immediately possessed of all
we can reasonably desire.

Let the same Instrument that takes away Penal Laws and Tests, secure our
Religion, and by the very Breath, that the one is destroyed, the other will be
established.

That a Sufficient Security may be found out, is not doubted by the most wise
and thoughtful. What that is, is the part of a Parliament to consider; but if
we have as good, or better Security for our Religion; to be content to part
with Penal Laws and Tests, is both the Duty and Interest of every true
Englishman.

That His Majesty will give us as good Security as can be reasonably desired,
is the Import of His Late Gracious Declaration, which, he has, on diverse
occasions, often publicly repeated, and it has been fully proved, That His
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Commissioners have done nothing that is inconsistent
with It. Whence it clearly follows, That there is nothing of Argument in our
Hot-Churchmens Clamours, about this Courts Proceedings against the Taking off
Penal Laws and Tests.

In a word, from what has been already urged, it is most apparent:

I. That the Court, held by His Majesty's Ecclesiastical Commissioners, is,
according to the Sentiments of Church of- England-Lawyers and Divines, a Legal
Court.

II That the Prerogative, recognized by the Church-of- England to be inherent
in the CROWN, is much larger than what His Majesty has yet exercised. For, 1.
The KING with His Commissioners Ecclesiastical may make New Laws about
Ceremonies; and instead of Three, impose Thirty more. The Power being lodged in
the KING, He is the most proper Judge of their Decency, and Number; and for the
same Reason, that Three are imposed, if His Majesty judges it meet, Thirty more
may be added to the present Imposition. 2. The KING with His Commissioners
Ecclesiastical, may enjoin a strict Subscription unto New Articles, and in the
present juncture, require the Clergy to give in Assent, and Consent unto them,
on Pain of Deprivation. And if His Majesty should oblige our hot Church-Doctors
to Subscribe, Assent, and Consent unto Liberty of Conscience, What a condition
would these Violent Men be plunged into? They must either renounce their
persecuting Principles, or part with what is as dear unto them, viz. their
Benefices. 3. His Majesty may proceed against the Bishop of London to a
Deprivation; for, when ever any one falls under Suspension, it has been the
Custom of the Church of England, stiffly to insist on a Submission; and where
that could not be obtained, they never stopped one point this side a Deprivation.
Now it is plain, that it was the Bishop's Duty to obey the Mandate of his
Supreme Ordinary, and suspend Dr. Sharp; and seeing he refused to Discharge his
Duty, he was by their own Laws, justly suspended; and it is as certain, that His
Majesty exercises the greatest Clemency, in waiting so long for his submission.
4. If His Majesty should deal with some of the Magdalen-Fellows after that
manner, the Church-of- England-Judges advised King James the First, to proceed
against the Old Puritanes, He might handle 'em more severely than yet his
Commissioners have done. For their endeavoring to fill the Minds of His
Majesty's Subjects with Discontents, and Jealousies, is an Offense, Fineable at
discretion, and very short of Felony, or Treason in the Punishment.


By all which it is manifest, that His Majesty has not stretched his Prerogative
to the utmost length he might, and yet keep within the Church-of- England
Circle, and it is also as clear, that by reason of this Power His Majesty has
all the Conformable Clergy under His Girdle; to which we may add, that on the
account of the many Penal Laws against Protestant Dissenters, They also are as
much under the Power of their PRINCE; for which reason, we may be assured, that
if His Majesty designed any thing more than the Peace and Quiet of all His
People, if he had further resolved to have set up Popery in Dominion, to the
Ruining His Protestant Subjects, the only time of doing it would be before the
Penal Laws and Tests are taken off, and a Magna Charta, for Liberty of
Conscience is Established. For Now, the KING can either Muzzle all the Clergy,
or Ty^up the hands of Protestant-Dissenters, and get a Parliament, that shall
set up Popery.

It Is not to be doubted, but that it is more easy Now, than it can be after a
Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience is obtained; for Then, the persecuting
principle will be Damned, the Church of England will have fresh security for
her standing, and the Protestant-Dissenter be delivered from the Awe, and Dread
of Penal Laws. And every Man, whose desire is more for Peace, than Broils and
Confusions (be they Protestant or Roman Catholic) they will be for a
continuing the Magna Charta.

To deliver freely my Conscience in this case, it is this: His Majesty designs
to make us happy, by setting us all at ease under His Government; and the
utmost he desires, is, That the Roman Catholics with His other Subjects, may
enjoy the Free Exercise of their Religion, and have an equal share with others
in the privileges of Englishmen: and that thus much may be compassed, the King
would have Matters so settled, that it may never be in the power of any one
Party to hurt the Religion of the other, and that all Parties may be secured
from Fears and Jealousies, His Majesty calls for the help of a Parliament, that
in a Parliamentary-way, Men of every Religion, may have the greatest security
the Wit of Man can invent for Liberty of Conscience.

All those Pamphlets therefore, that are daily spread abroad, chiefly by those,
who had the greatest hand in the late Persecution, do hinder the Nations Peace,
so far, as they obstruct this His Majesty's most Gracious Design, and are to be
considered as such, by all good Men, who, when they weigh things, will, I doubt
not, see cause to do their utmost, that We may have such a Parliament, as will
concur with His Majesty in making us Happy.

FINIS.

