THE DIFFERENCE Between the Present and Future STATE OF OUR BODIES, Considered
in a SERMON,

By Jeremy Collier, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1686.

IMPRIMATUR,

April 23. 1686. Hen. Maurice, Rmo. P. and D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.

1 Cor. 15. 29. And as we have born the Image of the earthy, so we shall also
bear the Image of the heavenly.
WHether the Soul in the State of Separation acts independently of Matter,
purely by the strength of her own powers, or whether in order to the better
understanding her self and other Beings, she makes use of a Body of Air shaped
out into such Limbs and Senses as she has occasional employment for; whether
or no the want of her old companion is supplied this way, is uncertain. But
whatever abatements of happiness the pious Soul may suffer for want of a
suitable Body between the time of Death, and the General Judgment, then we are
sure this inconvenience will be removed, and it will be repossessed of its
ancient Seat out of which Violence or Nature had forced it.

Now this certainty of the Resurrection is a Doctrine, which helps the meanest
understanding to conceive the Nature of the Happiness of the other World, and
consequently must needs prove a great and universal encouragement to the
practice of our Duty. For in regard we have always been used to dwell in these
houses of Clay, the generality would not have been so well able to apprehend
the happiness of pure and uncompounded Spirits; but would have been apt to have
thought that the loss of their Bodies would have deprived them of no small part
of themselves; and consequently would not have been so willing to resign them
or expose them to hardship and inconvenience upon the account of Religion: But
now since we are assured that this visible part of us, which we are so well
acquainted with, shall be quitted only for a time, and then restored us with
all desirable advantages; yet Mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and we
shall exchange the Image of the earthy for that of the heavenly; what can we
more rationally infer than the last verse of this Chapter? Wherefore be ye
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord in as much as no
part of our being is lost, and consequently no part of our labor is in vain in
the Lord.

That by the Image of the earthy is meant that mortal corruptible body which we
have derived to us from Adam, is plain from the verse before the text; The
first man was of the earth earthy, the second man is the Lord from Heaven, and
then it follows, as we have born the Image of the earthy we shall also bear
Image of the Heavenly.

Now because the nature of opposite qualities is best discovered by their being
compared, therefore that it may the more plainly appear wherein the advantage
of changing the earthy for the heavenly consists; I shall in the

First place mention those inconveniences and defects to which our bodies are
subject now.

2. I shall endeavor to prove that the qualities of glorified bodies will be
opposed to those defects, and free from those inconveniences we are now
sensible of.

3. I shall draw some practical conclusions from the consideration of this
difference.

1. Those bodies we now have are inconvenient upon these following accounts.

1. Because of the weakness and uselessness of them when we have them first.

2. Because their best condition is but of a short continuance.

3. Because our being liable to the disorders of passion proceeds in a great
measure from them.

4. Because they make us subject to pain.

5. Because they hinder the operations of the mind in its pursuit after truth
and knowledge.

1. They are inconvenient upon the account of the weakness and usefulness of
them when we have them first.

Though our deriving our Beings from those of our own Nature, and coming
Infants into the World, is a great promoter of kindness and good
correspondence, and tends very much to support of Government and Society; yet
it must be granted, that we lose something (tho not so much) by it another way.
For the Soul at her first entrance, by reason of the indisposition of the body,
is incapable of acting rationally, and is forced to wait till she has fit
instruments to work with; and when we do begin to judge of objects, we measure
the good and evil of them by the pleasure of inconvenience which the body
receives from thence: Now because we are accustomed at first for several years
together to make our senses Umpires of the value of things, this forestalls our
judgment, with a good opinion of them, which makes us more inclinable to please
them afterward, and gives our reason a greater trouble in the managing of them
than otherwise it would have had.

Besides in our Infancy unpleasant and frightful things make a deep impression
upon us both because of the fluid and pliable nature of the Brain, and because
we have not judgment to discover the worst of things nor strength to resist
them, and therefore through our own weakness, and the indiscretion of those we
sometimes happen to converse with; we are apt to take up odd prejudices, and to
be possessed with unaccountable fears, which the reason of our whole life often
finds impossible to conquer: It must be granted therefore that Adam had a great
advantage above his posterity, by being created a perfect man, without running
through the weakness and folly of Infancy and Childhood: For in regard his Body
was prepared for the Soul to act in at their first meeting; he was not so
liable to be imposed upon by ill customs, and senseless imaginations, because
he was always capable of judging of them: And therefore his desires and fears
must be better proportioned to the nature of things; than they would have been
if his reason had come to him biased and tinctured with those impressions,
which the long weakness and unserviceableness of his body had made upon it.

A 2d Inconvenience of our Bodies is, that the highest condition they are
capable of arriving at, is but of a short continuance: They are a considerable
part of our lives a working up into any tolerable degree of usefulness, before
which time they signify little more to us than the Bodies of Brutes do; and
when they are once fitted for the service of the Soul, and we begin to
understand what they are good for, it is not long before they decline into Age
and Indisposition, and that which seemed to be a Palace before, turns to a
Prison, and has little either of pleasure or convenience in it. For though our
Youth is not placed upon such a precipice as immediately to tumble from its
highest station into a decrepit condition; yet when life is going down the
Hill, its motion is not so slow, but that it may be perceived in a little time,
especially if it be pushed forward by any accidental distemper.

1. The Senses grow flat, and do not enjoy and relish their respective objects
with that quickness and eager satisfaction which they formerly did. But if this
was all the alteration we were liable to, we ought possibly rather to account
it an advantage than a loss, because the lessening of sensual delights would
rebate the edge of our desires, and make them submit to the Laws of Religion
with less reluctance. But the flower of Youth does not only go off quickly, but
which is more to be regretted, the fruit of it too; and the abatement of the
Senses vigor, is usually followed with an apparent decay of strength. Thus
life, when it is once fermented to the height, has its spirits continually
flying off, till it is drawn to the Less, and that part of it only remains
which oftentimes makes us uneasy both to our selves and others: so that when
the mind is embarked in any design of considerable length and advantage; it is
usually set a shore upon the other World before it has reached its intended
port; or else forced to spend that stock of time and abilities which remains,
in stopping the Leakage and piecing up the ruins of the Vessel; which is not
only a hindrance of the main business, but is likewise a very troublesome
employment.

A 3. Inconvenience of our bodies consists in their making us subject to
passion; That our passions, at least the violence of them, are immediately
caused by the motion of the spirits, that is the finer parts of the Blood, will
appear, if we consider, that those who have a greater stock of spirits supplied
them from youth or intemperance, are soonest overborn which disorders of this
nature.

It Is true, God made our minds subject to the impressions of Passion upon a
very good account; that by such unusual commotions within us, we might be
awakened, and as it were roused up to pursue those things which are useful, and
avoid the contrary, with the greater vigor and industry: For if we had nothing
but dry reason and cool Blood to contrive and execute for us, our apprehensions
in many cases would be too flow, and our endeavors faint: But notwithstanding
the advantage the Passions were designed to give us, as they are commonly
managed, they do more harm than good: For we are apt either to place them upon
wrong Objects, to fly them to too high a pitch, or to continue them upon us
when they ought to be discharged, which makes us hasty in our Resolutions;
injurious and careless in our words and actions; they make us dote almost to
Frensy upon trifles, and by being too kindly entertained by us, improve a
sudden disgust against our Neighbor into a settled and habitual malice;
infinite almost are the indecencies and sins which the ill Government of our
Passions betrays us to; they discompose the whole frame of mind and body,
disquieting the one, and disordering the other; the effects of them are
different according to their nature, and the power they have gotten over our
reason; sometimes they make men languish and pine away with envy or desire;
sometimes through an excess of fear they betray them into worse inconveniences
than those they were afraid of: Some are said to have absolutely lost their
wits in their anger, and raved themselves into Bedlam; and others we may
observe are over-joyed to perfect folly and ridiculousness.

Now, though a great part of our present virtue and future reward depends upon
the due management of our Passions; neither can they come up to this height
which I have mentioned, without our own fault; yet in regard our bodies are the
immediate instruments of their violence, we must grant they are inconvenient
upon this account: For if our reason was quick enough to apprehend and pursue
our interest of it self, without being spurred upon duty by Passion; if the
mind had sufficient power to command the body upon its utmost, without being
concerned with its motions any farther than it thought fit; our condition would
be much more perfect and secure: For if we knew we are naturally invincible, we
need not give our selves the trouble of standing upon our guard, then we should
be free from all inward tumults and the ill consequences of them; and then, as
the power of Passion declined, that of Reason would grow up and flourish; and
the pleasures of the mind would more than counter-ballance those which we lost
by shaking off some of our correspondence with the body; and we might have
delight equal to those of a corporeal transport without the violence and danger
of them.

4. Our bodies are inconvenient, because they make us liable to suffer pain.

It must be confessed that the state of separation does not exempt us from
having ungrateful perceptions, but in some respects makes us more obnoxious to
them if we lie under any moral indisposition: For when the Soul is disengaged
from the oppression and soil of the body, it will act upon it self with greater
vigor, and make the Springs of Thought go much smarter than they do now; so
that ill men will be made much more powerful to torment themselves; insomuch
that it may be a question whether all the Fire, and Feinds in Hell, are a
greater punishment to the wicked than the guilt of their own Consciences;
besides, the Passions which I have mentioned, when they are violent, bring an
easiness along with them.

But then the reason why I distinguish pain from the trouble which proceeds
either from passion, or the more abstracted and immediate operations of the
mind, is, because the Soul is not only liable to this disturbance purely upon
the account of its Union with the Body, but because it is perfectly out of our
power to prevent it. For, let a man be never so innocent and composed, let
Prudence and Religion secure him never so well against Vice and Passion; yet
there is no fence against bodily pain: This proceeds from those motions over
which the Will has little or no command; and when we consider what a vast
number of parts the Body consists of, many of which are very fine and slenderly
tied together (otherwise they would be unserviceable) and upon this account are
easily put into disorder, when we consider how ignorant the generality are of
the frame and constitution of their Bodies; of the due proportion, and quality
of their nourishment; how careless and immoderate they are often in their
Labors, Recreations and Passions, to which if we add the sometimes sudden
alterations of seasons, and many other unavoidable accidents, when we consider
all these things, I say, we have great cause to admire and bless the providence
of God that our bodies are not oftener put out of order than they are. Now,
though some decays of the Body are unobserved by us, yet generally when there
is any considerable jarr made in the wheels of this curious Machine; when the
harmony of the humors is disturbed; when the strings are wound up too hard, or
too slack; when any thing of this nature happens, the Soul usually has notice
of it, which unacceptable news is that which we call pain, which is sometimes
so pungent and afflicting, that it makes all worldly blessings insignificant to
us, insomuch that there are not many who have experienced any accute distemper,
who would not, if it were put to their choice, prefer health and poverty, to
violent pains and diseases, though supported and gilded over with never so much
wealth and honor.

Now if it be asked why God has made the Soul so deeply sensible of the
injuries which the Body receives, I suppose these following Reasons (without
adding any more) may be a sufficient satisfaction to such an enquiry.

1. Therefore we may rationally conclude that God has made the Soul liable to
impressions of this nature, that we might be more careful to preserve the body
from falling into decay. Pain I observed before was an unwelcome and grating
sense of some injury which the body suffered, now if the Soul was not
intimately affected with alterations of this nature, and concerned upon its own
account to procure the welfare of its companion; we have reason to believe a
great many bodies would be very indifferently provided for. For the mind would
be so much taken up with its own business, that were it not admonished of the
necessities of the Body by partaking of the inconveniences of them, they would
be often neglected; men of Covetous, Ambitious or Contemplative minds, rather
than have their designs, and pleasures interrupted, would be apt to deny the
body its due maintenance in eating and sleeping; if they were not importuned,
and as it were forced upon justice; by the trouble and uneasiness of watching
and abstinence, were it not for the pain of a wound or distemper, we should
often let them run till they were incureable: In this case many would serve
their bodies as they do their houses, which because they do not feel them smart
when they decay, they let them drop for want of timely repairing.

A second reason why God made the Soul sensible of bodily pain, may be, that
its virtue might have the fairer trial. To be above the threatenings of ill men,
and to submit to any pain and hardship, rather than depart from those Opinions
and Practices which we believe to be right and necessary, is an argument of
true greatness of mind, and the highest testimony of a good man. Now the Body,
by laying us open to almost all sorts of injuries we are capable of receiving,
gives us an opportunity of exercising our Patience and Fortitude in suffering
in obedience to God's commands. To these virtues the imperfection and
defenseless state of our Bodies advances us; for, were we proof against all
misfortune, we should be incapable of this honor; for patience supposes us to
lie under the sense of a present evil; take away the affliction, and there will
be no appearance of the virtue left behind; neither can Fortitude have any
place, except we believe our selves within the reach of danger; for what
courage can it be to encounter any thing, when we know it is impossible for us
to be hurt?

A third Reason why God has subjected the Soul to bodily pain, is, for the
correction of our vices. Many sins do naturally bring indisposition and
diseases upon the Body, the dread and experience of which does not seldom
restrain and bring us off from them: Besides, pain and sickness, by convincing
men how insignificant, or rather troublesome their life is to them, and what a
slender hold they have of it, are oftentimes a good expedient, not only for the
reclaiming those vices which depend upon the ill use of the Body, but of a
general Reformation: For, did men's Bodies fret out like their clothes, without
any considerable trouble to those that wore them, we have reason to believe the
Soul would fare much the worse for it, and be oftener sent into the other World
in an unprovided and forlorn condition.

So that without question, we are as much bound to thank God for the
infirmities, and pains which flow from our constitution, as for the health and
pleasure of it. Besides, we have reason to account it a great mercy that God
has bound the Soul so gently to the Body, that a short struggle, if it happens
to prove boisterous, will let it loose; so that according to Epicurus his
Maxim, it is impossible for that pain which is violent to continue long,
whereas, had the Union of the Soul and Body been so strong, that a man might
have continued under the sharpest torments for some months or years together,
how difficult would patience have been then? what an advantage would the worst
men have had over the best, and have been able by their cruelty to have almost
tired out the bravest and most resolute virtue.

5. The present constitution of our Bodies is inconvenient, because it hinders
the mind in her pursuit after knowledge. Knowledge next to goodness is the
highest exaltation of humane nature, and sets us at the greatest distance from
the Brutes beneath us: Now that the present condition of our Bodies does hinder
our proficiency in this so excellent an accomplishment, appears from what has
been said already. As

1. Because we are born Infants, and the body is unfit for the Soul to exercise
its functions in; in which state of our infancy we pass a great many wrong
judgments upon things, so that when we come to the use of our reason, we are
not only void of true knowledge, but have a great many things to unlearn; which
mistakes it is very difficult to shake off. Now though these prejudices relate
chiefly to our proficiency in the knowledge of natural causes, yet it must be
aknowledged in the

Second place; That the passions which the Body subjects us to, are sometimes
an occasion that we do not examine things with that deliberation and
indifferency which is necessary to the finding* out moral Truth; and
consequently make us inclinable to some practical Opinions rather than others:
For according as the particular Byasse of our Bodies disposes us to any excess
of hope or fear, of anger or pleasure; if we are not careful, our apprehensions
of Religion will bend into a compliance with the Genius and Tendency of these
passions. For when Reason is either bribed, or discomposed by the Affections,
it is than more likely to pronounce amiss upon things, than when the mind is
even and impartial: For example, a man of a melancholic and gloomy temper, if
he gives way to it, will be in some danger of perplexing his imagination with
infinite and unreasonable fears concerning God Almighty, as if he was a
Humoursom or implacable Being; and consequently such a person may be more
easily proselyted to the Doctrines of Superstition, or despair: Whereas another
of a bolder and more sanguine Constitution, will be rather tempted to presume
too much upon Gods goodness, magnifying his mercy to the prejudice of his
wisdom and justice: And if he happens to fall upon ill Books or Company, he
will be disposed to dilute his Creed with Principles of Libertinism, that so he
may make it more agreeable to the Complexion of his Body, and reconcile it with
the use of unlawful pleasures: But here we must observe that these motives do
but incline; they by no means force us upon mistakes; so that then when we are
swayed by them, it is our own fault: The reason why I mentioned them, is, that
we might take the greater care to enquire into the particular defects, and
propensities of our temper; and form our judgment with a suitable caution and
suspicion of our selves.

3. Bodily pain is likewise no small impediment to the enlarging our
understandings, because while it continues upon us, it takes off our thoughts
from other things, and fixes them only upon that which troubles us: And
oftentimes when it is over, it leaves such ill effects behind it by altering
the Texture of the Brain or Blood; that the mind has not fit instruments to
assist it in the work of close and constant Meditation.

4. The generality are forced to spend a great part of their time in providing
for the necessities of life, so that they have little leisure to attend to the
improvement of their minds: But let them not be discouraged upon this account
if they take care to live well in this World; their utmost curiosity and thirst
after knowledge shall be satisfied in the next; without being encumbered with
that labor and difficulty which attends very inconsiderable Seize here.
Then as the Apostle informs us, We shall know even as we are known, and see God
as he is, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid. 1 Cor. 13.
Joh. 1. 3. To what has been said upon this Argument if we add that
considerable number of hours which those who are most covetous of their time
are obliged to spend in eating, sleeping and recreation; we shall see that he
had great reason for his Opinion, who has told us, that Art is long, and Life
but short.

But notwithstanding these inconveniences with which our bodies are attended in
this state of imperfection, we are not to complain as if God had dealt hardly
with us; because they are not just such as we could desire them; let us rather
consider that if the conveniences of them were much less than they are, it was
more than God owes us; besides, how impatient soever men may sometimes be under
extremity of pain, yet their general behavior is a plain argument that they
have no contemptible Opinion of their Bodies, for they are commonly loath to
leave them when they are at their worst condition: Let us therefore be thankful
that God has made them so commodious for us now, and has promised to improve
them to the utmost of our wishes afterward; which brings me to the second
thing at first propounded, viz. to show.

That the Qualities of Glorified Bodies are opposed to those defects, and free
from those inconveniences we are now sensible of.

1. They will be very much refined, and consequently fitter for the Soul to act
with. It shall be raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. which implies that it
shall be changed into an exalted and vigorous condition: All grossness and
feculency which adheres to it now, shall be purged off; all unevenness and
roughness of parts will then be filed into an exact serviceableness, and the
Soul will no longer labor under the disorders of an unweildy and incompliant
constitution: The Body will then be exactly at its beck, and execute all its
commands with pleasure, and dispatch. That Quality which we call Heaviness,
which hinders our motion, and confines us to the lower part of the World, will
then no more molest us; for the Refined Body by its nearer resemblance to the
Air about it, the improved Activity of its Spirits, and the greater force the
Soul will in all probability have to set them a work. By these advantages we
shall be enabled to meet the Lord in the Air, and fly up into the Regions of
light and happiness; and that the Soul may be the better accommodated, the
Senses will be improved in two respects beyond what they are now.

1. They will be larger, that is, able to take in more objects at a time, and
reach them at a father distance than they can now.

2. They will be quicker, that is, whatever notices they convey to the Mind,
will be more intimately and vigorously communicated to it: Upon which two
accounts they must afford the Soul a much greater pleasure than they do now.
And that the Senses will be thus improved, follows from a principle, which
every one that owns the Resurrection must grant, namely, that Glorified Bodies
will be endued with far greater Activity than they are at their highest
condition here; now we know men have a more full and delightful use of their
senses in their youth than at any other time.

Now of all the senses, those of Seeing and Hearing are not only the most
instructive to the mind, but likewise the most refined, and as I may say, the
most creditable senses: Therefore we need not question but they will accompany
the Bodies of the Saints to Heaven and possibly that of Smelling too; but as
for the two other grosser senses, they belong to a State of imperfection, and
are too coarse and insignificant to have much employment there; for ought we
know they may be changed into two new ones of a more spiritualized and refined
nature; which it is not possible for us to understand or conceive till we are
possessed of them; which we shall cease to wonder at if we consider that were a
man born Deaf or Blind it would be impossible for him to have the Vulgar notion
of sound or color: Nay, I may add, he could have no imaginable Idea of these
qualities except he received some description of them from others.

2. And as the Bodies of the Saints will be defective or superfluous in
nothing, but be exactly fitted for the service of the Soul, so likewise they
will be much more splendid and grateful than now they are; which is another
property of the Image of the Heavenly: Instead of those obscure and unamiable
qualities they appeared in here, they will be decked with light as with a
garment, and be clothed with Majesty and Honor; they will then be all beauty
and brightness without any disfiguring blemish, any scars remaining, except of
those wounds they have received in their Masters cause, which then probably
will shine out with a more orient and distinguishable luster. This is indeed to
bear the Image of the Heavenly, of which we are assured from more places than
the Text. As Philip. 3. 21. the Apostle affirms, Our Savior shall change our
vile Bodies, that they may be like his glorious Body, a representation of which
we have at his Transfiguration, though I believe but a faint one, and yet the
Evangelists tell us, his face shone like the Sun, and his Raiment with the
Reflection was white and glistering. Mat. 17. Luke 9.

3. The Bodies of the Saints will be impassible: They will then be fortified
against all accidents and diseases, and be no longer subject to any painful or
dishonorable alterations; Time and death will have no power over them. St.
John after he has described the general Resurrection, Rev. 20. in the 21 chap.
v. 4. proceeds to mention the unchangeable happiness of the Heavenly
Inhabitants, where enlarging upon their privative advantages, he informs us,
that there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away; that is, the
states of imperfection and mortality is over, Whereas, did not all things stand
at a stay; were not the perfections of the Body permanent and unalterable,
secured against all injury and decay; if there was not pain, we may be sure
there would be sorrow to lose the least part of so glorious a condition. Now
which way our Bodies shall be made immortal, signifies not much to know;
possibly they may have such an advantageous change from the Laws of Motion,
from the Figure of their parts, or the temperature of the Climate, as may
preserve them from suffering any alteration, or loss of parts; or if the parts
do fly off as they do now, it is easy with God to supply them with new ones
immediately made fit, without the trouble of eating, or concoction: But whether
by any of these ways, or which of them they will continue immortal, whether by
the settled course of Providence, or by Miracle, is neither material to
dispute, nor possible to determine; that they will continue so, we are sure,
for as with him that has made this Promise, nothing is impossible, so likewise
he is Faithful and cannot deny himself. It is more proper for us to prepare our
selves by a virtuous Life for so blessed an immortality, than vainly to enquire
into the mystery of it: The best way of satisfying our curiosity is to
endeavor to be accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection
from the dead; for we need not doubt but that those who are possessed of this
privilege will understand the causes which make it such; and that the goodness
of God will enable the Saints to explain the Philosophy of their happiness.

Now from what we experience here, we may in some measure conceive how
considerable an addition it will be to our happiness to have our Earthy part
refined into such a state of perfection as I have been describing: To have the
wisdom and experience of Age without the sickness and uneasiness attending it;
and the sprightlyness and vigor of youth separated from its usual rashness and
indiscretion. What a glorious change must it be to have these inobsequious, and
cadaverous Bodies possessed of the three only desirable qualities; being made
to the height of our wishes suitable, illustrious, and immortal?

I shall now in the

Third place proceed to draw some inferences from the consideration of the
different state of our Bodies here, and hereafter.

Therefore the consideration of the frail condition of our Bodies here, and the
improvements they will be advanced to hereafter, ought to make us entertain a
low opinion of the pleasures of sense; both because we are permitted but a
short enjoyment of them, and because they are only fit for us while we are in a
state of imperfection: We should consider that the Body is not able to provide
for it self; it is pleasures are not of it is own growth, but must be supplied
from Foreign Parts, and consequently are infallible marks of our want and
dependence; and therefore to have a strong desire for, or high Opinion of these
things, does but discover our own weakness to be the greater; and that we
preposterously value our selves upon the Poverty of our condition: What are
these satisfactions but only short respits from bodily pain and trouble? for
after the uneasiness of hunger and thirst is over, the pleasure of eating and
drinking immediately ceases; and to continue the action any longer is more a
burden, than a refreshment: Those therefore who are capable of the greatest
bodily pleasure, must have the strongest sense of want and uneasiness upon
them; for unless they are thus prepared, it will be flat and unaffecting to
them.

Now who would desire a Fever only for the satisfacton of drinking in it; or be
in love with extreme poverty because of the unusual pleasure which is then
taken in receiving the Charity of others?

The Body therefore is only so far to be indulged as is necessary to put it
into the best condition to be employed by the Soul; for as it should not be
tyrannized over, that being the way to make it both troublesome and
unserviceable; so on the other side, we should be careful to maintain the
Sovereignty of the mind; that whenever Reason and Religion requires it, we may
have power to control our senses, and be pleased with the victory: But on the
contrary, to make the Soul a Slave to the Body; to employ the powers of Reason
(the Image of the Glorious God) in providing for the gratification of the
Animal Life; is a most degenerous and dangerous abuse of so great a privilege:
And when God has made us little lower than the Angels, ought we not to blush
to make our selves less than the Beasts that perish? Now that sensuality does
degrade us in this manner is apparent, it being unquestionably more scandalous
and uncreditable to abuse the use of Reason, than to want it; for the one only
argues natural incapacity; which because it could not be prevented, is no just
reproach to any Being; but the other besides ingratitude to the Doner implies
most egregious folly; for what can be more senceless than to be inapprehensive
of the Prerogative of our nature, and to misapply and squander away the fairest
opportunities of being happy?

A man that makes himself a Beggar by ill Menage, and Luxury, is in the true
estimation of things a much more despicable person than he that is born to that
low condition, and fixed in it by those impotencies and defects of body or mind
which were irresistably forced upon him. The rational Brute therefore is most
certainly the meanest, because he stupidly undervalues the dignity of his
Being, and employs the highest qualities in the most sordid drudgery. Whereas
other creatures act according to the Instincts and Appetities which Providence
has put into them, it being as impossible for them to rise above their
natures, as it is dishonorable for us to sink below ours. But this practice is
not only dishonorable but dangerous, for if we give our selves up to the
disorders of Appetite, and make our Bodies instrumental in sinning; besides the
diseases which intemperance often exposes them to here, we shall find the sad
consequence of it in the other World; where they will be joined to the Soul
only to increase its misery by putting it into a new capacity of suffering. For
the Apostle assures us, if we live after the Flesh, and make Provision to
fulfill the Lusts thereof, we shall die, for to be carnally or sensually minded
is death, and that we cannot expect to live hereafter except we mortify the
deeds of the Body, Romans 8. 6, 13.

Secondly, We ought to be contented with the trouble, the present infirmities
of our Bodies may put us to.

God has made our Bodies of a frail Constitution, and liable to many
inconveniences; that we might aspire after a higher and more confirmed
happiness; and not place it in the satisfaction of our senses, which are so
easily made unacceptable to us by diseases, or quickly stupefied and worn out
with Age. Besides, upon the account that our Bodies make us liable to pain and
diseases, we have thereby an occasion of exercising many virtues, which
otherwise we could not have: If we were not liable to pain and uneasiness,
there could be no such thing as a contented Poverty; and an humble Resignation
to providence in affliction and distress; the essence of these virtues would be
lost in such impregnable circumstances: For to be contented when a man neither
feels, nor fears any evil, is not so much a commendation, as a necessary
action; it being as impossible to be troubled when we have what we have a mind
to, as to be perfectly pleased when we have not: I confess to be thus fortified
against injury and want, argues a great happiness of nature, but a moral
perfection it is not; and consequently deserves admiration, but not reward. The
Honor of our Christian warfare consists in the laboriousness and hazard of it,
and the strength of our virtue lies in the weakness of our condition; and
though we are made a little lower than the Angels, yet (with all respect be it
spoken to those superior Beings) upon this account we seem to have some
advantage of them; for their station being above the reach of misfortune, makes
them incapable of suffering upon the score of Virtue and Religion. We ought not
therefore to complain because God has made our Bodies liable to many
inconveniences here; but to resist the temptations they expose us to, with
resolution to bear the pains and infirmities of them, with submission and
contentedness, considering that in a discreet and Christian management of these
things, a great part of our obedience, and future reward consists: It is not
long before we shall be dismissed from this service, and when death shall be
swallowed up in Victory, and this mortal shall put on immortality, then it will
be a pleasure to survey the difficulties of our past life, and the very
thoughts of our former troubles will be an addition to our happiness.

Haec olim meminisse juvabit. And therefore

Thirdly, we ought not to be over-timerous, lest we should impair the strength
of our Constitution, but lay it out freely upon Religious and Worthy Actions.

Health is not chiefly to be desired for the sensual pleasure it affords, but
because we are then in the best condition to serve God, and to be useful to the
society we live in: Let it not therefore be our great aim to keep our Bodies in
Reparation, and ingloriously slumber out our time for fear of wearing them out
too fast; but according to our several Stations and Callings, let us diligently
employ them for our own real interest, and that of others; making them
contribute to the improvement of Reason, and the exercise of Virtue: If they
decay in such service, they will fall with honor, and rise with advantage. The
best way of consulting their future advancement is, not to dote upon them now:
If we would have them flourish in immortal youth, and beauty hereafter, we must
neither be too fond in indulging, nor too curious in adorning of them: We must
not out of an effeminate niceness to preserve their agreeableness, decline any
proper austerities, or opportunity of doing good. In short, if we expect these
earthy Bodies should bear the Image of the Heavenly, we must employ them
generously and religiously; suffer the inconveniences of them with Patience
and Christian Courage, and please them with temperance and reservedness.

FINIS.

