THE DECISION and CLEARING OF The great Point now in Controversy About the
INTEREST of CHRIST, And the Civil Magistrate, In the Rule of Government in
this WORLD.

Stated according to the Word of TRUTH; AND Presented to the PARLIAMENT Of this
COMMONWEALTH; AND To all other Powers in the World where it may come; Or, to
any that desire satisfaction in this Matter.

Written by T. Collier.

Mat. 22. 21. Render unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: And to God, the
things that are God's. LONDON, Printed for G. C. and are to be sold at the
Black-(...) Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1659.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and
the Dominions thereof.
I Have in this small Treatise been (at least) endeavoring to prepare and
present unto you a subject of highest Concernment at this day, (i. e.) rightly
to s^ver and distinguish between the interest of Christ and the Magistrates, or
Powers of this world, in matters relating to Government, it having been the
unhappy part of most of the Powers of this world to intermix and mingl^ their
Power with that which the Lord has reserved to himself, (i. e.) Rule and
Dominion in Divine Things, in and over the consciences of men, which is (alone)
the Lords Prerogative in that little Kingdom he has reserved to himself: I had
prepared it before, but now present it unto you, whom (after so long empting
from vessel to vessel) I may suppose are made willing to be acquainted with the
Lords mind, and your duty or work in this matter, which is to let the oppressed
go free.

I have no ground to question but that many (if not most) among you in this day
of light, are principled in this truth already; yet (I suppose) this p^o^
^abour of him that truly loves Truth and Peace, with the true Gospel-liberty,
may be both accepted and of use, if not to inform, yet to confirm in a truth of
such importance. I have in this Trea^^se endeavored truly to state the
^agistrates Part, (as to Govemrnent) and the Lords, and cleared this, Tha^
^^ule in Divine things belongs only to the Lord, and in civil things unto the
Magistrate; I have given the grounds, with the dangers of the Magistrates
intermedling with that which is none of his, I am not ignorant of the often
urging of that word of Christ, Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come in; although it
is as often abused from the real intention of our Lord therein, which is a
Ministerial compulsion by the Gospel-invitation, to us poor perishing Gentiles;
the high act of Gods grace that such a compulsion is come forth to us.

I have endeavored plainness (as becomes the Ministry of the New Testament)
and brevity, that so a little time might give you the reading thereof. Oh that
the God of Grace (who has begun his wonders amongst us) would be pleased to
engage the Powers of this Commonwealth wholly to di^avow the claim of any
interest in Dominion, (that so clearly and undoubted^y is our Lords
Prerogative) that you might become a Pattern to the Nations round you, and by
your practice preach this to all the world, That Rule in Divine things belongs
to the Lord; doubtless if it convince them not, it shall be a witness against
them; for on this account shall the Nations be broken, and th^i^ breach will be
grievous and incurable. You being once more come to sit at stern in this
Commonwealth; Who knows but that God has been proving and refining you, that
so you by whom he began the work in these Nations, might be honored by him
above all others in the further perfecting of it? Oh be not high-minded, but
fear, humble your selves, to walk with God; know who it is that has entrusted
you, and fear before him; be wise as Serpents, and harmless as D^ves. so may
you expect a blessing from Heaven, and your endeavors crowned both here and
hereafter: So prays he who for Zions sake cannot hold his peace:

T. C.

The decision of the great Point in Controversy, (i. e.) The Interest of
Christ and the Magistrates in the Rule and Government in this World.
Presented to the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
THat Jesus Christ is Lord of all, Acts 10. 36. Romans 10. 12. is without all
question: I suppose) to all who own the Scriptures of truth: That he is exalted
and made Head over all, to the Church, E^h. 1. 20, 21, 22. and that he has the
Government of the World in his hand, Matthew. 28. 18. although this be not so
visibly made manifest as in the fullness of time it shall be, Heb. 2. 8. we do
not yet see all things under him; by faith we believe it as it is made manifest
in his Word.

And it is as unquestionable, That the Powers and Magistrates of this World
have from, and under him a right of Rule and Government committed to them, in
which they ought to be faithful: And in as much as it is a great Point now in
controversy, What Power it is that the Lord has extended to Magistrates, and
what are the limitations and bounds thereof; And, What it is he has reserved
to himself; Or, Whethether he has reserved any thing in point of Government to
himself or no, or committed all to the Magistrate, both Ecclesiastical as well
as Civil: My Work will be in these ensuing lines to be discoursing and
discovering the truth in this matter; and I cannot reasonably suppose (it being
a matter of such great concernment) that it should be taken any otherwise then
acceptably, it being no more (as I am in conscience convinced) then the
discharge of my duty to the Lord, and the Magistrates under whom I live.

And as to the Point in hand, I say, 1. That Jesus Christ (to whom all Power in
Heaven and Earth is given) has committed an Authoritative Power and Rule to
Magistrates in this World, till his coming again from Heaven; the truth of this
is evidenced by the Word of Truth, Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice; By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth, Romans 13. 1. There is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are
ordained of God; So that the Magisterial Power is ordained of God, and by him
it is they rule, (i. e.) By his Ordinance and Appointment.

Yet 2ly. Christ has reserved a Room and Place of Rule for himselself in and
over the World; hence he is said to be Lord of all, Lord of quick and dead;
Head over all to the Church, and over all Principallity and Power, and every
Name that is named, not only in this world, but likewise in that which is to
come; so that the great query now will be, What Power it is the Lord has given
to the Magistrate, and what it is he has reserved to himself; the deciding
whereof will be of great and singular concernment at this day.

1. What he has given to the Magistrate, and that is Authority and Power to
rule over men, (i. e.) To rule over the Bodies and Estates of men for good, and
no other.

And 2. That which he has reserved to himself lies especially in these four
things:

1. The Power of a secret and invisible ordering and disposing of all
Governments, to carry on, and bring about his own design for his own glory and
his Churches good; Hence he is said to be Head over all things to the Church.

2. He has reserved the Power of pulling down, and setting up of whom he
will, Dan. 4. 17. Hence it is that he makes changes in the Worldly
Governments, to the end they might know that the Lord does rule, and that they
do rule by him, and should rule for him.

3. He has reserved to himself the Power of calling all Magistrates to account
at the great day of Account, in which they must be judged according to their
discharge of that Authority and Trust committed to them, and reposed in them:
These (I suppose) every one that has any awe or fear of God will acknowledge.

But 4ly. Christ has reserved all spiritual causes relating to matters of
Faith and Worship to himself, and has betrusted no Civil Magistrate or Power
in Earth with this; the proving of which will prove the first Assertion, (i.
e.) That the Trust committed to Magistrates is over the Bodies and Estates of
men, and no otherwise; Therefore to prove it, I shall present several
convincing grounds.

1. There is no New Testament Scripture presents us with the Lords giving up of
Authority to Worldly Magistrates in matters Ecclesiastical, (i. e.) Things in,
and relating to matters of Worship, that clearly relate to conscience; if so,
Hence I reason, That Authority which Christ has no where given to Magistrates,
he has reserved to himself; but this of ruling of, and over the conscience, is
to where committed by Christ to man, (i. e.) to Civil Magistrates, therefore he
has reserved it to himself.

Q. May we not suppose that the Scripture intends Spiritual ^^d Ecclesiastical
Concernments, as well as Civil, when it says, ^^a^ we should be subject to
every Ordinance of man for the (...) sak^, etc.

A. It is without question to be understood in civil things ^nely, there being
no Magistrates then but such as were either Jews or Heathens; if subjection in
Divine things had ^^ep intended, the Apostle in that saying (and in all others
^^at calls for subjecting to Magistrates) must necessarily ^^ve taught them
either to be Jews or Heathens in point of Worship; for the Command of the
Jewish Magistrates would be to the Old Testament-Ceremonies; and of the
Gentiles, to their Idol Temples, if to any thing in Worship; so that it is
questionless, That it was in civil things that subjection is required.

2. Ground; In that Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, (i. e.) of the
Worldly Government that he has committed to men; then certainly it must be
some where, (i. e.) in the consciences of his People, there is Christ's reign;
and doubtless to deny this, (i. e.) The Rule of Christ by his Word and Spirit
in the hearts of his people, and over them in matters of Worship, is a tenet
very near of kin to Atheism.

3. In that he has left in Scripture clear and absolute Rules for his people
to walk by in point of Faith and Worship, unto which it is their duty to take
heed until his second coming, Matthew. 28. 18 19. John 14. 15. and chap. 15. 14.
From whence I reason thus:

That if Christ has left Commands and Rules to his People as to matters of
Faith and Practice, then he has reserved Authority from the Magistrate in this
matter. But that he has left Commands and Rules to his people in this matter,
is clear, in which it is their duty to obey him; therefore he has not
committed this Authority to the Magistrate; for the Magistrate may (and that
probably too) contradict Christ's Commands; therefore Christ has prevented that
extremity, in reserving to himself Authority and Rule in Divine things: Hence
it is that when Christ's Law, and the Magistrates Will has come in Competition;
the Answer is stated for us, Acts 5. 39. Whether it be right in the sight of
God to hearken unto you more then God, judge ye.

4. This truth appears, in that Jesus Christ will judge his people in the day
of Account, according to his Word; that being the Rule by which they are to
walk, and by which it is they must be judged, John 12. 48. And in the keeping
thereof there shall be great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. Rev. 22. 14. Therefore he
has not committed this Authority to Magistrates, lest they should turn them
aside from the righteous Rule.

And indeed it seems to me to be ridiculous and unreasonable for any one to
suppose that the Lord has given up his people to the Wills of men in matters
of Worship, and yet will judge them for not walking according to his Will in
his Word; this were (indeed) to make him a hard Master, and to lay
impossibility upon his people.

5. As we do not find that Christ has any where resigned his Authority to the
Magistrate, so neither do we find at any time, or in any case, the Lord to
direct his people to the Magistrate for counsel or advice in determining Divine
things, but the contrary, (i. e.) to the Scripture, Isay. 8. 20. Job. 5. 39. 2
^im. 3. 15. and to his Ministers with the church, A^^. 15

6. If Authority in Divine things were committed to the Magistrate, it must be
necessary to know to what Magistrate it is committed, whether to all
Magistrates in all Nations alike; if so, then these two impieties will follow;
1. That the Lord has subjected his word and will to the Judgments of Heathen
and profane Magistrates. Or, 2ly, his people to their wills in point of
Worship. Or 2ly, If it be to some Magistrates, and not to all, (i. e.) to
Christian Magistrates, then the doubt will be, to whom of them it is, there
being many supposing themselves to be Christian Magistrates, and all think
themselves to be in the truth, and most of them think themselves concerned to
make provision for Worship, and to exercise their Power in these things and
(indeed) the Lord having committed no such thing to any Magistrate, there is as
much ground for one to claim it, as the other. The Papist supposes all truth to
be there, and persecutes the Protestant under the notion of Heretics. The
Protestant supposes the Papist to be out, and himself to be in the right, and
persecutes the Papist: and thus this very principle throws the World into
confusion, every one that can get into Power is ready to make, or (at least) to
think himself an absolute god in and over all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil; and (doubtless) it concerns that Magistrate that is most enlightened in
Divine Truth, to be first in rejecting and renouncing this authority in Divine
things; for (doubtless) the most enlightened and reformed
Protestant-Magistrate, walking by this Rule, (i. e.) Authority in Divine
things, etc. does justify all others in their practices, there being as much
rule for the one as the other; and so it is the ready way for Magistrates to be
contracting the sin and guilt of all the civil Magistrates, and of all the
blood that has been shed on this account.

7. If Authority in divine things were committed to the Magistrates, this would
without all controversy put an end to the sufferings of the Saints, for if
this power were given to men, then it would be the Saints duty to submit unto
them; then whence, and to what purpose are all those sayings of Christ in
Scripture to strengthen his people against, and to comfort them in persecution,
Matt. 5. Luke 6. Ioh. 16. If it were true indeed that Magistrates had received
this power from above, then they do well in exercising of it suitable to their
understanding, and in punishing those that will not submit; and the Lords
people do ill, and are justly persecuted for not performing their duty, how
then shall they be blessed in their suffering? So then that Principle and
Practice that justifies Magistrates in a way of persecution, and condemns
Saints under the notion of Heretics for their suffering for Christ, cannot be
of God, etc. So that from these grounds I undoubtedly conclude, That Jesus
Christ has reserved to himself the power of governing and ruling in, and over
his people in all Divine and Religious concernments and has not resigned it to
any Magisterial power on earth.

3. And finally, we find it clearly stated in the Scripture, that Christ has
committed his Authority in matters relating to Worship, to his Church, and not
to the Magistrate; Hence Christ having stated his own power, Matt. 28. 18. He
promises his presence with his Church to the end of the world, ver. 20.
therefore in case of offense he directs his to tell it to the Church, Matt. 18.
17. there being no higher appeal on Earth for Believers in divine things; and
as the Church, so is its Government distinct from the world, and the worldly
Government; so that that Magistrate that assumes this Authority to himself,
robs the Church of that authority her Lord has given her, and the authority
Christ has left in his church is spiritually to be exercised; all
church censures reaches in the utmost extent to reject and cast out to the
world and to Satan, from whence they came, not to inflict bodily punishments,
but to endeavor in all the saving of the soul, that the flesh might be
destroyed, and the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. And in
as much as the Lord knows that his church might err in matter of judgment and
censure about divine things, therefore he has communicated a power of
judgment to the church to be exercised according to their light and faith in
divine Record, yet has reserved to himself the power of judging, and that even
of all the churches judgments and actions, to be made manifest in the day of
Christ.

Obj. God having once committed the power of judging and executing of his
Divine will in point of worship to the Magistracy of the Jews, (in the
Old-Testament-Ministration) why may we not conclude, it remains a duty under
the gospel, in as much as we find no repeal of that Authority?

Ans. God owning them as they were the natural seed of Abraham, to be a
National church, he made that Church and State one, which is not, nor cannot be
so in the Gospel, because he now owns the spiritual seed in the Gospel, Church,
and Covenant: And further, as he made that Church and State one, so he gave the
Judicial and Political Law clear to them, and clearly stated the Magistrates
duty on that behalf, but no such thing under the Gospel.

2. The authority of the Magistrate under that Ministration, was typical, and
presented Christ the great Lord and Lawgiver in the Gospel-ministration; for
the anointed Office of Priest and King, lead to Christ the anointed one; so
that when Christ was come, and had suffered and conquered in, and by his
suffering, he put an end to that Ministration, and repealed
Priesthood-government, and that whole ministration; so that whoever pleads
Magistrates authority in Eccclesiastical causes from the Jewish constitution,
does (consequently) deny Christ to be come in the flesh, and takes his
Government from him; so that we rightly understanding the Government of the Old
Testament-Magistrates, should rightly be informed to whom the Right of Rule in
Divine things, and Ecclesiastical concernments do now belong, namely, to
Christ, into whom the magisterial power of the Old Testament is naturally and
properly dissolved as the type into the substance.

q. Is it not the Magistrates duty to see to, and take care of the performance
of the first table, and to see that the will of Christ (contained therein) be
done by the people?

A. Doubtless it is not any part of his charge or work, and that from the
Reasons already minded; and further, I might truly say, That as man is a
reasonable creature, so Gods way of working to Divine undertakings, is by the
illuminating of his understanding through his Word and Spirit, that so he might
be able to give a reason of his hope, and serve in Divine things in the liberty
of the Gospel, not having his understanding captivated to the will of another.

q. Whence should arise this great mistake, as doubtless if it be a mistake, it
is a great and dangerous one?

A. Ignorance and Pride ushered in this mistake, and that is it which still
endeavors to keep it on foot.

1. Ignorance: this ordinarily is the mother of all sin; and lies at the
bottom of all mischiefs; Christ was put to death through Ignorance, 1 Cor. 2.
8. and it is through Ignorance men put him to death in his Authority, and put
to death those that own him in his Authority, John 16. 2, 3. It is (says
Christ) because they have not known the Father, nor me.

2. Pride flowing from Ignorance, and a desire of self-exaltation: Pride of
Magistrates, and pride of Ministers, accompanied sometimes with mistaken zeal,
and sometimes with enmity, and desire of revenge, on those who submit not to
their wills; witness the truth of this. That Person or people whoever, that
concludes it the Magistrates duty to compel to Religion think withal its meet
they should be uppermost to be prescribing Laws for others. This proclaims it
to be a proud, selfish principle, men while under will not like it, but when
over will exercise it, this is pride, and a desire of domination; for all sorts
of people in the world, dislikes with, and complains of a coercive power in
matters Spiritual and Divine; unless it be when themselves have the ruling
power, and are gotten uppermost; Protestants complain or Papists, and Papists
of Protestants where they are under, and Non-Conformists of both; but him that
is uppermost will rule.

q. But what is the evil and danger incurred, by ta^ing this authority if
ordering and settling things relating to the worship of God, with a coercive
Power.

Answ. 1. It is an intruding into that which they have no right unto, and
doubtless it is as open a wrong to Jesus Christ, as it is for one Prince to
invade another Territories, and take away his dominion from him, under
pretense of love to him, a sad sign and symptom of an aspiring mind, when
when men will not be content with what God has allotted them, and not only to
be undermining one another to make themselves greater, but they dare adventure
on the crown and dignity of Jesus Christ.

2. Magistrates by this Practice do not only intrude themselves into his
authority, where they have no right; but likewise must necessarily expose
themselves to the great danger of contracting the guilt of the blood od souls
upon themselves, And that (first) because compulsion by a coercive power,
necessarily makes a world of Hypocrites and Formalists; and so deceives them
with the name and supposition of Christians and believers, when they are
strangers to it; whereas otherwise through the spreading forth of truth in the
Gospel Light; they might in an ordinary way be brought truly to look after God.
Or secondly, in case the Magistrate err himself, in the Religion set up by him
(as its wonder if he do not) and so compel to his own will in stead of the will
of Christ; he may be instrumental to destroy souls in deterring them from
closing with the truth, and compelling them to close with his error.

3. By this the Magistrate proclaims himself (in effect) to be infallible, in
judging and determining universally, in matters of Relgion, which is proper
only to Jesus Christ, and so exalts himself above all that is called God, even
above Jesus Christ, in that which is his Prerogative alone, and so at least
attains to the badge and livery of Antichrist. This is judged so to be, by all
reformed Churches, and therefore they apply it to the Pope or Papal power on
this account (i. e.) his usurping a power and rule over the Consciences of the
people, and persecuting all that differ from them, and how those who walk in
the same steps (only their opinion changed in matter of Religion) will acquit
themselves from the same guilt, I leave to themselves to judge.

4. It is that which derogates from the liberty of the Gospel which Christ has
purchased by his own blood for his people that they might not be the servants
of men in divine things. May we rationally suppose that Christ has delivered
his people from the old Testament-Bondage; (that was ordained of God himself)
to deliver them up to the power and wills of men, and it may be too, of such
men as know not God; its true, God has rather chosen to subject his children
to the wills of men in suffering, then in serving in divine things; if Christ
had left his people in this matter to the wills of men, the Gospel liberty had
been much worse then that of the Law; David when he was to choose, would
rather fall into the hands of God, then into the hands of men, because he is
merciful; and so tender was Paul of derogating from the Gospelliberty, that
notvvithstanding he was infallibly inspired, yet usurps not this power to
himself, of having Dominion over the faith of his Brethren, 2 Cor. 1. 24.

5. The Magistrate by this means necessarily exposes himself to the danger of
persecuting Christ; For (First) we may yea, we must suppose a possibility for
Magistrates to err, especially in divine things, being liable to tentations
and snares above other men; and if they miss in the least hint or part of
truth, and so compel from any part of truth to their own error, and persecute
those that cannot in conscience submit, doubtless they become persecutors of
Christ. And (Secondly) we may have grounds for all that I know, to judge and
hope, that the Lord may have a people that are precious to him, in and under
all apprehensions in Christian profession, (who hold the head) and truly then
it concerns the Magistrate to look to it, and to succor and delend all in all
sorts of profession, rather then to persecute any one of Christ's little ones,
the danger of this see Mat. 18. 6.

6. Acts of Rapes and force on the body, in order to bodily fornication, are
judged by the law to be acts of highest offense, even felony deserving death;
but know that acts of force upon the soul, to spiritual fornication (which is
done on all that are forced by a Magisterial Coersive power to that in worship,
which is contrary to conscience) is a worse and more dangerous force or Rape,
then that on the body to outward bodily fornication. For (first) the soul is
the more sublime and divine part of man. And (secondly) a bodily rape may be
(as its generally judged) without sin in the party that is violently surprised;
but this of the spiritual force, who ever is conquered by it sins against God,
though the thing may be lawful to which he may be compelled, yet to him its
sin, being done against faith and conscience, for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, so that to set up a coercive power in Religious matters, is the likeliest
and surest way in the world, to lay a necessity of sinning, or suffering, upon
all conscientious people.

7. This act in the Protestant Magistrates, far exceeds that in the papal, and
so it becomes a force of the highest nature; for the Papist says to all, That
they must believe as the Church believes, i. e. the Pope and his Clergy, and to
accomplish this, he keeps them ignorant; permits not the Scripture in their own
language, to the end they may believe as the Church believes; the common people
shall know but what the Church will tell them, and so are kept ignorant, and
their force is without trouble, for they think they do well, etc. But the
Protestant seems to go further. The Scripture shall be translated into the
mother tongue, that every one may read it; the people shall be pressed to buy
Bibles, to search the Scriptures, to find out the mind of God, etc. and when
all is done, they must still believe as the Church believes, i. e. as the
Minister, and Magistrate shall conclude. It is to invite to search, and see
with their own eyes, and yet compel to believe what another sees, doubtless
its not only an irreligious, but an irrational thing to allow people to search
and know, yet will put out their eyes and compel them to see with others.

I quere whether it would not be a lesser evil (Pope-like) to keep the Bible in
an unknown tongue, and so keep the people ignorant, then to allow the Bibles,
and compel to walk contrary to the light and truth apprehended therein; I mean
to the powers thus acting, Be wise now therefore, Oy kings, be inst^ucted ye
Judges of the earth, kiss the Son lest he be angry, etc.

8. The Magistrate by this, necessarily exposes himself to the greater
business in point of Government, and that unnecessary and needless business
too; Such for which he will have no thank in the day of the Lord,
notwithstanding he may undertake it through mistaken zeal (being persuaded
thereto, that its his duty to take care for the observation of the first table,
yet it belongs not to him, being no part of that which is committed to his
care, by reason of which he does not only imyloy himself about what he has
naught to do; but probably through his zeal in this, neglects the work he is
entrusted with: See Psalm. 82 3, 4. Doubtless if Magistrates were rightly
learned in this truth, it would ease them of much burden and care in and about
what they suppose themselves concerned in, and set their hearts more to the
work they are rightly called unto.

9. By this means Magistrates and others lay a foundation of persecution to
themselves and their posterity; for if it be lawful for them to use a coersive
power in Religious things toward others, then by the same rule of reason its
lawful for another power (if it should arise) whose apprehension may be
differing from theirs, to compel them and theirs contrary to their consciences
to that Religion be it what it will, so they suppose it to be truth: And so,

10: It destroys that golden rule of righteousness to be observed of all, as ye
would that men should do to you, so do ye to them, etc.

11. And finally, The Magistrates by this means, must necessarily expose
themselves to the greater judgment in the day of account when they shall have
not only to account for the bodies and estates of men, but for the souls of men
and for the wrong done to Christ and to his tender Lambs. Oh how does it
concern Magistrates as well as others, to take heed of heaping, and treasuring
up of wrath against the day of wrath and pe^dition of ungoely men: But to
remember the words of Christ, Mat. 23. 35.

Ob^ect. Probably it may be objected (notwithstanding all that has been said
we judge it to be our duty to take the care of Gods worship, and we are so
persuaded by divines: That it is the first work we should be about to prefer
Gods concernments before our own, if we miscarry in it, the danger will be to
our selves, for we own Christ to be above us, and expect to give an account to
him for what we do in divine things, as well as civil, and therefore must
adventure our account for the one as well as the other.

Answ. The first, i. e. Government in civil concernments, is clearly committed
to the Magistrates, and therefore may be lawfully and comfortably undertaken,
with an expectation of standing in the day of trial, i. e. of those that have
been conscientious and faithful to God in the discharge of that trust, but as
for divine concernments that is altogether intruded into, and therefore an
account must be given for the very act of undertaking and entering into, or
assuming of that power, that is not betrusted with any Magistrate on earth, and
is therefore as clearly an act of treason (against the King of Kings) to enter
upon and take his kingdom from him, as it is for a subject (though in pretense
of love) without any rule or reason, to endeavor to take the Kingdom and
Government from his prince; therefore let Magistrates learn to content
themselves with what God has given them, and let the Lord alone with what he
has reserved to himself.

Obj. The Apostle says, That Magistrates are for the praise of them that do
well, etc.

Answ. Its true they should be so, i. e. that walk civilly, and orderly in
subjection to the Laws of that power, under which they live, in civil respects;
the Apostle intends not divine things, for the Magistrates were then heathens;
but as to things relating to this life, I do not think that there was ever a
Magistracy yet in the world, no not among the heathen, but it had so much of
the authority of God stamped upon it, that it was in it self for the praise of
them that did well, i. e. Those that walked righteously and in offensively on a
civil account. However all men, i. e. Magistrates have failed that have meddled
with things divine, making that one part of their work, and particular acts of
unrighteousness on the outward account might and may be committed (and
doubt^ess was) either through ignorance or unrighteousness in the Lawmakers,
or such as did erect them; but I do not judge that ever there has been any
Magisterial authority in the world, but has countenanced civil righteousness
amongst men, and discountenanced unrighteousness, and so it has been for the
praise of them that do well,

Q. If the case be thus, What then is the Magistrates duty in Religious
matters? has he nothing at all to do in it?

A. As a Magisttrate doubtless he has not, in any way of restraining from, or
of compelling to any Religion, it being the Lords work; and without the birth
from above, there can be no entrance into the Kingdom. As a Christian, he ought
to walk according to the rule of Truth him self; according to his light and
faith, and to protect and defend all in the peaceable profession of what they
believe to be the truth of God: Commending and preferring the holy Scriptures;
encouraging all to a conscientious searching ofter, and living according to,
the will of the Lord therein revealed.

But as for such principles and actions, as are clearly sinful, and not any
matter of conscience; be it contrary to the first or second Table, as sweering,
cursing, and tumultuous disobedience, or whatever clearly flows from corrupt
and degenerated Nature, and is contrary to the Law of Nature it self; I judge
is the Magistrates duty to take cognizance of: For the original of Magisterial
power was to correct the exorbitancie of mankind in the fall; that so they
might live peaceable together; for had not man fallen, there had been no need
of Magistracy, but man being fallen, Magistracy was ordained of God, for the
punishment of the evil doers in this estate; and there was no other end, nor
is there any other work for Magistrates; though God did for a time commit a
power to the typical Magistracy of the Jews, which lead to Christ, and is (as
has already been said) natively devolved into Christ, and all things of the
celestial and soul-concernment, is in his hand; so that the work and duty of
Magistrates, as Magistrates, I shall present in these Scriptures, Psa. 82. 3,
4. Defend the poor, and fatherless; do justice to the a^fiicted and needy;
deliver the poor and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked; Romans 13. 3.
4. 1 Pet. 2 13, 14.

Q. Is it not the Magistrates duty to punish Blasphemy?

A. I suppose it is, being rightly understood what Blasphemy is, not what men
call or suggest to be Blasphemy: Blasphemy being evil, or wicked speaking, or
cursing either of God or man. And this I do judge, that the Magistrate ought to
make provision against, it being no matter of conscience, but palpable
wickedness, to speak evil of, or curse either God or men; though I do not
think it should be punished with death, as in the Old Testament, (i. e.)
Blasphemy against God, that Church and State being typical, and the censures
are to be exercised by Christ in the Church here, cutting off from the Church,
and will be eternally judged by Christ hereafter, if repentance prevent not.

And further, it seems to be that which is seated as a Law in Nature, and that
in the Heathen in this case, to preserve the honor of their gods, much more of
a professing Christian Magistrate, Acts 19. 37. which cannot be, if this of
Blasphemy be permitted; it is evident that there was no Law among the Heathen to
compel to the Worship of their Gods, and forbid the preaching of another way;
for in as much as they had not been Robbers of Churches, (i. e.) taken out of
their con^ecrated places, nor blasphemed their Godness, there was naught
against them; so that in a word, (to conclude) it behooves Magistrates to have
respect unto this, only let them be heedfull what they call Blasphemy, lest
they themselves should blaspheme; for persons to have a d^ffering apprehension
in matters divine* although it may be of things that are of highest
concernment, believing it to be the truth of God, though probably they may be
mistaken in their understanding, is not Blasphemy, but that which may and ought
to be left to the Lord and the Church; For to his own Master he stande^h ^r
falls. This testimony for the Lord I leave with you, as a word that may be of
use unto you (if embraced) for almost all Magistrates have assumed Christ's
Throne, and the People have been willing to have it so; insomuch that the
generality of people in the world, have known no other Lord nor Lawgiver, but
the Magistrate even in divine things. And this I judge to be one part of the
Lords work at this day, to untwist this knot, i. e. unity of Church and State,
and to let the oppressed go free. Amen.

FINIS.

