Miscellanies:

In Five ESSAYS.

I. Upon the Office of a Chaplain. II. Upon Pride. III. Upon Clothes. IV. Upon
Duelling. V. Upon General Kindness.
The Four last By way of DIALOGUE.

By JEREMY COLLIER, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Keeble at the Turks-head in Fleetstreet, and Io.
Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1694.

To the Reader.
It Is some Years since the Publication of this small Treatise: I am still
convinced the Interest of Religion is not a little concerned in the Enquiry.
The Office lies among Persons who have a great force upon Custom and Practice:
And where the Motion is strong, the Direction should be well secured. It Is true
Milton treats the Argument as he does the King, with great Contempt: But to be
ill used by such a Hand, and in such Company, is rather an Honor than
otherwise. The Scripture (says this Man) owns no such Order, and therefore they
must be left to the Examination the Sons of Sceva met with. Bishops or
Presbyters we know, and Deacons we know, but what are Chaplains? (Eiconocl. p.
163.) He might have answered in his own Words, (p. 164.) That they were
Household Priests; and given an Instance from the Old Testament. For there we
find that Micah entertained a Levite with Salary and Diet; and after all told
him, he should be a Father, and a Priest to him. (Judge. 17. 10.) It seems he
did not think he had hired a Servant with his ten Shekels. As for the Heathen,
They had a Modester Sense of Religion than to rob their Gods of their
Ministers, and make them their own. The Roman Emperors were Priests
themselves, but had none Belong to them till they were Dead, and Deifyed.
Toward the Declension of Philosophy, now and then a grave Pretender was drawn
off by the Steams of the Kitchen. Lucian ridicules these Men for their Little
Compliances. One of them it seems made his Court to the Lap-dog, to improve his
Interest with the Lady. But an envious Footman happening to smoke the Matter,
broke a Jest upon the Favorite, and the Philosopher, and spoiled All. But these
Sages don't come strictly within the Question. They were only Seculars; and
entertained upon the Score of Learning, not Religion.

In the Church, the Business of a Chaplain seems not of the highest Antiquity.
In the first Ages the Clergy were supported by their Bishop, and generally
lived under his Observation. (Can. Apost.) And afterward, when They removed
from the Mother Church, They had Titles, i. e. Cures assigned them, much larger
than single Families. The first Chaplain I meet with was one Majorinus, a very
unfortunate Person. He lived in the Reign of Dioclesian: And was Ordained by
the Donatists for the Sea of Carthage, against the Catholic Bishop Caecilian.
He was Set up and Countenanced by his Patroness Lucilla, a high Spirited Lady;
who refused Communion with Caecilian, for being Reproved by Him when he was
Archdeacon. (Optat. Lib. 1. cont. Parmen.) However, by the Story Majorinus
might be no more than a Reader in the Family; who in the Custom of those Times
was less than a Subdeacon.

The wrong Use the Rich Laity might make of the Indigence or Ambition of these
Household Clergy, was I suppose the Reason why the Second Council of Orange (
Can. 9. held Ann. 533.) allowed no Priest to Reside with Secular Persons,
without the Bishop's Leave.

Dr. Heylin Reports (Cypr. Ang.) That Bishop Laud observed the Interest of the
Church prejudiced by the great Increase of Chaplains in the Houses of private
Gentlemen. To prevent this Inconvenience, and some others, King Charles the
First published his Instructions to Archbishop Abbot, An. 1629. containing
Orders to be executed by the Bishops in the Province of Canterbury. The
Instructions were comprehended in ten Articles. The seventh enjoins, That the
Bishop suffer none under Noblemen, and Men Qualified by Law, to have any
private Chaplain in his House.

I have mentioned these Instances, to show the Difficulty of the Office. It Is a
nice Undertaking, and requires a more than ordinary Sufficiency. And therefore
an Unexperienced, Vnballasted Divine, must be an improper Missionary. 'Twere
well if he understood Something of Men and Things; if he was furnished both
with Matter and Form, and rather Brought his Education than Received it. For a
Disadvantage in the Beginning of Business, is not easily overcome. There should
be Vigilance in Conversation, a Sweetnes^ of Temper, an Unaffected Piety, and a
noble Contempt of Interest. And since the Clergy thus engaged are more Numerous
than formerly, they should manage with the greater Care. For when the
Priesthood is misunderstood, Religion must decline of Course. And when Religion
is gone* we have lost the best support of this Life, as well as the other. This
Reasoning must be allowed by those who are not sunk below the Doctrines of
Providence. Indeed if a Man sets up for a Sceptick, I don't expect the Argument
should Relish. But the Opinion of such Judges is neither Credit, nor
Misfortune. With these People a Jest passes for a Demonstration; and to Laugh,
and Confute, is the same Thing. It seems Truth and Falsehood depends upon their
good Liking: And they have the peculiar Privilege of Wishing Things in, or out
of Being, at Pleasure. Who would expect such Flights of Conceit from so humble
Pretenses? For an Atheist, if you will take his Word for it, is a very
despicable Mortal. Let us describe him by his Tenants, and Copy him a little
from his own Original. He is then no better than a heap of Organized Dust, a
stalking Machine, a Speaking Head without a Soul in it. His Thoughts are bound
up by the Laws of Motion, his Actions are all prescribed. He has no more
Liberty than the Current of a Stream, or the Blast of a Tempest. And where
there is no Choice, there can be no Merit. The Creed of an Atheist is a
degrading Systeme, a most mortifying Persuasion. No Advantages can make him
Shine: He strikes himself out of all Claim to Regard: And has no Alliance to
any honorable Distinction. He is the Offspring of Chance, the Slave of
Necessity, danced by foreign Impulses no less than a Puppet. Ignoble in his
Descent; Little in Life, and Nothing at the End on it. Atheism, the result of
Ignorance and Pride; of strong Senses, and feeble Reason; of Good Eating, and
Ill Living! Atheism, the Plague of Society, the Corrupter of Manners, and the
Underminer of Property! What can the Raillery, the Reproaches, the supercilious
Censures of this Sect signify? Why should They be raised above their
Principle, and rated higher than their own Valuation? They are below all
Consideration, except that of Pity, and Prayers; and these I heartily give them.

If the Plainness of what Follows disgusts the sober Reader I am sorry for it.
It Is a Circumstance which could not be declined without Prejudice to the
Subject. The oversmoothness of an Argument, is apt to abate the Force. You must
give it a Point to make way for Passage* Pleasure cannot always be made the
Vehicle of Health. And when the Case requires it, no Man blames the Doctor for
preferring the Cure to the Palate. Besides, the bare mention of some Practices
is enough to expose them. And when Things are a Satyr upon themselves, who can
help it? The Deformity lies in the Monster, not in him who shows it.

I am far from desiring a Depression of the Laity, or abetting any Spiritual
Usurpation. Honor and Civil Pretenses are not Held at the Will of the Church;
and therefore She should not Seize without Warrant. To make Orders a Patent for
Pride, and a Privilege for Misbehaviour, is much more than runs in the
Commission. I am pleading for no Cynical Neglect, no ill supported Forwardness,
no Briskness above Men's Business, or their Talent. But then I hope it is no harm
for Churchmen to maintain their Liberty; and keep the Property of their
Persons to themselves. Especially since They live amongst a Free People, and
have so good Evidence for their Title. Farther, There is no fear of Levelling
from this Enquiry. For Independency does not suppose Equality: Freedom and
Degrees are well enough consistent.

To prevent all Misconstruction. I willingly grant it no Disadvantage to a
Gentleman to Belong to a Person of Quality, provided his Employment be Secular.
But the Function of an Ecclesiastic, requires another Relation.

ERRATA.
OFfice of Chaplain, page 4. line 25. for at read that. p. 35. l. 7. for
Inconsiderateness r. Inconsiderableness. Essay upon Pride, p. 19. l. 13. for
indifferent r. different. p. 56. l. 26. for Inscriptions r. the Inscriptions,
p. 62. l. 31. for that r. than. p. 81. l. 2. for fanciful r. so fanciful.

THE OFFICE OF A Chaplain Inquired into, and Uindicated FROM SERVILITY AND
CONTEMPT.

THE OFFICE OF A CHAPLAIN Inquired into, etc.
JUvenal observes, Sat. 7. that the Practice of the Lawyers in his time was
usually proportioned to the Figure they made at the Bar; where he that appeared
in the best Equipage was supposed to have the greatest share of Law and Sense
in him: so that had the Vulgar had any Power in determining Right, a good Cause
might oftentimes have been lost for want of fine Clothes to plead it in.
Whether any part of this Vanity prevails with us, I shall not dispute; however
this Inference may be fairly allowed, That the Success of Truth depends very
much upon the Reputation of its Advocate. For the generality of Mankind, in
regard they are not judicious and impartial enough to penetrate the bottom of
things, are more influenced by show and appearance, than by substance and
reality. And therefore if a Man's Person or Office happens to wear an
uncreditable Name, and and falls under a general di^esteem, though never so
undeservedly, he must not expect to be persuasive with others, though the
nature and proof of what he recommends, may appear sufficiently evident and
weighty to an unprejudiced mind. For besides that Men are not willing to learn
Rules of Wisdom and Condu^^ from those they contemn, because this looks like a
disparagement of themselves, and sets the despised Person in some measure above
them, besides, I say, they are not over-willing to be informed by such
Instructors; it is not often that they think they can: For it is generally taken
for granted that Discourses cannot rise much above the Character of those that
make them; and that it is scarce possible for an inconsiderable Man to say any
think that is worth the taking notice of. So that when Men have entertained a
little Opinion of any Person, he is under a mighty disadvantage of fixing any
good Advice upon them. The contemptible Notion they have of him gives their
Judgments an ill tincture, and makes them unindifferent, so that they neither
see things in their true colors, nor allow them their proper weight; but are
apt to conclude the reasonings of those they disesteem resemble the
insignificancy of their Authors, and so many a g^od well-meaning Argument is
turned back and discountenanced, only for keeping suspected unreputable Company.

Of the truth of this Observation ill Men are very apprehensive, who being
desirous of enjoying the ple^sures of Vice, without coming under the discipline
of Ignominy and Restraint, make it their business to misrepresent the Ministers
of Religion, depressing their Authority, and decrying the usefulness of their
Prosession; being well assured that when they have disarmed their Adversaries
(as they reckon them) of their Reputation, they need not fear any considerable
disturbance from them.

In pursuance of this Design they would fain persuade the World, that the
Clergy are so far from deserving any additional Esteem upon the account of
their Office, that for this reason they ought to forfeit part of what they had
before; as if Orders supposed some antecedent Crime, and were rather inflicted
than given, and that those who receive them ought to pass for Persons degraded
from the privileges of Birth and Education, or at least not to enjoy them
without stain and abatement.

Now that there are some Persons, and those not all of the lowest Rank, who
seem to be of this unreasonable Opinion, is too apparent; and therefore I shall
desire them to consider, that those who account the Priesthood a lessening of a
Man's Quality, must either believe all Religion to be an Imposture, or if they
do own the Being of a God, their apprehension of him is so scandalous and
unworthy, that I think it would be a kindness to them to suppose them Atheists:
For it is not so monstrous and provoking to deny the Existenee of a Deity, as to
suppose him void of Excellency and Perfection: To imagine him to be so far from
being the Fountain of Honor, that He is rather to be accounted a discredit to
those who belong to him, and that a Person of Condition ought to be ashamed of
his Service; such a Notion of God Almighty as this, besides the Absurdity of
it, looks like a malicious acknowledgment of his Being, only to make him
capable of contempt.

But besides, at the Function of the Clergy in general is too often
misunderstood, (which in such a skeptical and licentious Age we need not wonder
at) those who officiate in private Houses lie under particular Disadvantages:
Here the Master of the Family usually expects an extraordinary observance from
the Priest, and returns him less notice in exchange, than to others of the same
Order and Condition. Now one would think in point of reason, that an
Ecclesiastical (as well as a Civil or Military) Officer should be more
considered within the limits and extent of his Employ than elsewhere, both upon
the account of the Jurisdiction he has there, and because of the Advantage
those he is concerned with, do or may receive from the Execution of his Office.

Now the reason of this unaccountable Practice must be resolved into one or
both of these Pretenses; either

1. That a Clergyman officiating in a Family, ought to be entertained no
otherwise than under the Notion of a Servant: or

2. Because it is in the Patron's Power to oblige the Priest with
Church-Preferment.

It will be therefore the Design of these Papers to show,

1. That a Priest, or Chaplain in a Family, is no Servant.

2. That whatever fair Expectations the Patron may have given the Priest of
future Advantage, those are no sufficient Grounds to justify an imperious
Deportment on the one hand, or a servile Submission on the other.

1. I shall prove that a Priest, or Chaplain in a Family, is no Servant; the
contrary of which I believe he is often thought to be, though it is not always
spoken out. Now in order to the removing this Mistake, I shall in the

First place answer those Objections, which seem to have given the most
probable occasion of its rise.

Secondly, I shall give a short Description of the Office of a Chaplain; and
show how much it differs from that of a Servant.

I. I shall answer those Objections, which have given the most probable
occasion to this Mistake; among which we may reckon the Priests being
entertained with Diet.

But that eating at another's Table does not make a Man a Servant is plain; for
if it did, then every one that visits his Friend, if he happens to eat or drink
without paying for it, must immediately forfeit his Liberty. If it be said,
That it is not eating now and then upon a Visit which brings a Man into the
Condition of a Servant, but doing it constantly, and with the same Person: To
this I answer, That if eating by the year makes a Man a Servant for a year,
than eating by the day must make him a Servant for that day; the only
difference in this case is, that the one who eats but a Meal or two comes into
his Liberty sooner than the other.

But possibly it is the Priests contracting for Diet which makes him mistaken
for a Servant to him that affords it; and here it is supposed to come under the
notion of Wages, because the Priest is to do something for it. Now because a
consideration of this nature, whether it be received in Money or Diet, or both,
is the same thing; I shall prove that a Man's Receiving Money in consideration
of bestowing his Time and Pains upon another, does not make him a Servant to
him that returns him a Recompense for his Trouble. For example, Lawyers and
Physicians have their Fees, or their Wages if you please, and yet I suppose
none will say that they are Servants to all the Clients and Patients that
employ them, and if not to all, then for the same reason not to any: The Judges
have a Fee for every Cause which is tried at the Nisi prius Bar, and a Justice
of Peace has Money allowed him for making a Warrant, which both of them may
receive without forfeiting their Authority. The House of Commons likewise have
Pensions from their Electors, during the Session of Parliament; I confess it is
not usually paid now, but if they did receive it as formerly they have done, I
hope no one would say a Knight of a Shire was Servant to a Man of Forty
Shillings per annum, because he contributed something toward his maintenance.
In all these cases a Man is engaged in the business of others, and receives a
consideration for his employment, and yet has no reason to be accounted a
Servant for his pains.

If it be said, that in most of these Instances the Salaries are assigned by
Law, and consequently that there is no contract between him that receives and
him that gives the consideration; I answer, that there is a vertual* though not
an express contract, because the People have agreed to consent to whatever
their Representatives shall determine.

2 ly, As to the case of the Lawyers, though their Fees are stated by Law, yet
every one chooses whom he will make use of; so that the voluntary Retaining any
one, is no less than a plain Contract, and the giving him so much Money upon
condition that he will plead for him.

3 ly, It Is not the contracting for Money in lieu of some other exchange which
makes a Man a Servant, for then every one that sells for Money would be a
Servant to the Buyer, and consequently a Pedlar might make himself a Master of
the best Merchant in London, if he should happen to be so ambitious as to be
his Customer: and which is most to be lamented, if a Man could not by way of
Contract receive Money with one hand, without parting with his Liberty with the
other, then the Landlord must be a Servant to the Tenant; for the bare
contracting for Rent, though he never received a Penny, is enough to bring him
Under; so that according to this Opinion, a Man cannot let his Farm without
Demising and Granting away himself.

But further, That the entertaining the Clergy with Diet and Salary is no
Argument of their subjection, will appear, if we consider that we are bound to
contribute toward the support of our Parents, if they stand in need of it; and
yet I suppose it does not follow that this makes us there Superiors: It Is so
far from it, that our assisting them is accounted part of that honor which the
Fifth Commandment enjoins us to pay them, and is so interpreted by our Savior
himself, St. Matthew. 15. 4, 5, 6. The communication therefore of part of our
Wealth to the Clergy officiating in our Houses, is in reason nothing but a due
respect to their Function, and a grateful acknowledgement of their Care: What
the Priest receives from us is in effect offered to God Almighty, because it is
given upon the account of the Relation he has to him, and the Advantages we
recieve from thence. This is honoring God with our Substance, who in regard he
stands in need of nothing himself, has ordered those Persons (whom he has set
apart to keep up his Service and Worship) to receive what Men present to him in
token of his Sovereignty and Providence. Thus what was offered to God under the
Old Testament (except what was spent in Sacrificing) was the Priests Portion,
assigned by the Divine Appointment, Numb. 18. 8, 9. and in the 20 th. verse of
that Chapter the reason why the Tribe of Levi was to have no Inheritance in the
Land which was to be divided, is given, because God promised to be their
Inheritance, that is to give them those Offerings which were made to him; and
that this was a very liberal Assignment, and much exceeded the provision which
was made for the rest of the Tribes, might easily be made good, were it not
foreign to the present Argument.

There are many other places in the Old Testament which may be alleged for the
confirmation of this Truth, as Deuteronomy. 18. 2. Josh. 13. 14. Ezekiel. 44. 28, etc.
And that this practice did not depend upon any Cerimonial Constitution, but was
founded in the unalterable reason of things, will appear if we look into the
New Testament; where St. Paul tells us that God has ordained that those that
Preach the Gospel (which every Priest does who reads the New Testament) should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. Our Spiritual Governors are Ministers of God
to us as well as our Temporal, Romans 13. 4. and therefore the Apostle's
Inference, v. 6. may in a qualified sense at least, be applied to them, For
this cause pay you Tribute also. And that the same Apostle did not believe that
a Consideration of this nature, ought to subject the Clergy to Distance and
Submissive Behavior, is beyond question; for he plainly tells the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a great thing,
if we shall reap your carnal things? It seems he did not believe this Favor so
extraordinary, or to have any such commanding quality in it, as to make him
their Servant, or Dependant, if he had received it. Nay he tells them that he
had power to eat and to drink; that is, God had given him a right to a
competent Maintenance out of the Estates of those he instructed; which without
question, where the circumstances of the Person will permit, ought to be
proportioned with respect to the Person Represented, and to the Nature and
Quality of the Employ. It Is plain therefore that the Apostle thought that if
God's Ministers lived out of the Fortunes of their Charge, yet they were not so
mightily indebted beyond a possibility of Requital; but that the Obligation was
full as great on the other side: and the reason why some Men now a days are not
of the same mind is, because the Concerns of another World have none, or a very
slender Consideration allowed them; for otherwise without question Men would
look upon those as none of their least beneficial Friends, who are appointed by
God to guide them securely in their Passage to Eternity: but now it is the Mode
with too many to live as if their Souls were the most inconsiderable thing they
carried about them.

5. It may be objected, That every Family ought to be under the Government of
one single Person, and because the Priest is confessed not to be the Master,
therefore he must be under command, and consequently a Servant. Now this is so
slender an Objection, that I should have waved the mention of it, but that some
People seem desirous of being imposed upon in this matter; and we know when Men
are in love with a Mistake, the least appearance of a reason is apt to entangle
their Understandings, and make them overlook the evidence of an Assertion they
are prejudiced against.

To what is objected therefore I answer, That this Argument proves all Boarders
Servants, though their Office or Quality be never so much above those they
sojourn with. I grant the Priest is not to disturb the Master of the House in
the Government of his Family, nor to intermeddle in his Affairs, (to do this
were an unreasonable Incroachment) but the living under his Roof makes him no
more his Servant, than his Father or Mother are, when they reside with him.

There may be several other things urged against the truth of the Proposition I
am to defend, but the solving the remaining Objections will fall in more
conveniently, after I have given a short description of the Office of a
Chaplain, and shown how much it differs from that of a Servant, and how
inconsistent it is with it; which I shall proceed to.

1. Therefore, The Office of a Clergyman in a Family, is to Pray for, Bless,
and give Absolution to those he is concerned with; which are all Acts of
Authority and Jurisdiction. He is to Counsel, Exhort, and Reprove the Master of
the Family himself, upon occasion (though with respect to his station) which
Offices are inconsistent with the condition of a Servant, and must be very
unsuccessfully performed by him, as will further appear afterward.

2. He does not receive this Commission* from the Master of the Family, or from
any humane Authority, but from God himself, whose Deputy he is in things
pertaining to Religion: He is not entertained upon any secular Account, or to
manage any other Business but what relates to another World; and is Consecrated
to this Function by the Divine Warrant and Appointment, and consequently he is
God's Minister not Man's. The Place in which he is engaged is his Parish, and
the difference between a Parochial Priest and him lies in this, that the extent
of his Charge is not so large as that of a Parish Priest; the one having but
only one single Family to take care of, and the other a great many: but the
Office is the same, and therefore the one has no more reason to be accounted a
Servant than the other.

3. However Pride, Ignorance, or Inconsideration may sometimes bias Men's
minds, yet if they would but attend to their own practice, they would see that
the concern of a Priest in a Family is no servile Employment; because in the
absence of a Priest the Master of the Family supplies his Place, as far as
lawfully he may, that is, in Praying and giving Thanks at Meat; which is a
plain confession that Men are satisfied that it is very improper to employ any
of their Servants in the performance of Holy Offices; the doing of which would
be dishonorable to God, and weaken the force and Majesty of Religion; and
therefore when one Consecrated to Holy Ministrations is not present, God ought
to be addressed to by a Person of the greatest Consideration in the Family;
which implicit confession of theirs, is both agreeable to the reason of Mankind
in general, and the practice of the first Ages of the World, when the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Authority were united, the same Person being both Priest and
Prince in his Family; as appears from Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job's erecting
Altars, and offering Sacrifices: And before the Institution of the Mosaic Law
(in which God chose a distinct Tribe to serve him in Holy Offices) the
Firstborn, among other considerable Privileges, had the Priesthood annexed to
his Birthright.

4. This Notion of a Servant destroys the End and Design of the Priestly
Office, it renders his Person cheap, and his Discourse insignificant, it causes
his Reproofs to be looked upon as presumptuous, and makes a generous Freedom
and impartial Plainness, to be interpreted a forgetfulness of Distance: And yet
this sort of Plain-dealing is not more necessary toward any sort of People than
those who are Wealthy and Honorable, the Nature of their Circumstances being
such as make them much more apt to flatter themselves, and to be flattered by
others; which made St. Paul command St. Timothy, to charge those that were Rich
that they should not be High-minded: The Apostle well knew in what great danger
such Persons were of taking the height of their Condition amiss, and confiding
too much in it; for to this unhappy Mistake they have not only the common
Artifices of Self-love to betray them, but several confederate Circumstances
from without strike in to carry on the Imposture, and to cheat them into a
wrong Opinion of themselves. They see how they are reverenced and admired by
almost all sort of People, and that Men frequently resign their Ease, their
Liberty and Conscience too, to purchase fewer Conveniences than they are
already possessed of: They find that Wealth and Reputation puts them into a
capacity of gratifying their Senses, and their Humor; gives them many
Opportunities of obliging their Friends, and crushing their Enemies; and makes
their Will a kind of Law to their Inferiors and Dependants. Now these
Advantages when they are not thoroughly examined, but rated according to the
value which vulgar Estimation sets upon them, are apt to swell them into an
unreasonable Conceit of themselves; which Vanity is still fed and inflamed
because they are often so unfortunate, as not to attend that these worldly
Accommodations are things really distinct from their Owners; that these
ornamental Privileges are but a decent Varnish which enriches no deeper than
the Surface; and Impression, which though Royal, cannot alter the Metal: But
on the contrary they are apt to fancy their Fortunes and themselves to be all
of a piece, that this glorious Outside grows out of some intrinsic
Prerogative, and is the genuine Luster and Complexion of their Nature. And
since a flourishing Condition is thus apt to impose upon Men, and has such a
natural tendency to give them a false Idea of their own Excellency, have they
not need of a prudent and conscientious Friend, to insinuate that they have no
Essential Advantages above the rest of Mankind, to awaken them into right
Apprehensions of things, and rescue them from that Delusion which their own
Vanity, and the Ignorance or Design of others of often puts upon them?
Therefore if Men would have their Lives correct and happy, they ought to
encourage their Friends, (especially those who are particularly concerned in
the Regulation of their Conscience) to tell them of their Faults; they should
invite them to this freedom, if not by express Declaration, yet by affable
Deportment, always receiving the Performance of the nice Office with
demonstrations of Pleasure and Satisfaction. Did Men consider how slippery and
difficultly manageable an elevated Station is, they would easily discern that
it was not the safest way to trust altogether to their own Conduct, but to take
in the constant assistance of a Religious Person, that so their Miscarriages
might be represented, their Consciences directed in doubtful Cases, and their
Minds fortified with Defensatives proper to the Temptations of their Condition
and Temper. Indeed the very converse of such a Guide, if his Character were
rightly understood, and prudently supported, would help to keep them upon their
guard; and by striking a kind of Religious Awe upon their Spirits, make their
Conversation more staunch and regular, and often prevent their falling into any
remarkable Excesses: But these Advantages are all lost upon those who
misapprehend the Priest's Office, and entertain him upon the same account they
do their Footmen, only to garnish the Table, and stuff out the Figure of the
Family. When a Man has received such a disparaging Notion of the Priest, and
ranged him amongst his Servants, there is small likelihood of his being the
better for his Company; for this Conceit will make his Carriage lofty and
reserved; his Words, Gestures, and Silence, will all carry marks of Neglect and
Imperiousness in them: which are plain and designed Intimations that the Priest
must not insist upon the Privileges of his Function; that he must not pretend
to any Liberty, but what his Patron is pleased to allow; with the Direction of
whose Actions he is not to intermeddle, nor remonstrate against the
unreasonableness of any Practice, nor show him the Danger of continuing in it:
for though all this be done with Caution and Tenderness, and Respect, yet he
must look for nothing but Disdain and Disappointment in requital, for presuming
to admonish his Superiors; which is such an Usurpation upon Dominion and
Quality as is not to be endured; being neither agreeable to the servile
Employment of the one, nor consistent with the Honor of the other.

5. This degrading the Priesthood into a servile Office, takes off from that
Veneration which is due to the solemn Mysteries of Religion, and makes them
look common and contemptible; by being administered by Persons not sui juris,
but obnoxious to the pleasure of those who receive them: God therefore to
prevent his Ordinances from falling into contempt, and to make them effectual
to procure the happiness of Mankind, has given his Priests Authority over all
they are concerned with; they are to bless the People in his Name, and the
Author to the Hebrews tells us That without contradiction the less is blessed
of the better, Hebr. 7. 7. They are called the Lord's Priests, 1 Samuel 22. 17.
The Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. And in the New Testament, they
are styled the Stewards and Ambassadors of God; and made Overseers of his
Church by the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Acts 20. 28. The Sense of which Texts,
and partly the Words are by the Appointment of our Church applied to those who
are ordained Priests, to put them in mind of the Dignity of their Office, and
the great Care they ought to take about the conscientious Discharge of it.

I confess it is possible for a Priest to make himself a Servant; he may it is
likely be Steward or Clark of the Kitchen if he pleases, (as Bishop Latimer
complains some of the Clergy were forced to be in his Time, Heylin's Histo
Refor. p. 61.) but as long as he does not engage in any Employment which is
intended for State, or the Convenience of Life, as long as he keeps to his
Priestly Function, so long he may be assured he has no Master in the House;
and for any to suppose he has, is an unreasonable and absurd Mistake; (to say
no worse of it) it is an inverting that Order which God made between the Priest
and People, and denies that Authority which God has granted for the
Edification of his Church. It endeavors to destroy that Honorable Relation
which the Priest has to the Divine Majesty (to whose Service he is
appropriated) which God is pleased to dignifie him with, that he might have the
greater Influence upon those he is concerned with, and be Successful in the
Execution of his Office: And therefore for a Patron to account such a
Consecrated Person his Priest, as if he Belonged to him as a Servant, is in
effect to challenge Divine Honors, and to set up himself for a God: For if he
is any thing less, he must own that the Service of the Priest does not belong
to him; for that in the very Terms and Notion of it, is intended for no Being
inferior to that which is supposed to be Divine.

If it be objected, That the Priest has obliged himself to remove with the
Patron, when and whither he thinks fit, and therefore seems to be in the same
Condition with the rest of the Attendants: To this I answer, That this makes
him no more a Servant than the traveling and ambulatory way of Living among
the Tartars, would make the Priests Servants to the People, provided they were
Christians: To make it plainer, Suppose a Bishop Ordained over the Company of a
Ship, and that his Diocese lay only in one Bottom; can we imagine that he would
lose his Episcopal Power, and fall into the Condition of other Seamen, as soon
as the Ship was ordered to weigh Anchor, and began to make its Voyage from one
Port to another: At this rate a Man may call a Guardian Angel one of his
Domestics, because for the Security and Protection of their Charge, these
benevolent Spirits are pleased to accompany us from one Place to another. I
grant the Scripture tells us they are sent forth to minister for those who are
Heirs of Salvation, Hebr. 1. 14. but then we must allow them to be God's
Ministers not ours; and so likewise are those of whom I am now Speaking, as
among other Places may be seen from 2 Cor. 6. 4. God has pleased to put the
Clergy in joint Commission with the Angels themselves, for the Guidance of, and
superintending his Church. When St. John would have worshipped the Angel which
appeared to him, he is forbid to do it, and the reason alleged is, because I
am thy Fellow Servants, Rev. 19. 10. that is, as Grotius expounds it, we are
both Ambassadors of the same King. And although St. John, and the rest of the
Apostles, had Privileges peculiar to themselves, both in respect of the extent
of their Jurisdiction, the infallibility of their Doctrine, and other
miraculous Gifts with which they were endowed, to which Bishops themselves,
much less inferior Priests, have no reason to pretend; yet though God was
pleased for the more speedy and effectual planting of Christianity, to qualify
the Apostles in an extraordinary Manner, and to give them a larger Commission
than to the Clergy of succeeding Ages, yet they all act by the same Authority,
and for the same End; therefore the unfixt and moving Nature of a Cure, does
not alter and degrade the Office of a Priest: He is not less a Shepherd,
because the Flock happens sometimes to wander unaccountably, from one Pasture
to another: He is bound to attend the Charge he has undertaken, and must
answer the Neglect of it to God; and when it does not continue in the same
Place, to accompany its Motion, is no more a Diminution to his Office, than it
is to that of a Judge to go the Circuit, whose Commission is as considerable,
though it travels with him from one County to another, as if he had been always
fixed in Westminster Hall.

If it be farther objected, That the Patron appoints the Hours of Prayer, which
seems to imply something of command: To this I answer, That in his choosing the
Time of Prayer, he does not appoint any Service for himself, but only declares
when he and his Household are ready for God's Worship, and desirous of the
Priestly Absolution and Blessing; which is proper for him to do, because the
Family is employed in his Business, and under his Command; and therefore
without his Permission, they have not many times an Opportunity of meeting
together for Divine Service: Which is still more reasonable, because the Priest
is supposed only to intend the Affairs of Religion, and to be always ready for
the performance of his Office, and consequently that Time which is most
convenient for those under his Care, and in which the Assembly is like to be
most numerous, he is by virtue of his Office bound to observe, whether his Cure
lies in a private Family, or a whole Parish.

But lastly, it may be urged, That the 13 of Hen. 8. cap. 28. calls the Patrons
of Chaplains their Masters; and will any Man be so hardy as to question the
Judgment and Determination of the Parliament? But here we may observe, That
this Act calls only those Patrons Masters, who can give Qualifications for
Pluralities. Having premised this Observation, I answer, with all due
Submission and Respect to this Legislative Council; That if the Question was
concerning any Civil Right, then it is confessed it is in the Power of the
Parliament either to limit, or take it away, because the whole Power and
Authority of the Kingdom is there, either Personally, or by Representation; and
therefore they may deprive any Person of his Honor or Estate (the Right of the
Succession to the Crown excepted) as far as they please: Not that it is
impossible for them to act Unjustly, but only that what they Determine has the
force of a Law, because every Man is supposed to have given his Consent to it.
But here we must observe, that the Church is a distinct Society from the State,
and independent upon it: The Constitution of the Church is founded in the
Appointment of Christ, in that Commission which he gave the Apostles and their
Successors, and consequently does not derive its Authority from any Earthly
Power. The Civil Magistrate never yet made Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, nor ever
can; and therefore we may safely affirm, without any injury or disrespect to
him, That he cannot make these Spiritual Offices greater or less than they are:
Therefore if God has made the Priests Office (as nothing is plainer in
Scripture than that he has) an Office of Government, Direction, and
Superintendence over those he is concerned with, then it is not in the Power of
the Parliament to make his Condition servile; because no Person, or Society of
Persons, can take away that Power which they never gave: The Parliament may
with equal Right Enact that Parents shall be subject to their Children, and
that the Wife shall be her Husband's Mistress, without a Compliment, as make
the People the Priests Masters, and give the Flock a Jurisdiction over the
Shepherd: They may with the same Justice repeal the most Established Laws of
Nature, and invert the Right of the two former Relations, as of this latter;
for this has its Establishment from the same God that the other have, and for
Ends, at least equally weighty, and momentous. This Power of their Spiritual
Governors they have no more Authority to destroy, than they have to vote down
the Cannon of Scripture, or to decree Sacrilege to be no Sin: It Is granted,
That all Ecclesiastical Persons, as they are Members of the State, are subject
to its Authority; and that a Priest, or Bishop, may properly be a Servant to
the Magistrate, if he holds any Secular Employment under him; because in this
case he acts by a Commission from the Civil Government; but this only concerns
him as he is a Member of the State, and does not in the least affect his
Spiritual Capacity: The Power which results from that, flows from another
Fountain; and is given by our Savior himself, and therefore cannot be weakened,
or recalled, by any State-Constitution whatever. Men should do well therefore
to consider, That as a Prince has no reason to take it well, if the People
should look upon his Officers as their Servants; so it is not over-respectful to
God Almighty to suppose his Ministers stand in that inferior Relation to those
they are concerned with.

I shall now proceed to the Second thing at first propounded, viz. to show,
That whatever fair Expectations the Patron may have given the Priest, yet these
are not sufficient Grounds for an imperious Carriage on the one hand, or a
servil Submission on the other.

1. This sort of Deportment were unreasonable, supposing the Patron had as full
and absolute a Right in Church-Preferment, as he has in any other part of his
Estate. For what can be a more ungenerous and ungentlemanly Practice, than to
require that a Man should resign up his Liberty, and forfeit the Privileges of
his Station, only upon the probability of receiving some sort of Consideration
for it afterward? How unlike a Benefactor does he look who sets an Excise upon
his bare Word, and clogs the expectation of future Advantage with present
Inconvenience? Thus to anticipate the Revenues of a Favor, is like taking
Usury for Money before it is lent, which certainly is one of the worst sorts of
Extortion, because here a Man not only pays for that he has not, but for that
which possibly he may never have. But

2. Let us suppose the Priest in actual Possession of some considerable
Preferment, yet being it is pretended to be given, it ought certainly to come
disencumber'd from all Conditions which may abate the Kindness of it. He that
pretends to give, should chiefly respect the Advantage of him to whom the
Favor is granted. He should demean himself toward the obliged Party, as if
the Obligation had never been; that it may plainly appear, that his Intention
in conferring it, was disinterested; that he had no little Designs of Profit or
State, to serve in it; but that it proceeded purely from a generous Inclination
to promote the Happiness of another. Whereas on the contrary, to part with any
thing out of a selfish Design, is an Exchange, not a Gift, which when it is done
by a Person of Estate, is an Argument of a mean and mercenary Spirit. But then
to pursue a Benefit with Superciliousness and Contempt, to expect a Compliance
with the most unreasonable Humors; to give upbraiding and contumelious Signs
of the dependence and unworthiness of the Receiver; to require a Man to
relinquish the necessary Freedom of one of the most solemn and honorable
Professions; this turns an Obligation into Injury and Affront, and looks like a
malicious Trap set to catch a Man's Reputation. Who that has either Sense or
Honesty would turn his Canonical Habit into a Livery, and makes himself useless
and ridiculous for the greatest Consideration whatever? A worthy Person would
scorn a Kingdom proffered upon such dishonorable terms.

3. If we put the case as it is determined by Law, this practice will appear
still more unreasonable. It Is sufficiently known, and were it not for the
overgrown Prejudices of some Persons, it were superfluous to mention that the
Patron is so far from having a full Propriety in Church-Preferments, that his
Right only consists in a power to Nominate who shall enjoy them. Which very
Nomination must be made within six Months, and fixed upon a Person Canonically
qualified, otherwise it is wholly invalid. His Interest in Church Livings only
enables him to give them away, not to keep them. He has no Power to enter upon
any part of the Glebes, or Tithes, or so much as to sequester the Profits for
the next Incumbent. He is only a Trustee authorized under certain Conditions,
to dispose of the Patrimony of the Church, which is settled upon it by as good
Laws as any he holds his Estate by. That Right which he has was originally
granted in consideration of Works of extraordinary Piety, in building or
endowing of Churches: which is a Title very few (except the King) can pretend
to, either upon their own, or their Ancestors Accounts. From all which it
appears, that the Patrons giving an Annuity out of his Estate, is a quite
different thing from his Presenting to a Living, and therefore his Expectations
of Gratitude and Observance, should not be set so high in this latter case. For
here neither Law, nor Religion, allow the Donor to be a Penny the better for
what he disposes of; he cannot detain the least part of it without Injustice
and Sacrilege, nor confer it upon exceptionable Persons without breach of
Fidelity.

The Trust indeed is honorable and weighty, it being in the Power of those to
whom it is committed to encourage Learning, and to provide the People with
prudent and conscientious Guides: but then I must add, that it ought to be
discharged accordingly, and that those who do not chiefly aim at these Ends in
the exercise of it, have little either of Conscience or Honor in them.

We have reason to believe that when the Church gave this Right of Presentation
to Lay-Patrons, (for that the Bishops had originally the Right of judging the
Qualifications of Priests, and fixing them in their respective Cures, without
being accountable to a Quare impedit for their refusal of the Peoples choice,
might be made evident were it pertinent to the business in hand.) When the
Church I say parted with this Right, she had no Suspicion of the Degeneracy of
after Ages; but imagined that the Integrity, and Conscience, if not the
Munificence of the first Patrons, might have been transmitted to the Heirs or
Purchasers of their Right. The Piety of those Times would have made it look
uncharitable to have been apprehensive of Resignation Bonds, of forced
Compositions, and Contracts for Farms, or Women. But some People have now
learned to make bold with God Almighty, beyond the Imagination, as well as the
Example, of their Predecessors; and to be guilty of those Sacrilegious Frauds,
which by the late Provision of our Laws against some of them, seem not to have
been so much as thought on, in those more Primitive and Religious days.

And here in point of Charity I think my self obliged to desire those who are
concerned in the Rights of Patronage, to consider before it is too late, how
great a Sin it is to abuse their Power; and through Covetousness, or some other
unwarrantable Principle, to betray the Church, which has in some measure made
them her Guardian: It imports them very much to reflect how unworthy and
unchristian it is to play upon the Indigence or Irresolution of another; and
take an Advantage from the Unfortunateness of his Condition or Temper, to
oblige him to mean and sinful Compliances! And what an open and undisguised
Affront it is to the Divine Majesty, to endeavor to make his Ministers cheap
and insignificant; both before, and after the conferring our pretended Favors
upon them. To create servile Dependances, and raise our private Grandeur upon
the Endowments of Religion, is a perfect Contradiction to the End and Design of
them. This makes the Church contemptible by the Strength of her own Revenues,
and causes the Monuments of our Forefathers Piety to be instrumental in
undermining, and exposing that Faith they thereby intended to secure and
advance: which whosoever is guilty of, he may be assured he has a Right to the
Imprecations, as well as the Patronage of the first Endowers of Churches, which
dreadful Legacy they were generally very careful to settle upon such
irreligious Posterity, Spelman de non temerand. Eccl.

In short, To prostitute so sacred a Trust as this is, to Pride and Ambition,
is in effect to sacrifice to the Devil with that which is consecrated to God
Almighty; and looks like a more provoking Impiety than Belshazzer's debauching
to the Honor of his Idols, in the Vessels of the Temple, Dan. 5. 3, 4. For
here is not only an Abuse of Holy things but Persons too, and God is
dishonored in those that Represent him upon a most solemn and important
Account.

I shall now at last crave leave to desire those of the Clergy, who are engaged
in the Families of Secular Persons (for I mean no other) to reflect of what ill
Consequence it is to Religion for them not to assert their Office in a prudent
defensible way: and how cheap in their Persons, and unsuccessful in their
Employment, they must necessarily be, if they betray the Privileges of their
Function, by servile Compliance and Flattery. People will be apt to imagine
(and not without reason) that those who will cringe below the Gravity of their
Character, to gain a little of this World, can scarce have any Great and
Religious Apprehensions of the other. Overmuch Ceremony in a Clergyman is
frequently misinterpreted, and supposed to proceed not from his Breeding or
Humility, but from a consciousness of his Meanness; and others are willing to
allow him so much Sense, as to be a competent Judge of his own
Inconsiderateness; and since he confesses himself contemptible by his Carriage,
they think it but just to treat him accordingly. For Men of Figure, excepting
those who are very Understanding and Religious, are apt to have
Misapprehensions conveyed into them by over-proportioned Respect; and to
imagine the Distance between him that gives it, and themselves, to be much
greater than really it is. Since therefore as things stand, there is some
danger lest Churchmen should complement away the Usefulness and Authority of
their Calling; they would do well to decline superlative Observance, for fear
they give others a wrong Notion of their Employ, or be thought to have Men's
Persons in admiration because of Advantage. It would be no more than requisite,
if they would reserve their Duty for their King, their Bishop and their
Parents, and express their Gratitude to their Patrons in Language less liable
to Misconstruction, and more proper to the Relation between them. For as they
should not be unwilling to own the Distinctions which the King's Laws have
made, as they ought to make some particular Acknowledgments for the Favors and
Civilities of those they are more immediately concerned with, and by
inoffensive and agreeable Conversation, prevent all reasonable Suspicion of
their being displeased with the superior Quality or Fortune of others; so
likewise are they obliged not to be so officiously, or rather parasitically
mindful of the Condition of any Person, as wholly to be forgetful of their own.
For notwithstanding the Disadvantages they may sometimes happen to come into
the World with; the Constitution of the Government has set them upon the same
Level with the inferior Gentry, as a reward of their Education, and out of
regard to their Function: Now that the Laws were not Priest-ridden and
superstitiously lavish of their Honor in this case might, were it necessary,
be abundantly proved from the reason of the thing, and the general practice of
other Countries, both with respect to ancient and modern Times. These
Privileges therefore being conferred upon just and public Accounts, a Man is
sometimes bound to maintain; and to surrender them up to the superciliousness
of every assuming or ignorant Pretender, is a Reflection upon the Wisdom, and
Ingratitude to the Religious Bounty of those Kings who granted them: and which
is worse, a Churchman by making himself Contemptible has parted with his Power
of doing good; and consequently disappointed the great End of his Calling.
Whereas without doubt it is part of the Design of these Privileges to create a
suitable Resolution and Presence of mind in those that have them, that so their
Spirit being raised up to their civil Station, their Character and Department
may be the better proportioned, and their Actions keep a truer Decorum with the
Nature of their Office; that they might not be Overawed, and almost struck
Dumb with the Glitterings of Title, or Fortune; but retain a graceful Freedom
in Conversation, neither Idolizing Greatness, nor Neglecting it. The Intention
of the Laws in distinguishing the Clergy from the Vulgar, besides the
Consideration of their Merit, was to put them into a better Capacity to
maintain the Honor and Interest of Religion among all sorts of Persons; that
the Rich as well as the Poor might be advantaged by their Ministry, and when
Persons of Condition were to be told of their Faults, the Priest might be
fortified with a convenient Courage to give the Reproof, and the others
disposed to receive it without disgust and impatience. Now to be ready upon all
Occasions to resent any dishonor done to Religion with a prudent Gravity and
Assurance, carries such a noble Air of Greatness and undesigning Honesty in it,
that it Forces a secret Veneration from Enemies themselves; and though a Man
may happen to be unjustly hated for speaking unacceptable Truths, yet he is
sure never to be despised. Whereas a diffident and unsupported Behavior in a
Clergyman, is often supposed to proceed from ignoble Qualities, and
consequently will be sure to weaken the force of his public Instructions; it
being natural for ill Men especially, to disregard, if not to deride the
Admonitions of those they believe are afraid of them; and he that cannot talk
without concern before a Sinner of Quality any where but in the Pulpit, might
almost as good say nothing to him there. For if a Churchman's Conversation be
servile and designing all the Week, his appearing with a new Set of Notions
upon the Sunday, will be interpreted only a formal Compliance with his
Profession: His pressing those Doctrines which his Practice contradicts, will
signify little either to his own Advantage, or theirs that hear him: For though
Men ought to mind what is said, and not who says it; yet the Prejudices of the
Generality are such, that a good Cause usually suffers very much when it is
pleaded by an improper and exceptionable Advocate: How fulsom an Entertainment
it is to hear a Coward harangue upon Valor, or a Covetous Miser preach up
Contempt of the World? The Man might better have spared his Rhetoric; for his
commending those good Qualities he neither has the Honesty or Courage to be
Master of, is in effect but a Satyr upon himself, and serves only to make him
more despicable and ridiculous; and which is worse, the secret disdain the
Audience has for such a Panegyrist, often slides from his Person to his
Subject; which makes his Exhortation nauseous, and helps to bring Virtue it
self into Disgrace.

If it be objected, That the Poverty of some of the Clergy forces them to
suppress their Sentiments in some things, and to suffer whatever an encroaching
Spirit shall think fit to put upon them: To this I answer, That the Temptation
to this Sin ought to have been prevented before their going into Holy Orders:
For those who cannot be supplied with a competent Fortune by themselves, their
Relations, or at least by some creditable independent Preferment, had much
better choose some other inferior Employment, than expose themselves to such
apparent Danger in this: But if their own or their Friends imprudence, has
sent them unprovided into the Church, it is more Reputable, Conscientious, and
to a generous mind more Easy too, to submit to the Inconveniences of their
own Poverty, than to the Pride of others; and to prefer a homely, unornamented
Liberty, to a splendid Servitude. And as for those (if there be any such) who
do not discharge their Office with that Plainness, and discreetly managed
Resolution which God and the Church expects from them; it will not be improper
to remind them of what Mr. Herbert has written upon this Occasion, Country
Parson, page 5. where he tells us, That such Persons wrong the Priesthood,
neglect their Duty, and shall be so far from that which they seek by their
Over-submissiveness and Cringing, that they shall ever be despised. Indeed they
have no reason to expect any better Usage; for as Flatterly is deservedly
accounted one of the most contemptible Vices, so a Clergyman when he is guilty
of it is the worst of Fla^^^^ers. To which we may add, That it is hard to
conceive how the Oath against Simo^^ can be fairly taken by such Persons* for
certainly he that purchases his Preferment with the Prevarication of his
Office, does no less contradict the Design of this Oath, than if he had paid
down the full value in Money for it: He that has bartered away his Freedom and
Usefulness, (and as much as in him lies the Reputation of his Order) cannot in
any reasonable Construction be said to be Presented Gratis.

Those therefore who are this way concerned, should do well to consider, How
Mean it is to be overawed, and how Mercenary to be bribed into an Omission of
their Duty! What a sordid and criminal Perfidiousness is it, to betray the
Honor of their Function, and the Happiness of their Charge, For handfuls of
Barley and pieces of Bread? Ezekiel. 13. How ill do they Represent the God of
Faithfulness and Truth; who either by verbal or silent Flattery deceive Men
into a false Persuasion of Security, and dissemble their Apprehensions of
Danger, when the Mistake is likely to prove Fatal to those that lie under it?
Can they that pretend (and that truly) a Commission from our Blessed Savior,
That good Shepherd, who laid d^wn his Life for the Sheep; Can they have so
little Charity for the Souls of Men, as to let them miscarry out of Ceremony
and Respect, and rather venture their being Damned than Disobliged? How such a
Treacherous Observance will be looked upon in the Great Day of Accounts is not
difficult to foretell, were it not too sad an Argument to dilate upon: However
something of the Guilt of it may be conceived by a remarkable Sentence of the
forementioned Author, page 6. which seems to be no less true than severe, They
(says he) who for the hope of Promotion, neglect any necessary Admonition or
Reproof, sell, with Judas, their Lord and Master.

FINIS.
A Moral Essay Concerning the Nature and Unreasonableness OF PRIDE.

IN WHICH The Most plausible Pretenses of this VICE are examined.

IN A CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes.

TO THE READER.
I Easily foresee some People will be disobliged with the Freedom of these
Papers* and think themselves treated with too little Ceremony; But unless they
can disarm their pretended Adversary, and confute his Arguments, I would desire
them by all means to smother their Resentments: For as bad as the World is, to
appear in defense of Pride, and turn Advocate for the Devil, looks like an
untoward sort of an Employment. However to sweeten their Humor as much as may
be, they may please to consider that there was no good to be done in this Case
without plain dealing; This Malady of all others must be well examined,
otherwise it is in vain to expect a Cure. It Is to no purpose to declaim in
general against a Proud man, and to give him a great many hard Names; for
unless you point directly upon his Vice, distinguish it is Nature, and discover
the weakness of that which he builds upon. Every one will be sure to avoid the
Charge and parry against the Application. Farther, to abate their Censure I
think it not improper to acquaint them that here are no particular Characters
attempted, nor is there the least intention to provoke or expose any Person
Living. Besides when a Piece like this is drawn from so many different Faces;
the mixing of Features and Complexions, will keep the Originals from being
discovered. In short the Design of this small Discourse is only to make Men
more useful and acceptable to Society, and more easy to themselves than they
generally are: And that those who overtop their Neighbors upon any
considerable account; may manage their Advantage with that Modesty and good
Humor, that none may have any ^ust occasion to wish them less.

A Moral Essay UPON PRIDE, IN A CONFERENCE Between PHILOTIMUS and PHILALETHES.
Philot. PHilalethes, I am glad to see you, though you are so wrapped up in
Speculation that I scarce knew you at first sight; pray why so thoughtful? you
don't use to have so much Philosophy in your Face.


Philal. I have a particular reason to look a little pretendingly at present;
therefore I hope you will excuse it.


Philot. With all my heart, for I suppose you will not make a practice of it:
But whatever Emergency you may be under, I would advise you to appear in your
old shape again; for in my Judgment that contemplative Figure does not become
you.


Philal. I am sorry to hear Thinking agrees so ill with my Constitution; but I
hope this Alteration does not arise from any natural Antipathy I have to Sense,
but from the unacceptableness of the subject I am upon.


Philot. Pray if it be not too free a Question, what were you musing upon?


Philal. Why last night I happened to light upon an overgrown Fop, who plagued
the Company with such an impertinent History of his Quality and Performances,
and was so vain and insolent in all his behavior, that as soon as I was
delivered from him, I had a plentiful occasion to consider the unreasonableness
of Pride; which is the present Employment of my Thoughts, and upon a full view,
I find so much folly, and ill humor, and Monster, in the Composition of this
Vice, that I am ashamed, and almost afraid, of the Idea I have raised.


Philot. It Is somewhat hard you cannot stand the charge of your own Imagination;
But though I shall not dispute your Courage, yet I much question your
Mortification.


Philal. The Reason of your censure?


Philot. Because I have observed it is but a bad Sign of Humility to declaim
against Pride; for he that is really humble will be unconcerned about Respect
and Applause; such a Person values himself upon nothing but his Conscience and
Integrity, and therefore the haughtiness of another cannot make him uneasy; so
that if he finds himself wince upon the account of neglect, he may be pretty
well assured he has a sore place.


Philal. I think you are somewhat out in your notion of Humility; for that
virtue does not make us either servile or insensible, it does not oblige us to
be ridden at the pleasure of every Coxcomb. We may show our dislike of an
imperious humor, as well as of any other foolish Action, both for the Benefit
of others, and in vindication of our own right.


Philot. I am glad to hear this concession from you, because from hence it
follows that a man may have a just esteem of himself without being proud: Now
if this observation was remembered and rightly applied, men would not be so
censorious in this point, nor mistake their own Pride for their neighbors so
often as they do. For instance, a man whom the Law has made my Superior, may
take notice of his Quality if he pleases; but this cannot well be done, except
he makes me an abatement of the regard he receives from me, therefore I ought
not to interpret the Reserve or Familiarity of his Carriage, as a Neglect, for
provided he keeps within his proportion, he challenges nothing but his own; so
that if I am displeased, the Pride lies on my side, for affecting to have an
equal Regard paid to persons who are unequal.


Philal. I have nothing to object against the main of your discourse, and
conceive that the best way to know whether we are guilty or not, and to prevent
charging this odious Imputation unjustly upon others, is to state the Nature of
Pride, and to enquire into the Grounds of it.


Philot. I confess that is the way to pinch the Question, therefore let what
will come of it, I will stand the Test of your Method, though I am afraid you
will say some unacceptable things.


Philal. Suppose I do; if the subject leads me to it, the fault is not mine:
But to come to the point: Pride has a very strong Foundation in the mind; it is
bottomed upon Self-love.


Philot. Then I sind there is somewhat to work upon. --


Philal. Pray give me leave, I say Pride is originally founded in Self-love,
which is the most intimate and inseparable Passion of humane Nature. The
kindness men have for themselves, is apt to put them upon overvaluing their own
things: which humor unless checked in time, will make them take most delight
in those Circumstances and Actions which distinguish them from their
Neighbors; and place their supposed Advantages in the best light. Now this
design is best pursued by being Master of uncommon Excellencies, which though
desired by all, are possessed but by a few; for the Rareness of things raises
their Esteem, and draws a general Admiration. And their desire of being
distinguished, is one reason why they love to keep the odds in their own hand,
and to make the distance between themselves and their Neighbors as wide as may
be, which often runs them upon a vain, and tyrannical Ostentation of their
Power, Capacity, etc. For this magnificent discovery makes the difference
between them and their Neighbors the more apparent, and consequently occasions
their own Greatness to be the more remarkable.


Philot. I think you have said something very remarkable, and I don't know but
you may grow considerable by it, if you can prove your Assertion.


Philal. Pray what rising Doctrine have I laid down?


Philot. You say that Pride is founded in Self-love, which is an unseparable
Passion of humane nature; from whence I gather, that it is impossible for a man
not to be proud, because it is impossib^e for a man not to love himself. We are
like to have an admirable Preservative from you at this rate.


Philal. Not so fast, If you had attended to the whole, you might have observed
that by self-love I meant the Excesses of it.


Philot. I thought a man could not have loved himself too well.


Philal. If by loving you mean wishing himself happy, I agree with you; for we
may, or rather we must desire to be as happy as is possible, provided it be
without prejudice to another. But then if Esteem is understood by Love, it is
easy (without care) to exceed in our own behalf; and in this sense we
certainly do love our selves too well, as often as we set an overproportioned
and unusual value upon any thing because it is our own; as if our fondness and
partiality was the true Standard of worth, and we had the faculty of turning
every thing we touched into gold.


Philot. I will not contest this point any farther with you; but as I remember
you started another Paradox, by intimating that it was a sign of Ambition to
esteem any Excellency the higher for being uncommon: Now since the value of an
Advantage is enhansed by its scarceness, and made more reputable to the owner;
I think it somewhat hard not to give a man leave to love that most which is
most serviceable to him,


Philal. So it would if he had no body to love but himself; but since he is
both obliged and naturally inclinable to universal Benevolence, this alters the
Case: for he who values any thing the more for being uncommon, will desire it
should continue so, which is no kind Wish to his Neighbors, and is an Argument
that a man does not delight in an Advantage so much for it self, as for the
Comparison; not so much for its own irrespective goodness, as because others
want it. Now it affords a more generous, and I believe, a more transporting
pleasure, to converse with universal Happiness, though we make no greater
figure in it, than the rest of our Neighbors; than to be gazed at, and admired
by a Crowd of indigent and inferior People.


Philot. The World does not seem to be of your opinion; however I will let your
Argument pass for the good nature of it. But after all let me tell you, though
I have no mind to be counted proud, yet I have a strong fancy for myself, and
therefore if you will not allow me to be civil to my Person, we might even as
good dispute no farther, for --


Philal. Don't trouble your self, if your Terms are moderate, we'll never break
off upon the score, therefore I will offer at a short negative description of
Pride, in which if it is possible, I will give you Satisfaction.


Philot. Pray let us see how liberal you will be.


Philal. First it is no part of Pride to be conscious of any perfections we
have, whether intellectual or moral; for this is in many Cases necessary, and
impossible to be avoided. He that is wise or learned must know it, otherwise he
cannot understand when he judges true or false, nor distinguish difficult and
noble Speculations, from trifling and vulgar Remarks, nor tell when he acts
rationally or not. Now a Man that is ignorant of these things can neither be
wise nor knowing: Therefore as he that has a just and vigorous sense of the
Magnitude, Distance and Colors of Objects, must conclude that he has eyes
whether he will or not; so these perfections of the mind discover themselves by
their own Light. The Possessour can no more be ignorant of them, than he can
doubt of his Existence when he is awake. To give one instance more; How can any
Person have true Fortitude, who does not know how far he ought to hazard
himself, and wherein the baseness of Cowardice consists? So that to affirm a
Man may be ignorant of his own considerableness, is to make him wise and great,
and good by Chance, which is a contradictition to the Excellencies supposed in
him.


Philot. Right. And since I like the Frankness, and tendency of your Argument,
I Will try if I can reinforce it: I say then, supposing it was possible for a man
to be ignorant of his good Qualities; it was by no means convenient: For if he
carried such a Treasure about him, without knowing how well furnished he was;
its somewhat hard to conceive, how he could either improve or use it. If it lay
thus close, it would be little better, than a Mine undiscovered, for which
neither the owner of the Ground, or any Body else are ever the richer,


Philal. You say well, and therefore I shall venture in the second place to
affirm, That as we may be acquainted with our own Accomplishments, without
being guilty of Pride, so neither is it any branch of this sin to discover that
they are greater than some of our Neighbors enjoy. If we have a real Advantage
over another, it is no sin to be sensible of it; to apprehend otherwise, is to
judge contrary to the Reason of things, when the Case is plain, we may believe
we have more Honesty, Sense, etc. than some others. This is as allowable as it
is for us to think, that we have better Complexions than Moors, and are taller
than Pygmies.


Philot. Can you go on?


Philal. Yes, I Am not afraid to add, Thirdly, that we don't fall into the sin
of Pride by being delighted with those Advantages of Mind, Body or Fortune,
which Providence has given us; these things in the very notion of them are
supposed to be beneficial. Now it is natural and necessary for us to be pleased
with the Enjoyment of that which is good; of that which is agreeable to our
Faculties, and an Advancement of our Nature: To speak strictly, when the
Faculty and the Object are rightly proportioned, Satisfaction follows of
course, and its as impossible for us not to be pleased, as it is for fire not
to ascend: Farther, if we are not allowed to take any Satisfaction in our
condition, we are not bound to give God thanks for it,; for we are not obliged
to be thankful for that which does us no good: But nothing can do us any good,
except it be by giving us a pleasure either in hand or in prospect. Fourthly,
it is no part of Pride, to be more pleased with having of an Advantage our
selves, than by seeing one of the same value possessed by another.


Philot. Make this out and you will oblige me.


Philal. Very well: I prove my Proposition thus. First, Because that which is
in our Possession, or incorporated into our Essence, is always in our Power,
and ready to be made use of when we think fit. But that which belongs to
another is often at a distance, and out of our reach, and cannot be communicated
to us, though the owner was never so willing. Secondly, it must be more
agreeable to be Master of any perfection our selves, than to contemplate one of
the same nature in another; because every one is more certain of the kind
Inclination he has to himself, than he can be of the Affection of any other
Person whatever: That I will be always kind to my self, I am as well assured
of, as that I have a being; but that another will be so, is impossible for me
to know: And therefore let a man be never so good natured, it must be somewhat
more satisfactory to him, to see himself well furnished in any kind, than his
Neighbor. Thirdly, that which is our own and in our Nature, we have the most
intimate and vigorous sense of; for the presence of any desirable Object, we
know is more acceptable and entertaining than either the notion or Prospect of
it: Possession gives us the Life of the thing, But hopes and Fancy can furnish
out no more at the best than a Picture finely drawn. So that, for Example, let
a man be of never so generous and disinterested a Spirit, yet it is natural for
him to be better pleased, withbeing rich himself (if he has any value for
riches) than in having the bare Idea of an Estate: Besides as I observed, that
which is our own, is always at our disposal, and does not depend upon the
uncertain Inclination and humor of another.


Philot. Very comfortably argued. I find then by your discourse that a Man may
without vanity be pleased with his Circumstances, and have good Thoughts of
himself too, if he deserves it. Now some People are so unreasonable, that they
will neither give Men leave to love, nor understand themselves; if they are
conscious of any commendable Quality, they must be sure to lay it out of the
way that they may not see it; nay if a Man has taken never so much care to make
himself insignificant, in order to the promoting of Humility, they will scarce
let him know he is good for nothing, for fear he should grow conceited of his
Virtue. But I perceive you are not so strait laced, and pedantick in your
Notions. Therefore if you can recover us no more Ground, let us know directly
what Pride is, and be as fair as you can.


Philal. Why Pride in the plainest words which I can think of, is too high an
Opinion of our own Excellency.


Philot. How shall we know when we over-rate our selves?


Philal. That is a very seasonable question, and absolutely necessary to the
state of the Case: Therefore I shall lay down some indisputable Marks of this
Vice, that whenever we see the Tokens we may conclude the Plague is in the
House.


Philot. Let us hear your Diagnosticks.


Philal. First, Then we may be assured we have this Disease, when we value any
Person chiefly because his advantages are of the same nature with those we
enjoy, neglecting others who have an equal right to Regard, only because their
Privileges are of a different kind from our own. For instance, when Men who
derive their considerableness from the Sword, the Gown, or their Ancestors,
think none worthy their Esteem but such as claim under their own Pretenses; In
this case it is evident it can be nothing but Partiality and Conceitedness which
makes them give the Pre-eminence.

Secondly, We may certainly conclude our selves infected with this Vice, when
we invade the Rights of our Neighbor, not upon the account of Covetousness,
but of Dominion; only that we may have it in our power to create Dependencies,
and to give another that which is already his own.

Thirdly, When Men don't measure their civil Advantages by the Laws of their
Country, but by their own fancies, and the submissions of Flatterers; this is
another infallible sign they are Proud.

Fourthly, to mention no more, When Men love to make themselves the subject of
discourse: To conn over their Pedigrees, and obtrude the Blazon of their
exploits upon the company; this is an argument they are overgrown with conceit,
and very much smitten with themselves.


Philot. Though I think you have hit the symptoms pretty well, yet except they
are marked somewhat more distinctly, it is possible for a Man to have most of
them without being ever the wiser. For unless we are able to draw up a just
State of the Degrees of merit, we can never take the true height of our
Pretensions, and being in this uncertainty it is odds if self Love does not make
us determine to the prejudice of our Neighbors. Now I would gladly know how we
must go to work to be sufficiently informed in this Point.


Philal. We must endeavor to get right apprehensions of the several
Excellencies of humane Nature, and what proportion they hold to each other: In
order to the assisting our Judgment in this case I shall lay down these general
rules.

First, Those advantages which spring from our selves, which are the effects of
our power and courage, of our Industry or Understanding, are more valuable than
those which are derived, and borrowed, because they are a sign of a Richer and
more active nature.

Secondly, Those Qualities which are most useful ought to have the Preference:
for since acknowledgments ought to be suitable to the nature of benefits
received, those who have the largest Capacity of obliging, may fairly challenge
the Perheminence in our Esteem; and therefore in the third place the duration
of an advantage ought to be considered; And that which has the firmest
Constitution and is most likely to continue, ought to be preferred to others
which are brittle and short lived. These rules carefully applied will show us
how far our pretensions to Regard are short of, or exceed other Men's, and so
prevent an overweening opinion of our selves. However, we are to observe that
outward Respect ought to be given according to the Distinctions of; Law, and
though a Man may happen to be very defective in point of merit, yet we ought to
take notice of the value Authority has set upon him.


Philot. Give me leave to put in a word, which is to tell you, that though I am
not satisfied with your Instances, yet I am glad to find you will allow us
different degrees of worth. I was almost afraid you would have set all Mankind
upon a Level.


Philal. To deliver you from such apprehensions, I freely grant you that the
Distinctions of Quality ought to be kept up for the Encouragement of Industry,
and the support of Government. I hope now you have the reason of my Concession;
you will no^ be so suspicious for the future.


Philot. No, not till you give me a farther occasion; especially since the
inference of your discourse is not unacceptable: from whence it follows, that
when a Man sees plainly that he has the Advantage of his Neighbor, he may let
him understand so much without any offense to humility.


Philal. No doubt of it, especially when his station is public; but then the
discovery of his superiority ought to be managed with a great deal of Art and
good nature, to which we are obliged not only in point of Complaisance but
Justice. For though there is often a real disterence between one Man and
another, yet the party who has the advantgae usually magnifies the inequality
beyond all Sense, and Proportion. Men don't consider that the great privileges
of humane Nature are common to the whole Kind; such as being equally related to
God and Adam, Reason and Immortality, the same number of Senses, and much of
the same perfection and continuance. And as for those things which are the
peculiar Advantages of a few; they are either acquired and enjoyed by the
strength of those general ones I have mentioned, or else they are foreign and in
a great measure Chimerical, and therefore can be no real enrichments of our
nature. They are often no more than the Blessings of Chance, of Flattery, and
Imagination. And though they may set us upon higher Ground, yet they can add
nothing to the true Stature of our Being. But to combat this Vice more
successfully, we'll examine its most plausible Pretenses, and see if we can
discover the weakness of them.


Philot. What pretenses are those?


Philal. I mean Learning, Nobility, and Power; for these you know are accounted
the brightest and most distinguishing Advantages. But though they ought all to
be considered, yet I believe there is much more Weight laid upon them, than in
strict reason they will bear.


Philot. You talk as if you were retained by the Mobile, and had a Mind to
bring us back to our original State of Ignorance and Peasantry.


Philal. I tell you once again you are much mistaken. I have no design to
lessen the value of any man's Honor, or Understanding: Let People have as much
Sense and Quality as they please, provided they don't grow troublesome and
ridiculous about it.


Philot. I somewhat suspect you have a mind to engross this Vice of Pride to
your self. This sort of discourse looks like declaiming against Arbitrary
Power, where the sharpest Invectives are commonly made by the most
Enterprizing, and unmortifyed Men, who are only angry that they are not
possessed of that absoluteness themselves, which they endeavor to render
odious in others.


Philal. Hah! you are somewhat smart. However let me tell you, if I have any
such project as you imagine, you have me upon a fair Dilemma. For, if my
reasons against Pride hold good, they will stand upon record against my self,
which I suppose will be no unacceptable revenge for you: if they are
insignificant, you will have the diversion of laughing at the folly of the
attempt: and which is more considerable, you may keep your good opinion of
yourself into the bargain.


Philot. Pray begin your attack as you think fit, and for disputes sake I Will
try how far I can maintain the ground against you.


Philal. First then, Learning (to begin there) and High Conceit agree very well
together: for a Man of Letters may have a clearer notion of the stupidness and
deformity of this Vice, and being better acquainted with the frame and passions
of humane Nature, he cannot choose but discover how unacceptable it must make
him to all Mankind. Besides he is supposed to know that nothing in strict
reason deserves a true Commendation, but a right use of the Liberty of our
Will, which is in every ones power to manage to advantage.

Secondly, Learning gives us a fuller conviction of the impersection of our
nature, which one would think might dispose us to Modesty. The more a Man knows
the more he discovers his ignorance. He can scarce look upon any part of the
Creation, but he finds himself encompassed with doubts and difficulties. There
is scarce any thing so trifling or seemingly common, but perplexes his
Understanding, if he has but sense enough to look into all the objections which
may be raised about it. He knows he has a being it is true, and so does a
Peasant, but what this thing is which he calls himself, is hard to say. He has
reason to believe, that he is compounded of two very different Ingredients,
Spirit, and Matter; but how such unallyed and disproportioned substances should
hold any Correspondence and act upon each other, no man's Learning yet could
ever tell him. Nay how the parts of Matter cohere, is a Question which it is
likely will never be well answered in this life. For though we make use of the
fairest Hypotheses, yet if we pursue the Argument home, we shall go nigh to
dispute away our Bodies, and reason our selves all in pieces. Insomuch that if
we had nothing but Principles to encourage us, we might justly be afraid of
going abroad, lest we should be blown away like a heap of dust: For it is no
solution to say the greater parts of Matter are connected with hooked
particles; for still the difficulty returns how these Hooks were made? Quis
custodiet ipsos Custodes? What is it that fastens this Soder, and links these
first Principles of Bodies into a Chain? And as the more refined Understandings
know little or nothing of themselves, and of the material World; so upon
Enquiry we shall find them as defective in their Skill about Moral Truths:
(excepting those who are taught by Revelation, which supernatural Discoveries
the unlearned are capable of understanding, as far as their happiness is
concerned.) Those who made Laws in their respective Countries, we have reason
to believe had their minds polished above the vulgar rate: And yet we see how
unaccountably the public Constitutions of Nations vary. The Persians and
Athenians allowed Incest, the Lacedaemonians Stealing, and some Indians
Herodotus mentions, used to bury their best Friends in their Stomachs. In
short, the Rules of Decency, of Government, of Justice it self, are so
different in one place from what they are in another, so party-colored and
contradictious, that one would almost think the Species of men altered,
according to their Climates; and that they had not the same Nature in common.
One would almost think that Right and Wrong lay rather in the Fancies of men,
than in the reason of things, and was bounded more by Seas and Rivers, than by
any unalterable limits of Nature; that Virtue and Vice were minted by the Civil
Magistrate, and like Coins would pass for Current only in his own Dominions.
The Heathen Philosophers may fairly be granted to have as good pretenses to
Learning, as any other sort of men among them: And yet we may observe from
Tully and Laertius what a small Proportion of solid Knowledge they were Masters
of; how strangely did they differ in Matters of the highest Import? How eagerly
did they dispute, and not without probability on both sides: Whether there was
any thing certain? Whether the Criterions of Truth and Falsehood were clear and
indubitable or not? Whether the Government of the World was casual, fatal, or
providential? How many Summum Bonums have they presented us with, some of them
only fit to entertain a Brute, others noble enough for a Spirit of the highest
Order? It were tedious to recount the differences one Sect had with another,
their Inconsistences with themselves, and the ridiculous and ill supported
Tenets some of the most famous of them have held. Insomuch that Tully takes
notice that there was no opinion so absurd, but was held by some Philosopher or
other. It Is true they could wrangle and Harangue better than the common People;
they could talk more plausibly about that they did not understand; but their
Learning lay chiefly in Flourish, and Terms, and Cant; for as for any real
Improvements in Science they were not much wiser than the less pretending
Multitude. Indeed the more modest of them would confess that the chief use of
Learning was to give us a fuller discovery of our Ignorance, and to keep us
from being peremptory and dogmatical in our determinations. Now one would
imagine the more intimate Acquaintance we had with the Imperfections of our
Nature, the greater reason we should have to be humble. Is Weakness a proper
Foundation to erect our lofty conceits upon? Indeed he that has not the leisure
or capacity to examine how it is with him, may be fondly persuaded to fancy
himself somebody, and grow vain upon the kind presumption; but for a man to be
proud who can demonstrate his own poverty, is little less than Madness.


Philot. If the case stands thus, to make all sure, we had best get an order to
burn the Twenty four Letters, and hang up Cadmus in Effigy; for --


Philal. Pray don't interrupt me, and I will try if I can give you a little
Ease. Granting therefore, as we may, that Learning does give some advantage,
and that our Understandings are really enriched by it; yet in regard we have
but a few Principles to build upon, the greatest part of our Knowledge must
consist in Inferences, which cannot be wrought out without great Labor and
Attention of mind: And when we are at any distance from self-evident Truths,
the mind is not only perplexed with the Consideration of a great many
Circumstances, but which is worse, Forgetfulness or Mistake in the least of
them, frustrates our whole Design, and rewards us with nothing but Error for
our trouble.

Now he that is so liable to be imposed upon, who rises but by Inches, and
enriches himself, by such slow and insensible Degrees; it is a Sign that his
Stock was either very small, or that he is unskilful in the management of his
Business, and therefore he has no reason to be proud of what he has gotten:
Besides it is an humbling consideration to reflect what pains we are obliged to
take to muster up our Forces, and to make that little reason we have
serviceable. How fast does Obscurity, Flatness and Impertinency slow in upon
our Meditations? It Is a difficult Task to talk to the purpose, and to put life
and perspicuity into our Discourses; those who are most ready and inventive
have not their best Thoughts uppermost: No, they must think upon the Stretch,
ransack, and turn over their mind, and put their Imagination into a kind of
Ferment, if they intend to produce any thing extraordinary: So that considering
the Trouble and almost Violence we are put upon, one would think that Sense and
Reason was not made for Mankind, and that we strive against our Natures, when*
we pretend to it.


Philot. Well; What though our Minds were poor, and unfurnished at first, is it
any disparagement to us to have more Wit than we were born with? What though we
cannot strike out a Science at a Heat, but are forced to polish our selves by
degrees, and to work hard for what we have? The less we were assisted by
Nature, the greater commendation it is to our Industry, and our seize are
so much the more our own. And since we have thus fairly distinguished our
selves by Merit, why should we seem unapprehensive of our Performances? since
we have paid so dear for the Improvements of our understanding, and our
advantages are gained with so much Difficulty, what harm is it to make our best
of them? Why should we not oblige the negligent to Distance and Regard, and
make those who are younger or less knowing than our selves sensible of their
Inferiority?


Philal. I agree with you as I have already hinted, that a Man may lawfully
maintain his Character and just pretenses against Rudeness and Ignorance,
especially when the public Good is concerned in his Reputation. But when he
acts a private part, and converses with People of Sense and Modesty, he should
give them but very gentle remembrances of his Prerogative: his Opinion of his
own worth should but just dawn upon them, and at the most give them but an
obscure and remote notice, that he expected any singular Acknowledgment: He
should take the respect that is paid him rather as a Present than a Debt, and
seem thankful for that which is his own: But to be stiff and formally reserved
as if the Company did not deserve our Familiarity; to be haughty and
contemptuous, and to make scanty and underproportioned returns of Civility:
this is a downright Challenge of Homage, and plainly tells people, they must be
very mannerly: It Is in effect to say, Gentlemen, I have more Learning, and have
done the public greater Service than you, and therefore I expect to be
considered for it: you may possibly say that I have more preferment too, and am
paid for my merit in money, but that shall not serve your turn; for except you
show your selves very dutiful, I shall give you broad Signs of my
dissatisfaction, and never let you have the Honor of my converse again. Now
such a Man if he went much abroad, would plague mankind more with his Company,
than he could oblige them with his Writings, though they were never so
considerable. Such People seem to owe their parts to their ill Temper: Their
Industry is malicious, and they have taken pains not so much to oblige the
World, as to get an Opportunity of trampling upon their Inferious. Had they
been good-natured, they would have been as dull and insignificant as their
Neighbors. But their imperious Carriage is just as reasonable as it would have
been for the old Athletae to have drudged hard in Eating and Exercise, that
they might employ their Bulk and Activity in beating every one who was weaker,
and less skilful than themselves.


Philot. By your discourse you seem to mistake the matter, and not to weigh
things rightly. It Is not Superiority that these Gentlemen of Learning are so
solicitous about; it is not personal Advantage which they chiefly intend by
their Reservedness: They have no doubt a more public and generous Design; for
you may observe they usually bear hardest upon those of their own Order and
Profession, which is nothing but a forced and politic stateliness for the
promoting of Knowledge in others. The young Fry, whether you know it or not,
must be held at a Distance, and kept under the Discipline of Contempt. If you
give them any tolerable Quarter, you indulge them in their Idleness, and ruin
them to all intents and purposes. For who would be at the trouble of Learning,
when he finds his Ignorance is caressed, and that he is easy and acceptable
enough in the Company of the best Authors of the Town? But when you brow-beat
them and maul them, you make them Men for ever; for Vexatio dat intellectum;
though they have no natural Metal, yet if they are spurred and kicked they will
mend their pace, if they have any feeling. Such rigorous usage will make them
study night and day to get out of this ignominious Condition, in hopes that it
may come to their own turn to be proud one day. Take my word for it, there is
no such way to make a Scholar, as to keep him under while he is young, or
unpreferred.


Philal. Notwithstanding your Flourish I cannot persuade my self that this
Dispensation of Pride is so mighty useful as you pretend I should think such an
untoward management of any Accomplishment should rather discourage others from
attempting such dangerous circumstances. If Sense and Learning are such
unsociable imperious things, a good natured Man ought to take especial care not
to improve too fast. He ought to keep down the growth of his Reason, and curb
his Intellectuals when he finds them ready to outstrip his Neighbors. I assure
you, if I was of your opinion, and thought my self near the temptation to so
much ill humor, I would never look on a Book again.


Philot. Come when you have said all, there is no keeping up the Credit of
Learning without that which you call a reserved behavior. For if those who are
eminent this way should condescend to those Familiarities which you seem to
desire, the honor of their Profession would suffer much by it; if they should
converse upon the Level, the veneration which their Inferiors have for them
would quickly wear off: And if the vulgar observed there was no distinction
kept up amongst the Men of Letters; they would suspect there was nothing
extraordinary in any of them. Pray who are supposed to be the best Judges of
Learning, those who have it or others?


Philal. No doubt those who have it.


Philot. Then if they seem to undervalue it themselves, is not this the way to
bring it into a general disrepute? I tell you once again, if the privileges of
Merit are not insisted upon all, must go to wrack. If a Man who has digested
all the Fathers, and is ready to add himself to the Number, shows any tolerable
countenance to one who has scarce rubbed through Ignatius, and lets a pure
English Divine to go cheek by jole with him, the Commonwealth of Learning will
grow almost as contemptible as that of the Pigmies, and be only sit to write
Romances upon.


Philal. I shall not enquire how far this lofty method may advance the
Reputation of Learning, but I am pretty sure it is no great addition to theirs
who use it; for it only makes others more inquisitive into their defects, and
more inclinable to expose them. If they take them tardy they endeavor to
humble them by way of Reprizal. Those slips and mismanagements are usually
ridiculed and aggravated, when such Persons are guilty of them, which would be
overlooked or excused in others of a more modest and affable Conversation. If
they happen to be found inconsistent with themselves: If their vanity of
appearing singular puts them upon advancing Paradoxes, and proving them as
Paradoxically. If a presumption upon their own strength, and a desire of
greater triumph makes them venture too far into the enemies Quarters, and take
up a Post which they cannot maintain; they are usually laughed at for their folly
and left to shift for themselves; for Pride never has any friends, and all Men
are glad of a just occasion to lessen his Reputation who makes such an
ill-natured use of it.


Philot. I conceive you harp a little too much upon one string: do you think
the inferious Clergy for whom you are now pleading, are discouraged by none but
those of their own Profession?


Philal. No, I grant there is another sort of People who use them with neglect
enough: But then they are somewhat more to be excused. They have not such fair
opportunities to understand the just pretenses of a liberal Education, and a
Religious employment. They are apt to fall under unfortunate hands in their
minority: The vanity of their Parents, and the Knavery of Flatterers often
gives them a wrong notion of themselves, and makes them admire nothing but
Wealt hand Greatness, and think no condition deserves regard but that which
resembles their own. Besides their neglect looks less unaccountably by reason
of their Quality, and their Breeding makes their Pride sit more decently upon
them. They usually contemn with a better Grace than others: for there is a
great deal of Art and Mystery in Pride to manage it handsomely: A man might
almost as soon learn a Trade: and if we observe we shall find that those who
were not brought up to it, seldom prove their Crafts-master or practice with
any sort of address. To which I may add, that such Persons are usually willing
to pay for their imperiousness, so that a Man is not made a Fool for nothing.
But when this lofty humor is clumsily and inartificially managed, when it is
affected by those of a self-denying and mortified Profession, and who get their
Living by declaiming against it. When it is taken up by Men of Sense, who may
well be expected to see through the folly of this Vice, and who generally have
not those pretenses of a biased Education to misguide them: especially when
they play it upon Persons of their own Order who were born and bred to as fair
Expectations of Regard as themselves, and are sometimes their Inferiors in
nothing so much as in Success; this is such a singular Practice that I had
rather leave it undescribed than be forced to give it its proper Character.


Philot. I believe you will be willing to abate, if not to retract your ceasure
when you consider that these Gentlemen of the Gown, whom you think too much
depressed, are many of them Curates; and is it not very reasonable there should
be a distance observed between Masters and Servants? If you confound these two
Relations by lavish and indiscreet Familiarities, you destroy the respect, and
by degrees the very notion of Superiority. If there is not a due Homage paid in
Conversation, those who are in a state of subjection will neither know their
Condition nor their Duty: They will be apt to forget they hold by a servile
Tenure, and think themselves enfranchised from all manner of Suit and Service.
Besides, if the Parson should use his Curate with that freedom which you
insinuate, as if there was neither dependence nor obligation between them; this
might be of very ill example to the Parish, and make all other servants
challenge the same liberty, and grow pert upon their Masters: And when this
Sawciness became universal, as it is likely it might do in a short time, what
less Mischief could be expected from it, than an old Scythian Rebellion?


Philal. I confess, I was not aware the being of Government depended so much
upon the distinction between Rector and Curate, and that if the modern way of
Distance and Subordination was not kept up, we must presently return to Hobs's
state of Nature. If a Curate be such a dangerous thing, that a little civil
Usage to him is ready to make the World fall about our Ears, I wonder why so
many of them are suffered. Now without raising the posse Comitatus, if the
Pluralists would but do their best to suppress them, their Number might quickly
be so retrenched, that they would not be in the least formidable. But you seem
to argue all this while upon a wrong Principle, you take it for granted, that
Curates are Servants; now if this proves a mistake, you will own they may be
treated with a little more freedom, without any danger to Authority.


Philot. Who doubts of their being Servants?


Philal. I do, and for very good reasons.


Philot. See how a Man may be mistaken! I thought the English of Curate had
been an Ecclesiastical Hireling.


Philal. No such matter, the proper import of the Word signifies one who has
the Cure of Souls; therefore in France all Parochial Priests are called
Curates, as they are likewise in our Rubric and Common Prayer.


Philot. I find then there lies no Servitude in the Name, so that it must be
either the Deputation, or Salary which they receive from the Instituted Priest,
which sinks them into this condition.


Philal. That there is no Servitude in either of these, I am ready to make
good. 1. Not in the Office; and here I must crave leave to ask you a few
Questions.


Philot. Take your own method.


Philal. What in your apprehension is a Curate's Employment?


Philot. To serve God in the public Offices of Religion, and to take care of
the Parish.


Philal. Then he is not entertained to serve the Rector.


Philot. Go on.


Philal. In the next place I desire to know whether Authority is not essential
to a Master?


Philot. Who questions it?


Philal. Has the Curate his Authority to Preach, and Administer the Sacraments
from the Rector?


Philot. No, from the Bishop.


Philal. May not a Master turn away his Servants when he pleases?


Philot. I think so.


Philal. But the Rector has no power to remove the Curate after he is Licensed
and Fixed by the Bishop. To sum up the Evidence therefore; if the Curate was
not entertained to wait upon the Rector, nor has his Authority from him, nor
can be removed from his Employment, I think it is pretty plain he is none of
his Servant.


Philot. Well, but does not the Parson make choice of him, and pay him?


Philal. Don't a Corporation choose a Mayor?


Philot. What then?


Philal. Pray whose Servant is he after his Election?


Philot. None but the Kings that I know of: but you have not answered the
latter part of my objection about his being paid by the Rector.


Philal. If you had not called for my answer, I had waved it for your sake,
because I think your objection borders somewhat upon Treason.


Philot. How so?


Philal. Why, is it not of kin to Treason to say the Subjects are Masters over
the Supreme Authority?


Philot. If Nonsense will not excuse a Man, I think it is.


Philal. But your Argument proves the King a Servant to the People.


Philot. How?


Philal. Because they pay him Taxes, and that among other reasons, by way of
acknowledgment of the benefits of his Government, and that they may show
themselves willing, if it was in their power, to requite him for his care of
the State.


Philot. Pray why so much concerned to prove Curates no Servants?


Philal. Because I am willing to rescue them from that contempt, which they
will certainly fall into, as long as they pass under this notion: which
considering the number of persons Officiating, this way, must be very
prejudicial to Religion. Besides it makes some persons, who are fit to do the
Church service, suspend themselves, and show their Priesthood only by their
Habit, rather than serve God under such uncreditable circumstances: and for the
same reason others are tempted to grow too fond of a Presentation, and choose
rather to court it by Flattery, or other indirect practices, than be condemned
to the servile condition of a Curate. For let me tell you, it is no ordinary
piece of Self-Denial, for a Man of a generous Education, who has been trained
up all along to Freedom and good Usage, to be degraded in his Manhood, when the
mind is most in love with Liberty, and to enter upon Business with marks of
disadvantage, when he stands most in need of Reputation. To my thinking this is
a very discouraging and preposterous way of Educating the Clergy. If a Man must
go to service, he had better begin with it as they do in Trades, and not be
Master at first, and then be forced to turn Apprentice, or Journyman
afterward. Of such ill consequence it is to miscal things, and as Plato
observes, that an alteration of the Notes in Music is apt to produce an
Innovation in the Laws and Customs of a Country: so by changing the names of
Offices for others of less Repute, we change the Uses and Designs of them, and
make them less satisfactory to those engaged, and less serviceable to the
Public than they would have been, if the Character of their Institution had
been kept up.


Philot. Granting at present what you say to be true, yet a Curate seems to lie
under another disadvantage, which makes him considered with Abatement.


Philal. What is that?


Philot. Why, People are apt to fancy that it is the want either of Parts or
Conduct, which keeps him without a Patron.


Philal. If People think so, I am sorry their Sense and Charity is no greater;
for if they examined things fairly, they would find that the being a Curate is
no Argument of a Man's insignificancy, nor any just blemish to his Reputation.
For it is often the integrity and generous temper of his mind which hinders him
from a better Provision; it is because he will not flatter the Pride of some,
nor keep pace with the Bigottry of others: because he will neither court
Greatness nor Faction, nor make himself popular to the disadvantage of his
Audience. Because he cannot digest a Simoniacal Contract, nor charge through*
Perjury with the courage of an Evidence. In short, it is his plain and
impartial dealing with the People, his resolution to preserve the Decency of
his Character, and the Innocence of his Conscience which bars his promotion: so
that if he was mean enough to complain, he might have the satisfaction to apply
this Sentence of Tully to himself, Non nos vitia sed virtutes afflixerunt.


Philot. What a broad Innuendo is here upon the beneficed Clergy?


Philal. I am glad you have given me an opportunity of explaining my self. My
meaning is not that those who are possessed of Livings have gained them, by
such indirect Courses: God forbid! I only say, that all Men are not so lucky as
to have the offer of fair Conditions, and those who have not, must be Curates
if they will be honest; or else lay by the use of their Priesthood, which I am
afraid is not very accountable.


Philot. I confess you have brought your self off well enough: But now I think
on it you must try to maintain the liberty of your Curate a little more
convincingly. For some say there lies Prescription and immemorial Custom
against it, and then you know he is a Servant by Common Law.


Philal. Not at all* For as we are lately told by a great Lawyer, Prescription
is good for nothing where there are any Records to the contrary.


Philot. What Records can you produce?


Philal. Why, to mention no more, the 18 th of the Apostles Canons, and the 80
th of the Council of Eliberis, are, I think, considerable Evidence; the first
of which forbids the ordaining of those who had married a Servant, and the
other excludes manumized Persons, while their Patrons were living, from the
Priesthood.


Philot. Say you so? Then I fancy those who drew up Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions knew nothing of this piece of Antiquity you mention.


Philal. Your Reason?


Philot. Because by those Injunctions a Clergyman could not lawfully marry
till he had gone and made his complaint against Celibacy, before two Justices
of the Peace, and gained their consent, and the good will of the Master, or
Mistress where the Damsel served.


Philal. And then I suppose if he could not prevail by his Rhetoric they gave
him a Warrant to distrein.


Philot. Or possibly if he courted in forma pauperis they assigned him a Wife
gratis out of an Hospital.


Philal. Upon my word this Order, take it which way you will, has a singular
aspect, and looks as if it intended to put the Clergy in mind, that they ought
not to aspire above an Abigail. Certainly Discretion and Merit ran very low in
the Church at that time, or else, some People were willing to make the Nation
believe so. But to return to the Canons, the design of, which was to secure the
Reputation of the Clergy; but according to the modern opinion, this provision
signifies nothing; for if a man must go to Service after he is in Orders, had
he not as good do it before? In you sense he often only changes his Lay for an
Ecclesiastical Master, which sometimes might be so far from an advantage that
it would make the Servitude the more uneasy, by being subjected to one no more
than equal to himself.


Philot. I grant you in the Primitive Times the advantage of Priesthood was
equally shared among all the Order, and none of that Character had any
Superiority over another. For then the Revenues of the Church consisted only in
the voluntary Offerings of the People, which were all deposited with the
Bishop, who assigned every one his respective portion; so that no Priest had
any dependence upon another for his maintenance; but now the case is otherwise,
and a manought to be subject to him that supports him.


Philal. It Is somewhat hard, that the bare alteration of the Church Revenues
should make so wide a difference between those who were equal before; that a
man must lose his freedom only for want of a Presentation, and be made a
Servant because he does not take Tithes, though he has as much spiritual
Authority as if he did. But I perceive you think there is no consideration
equivalent to a little money, and that he who receives it must be no longer at
his own disposal, though he makes never so valuable a return. Since therefore
you insist so much upon maintnance, what if it appears that the Curate
maintains the Parson?


Philot. That would be strange indeed.


Philal. To what end were the Church Revenues intended?


Philot. To keep up the worship of God.


Philal. Which way?


Philot. By settling a competent maintenance upon the Ministers of Religion,
that they may be in the better capacity to discharge their Office, and not be
obliged to lose their time, and lessen their Character, by engaging in
Labourious or Mechanical Employments.


Philal. By your arguing there should be something for them to do.


Philot. Yes, they are to take care of that Precinct to which their Endowment
is annexed.


Philal. I hope you don't mean not to come at it.


Philot. I mean they are to take care of the performance of the duties of their
Office.


Philal. Then ought not he to have the Revenues who performs these Duties?


Philot. I am not willing to grant that.


Philal. Have a care of denying the conclusion; you grant the Revenues of the
Church were designed for the support of the Clergy.


Philot. Yes.


Philal. Of what Clergy? Those who live many miles distant from the Premises?


Philot. No, I Am afraid they were intended for those who live upon the place,
otherwise methinks Endowments are a very slender Provision for the benefit of
the Parish.


Philal. Then if the Curate does all the work, ought he not to have the reward
for his pains? In short, either he is qualified to undertake the Parish or not;
if not, with what sincerity can he be employed? If he is qualified, why is he
barred the profit when he only performs the Conditions upon which they were
settled, when none but himself answers the design they were intended for? To
speak properly, the Rector seems to live out of the labors of another, he is
maintained by the perquisites of the Curates Office; and therefore is in effect
but a kind of Pensioner to him.


Philot. I see you are an everlasting Leveller, you will not allow any
encouragement to extraordinary Industry and Merit.


Philal. You mistake me. I would have the best men have the best Livings, but
then before we go to doubling of Preferments, possibly it were not amiss to
examine whether the number of Benefices exceeds the Persons who are capable of
them. Let us first examine whether they will hold out one apiece, and when
every man has one, then the supernumerary Livings may be divided amongst those
who are most deserving.


Philot. In good time, when it is likely there there will be none left! Now do
you imagine the Church can be defended against her Adversaries by the strength
of a single Parsonage? But it may be you will say all our Plurality-men are not
Writers.


Philal. No, nor Readers neither. Besides, we may observe that Heresy and
Schism were very successfully combated before Unions, Dispensations, and
Consolidations were heard of. If you consult Father Paul's History of the
Council of Trent, (p. 216.) he will inform you that Non-residence and
Pluralities are things of no very primitive establishment. I confess some of
the Lay-managers of our Reformation have not been over-kind to the Church, so
that Affairs are not in so good a posture as they might have been: But God be
thanked there is still some provision left for the Ornament and Defense of
Religion.


Philot. What Provision do you mean?


Philal. Why, to speak to your Case, there are Dignities, to which those
Gentlemen who are prepared to engage in the Controversy have a good right: And
with submission to better Judgments, I think it would not be amiss if all
dignified Persons held their Preferments by a new Tenure.


Philot. What Tenure?


Philal. By Knights Service; pursuant to which they should be obliged to draw
their Pens in the Cause, when ever their Superiors required them: to appear in
the Field upon an Invasion with their Quota, and in short, to maintain any Post
that shall be assigned.


Philot. What if a man has not a mind to quarrel, must he be turned out of his
Dignity for being of a peaceable Disposition?


Philal. Those peaceable men you speak of, are none of the most useful in a
time of War, and therefore a smaller Gratification should content them.


Philot. What if they are disabled by age?


Philal. Then they should be continued for their past Services.


Philot. Truly this is a good probable Expedient to keep the Church Militia in
Discipline, and might for ought I know, very much improve the noble Science of
Controversy. But to return to the old Argument, if you intend to bring me over
to your opinion of the Curate, you must clear the business of his Salary a
little better, for I am afraid where he has his money he ought to own he has
his Master too.


Philal. I confess there would be a great deal in what you say, if the Rector
had the right of Coinage. If the Money had his Image, and Superscription upon
it, the Curate's taking it for current, would conclude him under his
Jurisdiction: but that the bare receiving a sum should sink a Man into a
servile state, is past my comprehension. For considering that Money is a thing
of such quality, and sovereign sway in the World, one would imagine it should
bring Power and Reputation along with it, and rather enlarge than abridge a
Man's Liberty by receiving it. And to mention nothing farther, the nature of
the Contract between the Rector and Curate, is sufficient to give you
satisfaction; for there, as has been observed, the Curate undertakes no other
Employment but the Instruction and Government of the Parish. There is no
attendance upon the Parson, no running upon his Errands, nor subjection to his
Humor indented for.


Philot. Methinks it is a little hard a Curate must not be called a Servant, as
well as a Cook, or a Footman, since he has Wages as much as the other.


Philal. Possibly not always so much neither; but waving that, if you had
remembered what I urged to you before, this Objection would have been no
difficulty.


Philot. What was that?


Philal. Why, that the Curate is to wait upon none but God Almighty, that the
manage of his Employment is not prescribed by the Rector, but by the Rubric
and Constitutions of the Church, and that he is not removeable at pleasure. I
suppose by this time you apprehend there is a difference between him and a
Footman, or a Steward either.


Philot. Well! Notwithstanding your subtlety, this notion of Wages sticks in my
Stomach still.


Philal. I wonder the glitter of a little Money should dazzle your Eyes at that
rate, that you cannot see so plain a distinction. You don't seem to understand
Commerce, if you think that something of Authority and Dominion is always given
in exchange for Money. Now I am of Diogenes his mind, and believe it possible
for one to buy a Master, as well as a Servant.


Philot. As how?


Philal. Why, for the purpose, if a person of twenty one puts himself
Apprentice to another, you know this is seldom done without charge: now what
does a Man do in this case but purchase his subjection, and hire himself a
drubbing upon occasion? To give one instance more. When a Woman of Fortune
marries a Man with nothing, does she not give him Meat, Drink, and Wages to
govern her? And to end this dispute, you know Physicians, and Lawyers, and
Judges, have Fees or Wages, either given, or assigned them by Law, without
being thought Servants to those they are concerned with, Now, what reason is
there a Curate should have worse luck with his Money than other People?


Philot. To deal plainly, I suppose it is because he does not get enough of it.
If his Fees were as considerable as any of those Gentlemen you speak of, I
question not but his Office would be much more reputable.


Philal. Well guessed, and therefore what Character do they deserve who confine
him to this scandalous Pittance. I believe you can scarcely name any sort of
Injustice which has a more malignant influence upon Religion than this
oppresion of Curates.


Philot. Why so Tragical?


Philal. Because their Poverty exposes them to Contempt, which renders their
Instructions insignificant, and which is worse, makes them less considerable in
themselves, as well as in the opinion of others.


Philot. I hope Poverty is no crime.


Philal. No, but it is a scurvy temptation, especially to those who have lived
freely, and been bred to better Expectations. For when a man finds his hopes
disappointed, himself unsupported, and topp'd upon by Persons of meaner
Pretenses and Employments; this is apt to pall his Spirits, and check the
courage of his thoughts, so that his Compositions and Fortune will seem to be
much of a piece.


Philot. I thought strait circumstances had been none of the worst promoters of
Learning, according to the old saying, Ingenii largitor Venture.


Philal. I grant there is some truth in your observation, and that it is Want
which often reconciles men to Labor and Letters; but this is at their first
setting out, when though they have not gained their point, yet they are full of
hopes, which pricks them on, and puts them upon their utmost. but after they
are once qualified for success, and find their industry discouraged, this makes
them sink in the socket, and fret away their strength and Spirits; so that
either out of impotence, or disgust, or despair, they give over the fruitless
pursuit, and seldom make any generous attempt ever after. It Is true, there are
some hardy souls that will not be beaten off by ill usage, but these are very
rarely to be met with.


Philot. Then you think there would be a strange improvement in the unbeneficed
Clergy, if they had a better Salary.


Philal. Yes; I think they would have more Books, and more Learning, and more
Credit. They would not be so easily obliged to improper Compliances, nor so
liable to serveral other miscarriages in their Conduct.


Philot. By your discourse the slender provision which is made for them, should
be very Criminal.


Philal. Doubtless so it is. For pray consider.


Philot. Pray be as brief as you can.


Philal. I say then, for a Clergy man to enrich himself by the labor and
necessities of one of his own Order, and make his Figure out of the Church
without performing the Services required, is a direct translating the holy
Revenues to a Foreign and secular use, and consequently besides other
aggravations is no better than sacrilege, which is a very uncanonical Sin, and
unless we are very much in the dark will be accounted for afterward. In short
this Practice has been the main ground of the Contempt of the Clergy, making
one part of them grow cheap by their Poverty, and the other by their
Covetousness.


Philot. Pray what allowance would you oblige the Rector to, if you had the
Regulation of that Affair?


Philal. To speak within Compass, in my Opinion the Curate ought to have half
the profits, let the value of them be never so considerable; for if the Parson
has the other moiety for doing nothing, I think he has no reason to complain.
But if the Living be small, then he that supplies it should have two thirds
assigned him, because he cannot be decently supported under that proportion.


Philot. Well, I am not disposed to examine that matter any farther. But I
beseech you what is all this to the business of Pride? I think your Zeal for
the Curates has transported you a little out of your Subject.


Philal. No such matter; for it is generally nothing but Ambition which makes
Men Covetous and Mean: besides, if it is a Digression it is a very seasonable
one. However I am willing to take my leave of this part of the Argument,
therefore if you please we will call a new Cause.


Philot. I think it is best to adjourn at present, and when we meet again I
will venture the other Brush with you.


Philal. Till then Farewell.


A SECOND CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes.
Philal. WELL met! I am glad the opportunity you mentioned is so quickly
returned.


Philot. So am I, and therefore if you please without any further Ceremony, let
us pursue the Argument we were last upon.


Philal. With all my Heart, and since (as has been showed) Learning and
Conceit, make so odd a Figure; let us proceed to examine the pretenses of
Nobility, for I am afraid the Vulgar Notion of it is screwed somewhat too high,
and that it has not Ballast enough to carry all the Sail which is commonly made
out.


Philot. I must tell you, you are upon a touchy Point, and therefore I hope you
will treat so nice a subject as this is with proportionable caution.


Philal. I am sensible of what you say, and shall manage my enquiry with all
the fairness, and decency, the free discussion of the Question will allow. To
begin, you know all Men were equally Noble, or if you will, equally Plebeian at
first: now I would gladly understand how they came to be so much distinguished
afterward, for there are different reasons assigned.


Philot. I suppose the distinctions you mention, were founded upon
extraordinary performances, and won at the expense of Industry and Merit. For
how can you imagine any persons should emerge out of the common Mass of
Mankind, unless by the advantages of Capacity, Labor, and Resolution? Their
mounting, argues that Fire was the ruling Element in their Composition; and
that they were of a more vigorous and enterprizing Spirit than their Neighbors.


Philal. I am willing to suppose with you, that they made a generous use of
these advantages, and employed them for the benefit of Mankind: being as
remarkable for their Justice, Fidelity, and good Humor, as for their Conduct
and Courage; and therefore I am not willing to believe the account which some
pretend to give concerning the Original of Nobility.


Philot. What is that?


Philal. They will tell you that it has been often founded upon Rapine and
Injustice. It seems they have observed out of Thucidides, that in ancient times
it was counted an Heroic Atcheivement to Plunder lustily, and he was a Man of
the best Quality, who was able to steal most Cattle. These Nimrods (say they)
grew great by the strength of their Limbs and their Vices, engraved their
Murders upon their Shields, and Hectored all the little and peaceable People
into Peasantry.


Philot. This looks so like a Chimerical and ill natured Opinion, that I shall
not do it the honor of a Confutation.


Philal. I have no exceptions to your Resentment, but to go on, for the more
distinct consideration of the Argument, we will divide Nobility into two kinds,
Hereditary, or Acquired. The first is transmitted to us from our Ancestors, the
other is immediately conferred by the favor of the Prince.


Philot. Proceed upon the several parts of your Division.


Philal. 1. Then, Hereditary Nobility seems no just ground for a high Opinion,
because it is borrowed. Those great Actions which we had no share in, cannot
properly be any part of our Commendation, especially if we want abilities to
imitate them. It Is true, they ought to be taken notice of by others for the
encouragement of Virtue, and the ornament of Society. But then he that depends
wholly upon the worth of others, ought to consider that he has but the honor of
an Image, and is worshipped not for his own sake, but upon the account of what
he represents. To be plain, it is a sign a Man is very poor when he has nothing
of his own to appear in; but is forced to patch up his Figure with the Relics
of the Dead, and rifle Tomb-Stones and Monuments for Reputation.


Philot. Notwithstanding your rallying, I cannot conceive what crime it is to
possess the Inheritance of our Forefathers. Now Honor is part of their Estate,
which was raised on purpose that we might be the better for it. And since their
Children were the occasion of their merit, and pushed them on to generous
undertakings, ought they not to share in the glory of the Success?


Philal. Yes. But it should be managed with great modesty, because though an
honorable Title may be conveyed to Posterity, yet the ennobling Qualities
which are the Soul of Greatness, are a sort of incommunicable perfections, and
cannot be transferred. Indeed if a Man could bequeath his Virtues by Will, and
settle his Sense, and Learning, and Resolution, upon his Children, as certainly
as he can his Lands, a brave Ancestor would be a mighty privilege.


Philot. I hope those fine Qualities are not so incommunicable as you suppose,
for methinks there is a Ie ne scay quoi, in persons well born: there is a
peculiar Nobleness of Temper in them, their Conversation is inimitably
graceful, and a Man may distinguish their Quality by the Air of their Faces.


Philal. I wish that Spirit of Honor and Bravery you mention, was inseparable
to their Quality; but it is too plain that great Minds, and great Fortunes
don't always go together; however I grant there is some Truth in your
observation, but am afraid the distinction does not always spring from the
cause you assign. For by the gracefulness of Conversation, I suppose you mean a
decent Assurance, and an Address in the Modes, and Gestures of Salutation. Now
these are pretty accomplishments I confess, and recommend a Man to Company with
some advantage; but then they are easily gained by Custom and Education, and
therefore we need not fetch them ex Traduce. And moreover, these little
Formalities are often magnified beyond all Sense and Reason, and some People
are so Fantastically fond of them, as if they were the topper perfections of
Human Nature; and that it were in reality a more valuable and gentile quality
to Dress well, and come handsomely into a Room, than to take a Town, or to be
fit to discharge the Office of a Privy Counselor, Now with submission to these
Ceremonious Gentlemen, I am not of their mind in this matter, but think it much
better for a Man's Parts to lie in his Head, than in his Heels.


Philot. I think so too, but you have not answered the whole.


Philal. True! Your Air was omitted: now if this was a constant privilege of
Birth, which you know it is not, yet in this deceitful Age of ours, there is no
Arguing from an Outside. Besides, I doubt this Advantage is sometimes the
effect of a slothful and Effeminate Life. When Men will attempt nothing either
in the Field, or in their Closets: when they will neither trouble themselves
with Thinking, nor endure to be exposed to the Weather: This Niceness, though
it renders them insignificant to the great purposes of Life, yet it Polishes
their Complexion, and makes their Spirits seem more moving and transparent.
Sometime this Sprightliness and Grandeur of Face, is Painted by Flattery: for
when Men are once made to believe they are very Considerable, they are
presently for trying to write the Inscriptions of their Quality upon their
Forehead. Now Conceit when it is Corrected with a mixture of Gravity, is an
admirable Wash, and will make one look as Wise, and as Great as you would wish.


Philot. This Grandeur of Face, as you call it, may possibly be explained upon
kinder Principles; for I am apt to believe that a quick Sense of Honor, a
Consciousness of Worth, an Elevation of Thought, will sometimes break out into
a Luster, and make the great Soul sparkle in a Man's Eyes.


Philal. I cannot deny what you say, and therefore the best Construction ought
to be made, where the known Character of the person does not disallow it.


Philot. I see you can be fair when you list, therefore I shall venture to go
on with you to another Advantage of Nobility, viz. Antiquity. Now to begin in
your own way, Don't you think it is a great addition to ones Birth to stand at
the bottom of long Parchment Pedigree, and be some yards removed from the first
Escocheon? Is not that Family substantially Built which can stand the shock of
Time, and hold out against all varieties of Accidents? How generous must that
Blood be, which has been so long Refining, and run through the Channels of
Honor for so many Ages, where it is sometimes as hard to come to the Plebeian
Fountain: as to find out the Head of Nilus?


Philal. Not so hard neither, For if you go but one Inch farther than the
Gentleman at the Topyou spoke of, it is ten to one but you take old Goodman,
etc. by the Leathern Breeches. And as for the Antiquity of a Family, though it
looks prettily at first sight, yet I fear it will abate upon examination.


Philot. Pray try your skill upon it, for I am not of your mind.


Philal. Then to deal plainly with you, I conceive the Antiquity you talk of,
is commonly nothing but ancient Wealth, and therefore the chief commendation of
this Privilege consists in the long continued Frugality of the Family, who
after they were once possessed of an Estate, had the Discretion to keep it.


Philot. Is it nothing then for a Man's Ancestors to have lived in Reputation,
and to have had Interest and Command in their Country for so many Generations?


Philal. I suppose the English of all this is no more than that they have lived
in good Houses, Eat and Drank better, and born higher Offices than those who
have wanted a Fortune. Now Money, and a moderate share of Sense, will furnish
any Man with all these Advantages. And as to the holding out against so many
Accidents, and Alterations of State, I am afraid it sometimes proceeds from
shifting and indifferent Principles, and from a servile compliance with
whatever is Uppermost. So that what my Lord Bacon mentions in reference to
Notions and Inventions, may be sometimes applicable to Families; where he tells
us, that Time is like a River, in which Metals and solid Substances are sunk,
while Chaff and Straws swim upon the Surface.

Secondly, You are to consider that an ancient Gentility does not necessarily
convey to us any advantage either of Body or Mind: and to speak like
Philosophers, these are the only two things in which we are capable of any real
improvement. I confess, if every Generation grew Wiser, Stronger, Handsomer, or
longer Lived than the other: if the Breed of a Man's Family was thus improved,
the farther it was continued; then indeed the quality of an Escocheon would be
exactly contrary to that of Clothes, and the one would always grow better, as
the other does worse, by wearing. From whence it would follow, that if the
seven Sleepers had been made Gentlemen immediately before they entered their
Cave, and had held on their Nap from seventy, to seven hundred years, they had
most undeniably slept themselves into a considerable degree of Quality.


Philot. You may talk as subtly as you please, but you must not think to
baffle established and uncontested Opinions, with a few Logical quirks.


Philal. Pray don't grow warm, and I will endeavor to satisfy you, and in
order to it, I observe in the third place, That an ancient Gentility, makes a
Man Superior only to those of the same Quality, (viz. an Esquire, to an
Esquire, and so in the rest) and that in nothing but in point of Precedence.
The reason, I suppose, why those which are placed in any degree of Honor,
precede others who are afterward raised to the same Height, is for the
encouragement of Industry. To make Men forward to exert their earliest
Endeavors to deserve well of the State; for this reason there is a distinction
made between Merit, otherwise equal, only upon the account of the Priority of
Time.


Philot. Is this all you can afford?


Philal. Look you! We that pretend to be subject to a Constitution, must not
Carve out our own Quality, for at this rate a Cobbler may make himself a Lord.


Philot. And what then?


Philal. Why, then I say, it is Vanity for any Man to have a better Opinion of
his Family than the Law allows: my Reason is, because the Law is the measure of
Honor, as well as of all other Civil Rights. Besides, I must tell you that it
is both reasonable, and the Interest of the State that Merit should be
considered, of what date soever it is. A worthy Action ought to be as much
rewarded now, as one of the same kind was a thousand years since. The prospect
of Honor, to a generous Mind, is the chief incitement to all great
Undertakings. This consideration Polishes Arts and Sciences, makes Men
Industrious in improving their Understandings, and Resolute in exposing their
Persons, for the Public Service. If therefore we dote upon Antiquity so far,
as to undervalue the Merit of the present Age, the Government must necessarily
suffer by it: for such a Partiality will slacken the Nerves of Industry, and
occasion a negligence both in those who have an ancient Title to Honor, and in
those who have not. The first will grow sluggish, because they have a
sufficient share of Reputation already; and therefore need not run any hazards
about getting more. The latter will abate in their forwardness to oblige their
Country, because they know their Service, though never so great, will be
contemned, and for that very Reason which ought to make them the more valued,
that is, because their Considerableness came from themselves. Moreover, If the
Inheritors of ancient Honor, have not by Personal Additions improved that Stock
which was granted to their Ancestors; there is no reason it should be rated
above the same Degree (Precedence excepted) which is given now. For to affirm
that a Family raised to Nobility by this King, is not as good as one raised by
the Conqueror, is a reflection upon his present Majesty: it supposes his
Judgment, or his Authority, less considerable than that of his Predecessors;
and that the Fountain of Honor is almost dried up, and runs more muddy than in
former Ages.


Philot. How plausibly soever you may make your opinion look, I Am sure it has
the disadvantage of being Singular. For you know a plain Gentleman of an
ancient Family is accounted a Person of better Quality than a new made Knight,
though the reason of his dubbing was never so Meritorious. Honor like China
Dishes must lie some Ages under Ground before it comes to any Perfection. And
to carry on your own Figure, the greater distance from the spring always makes
the Stream the more considerable.


Philal. This is to be wiser than the Laws! And since you are for Illustrations
I reply, that to suppose an ancient Title (though lesser in degree) is
preferable to a greater of late Creation, is as if one should affirm that an
old shilling is better than a new half-Crown, though the Alloy and Impression
are the same in both. Nay from your Argument a man may conclude that a coarser
metal only by being dug and refined in the Days of our Great Grandfathers,
(though perhaps it has contracted some rust by lying) is more valuable than the
same weight in Gold but lately separated from the Oar. And that an ancient
Estate is really better than one newly purchased, though the Lands of the
latter are richer, and the Survey larger than the other. Now if a man should
prove so fanciful as to demand a greater Rent for his Farm because it has been
in the Possession of his Family for some hundred of years, I believe the want
of Tenants would soon convince him of his Error. From whence it is evident that
in taking an Estimate of Nobility we are not so much to consider its Antiquity,
as the Merit of the first Grantee, and the distinction the Prince has put upon
it; which like Figures or other marks upon Money, stamp the value, and tell the
Subject for how much it is to pass.


Philot. Pray by your favor are not Meddals, and Coyns valued more for their
Antiquity than their Metal?


Philal. That Question is to the point; and therefore I answer,

First, That Coyns, etc. though they are valuable as rarities, yet they
signify little in Exchange and common use; And if a man has any debt to pay,
or Commodities to buy, K. Charles his Image, and superscription will do him
much more service than Ce'sar's.

Secondly, The Reason why these things are sometimes so much valued, is not
because they are old but useful: They often rectify Chronology, and explain
History, and retrieve us several material parts of Learning, which might
otherwise have been irrecoverably lost.

Thirdly, There is a disparity in the case of ancient Coyns and Families; For
in the first you have the same numerical piece, in the latter nothing but the
Name or Relation, so that the change and succession of Persons seems to destroy
the notion of Antiquity. To make the Instance parallel we must suppose a
Gentleman as old as Methusalem, and then I confess he would be a great
Curiosity, and ought to be valued accordingly.


Philot. As I remember you were saying, the merit of the first Gentleman of the
House ought to be considered.


Philal. Yes, I conceive that circumstance very material, and that if upon
enquiry it proves unintelligible, or unlucky, it is no small abatement to the
Family. For if he Advanced himself by a voluntary engaging in unjust Quarrels,
he has no better pretense to Honor than what a resolute and successful Padder
may Challenge. If he owes his Heraldry to a servile Flattery, and a dextrous
Application to the vices of Princes, the marks of their Favor are rather
infamous than Honorable to his Posterity, because he is ennobled for those
qualities, for which he ought to have been punished.


Philot. What if the Gentility was purchased, I hope we may make the best of
what we have paid for?


Philal. By all means! But then this is a sign that Worth and distinguishing
Qualities were wanting, otherwise the Honor had been conferred Gratis. The
same may be said when Arms or Titles are given at the Instance or
recommendation of a Favorite, for this is downright begging for Quality, and
looks more like an Alms than an Honor. Father it is a lessening to a man's
Nobility, when the Reason and Grounds of it are unknown, for if his Rise had
been derived from worthy and creditable Causes, he would in all likelihood have
been as certainly acquainted with them, as with his Arms; It being both easy
and for the Reputation of the Family; that Records of this nature should have
been preserved, and therefore the loss of them seems rather to proceed from
Design than Neglect. In short, if the first Principles of Honor happen to be
thus coarse, or counterfeit, it is not in the power of time to mend them: A
Pebble or Bristol stone will not change their natures, and improve into
Diamonds, though they are laid up a thousand years together.


Philot. Hark you Mr. I doubt your Effects (if you have any) have lain but a
little while in the Heralds Office.


Philal. Probably as long as your Worships: But I take it to be much more a
Gentlemanly quality to discover such unsociable mistakes than to abett them. If
we are capable of understanding any thing, it must undoubtedly be more
creditable to promote good humor and modesty in Conversation, and give men
right Apprehensions of themselves; than to flatter them into groundless
Conceits, and make them believe they may be truly Great, and yet good for
nothing. To maintain such indefensible and dangerous Principles of Honor,
which not only impose upon our Understandings, but emasculate our Spirits, and
spoil our Temper, and tend only to the nourishing of Idleness and Pride; is in
my opinion no very Heroical undertaking.


Philot. Then I find we must come to the Merits of the Cause as you call them,
and examine upon what foundation the Family stands.


Philal. I think that is the only way to know what we have to trust to, and how
far we may insist upon the advantages of Birth.


Philot. What are the usual steps to Honor?


Philal. I suppose one of these three, Learning, Commerce or Arms. The
pretenses of Learning have been examined already; To which I shall only add,
that if a Person whose mind is enlarged, and beautified with all sorts of
useful Knowledge, is notwithstanding obliged to Modesty, and Sobriety of
thought, then certainly those who claim under him, and are wise only by Proxy,
ought not to grow too big upon their Relation to the Muses. To Proceed,
Commerce is another Expedient which often distinguishes a man from the vulgar.
For Trading raises an Estate, and that procures Honor, so that in this Case
Wealth is the main of the merit, and that which is chiefly insisted on by those
who inherit it. But here we ought to be very cautious and meek-spirited, till
we are assured of the honestly of our Ancestors, for Covetousness and
Circumvention make no good Motto for a Coat. And yet your men of Trade are too
often assisted in their Fortunes by these Qualities.


Philot. I think you are too hard upon them, and believe they may come into
their Estates by more accountable methods, viz. by their Industry, by
Understanding how to make use of all fair advantages, and by the luck of a good
Acquaintance.


Philal. I grant there is a great deal of Good Faith, Frankness and Generosity
to be found among Tradesmen, and that such Professions are necessary to the
convenience and splendour of Life, and being thus useful ought to be esteemed
Honorable. But their being used to value small gains is apt (without care) to
make them contract a narrowness of Spirit, and to stand too much to the point
of Interest.


Philot. What is that which they call the Mystery of Trade?


Philal. A great part of it consists in the skill of overreaching their
Customers, which Science, I fear is not learned merely for Speculation.


Philot. Possibly it may be for Caution, that they may not be imposed on by
others.


Philal. I am willing to think so, however these Arcana Officinae, are counted
such Essentials, that except an Apprentice is fully instructed how to
Adulterate, and Varnish, and give you the Go-by upon occasion, his Master may
be charged with Neglect, and sued for not teaching him his Art, and his Trade.


Philot. It seems then he cannot be an Honest Man, except he teaches his
Servant to play the Knave.


Philal. Granting your Inference, yet you know a Man may understand his Weapon
better than his Neighbor, and notwithstanding be of a very peaceable
inoffensive Temper. However, when the Rise of the Family is owing to such an
Original, a Man has a particular Reason not to flourish too much upon the
glitter of his Fortune, for fear there should be too much Alloy in it. For some
People are forced to climb in a very mean and servile posture. They must
Flatter, Deceive, and Pinch; use their Neighbors, and themselves too, very
unkindly, before they can gain their Point. So that if the Ancestour had not
been remarkably Little, his Posterity had never been reputed Great.


Philot. But what needs all this Scruple? Why should I enquire so anxiously how
my Ancestors came by their Estate? Let their Merit be as small as you please,
the Revenue will not sink upon this Score. Now, if you considered the
Sovereignty of Money, how it commands Honor, and Beauty, and Power, how much of
Ornament, and Defense, and Pleasure there is in it; you would allow us to be a
little Uppish upon the Matter: for when a Man has such a Universal Instrument
of Delight, and is Master of that, which is Master of every thing else, he
ought visibly to Congratulate his Happiness, and pay himself a particular
Respect.


Philal. If I could purchase a parcel of new Senses, and some pretty
undiscovered Curiosities to please them with, I confess I should be more
desirous of growing Rich than I am.


Philot. What though you cannot buy any new, you may please the old ones
better, and make one Sense go as far as two, with Poverty.


Philal. I am not altogether of your mind; besides if my Understanding does not
improve proportionably, I am only in the fairer way to be more a Brute.


Philot. Understanding! Money will buy good Books, and though the Owner should
should not know how to use them, yet if has an Estate, he will never want
People to make him believe he has Sense, which will be in a manner as well, for
Pleasure consists mostly in Fancy.


Philal. I don't envy such a one the entertainment of his Imagination, though I
believe it is much short of the transports of Lunacy: but withal I think that
folly and madness are no proper Judges to pronounce upon the Advancements of
human Nature. But to return to the Argument, no person can be Great by being
Owner of those things which wise Men have always counted it a piece of
greatness to despise. To which I must add, that it is not the possessing, but
the right management of any valuable Advantage which makes us Considerable. He
that does not employ his Fortune generously, is not to be respected merely
because he has it. Indeed if a Man gives me part of his Estate, I am bound to
make him an acknowledgment; but I am not obliged to honor him because he is
pleased to keep it to himself.


Philot. Well! Since Merchandise is sometimes liable to exceptions, and ancient
Wealth has no right to challenge Worship, and Homage. Pray what do you think of
Nobility raised by Arms? I hope here you will grant the Materials are all
shining, and solid. And when an Ancestour works out his Fortune by great and
hazardous Undertakings, by contempt of Danger and Death, and all the instances
of an Heroic Gallantry; is it not highly reasonable his Descendants should
share his Honor, as well as his Inheritance? Nay, they seem obliged, in justice
to his Memory, to have some strokes of Greatness and Reserve in their Carriage.
They might better be Profuse in their Expenses, than their Familiarities. The
wasting his Estate, and razing* him out of the Heralds Books, is scarce more
injurious to his Name, than the heedless Condescensions of his Family. For by
such ill managed Humility, they do as it were Prostitute his Quality, mingle
his Ashes with ignoble Dust, and deface the Monuments and Distinctions of his
Merit.


Philal. I confess a Man ought to be civil to his Generation, but not to that
degree as to plague the Living, only in Ceremony to the Dead. And I may say
farther, that a Noble Ancestor, does not desire his Posterity should pretend to
honor him this way, except his Qualities, as well as his Name descend upon
them. A person truly Great, is never fond and unreasonable; he hates to see
Folly Idolized, though it be in his own Children; and had rather have his
Memory buried in Oblivion, than his Honor should be Usurped by a Degenerate
insignificant Offspring. Besides, the reasons you assign why Martial Men ought
to be valued by after-Ages, seem to be common to other pretenses to Nobility.


Philot. I am sorry if they appear so, since I designed them chiefly for the
advantage of Arms. For in my judgment, the Profession of a Soldier has a
particular, and paramount Title to Honor. For can there be a more extraordinary
instance of Greatness, than for a Man to be undismayed amidst so many horrible
Instruments and Images of Death? To expose his person as freely as if he knew
himself immortal, and to fear nothing but Obscurity and Disgrace? And therefore
though there are many other creditable Employments and Accomplishments, yet
there is a transcendent, and almost an astonishing Greatness and Gracefulness
in Valor. It has something more illustrious and sparkling, more Noble and
Majestic than the rest.


Philal. Hold! You are going to describe Alexander or Caesar; do you think that
every Field, or Charge in Gules, can pretend to all these fine things? This
must be examined farther by and by: at present I shall only observe to you,
that though I have a great esteem for a Gentleman of the Sword, and don't in
the least intend to lessen the just Character of Military Glory; yet I conceive
there is another Profession, which possibly does not glitter altogether so much
upon the Sense, but for all that, if you touch it 'twill prove right Sterling.


Philot. What Profession do you mean?


Philal. That of Learning; therefore if you please, I will just glance upon the
Advantages of Learning without interposing my judgment by way of comparison.


Philot. Do so, for I think you had need say some kind things upon this
Argument, to make amends for the freedom you took with it in our former
Conference.


Philal. Don't mistake me, I am conscious of no Injury, and therefore design
nothing by way of Reparation.


Philot. Take your Course.


Philal. 1. Then not to mention that Learning is an improvement of our Minds,
which is the noblest part of us. I say not to mention this, you may please to
take notice, that without some share in this accomplishment, War it self cannot
be successfully managed. Without the assistance of Letters, a Man can never be
qualified for any considerable Post in the Camp. For Courage and Corporal
Force, unless joined with Conduct, and reach of Thought (which are the usual
effects of Contemplation) is no more fit to command than a Tempest; doing for
the most part more harm than good, and destroying it self by its blind and ill
directed motion. It is Learning which teaches a General the successes and
events of Action in former Ages, which makes him better able to judge of his
present preparation. It instructs him how to take advantage of his Enemies, and
avoid those miscarriages which have been fatal to others before him. It teaches
him how to Fortify and Assault, how to manage the difference of Ground and
Weather. It lets him into the knowledge of Human Nature, and shows him how to
understand the Tempers of other men, and to govern his own. It discovers by
what secret Springs the Passions are moved, what are the most probable Causes
of Hope and Fear, of Resolution and Cowardice; and how strangely they are
mixed, and varied according to the difference of Climates, Governments,
Conditions, and Occupations, especially according to the different Age, Temper,
Interest, and Experience of those who are in Power.


Philot. Yes, no doubt it teaches a Man to take a Soul in pieces, as easily as
a Watch! If ever I heard such Conjuring!


Philal. Pray be not so sharp, the Discourse is not so Romantic as you suppose.


Philot. Go on.


Philal. Secondly, I observe that the Advantages of Learning are more lasting
and extensive than those of Arms. The Courage of a Soldier, does his Country
not much service after his death, the benefit of it being usually confined to
one Age: whereas by the knowledge of Men and Things, Public Provisions for
Society are framed, and the Constitution adjusted to the Temper, and
Convenience of the People; of the happy effects of which, remote Posterity is
often sensible. And as the Consequences of Valor, seldom reach beyond the
death of him who showed it, so there are few the better for it, except those a
Man engages for; which are commonly none but his Countrymen. But Learning, by
inventing and improving Arts and Sciences, scatters its Favors in a much
larger compass; becomes a universal Benefactor, and obliges mankind in its most
comprehensive Latitude of Place and Time.


Philot. I hope you will grant that Learning must fly to the Protection of the
Sword to secure its quiet, and all the profits accrewing from thence. For in
earnest, Notions, and Syllogisms, are very defenseless things against Violence.
If we had nothing but Philosophy, Statutes and Reports, to secure the Peace;
our Meum and Tuum were but in an ill condition.


Philal. I agree with you, and shall just add in the third place, That the
successes of Learning are naturally of a very innocent Tendency, and under good
management prejudicial to none. The Conquests of Arts are not like those of
Arms, gained by slaughter, and attended with ruin and desolation. No, Here is
nothing routed but Ignorance and Error, nothing destroyed but obstinate Humor,
and savage Disposition: Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. But a Martial Man,
except he has been sweetened, and polished by a Lettered Education, is apt to
have a tincture of sowerness, and incomplyance in his Behavior. And therefore
if you observe your old Heroes in Homer, (for want of being Book-Learned) were
none of the Gentilest Men. What a rugged tempestuous, unconversable Mortal was
Achilles; I could never fancy that same (...).


Philot. Well! I perceive it is requisite for a Man to get some Sense to his
Courage if he can: but have we not lost all our Pride, and gone somewhat off
from the Point?


Philal. No, We have only fetched a Compass, and thrown our reasoning more into
a Circle to invest the Place; and now we will come on directly, and make a
little Assault, only to try the strength of the Garrison.


Philot. Very Soldier-like! In plain English I doubt you are attempting to show
that it is not so much the Profession of Arms, as the unexceptionable
management of that Profession which makes a Family honorable.


Philal. Yes. Therefore before we fall too much in love with the Buff in the
Wardrobe; we should examine whether the War was just, whether our Ancestor
fought in defense of his Prince and Country, or let himself out to any person
who would hire him to murder. We should consider whether the Enterprise was
Great and Dangerous; whether the Advantages were gained by open Bravery and
Resolution, or were no more than the effects of Chance, of Treachery, or
Surprise. And though a Man can give a creditable Answer to all these Questions,
he should then remember there are a great many persons who have ventured as far
as himself, and yet continue in their first Obscurity: so that had it not been
his good Fortune to have fallen under the Notice of his General, his Merit had
been unrewarded. There are many persons who perform signal service in a Breach,
or Scalado, and yet their Courage is often unregarded, and lost in the Crowd,
and Tumult of the Action, so that they get nothing but Blows for their Pains.
To wind up this part of the Discourse: let the Rise of the Family be never so
considerable (I mean none but Subjects) it ought not to supersede the Industry,
or stop the Progress of those who are thence Descended. For if we rely wholly
upon the Merit of others, and are Great only by imputation, we shall be
esteemed by none but the injudicious part of the World. To speak out, if
neither the advantages of Fortune and Education. (which often concur in these
Cases) the expectation of others, nor the Memory of worthy Ancestors, if none
of these Motives can prevail with a Man to furnish himself with Supravulgar and
Noble Qualities, this is an argument that he is either under a natural
incapacity, or else has abandoned himself to Sloth, and Luxury. And without
dispute he is most emphatically mean, who is so under the greatest advantages
and arguments to the contrary. So that the Luster of his Family serves only to
set off his own Degeneracy, it does Facem praeferre pudendis and makes him the
more remarkably Contemptible.


Philot. You are smart upon the empty Sparks! And I perceive by your discourse
that if we intend to set up strong, we must do something for our selves.


Philal. Yes: And therefore I presume that Women have more reason to insist
upon their Birth than Men: because they have not so fair a trial to discover
their worth. They are by custom made incapable of those employments by which
Honor is usually gained. They are shut out from the Pulpit and Bar, from
Embassies, and State Negotiations, so that notwithstanding (as I believe it
often happens) their Inclinations are generous, and their Abilities great, to
serve the public; yet they have not an opportunity of showing it.


Philot. Truly I think you need not have been so liberal to the Beau-Sex; you
know they have enough to be proud of besides Heraldry.


Philal. What do you mean?


Philot. Their Beauty Man.


Philal. Right, I believe that may disturb them sometimes; but they have no
great reason for it. For Beauty though it is a pretty varnish, yet it is of a
frail Constitution, liable to abundance of Accidents, and but ashort lived
Blessing at the best. And waving this Consideration, it seems to be made
chiefly for the entertainment of the lookers on. Those who are so much admired
by others, cannot share the pleasure of the Company without the help of a Glass;
for the Eyes which show us other Objects cannot see themselves. Nature seems to
have laid the most graceful parts of our Fabric out of our way; to prevent our
vanity. For could some People always command a sight of their Faces, they would
Narcissus like be perpetually poring upon their Handsomeness, and so be neither
fit for Business, nor Company.


Philot. To my thinking you have not cleared the Point; For why may we not
insist upon the privileges of Nature? Why should a fine Woman be so prodigal of
her Beauty, make strip and waste of her Complexion, and squander away her Face
for nothing? There is no reason persons of a less agreeable aspect (except they
have some other advantage) should converse with beauty upon a Level. For those
who cannot furnish out an equal proportion toward the pleasure of
Conversation, ought to pay for their insufficiency in Acknowledgments. Beauty
without doubt was designed for some advantage, and if so, certainly the Owners
have the best right to it.


Philal. I grant it; and therefore it is allowable for them to set a value upon
their Persons, for the better disposal of them. And farther if they have a mind
to it, they may please themselves, because they are acceptable to others, which
is a generous satisfaction: But when they grow humoursom they spoil all; For
Pride not only raises a prejudice against their Beauty, but really lessens it.
For if you observe, it paints an ill-natured Air upon their Face; and fills
them with spleen and peevishness and passion, which exhausts their Spirits, and
makes their blood less florid, so that their Beauty is neither so agreeable nor
lasting as otherwise it would be. And if the present inconvenience will not
cure them, they will do well to remember that they must of necessity grow
humble when they are old; unless they are so fanciful as to dote upon Rubbish
and Ruins.


Philot. Pray let us take leave of the Ladies, and proceed to the other branch
of your Division, viz. to acquired Nobility. And here methinks every thing
looks unexceptionable and fine upon your own Principles. For here we are
beholden to none but our selves; we are not thrown up the Hill by another
Arms, and made considerable by Diversion, or Chancemedly; but climb the ascent
by plain Strength, and indefatigable Activity. Is it not a singular
commendation to have our circumstances not only large and Honorable, but
Independent; and almost to create the privileges we enjoy? Here is no gilding
of a coarse substance, no borrowed Glory, no faint Reflection from an
Ancestour, but the Man is all bright and luminous to the Center, and shines and
sparkles in his own worth. He is not Great by Genealogy and ancient Title, by
the Favor of Fortune and the Labors of those he never helped, but by Nature
and Performances, by having Greatness incorporated in himself. Now may not a
Person who has thus distinguished himself by his Merit, make use of the Honor
which has been so justly conferred upon him, and put the Lazy and less
significant in mind of their Defects?


Philal. If you recollect your self you will find that this point concerning
Acquired Nobility has been occasionally discoursed already: Therefore I shall
only add that upon supposition a Man has obliged the Public, and is remarkable
for great Abilities and a generous Use of them; he would do well to remember
that there are others who have ventured as far, and performed as considerably
as himself, whose Services all miscarried as to any private Advantage, because
they were not so lucky as to act under the Notice of those who were able to
reward: And that many Persons well furnished for Employment and Honor, go out
of the World as obscurely as they came in; only for want of a proper
opportunity to bring them into Light, and public View.


Philot. What tho some People are unlucky, ought their misfortunes to be
pleaded to the prejudice of Desert in others?


Philal. No. But when a man has received so valuable a consideration for his
Service as Honor and Estate, he ought to acquiesce, and not press too
arbitrarily for Submission. He should not set a tax upon his Conversation, and
put the Company under Contribution for Respect. Besides a Gentleman of the
first Head has a particular reason to manage his Advancement obligingly: For by
treating the little People roughly, he does in effect but expose his Ancestors
and reproach his own former Condition.


Philot. You have so many fetches with you! But what do you think of
Magistrates? In my opinion those who represent their Prince, and are the
Ministers of Justice, cannot practice that Humility and Condescension you seem
to admire, with any manner of Decency, or Security to the public. For if they
don't oblige their Inferiors to Distance, their Reputation will sink, and the
Majesty of the Government will be lessened, and then it is easy to guess what
the consequence must be.


Philal. I agree with you: Magistrates ought to assert their Office, and not
make themselves cheap by improper Familiarities. But their Character may be
over-strained. To prevent which inconvenience they may please to remember that
their power was given them upon a public account, more for the benefit of
others than themselves. They are deputed by their Prince, for the countenancing
of Virtue, for the ease and Protection of the People, and therefore they should
discourage none who are regular and fair, they should show their Authority upon
nothing but Insolence and Injustice, Thieves and Malefactors; upon those who
affront the Government, or break the Peace. There is no necessity they should
bring the Air of the Bench into common Conversation, and wear their Commissions
always upon their Faces. To manage their Power thus singularly looks like a
little private Design of setting up for themselves; as if they procured their
Authority to fright the Kings Liege Subjects, and to overawe the Neighborhood
into a greater Reverence.


Philot. But if they should happen to take too much upon them, are the People
to slight them upon this account?


Philal. By no means: the Authority ought to be considered let the Men be what
they will. However in general I observe that the best way to secure Observance,
is not to insist too violently upon it. For Pride is a most unfortunate Vice,
other Immoralities usually gain their Point, though they lose more another way;
but a Proud man is so far from making himself Great by his haughty and
contemptuous Port, that he is usually punished with Neglect for it: and that
Disdain with which he treats others, is returned more justly upon himself:
which may be done without much difficulty, in regard Honor is not become a
property so far as to have all it is Appurtenances bounded and fixed by Law. The
Circumstantials and oftentimes the most pompous part of Ceremony, are arbitrary
and undetermined. For we are not told either by Statute, or Common Law how many
Bows a Superior of such a degree may expect from us, not how low we are to
make them, nor how often the terms of Respect are to be used in our Application.


Philot. What do you mean?


Philal. I mean that it is not settled by Act of Parliament, how many Sirs and
Madams, a Discourse of such a length is to be sprinkled with; and therefore a
cross-grained Fellow, will tell you he has his Betters upon their Good
Behavior: if he likes their humor, he will be as liberal to them in
acknowledgments as they please; if not, he shall take the freedom to hold his
hand, and let them help themselves how they can.


Philot. Well! I cannot reconcile this self-denying Humor you are contending
for the Character of a Gentleman. Such an untoward management of Fortune and
Honor as this is, argues either that a Man wants Sense to understand his
Condition, or Spirit to maintain it. To throw away the Prerogatives of our
Birth, or the rewards of our Industry, at such a careless Cynical rate, is a
sign of a Rustic inapprehensive meanness, and that we have not the least
inclination to Greatness in us. For those who desire to be Great, will
endeavor to excel, and those who excel will be sure to show it; for the
Essence of Greatness lies in Comparison. A tall Man loses the advantage of his
Stature, unless he stands straight, and overlooks his Neighbor.


Philal. Methinks you are somewhat out in your notion of Greatness.


Philot. Let us hear if you can hit it better.


Philal. To speak freely, I conceive it a much more substantial and better
natured thing than you have made it. Greatness certainly does not consist in
Pageantry and Show, in Pomp and Retinue; and though a person of Quality will
make use of these things to avoid Singularity, and to put the Vulgar in mind of
their obedience to Authority, yet he does not think himself really the bigger
for them: for he knows that those who have neither Honesty nor Understanding,
have oftentimes all this fine Furniture about them. Farther, To be Great, is
not to be starched, and formal, and supercilious, to swagger at our Footmen,
and browbeat our Inferiors. Such a Behavior looks as if a Man was conscious
of his own insignificancy, and that he had nothing but Outside, and Noise, and
ill Humor, to make himself Considerable with. But he that is truly Noble, has
far different Sentiments, and turns his Figure quite another way. He hates to
abridge the Liberties, to depress the Spirits, or any ways to impair the
satisfaction of his Neighbor. His Greatness is easy, obliging, and agreeable,
so that none have any just cause to wish it less. And though he has a general
kindness for all Men, though he despises not the meanest Mortal, but desires to
stand fair in the Opinion of the World, yet he never courts any Man's Favor at
the Expense of Justice, nor strikes in with a Popular Mistake. No, He is
sensible it is the part of true Magnanimity to adhere unalterably to a wise
Choice: not to be overrun by Noise and Numbers, but to appear in defense of
injured Right, of neglected Truth, notwithstanding all the Censure and
Disadvantage they may sometimes lie under. To conclude his Character, A Great
Man is affable in his Converse, generous in his Temper, and immovable in what
he has maturely resolved upon. And as Prosperity does not make him haughty and
imperious, so neither does Adversity sink him into meanness and dejection: for
if ever he shows more spirit than ordinary, it is when he is ill used, and the
World frowns upon him. In short, he is equally removed from the extremes of
Servility and Pride; and scorns either to trample upon a Worm, or sneak to an
Emperor.


Philot. In earnest, you have described a Person of Honor: And I am so far
pleased with the Character, that I would give all I am Master of to make it my
own. But can we receive no other Advantages from Nobility, but what have been
hinted already?


Philal. All that I can think of at present, are these following.

First, It gives a fair occasion to excite the generosity of our Minds, and
disposes us to the imitation of great Examples, that so we may not seem
unworthy our Predecessors. Indeed, a Man is bound in justice not to impair the
Reputation, nor spoil the Breed of the Family: but to hand down the Line to his
Posterity, at least with the same good Conditions he received it.

Secondly, These Privileges of Birth may serve to check an insolent Humor in
others, who behave themselves contemptuously toward us upon lesser, or but
equal pretenses.

Thirdly, A Man may make some Advantage this way, when he falls undeservedly
under Public Disgrace, or is unrighteously Oppressed. For in such a Case, the
mention of his Ancestors seems free from all suspicion of Vanity, and may
fairly be interpreted to proceed either from self-Defence, or greatness of
Spirit.

Fourthly, The same may be done when any Office or Promotion, may Legally be
claimed by virtue of an honorable Condition. For example, If a Man should put
in to be one of the Knights of Malta, he might modestly enough publish his
Pedigree, and prove his six Descents, against a less qualified Competitor.


Philot. If you are at a sto^, I ^^ink I can carry your concessions (...) For,
as I remember, it has been granted already, that the common People may pay a
Respect to Quality, though you mortify the Pleasure a little severely in those
who receive it.


Philal. May pay a Respect, call you it? I say they must. For not to mention
that Gentlemen have generally a greater share of Fortune and Sense too, than
those of vulgar Condition; not to mention this I say, if they had nothing to
plead but their Quality, they ought to be regarded upon that Score, because the
State sets a value upon it, and that for public and considerable Reasons.


Philot. I perceive if a Man will but stay and hear you out, you are civil
enough at the last. Pray what are we to do next?


Philal. Why, now I could run a Discourse with you upon the inconveniences of
Pride: and snew you in particular, what an unconquerable Aversion it gives all
Mankind against us, when we are overgrown with it. How it multiplies, and
conceals our Defects from us, and makes us do a thousand silly things, without
taking notice of them. How it makes us a Prey to Flatterers, and puts us to
great Expenses only to be laughed at. I might debate with you, how it spoils
Conversation, and takes away the pleasure of Society. How often Families,
Kingdoms, and Churches are embroiled, and the World turned topsiturvy by this
Vice. These and many other ill consequences of Pride might be enlarged upon;
but this part of the Argument is, I conceive, more proper for Divines, and
therefore I shall pursue it no farther.


Philot. Well moved! For now I think it is almost time to give over.


Philal. I will not tire you.


Your humble Servant.

THE CONTENTS.
SOme mistakes concerning Conversation removed Page 3 The Grounds of Pride
enquired into, and shown to be founded in Self-Love, and why p. 5 The due
bounds of Self-Love briefly examined p. 6, 7 Pride described, 1. By way of
Negation p. 8 2. The Positive marks of it are laid down p. 13 The principal
pretenses to this Vice, viz. Learning, Nobility, Wealth, Power, and Beauty p.
17 The pretenses of Learning considered p. 18 The Office of Curates generally
misunderstood; the mistakes about it rectified p. 31 The depressing their
Character, and streitning them in point of Maintenance, of ill consequence to
Religion p. 35 The case of Nobility considered p. 51 Nobility divided into
Hereditary or Acquired p. 53 The Privileges of Antiquity examined p. 57
Families generally raised either by Commerce, Arms, or Learning p. 66 The
pretenses of Commerce inquired into, where likewise those of Wealth, are
occasionally handled p. 66, 69 The Merit of Arms debated p. 70 The Advantages
of Learning, and Arms compared p. 73 The Plea of Beauty argued, and that of
Acquired Nobility p. 79 The difference between Pride and Magnanimity p. 86 The
just Advantages of Nobility p. 88 Some of the unhappy Consequences of Pride
hinted. p. 89
THE END.
A Moral Essay CONCERNING CLOTHES.

THE THIRD CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes.

A MORAL ESSAY Concerning CLOTHES.
Philot. PHilalethes, I Am glad to meet you again; Where have you been this long
time?


Philal. Sometimes not just where I would be: But now I have no reason to
complain; for I always think my self well, when I am with a Friend.


Philot. I must have half an hours Conversation with you before we part.


Philal. You oblige me extremely. I was afraid your time had been preingaged to
those Gentlemen and Ladies you parted with at the Coach; I heard them desire
you not to stay long. By their Habit and Equipage they seem to be Persons of
Condition, and therefore you know the Appointment must be well remembered?


Philot. Leave that to me. But by the way, I thought you laid somewhat of an
Accent upon their Habit; were they too Fine for you?


Philal. They may be so for themselves for ought I know.


Philot. I perceive you are for making Prize of me again. I remember what
mortifying Discoveries you made at our last Meeting. I wish you had kept your
Cynical Truths to your self; for I Am sure my Mistakes were much more
Entertaining.


Philal. It seems they were Truths then.


Philot. Yes. And that is it which vexes me; for now I have much ado to keep my
self in my own good Opinion.


Philal. I Am sorry you should be in love with a Delusion, especially when you
know it to be such. Fevers and Intemperance bring a great many gay Fancies with
them; and yet they are not counted any of the Blessings or Ornamentals of Life.


Philot. Happiness is Happiness; whether it is founded in Reason or Imagination,
it is all a Case to me, provided I have a vigorous Sense of it. Nay, in my
Judgment, those which you call the Satisfactions of Fancy, are the better of
the two. They are more at Command than the other; and stand in no need of a
Foreign Supply. The want of Tools and Materials, if the Model is answered, is a
Commendation to the Workman. To make so fine a Something out of Nothing, has
some resemblance to Creation: So that if this way has as much Pleasure in the
Effect, it seems to have more of Magnificence in the Cause.


Philal. I grant you, if a Man could be always dreaming of Paradise: The Dream
would go a great way toward making the Thing. But alas! the visionary
Pleasure will quickly disappear. The agreeable part of the Fit will not last;
therefore let us get rid of it as soon as may be. The longer it continues, the
worse and the weaker 'twill leave us. We may, like the Romans, deify a Disease,
if we please; but if we expect any return of the Worship, we shall be Mistaken.


Philot. I tell you I came off with Loss the last Rencounter: And now by your
surveying me from Head to Foot, I find you think I have too much of Expense and
Curiosity about me; but if you expect to dispute my Clothes off my Back, you
will be disappointed.


Philal. I have no desire you should turn either Adamite, or Quaker; but yet I
believe some People throw away too much Money, and Inclination, upon these
Things.


Philot. You seem to forget that the Distinctions of Rank and Condition cannot
be kept up, without something Extraordinary in this kind. And unless this be
done, Government must suffer.


Philal. For all that, Noah had large Dominions, and, for ought appears, kept
his Subjects in good Order without any great Assistance from the Wardrobe.


Philot. But Princes Subjects are not so near of Kin to them now; and therefore
not so easily Governed.


Philal. We will Dispute no farther about Princes: Besides, I grant the World
is altered, and am willing to make an Allowance upon that Score.


Philot. I shall proceed upon your Concession. And endeavor to prove in the

First place, That Richness of Habit is not only Lawful but Convenient, for
those who are possessed of public Charges; especially when they execute their
Office* For the People generally take their Measures more from the Appearance
than the Reason of Things. Their Apprehensions are so disposed, that they think
nothing Great but what is Pompous, and Glitters upon the Senses. If their
Governors had not some Advantage of them in Figure; they would be apt to
overlook their Character, and forget their Distance.


Philal. I have no Intention to argue against Gold Chains, Velvet Caps, or
Sables, or any Thing of this Nature; but granting this Furniture may be
somewhat of a Guard to Authority, yet no public Person has any Reason to value
himself upon it. For the Design of this Sort of State is only to comply with
the Weakness of the Multitude. It Is an innocent Stratagem to deceive them into
their Duty, and to awe them into a just Sense of Obedience. A great Man will
rather contemn this kind of Finery, than think himself considerable by it. He
will rather be sorry that his Authority needs the Support of so little an
Artifice, and depends in any measure upon the use of such Trifles. To stoop to
the vulgar Notion of Things, and establish ones Reputation by counterfeit Signs
of Worth, must be an uneasy Task to a noble Mind* Besides, we are not to think
the Magistrate cannot support his Office without Fine Clothes. For if he is
furnished with general Prudence, with Abilities particular to his Business, and
has a competent share of Power, he needs not doubt his Influence over the
People.


Philot. Pray what do you think of private Quality? I hope you don't intend to
strike us out of all Distinction, to run all Metals together, and make a Sort
of Corinthian Brass of us.


Philal. By no means. However, your Argument must abate farther upon this Head.
For Quality, separated from Authority, is sufficiently maintained by Title,
Arms, and Precedence: This is enough to keep up Distinction, and to encourage
Industry and Merit. There is no necessity for Persons, without Jurisdiction, to
march always with Colors displayed. It seems more agreeable that they should
conceal, than make a needless Ostentation of their Wealth. Would it not look
odly in a Soldier to give in a History of his Valor and Conduct in
Conversation? Or for a Man of Learning to make Harangues upon his own Parts and
Performances, and tell the Company how ignorant they are in respect of him?


Philot. That would be a little Fulsom I confess; But is the Case the same?


Philal. Much at one, in private Persons. For them to appear Pompous in
Equipage, or Habit, is but a vainglorious Publishing their own Grandeur, a
silent Triumphing over the Inferiority of others, and is in effect to proclaim
themselves extraordinary People. Whereas a modest Man, if he was somewhat
taller than his Neighbors, would choose to shrink himself into the Dimensions
of the Company, and be contented rather to loose something of his own Stature,
than to upbraid them with the Littleness of theirs.


Philot. What, because a Lord of a Manor has not always a Commission, must he
be allowed no better Clothes than a Cottager?


Philal. Yes. There may be some Difference, and yet it needs not be very
Expensive. A Gentleman's Mien and Behavior is sufficient to discover him,
without any great dependence upon Shops and Tailors. After all, the best way of
distinguishing, is by the Qualities of the Mind. Let Persons of Condition
strive rather to be richer in their Disposition than the Vulgar: Let them put
on a better Humor, wear a finer Understanding, and show a more shining
Fortitude: Let them appear remarkably Just, Inoffensive, and Obliging. This is
the way to be nobly Popular, and gives them the Hearts, as well as the
Ceremony, of their Inferiors.


Philot. How must they spend their Estates, they cannot Eat and Drink them all?


Philal. However, they seem willing enough to try their Skill; and I believe
the Experiment succeeds sometimes. But to your Question: Was the Surplusage of
Wealth employed in charitable Uses, and Entertainments soberly Hospitable, I
conceive it would run in a more proper Chanel. Did Men lay out their Abilities
in the Service of Religion, and for the promoting of Arts and Knowledge, how
might they advance the Prosperity and Glory of a Nation this way? How much
Wiser, and Easier, and Richer, might they make their Inferiors? And as they
would be more beneficial to their Country, so they would serve the Designs of
Greatness much more effectually. Such a generous Use of Fortune, would give
Luster to their Reputation; and make the World look with Wonder and Regard upon
them. How would it raise a declining Interest to its former Height, and with
what Advantage convey their Memories to Posterity? But to return; Richness of
Habit is not only unnecessary to keep up the Distinction of Degrees, but
insufficient. For where there are no Sumptuary Laws to confine the Condition of
Persons, and ascertain the Heraldry of the Wardrobe, every one has the Liberty
of being as Expensive, and Modish as he pleases. And accordingly you may
observe that ordinary People, when they happen to abound in Money and Vanity,
have their Houses and Persons as richly Furnished, as those who are much their
Superiors. There are other Instances in which methinks these things are a
little misplaced.


Philot. As how?


Philal. Why, to see Gold and Scarlet condemned to Liveries, the Coach-box
furnished like the Council Chamber, and the Horses wear as good Velvet as the
Company, is methinks not very agreeable. This Prostitution of Finery is enough
to make it nauseous, and to ruin its Reputation to all Inteats and Purposes.


Philot. When you have said all, A good Suit does a Man Credit, and puts People
in mind of paying him a proper Respect. And since others esteem me upon this
Account, I ought to follow their Opinion. For why should I think my self wiser
than the Majority of Mankind? Singularity seems to have always a Spice of
Arrogance in it.


Philal. You are wonderfully resigned in your Understanding; I guess the
Occasion, and shall endeavor to disappoint your Humility. For notwithstanding
your Majority, I conceive the Reasons of things are rather to be taken by
Weight than Tale: And if so, fine Clothes will signify nothing in the Value of
a Man, because they are but Signs of Wealth at the best, which generally
speaking is no more an Argument of Worth, than of the contrary. And as Clothes
don't suppose a Man considerable, so neither can they make him so. This will
appear if we examine either the Materials of which they consist, or the Art and
Curiosity which is shown in the Fashioning of them. The Matter of which a rich
Habit consists, is either the Skins of Beasts, the Entrails of Worms, the
Spoils of Fishes, some shining Sand or Pebles, which owe their humble Original
to the Dirt. And is it not a ridiculous Vanity to value our selves upon what we
borrow from Creatures below Reason and Life? In short, either they are a real
Advantage, or not: If they are, they prove our Dependence upon inferior
Things; which ought to be a mortifying Consideration, unless we can be proud of
Beggary* If they are not, then to dote on them is a Sign we are sunk beneath
our proper Level; that we admire Trifles, and disgrace the Dignity of our
Nature. To see these insignificant Ornaments valued at so great a Rate, and
preferred to the Necessaries of Life, is no small Disparagement to the
Understandings of Men, and is an Argument of the Littleness and Degeneracy of
our Kind. One would think he that has the Liberty of looking upon the Sun and
Moon for Nothing, would never purchase the Glimmerings of a Peble at so high a
Price.


Philot. I find you imagine Pearls were made only for Cordials, and that
Diamonds and fit for nothing but Bartholomew-Babies to sparkle in. But I
believe the Iewellers would do well enough, if they had nothing but your
Philosophy to damp their Trade.


Philal. That may be. But what if I can prove that the Price of them is kept up
by Imagination and ill Humor, and that the very Reason which makes them Dear,
ought to make them Cheap.


Philot. Let Us hear.


Philal. You may observe then that most of these Ornaments owe their Value to
their Scarcity. For if they were common, those who most admire them would be
ready to throw them away. Tertullian (de Habit. Muliebr.) observes, that some
People bound their Malefactors in Chains of Gold. And if a Man's Crime was very
Notorious, they would make him as fine as a General Officer.


Philot. I suppose they were Sir Thomas Moor's Vtopians. A pretty Devise! It Is
pity Whitehall was not plundered to Ornanament Newgate!


Philal. Tertullian observes farther, That Diamonds and Rubies were little
esteemed by the Eastern Nations, where they were the Growth of the Country. So
that I suppose when the Parthian Children, and Milk-maids, had worn them till
they were weary, they were bought up for the Roman Ladies.

Now to be fond of any thing purely because it is uncommon, because the
generality of Mankind wants it, is an ill-natured Pleasure, and arises from an
unbenevolent and ungenerous Temper.


Philot. Pray what do you think of the Artificial Improvement, is not a rich
Dress an Addition to the Wearer upon this Account?


Philal. Not at all. It Is true, the Refining upon what was more imperfectly
begun by Nature, the graceful Disposition of the Parts, and the judicious
Mixture of Colors, are Arguments of Industry and Ingenuity; but then this
Commendation does not belong to those that buy them. If the mere Wearing them
is any ways Creditable, it is because the Tailors, etc. are the Fountains of
Honor.


Philot. I grant you those People make them, but the Suiting them is above
their Talent. None but Persons of Condition can hit this Point. Indeed they
have a great Delicacy and Exactness in their Fancy: They pitch upon nothing
that is Tawdry and Mechanic, Staring, or ill Matched. One may know a
Gentlewoman almost, as well by seeing her choose a Mantua, or a Ribon, as by
going to Garter, or Clarencieux.


Philal. The mixing of Light, and Shade, handsomely, looks like a Genius for
Painting: And that is the most you can make of your Observation. To go on with
you: I shall venture to add, That for private Persons to expect an unusual
Observance upon the Account of fine Clothes, argues them conscious of their own
little Worth, and that the greatest part of their Quality comes out of the
Dressing Room. Having nothing to prefer them to the Esteem of the Judicious,
they are contented to take up with the Ceremony of the Ignorant: And with a
little Glitter, and Pageantry, draw the gazing, unthinking Mobile to admire
them. Now to desire Respect where we have no Jurisdiction, purely upon our own
Account, is an Argument either of a weak Judgment, or weak Pretenses. If we
understood the true Grounds of Esteem; If we were well stocked with Abilities,
or good Actions, to entertain us at home; we should not make our selves so
mean, as to let our Satisfactions depend upon the Reverences of the Ignorant,
or Designing. Besides, to delight in the Submissions of others, is a certain
Sign of Pride. This supposes that we are not so much pleased with our own
Station, as with looking down, and seeing our Neighbors as we fancy in a worse
Condition than our selves. Whereas a generous Mind has its Happiness increased
by being Communicated.


Philot. I suppose your Artillery may be almost spent by this time.


Philal. I was going to tell you, that Rich Clothes are accounted unsuitable to
old Age, which is a farther Proof of their Insignificancy. That Age which is
most remarkable for Wisdom and Temper; which is particularly honored with the
Weight of Business, and Dignity of Office; and has deservedly the greatest
Regard paid it: That Age, I say, chooses to appear in a plain, unornamented
Guarb. Whereas were fine Clothes marks of true Honor; were they Ornaments
great enough for a Man's Reason to delight in, the wisest part of the World
would not go without them: Especially since the Decays of Nature give so fair a
Plea for the Assistances of Art. There cannot be a greater Disparagement to
this sort of Finery, than its being refused by that Age which seems to need it
most; and if it was Considerable best deserves it. Since Men at the Height of
Discretion are ashamed of these Additions; this is a convincing Proof that they
are Childish and Trifling, and fittest for those who carry more Body than Soul
about them.


Philot. Your Inference is, That there should be a Resemblance between Age and
Habit; and that a Finical old Spark, can never be in the Fashion.


Philal. Right. For old People to set up for Mode and Dressing is a nauseous
Piece of Vanity. Indeed, when we come into the World first, it is not so
remarkable an Imprudence, if we misplace our Esteem, and make an indiscreet
Choice. It Is no wonder if we stick upon a gaudy Outside, when we are not sharp
enough to look through it. When our Minds are unfurnished with Materials for
Thinking, and scarce strong enough to wield a rational Pleasure, they are apt
to divert themselves with the Amusements of Sense. But when we have run through
the Experience of many years, and had so many Opportunities of Improvement:
When our Reason is grown up to Maturity, and we are supposed to have made our
last Judgment upon Things: When every thing we say or do, should have an Air of
Gravity and Greatness in it; then to dote upon Trifles, is a shrewd Sign that
our Minds are no less decayed than our Bodies. It looks as if we were ashamed
of making any Pretenses to Wisdom, and betrays an impotent desire of returning
to the Extravagance of Youth.


Philot. After all your Strictness, I hope you have some Reserve of Liberty for
Women. They have the Excuses of Custom, the Agreableness of Figure, and the
Inclinations of Sex, to plead in their behalf. Besides, I am told St. Augustine
(Ep. 245. Tom. 2.) abates very much of the Rigor of your Tertullian, and
speaks with great Moderation upon the Point. He thinks Fine Clothes ought not
to be forbidden married Women, who are obliged to please their Husbands. And if
they may use this Expedient to please them when they have them; why may they
not do it that they may please to have them? Why may not the same little Charm
be practiced to Begin, as well as to Entertain the Relation?


Philal. With all my Heart; let St. Augustine's Indulgence pass. But it is my
humble Opinion they should keep their Inclinations unengaged. They would do
well not to dress their Fancy, nor wear their Finery in their Head, nor think
their Afternoon Quality better than their Morning. For when a Woman is once
smitten with her Drapery, Religion is commonly laid aside; or used moreout of
Custom than Devotion. When her governing Passions lie this way, Charity is
disabled, and Goodnature fails, and Justice is overlooked, and she is lost to
all the noble Purposes of Life. How often are Relations neglected, Tradesmen
unpaid, and Servants stinted to mortifying Allowances for the Support of this
Vanity? How patched and ununiform does it make the Figure of some Families? And
what a disagreable Mixture of Poverty and Riches do we see sometimes within the
same Walls? These Excesses make them forget the Compassion of their Sex, and
the Duties of their Station. They Rob the Necessities, and Fourish in the
Penance, and Wear that which should have been the Flesh and Blood of their own
Retinue.


Philot. What do you think of those below the Gentry, ought they not to be
somewhat Frugal, and Unpretending in their Appearance?


Philal. Truly I think the Tailor should take Measure of their Quality, as well
as of their Limbs. For those who make their Clothes much better than their
Condition, do but expose their Discretion. Persons of Quality have some little
Color for their Vanity: But as for others, they have nothing to say for
themselves. In them it looks like a Levelling Principle; like an illegal
Aspiring into a forbidden Station. It looks as if they had a mind to destroy
the Order of Government, and to confound the Distinctions of Merit and Degree.
In a word, At this rate of Management, a Man looses his Wealth, and Reputation
at the same time, makes himself expensively Ridiculous, and over-shoots
Extravagance itself.


Philot. My Time is up, I must leave you.


Philal. Adieu.


OF DUELLING.
The Fourth CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes.
Philal. WHether so fast this Morning, methinks you are somewhat earlier than
usual?


Philot. May be so. But when a Man's Occasions are Up, and Abroad, it is fit he
should attend them.


Philal. Pray what may your Business be, for you don't use to break your Sleep
for Trifles?


Philot. Why last Night Mr. A. and I happened to fall into a Misunderstanding
over a Glass of Wine. At length he told me the Controversy could not be taken
up, without giving the Satisfaction of a Gentleman. My Answer was, That I would
debate the Matter with him in his own way this Morning. And I am now going to
settle some little Affairs before the time of Meeting.


Philal. If you design to make your Will, you are out: For to do that to any
Purpose, a Man must be sound in Mind and Memory, which is none of your Case.
For the Business you are going about is sufficient to prove you Non Compos.


Philot. Pray let us have no Bantring. You know me too well to imagine that a
Concern of this Nature should make any dishonorable Impression: However,
because an Accident may happen, I love to make a proper Provision, and leave my
Discretion unquestioned.


Philal. That you will not do with me, I promise you; unless you can give a
better Account of your Undertaking than is usually done.


Philot. I am now obliged to dispute the Matter at the Swords Point, so that it
will be to no effect to argue it any other way: For a Man of Honor must keep
his Word.


Philal. Yes, no doubt on it. If he promises so set a Town on Fire, it is as much
as his Eschutcheon and Pedigree is worth to fail in the Performance. Look you;
you seem sensible that you are within a Hazard: If you are a Gentleman, learn
to value your self. Don't stake your Life against a Nutshel, nor run into the
other World upon every Fop's Errand.


Philot. I tell you I am engaged. What if I understood the Practice as little
as you do? Since it is the Custom I must defend my Honor: For to suffer under
the Imputation of Cowardice, is worse than being buried Alive. However, if you
have any thing to say, I have an hour good to hear you.


Philal. As much a Custom as you make it, it is not improved into Common Law:
That is point blank against you, and Ties you all up, if you kill upon the
Occasion.


Philot. It Is the Custom of Gentlemen, and that is sufficient for my purpose.


Philal. What if it was the Custom to Tilt your Head against a Post, for a
Mornings Exercise, would you venture the beating out your Brains rather than be
Unfashionable? What if it was the Custom for People of Condition to betray a
Trust, to forswear a Debt, or forge a Conveyance, would you follow the
Precedent, or forfeit their good Opinion?


Philot. You seem to mistake the Point. I grant you Men of Figure are too often
saulty in some of the Instances you mention: But then they are not bound to it
upon the Score of Reputation, which makes a Disparity in the Case.


Philal. They are not; true. But suppose they were, what then? Does not this
Supposition clearly prove, that we are not to take the Conduct of any Sort of
People upon Content: But to examine the Reasonableness of a Custom before we go
into it? Whatever is beneath a Man, is beneath a Gentleman; but to act without
Thinking, is beneath a Man, much more against it.


Philot. I perceive you believe this sort of Satisfaction very unaccountable.


Philal. I do so. And the Law is of my Opinion, which I hope is no contemptible
Authority.


Philot. Hark you, we do but laugh at these Stories. Do you think a Parcel of
starched Lawyers, with a Jury of Haberdashers, and Chandlers, are proper Judges
in the Case? Are such Pedants and Mechanics as these, fit to give Rules to Men
of Honor?


Philal. I perceive you think Ignorance and Idleness necessary Qualifications
of a Gentleman; and doubt not but that you practice accordingly. But if Men of
Honor are too great to be governed by the Laws, they should be so modest as
not to plead it for their Advantage. They should throw up their Fortune, and
disband from Society. Yes, and their Quality too; for this, as well as the
other, is settled by the Constitution.


Philot. I thought Quality had been the sole Privilege of Birth, or at least of
the Prince's Favor.


Philal. All Honor, as well as Land, is originally a Gift from the Crown. Now
Prerogative is a part of the Law: And though Quality and Estate are settled
upon a Man and his Heirs, yet the Grant runs always with a Condition of
Forfeiture in Case of Treason. And therefore the Son of an unrestored Traitor
has no Pretenses to the Quality of his Ancestors.


Philot. I know we say that Treason taints a Man's Blood, and makes it baser
than that of a Peasant; but I look upon this as a kind of Whimsey. For though
the Government may take away my Estate, yet it cannot make me nothing of Kin to
my Father. So that the Son of a Gentleman must be a Gentleman, in spite of
Fate.


Philal. But not in spite of Treason. For in that Case, he is banished the
Blood, and transplanted from the Family of his Ancestors. His Lease of Heraldry
is expired, his Title is extinct, and he can no more claim his former Honor,
than an Estate which was sold by his great Grandfather. I grant you the
Relation between him and his Father continues, and that is it which destroys his
Pretentions. The Stream of Honor is dried up, before it reaches the Chanel of
Posterity. The Father has lost all, and therefore can convey nothing over. The
Son if he pleases may be of kin to the Treason, for the Infamy of that remains;
but as for the Quality it is all wiped out, as if it had never been. And
therefore though your Instance is true, your Inference fails; for the Son of a
Traitor, is not the Son of a Gentleman. In short, you must either allow that
Quality, like other Branches of Property, stands upon the Basis of Law; or else
you unavoidably run into the Principle of Levelling. For where the Distinctions
of Condition are not ascertained by public Provision, every one is at Liberty
to rate his own, and his Neighbor's Station, as he pleases. Where there are no
Enclosures all People may intercommon, without Preference or Ceremony. New
Grounds of Honor may be set up, and the old ones disclaimed; and a Tailor may
make himself a Lord, and clap a Coronet upon his Goose, if he has a mind to it.


Philot. I suppose your Conclusion is, That the Notion of Honor is to be taken
from the Laws and Government, and not from any private Set of People, how
valuable soever in other Respects.


Philal. Right. And from thence I infer that Duelling is a very dishonorable
Practice. For when you have given the best proof of your sufficiency, and
killed your Man, you are seized into the Hands of Justice, treated like
Assassinators, and condemned to die with Circumstances of Ignominy. You are not
Indicted for acquitting your selves like Gentlemen, but for disturbing the
public Peace, and murdering the King's Subjects. Now the Law never loads a
Man with Reproaches, nor punishes him thus coarsely, for doing a handsome Action.


Philot. What do you tell me of Lawyers Cant; Murdravit, stragem excercuit, and
practicavit: Very pretty Stuff to dispatch a Man of Honor with! You see how
the Men betray their Ignorance by their Forms of Speaking. And as for the
Bench, they have a thousand Pound per Annum for making of Malefactors; and they
must say something in Defense of their Trade.


Philal. As for the Bench, the Bar, and the rest, they are not the Makers but
the Ministers of Law; they are the Servants of the Government, and their
Methods of Proceeding are chalked out by their Superiors. And when the Reason
of Things is good, it is not material though the Latin proves otherwise. Indeed
I think the Laws cannot use you too rigorously, for I Am sure you treat them with
great Contempt. When Highway-men kill it is commonly for a Livelihood, to
prevent Discovery, or in the heat and surprise of Passion; and when it is over,
they seldom justify the Fact, but condemn what they have done. But your Tribe
are Murderers by Principle, which is something worse than Malice prepence,
because it is ready upon all Occasions, and often acts without any Provocation;
except the Vanity of complying with a barbarous Custom. As if it was as
indifferent a thing to cut a Man's Throat, or let it alone, as to wear a Broad
or Narrow brim'd Hat: And that these little Concerns of Blood, ought to be
perfectly governed by the Fashion. And when the Barbarity is committed, you
have the Assurance to maintain it, and to argue for the Murder against Law and
Gospel. In short, I think you stand in the greatest defiance to Authority of
all Men Living.


Philot. How so?


Philal. I have given you some of my Reasons, and you shall have the rest.

1. You scorn to refer your Differences to the Law, but make your selves your
own Judges.


Philot. If the Government will not make a sufficient Provision for the Honor
of Gentlemen they must right their own Case, and there is an end on it.


Philal. You would do well to prefer a Bill against all Kings and Parliaments
since the Conquest; and if that will not do, challenge the Crown, and the two
Houses at their next Meeting, to give you Satisfaction. Do you not perceive,
That by thus taking the Business out of the Hands of the Government, you both
reproach, and in effect renounce it at your Pleasure. The Laws very well
suppose, that People are apt to be too partial and passionate in their own
Concerns, and therefore remit them to a public Decision. Now it is a kind of
Maxim with us, That no Man should be wiser than the Laws.


Philot. What would you have me complain to a Magistrate when a Man gives me
the Lie, or any such sort of Affront? These things will not bear an Action; and
yet a Gentleman will rather dye than put them up.


Philal. By the way, a Lie was not counted so mortal an Affront till Charles
the Fifth happened to say, He was no Gentleman that would take it. Now what has
England to do with Germany? If an Emperor throws out an unweigh'd Sentence,
must we be governed by it? Are Law and Justice such Phantoms, that a Spanish
Rhodomontade should make them vanish? Or must a Foreign Prince's Humor command
farther than his Legal Authority?


Philot. The Prince's Opinion is the Standard of Mode. And to be Precise and
Singular, looks like Spleen, and Monkery, and ill Breeding. You know when
Dionysius of Sicily had a Fit of Geometry upon him, his Court took it
immediately. You could scarce meet a Man of Quality without a pair of Compasses
about him; and Visits were mostly spent about Squares and Circles. But as soon
as the King grew weary, the Fashion was quite laid aside. And then as Plutarch
observes, nothing was a greater Pedant than a Mathematician.


Philal. You lay so much stress upon these Compliances, one would think you
took them for part of your Allegiance.


Philot. Not to follow a Prince's Opinion, is in effect to say he is mistaken,
which is an unhandsom Reflection.


Philal. In Things indifferent you say well. But where Justice and Conscience
are concerned, mere Complaisance should not carry it. By the extent of your
Maxim, you would have made an admirable Ethiopian Courtier.


Philot. What is that?


Philal. Diodorus Siculus tells us (Biblioth. l. 3.) That the Aethiopians
happened once to have a one Eyed bandy Legged Prince; now such a Person would
have made but an odd Figure, if care had not been taken.


Philot. Pray how did the Court behave themselves upon this Accident?


Philal. Like Men of Honor. They made a Fashion of their Prince's Misfortune;
and immediately shut up one of Natures Windows, and got a sort of Scotch Boot
to bend their Hams in.


Philot. I think I could have imitated Alexander's wry Neck, as well as the
Macedonians. But this which you mention is a chargeable Fashion.


Philal. However it prevailed so far, that a Gentleman would no more appear
with strait Legs, or two Eyes in his Head, than you would in a pink'd Doublet,
or Boot-hose Tops. You see how far good Breeding will carry a Man, if he will
but stick to his Principle. But to return.

Your saying that these Indignities will not bear an Action, is to confess that
the Wisdom of the Nation has thought them below Notice. And will you venture
your All upon a Cause which would be Hissed out of all the Courts of England as
ridiculous? Will you take away a Man's Life upon a Provocation for which no
Government will allow you Six-penny worth of Damages? A Complaint fitter for a
Boy to run to his Mother with, than to disorder a Man. It there was but a few
of you, and you should talk at this Rate, you would be sent to B -- lam; but
Defendit numerus, and that is the best of your Plea.


Philot. As the Case stands, he who refuses a Challenge looses the Reputation
of a Gentleman; none of that Quality will keep him Company.


Philal. Lucifer's Excommunication exactly! And I perceive you dread the
Censure much more than that of the Church. The best on it is, you are somewhat
out in your Calculation. For there are not a few of good Extraction of another
Opinion.


Philot. I suppose you mean Ecclesiastics. Now we have nothing to say to them:
Their Profession exempts them from a Necessity of Fighting.


Philal. I mean Seculars too. I hope the Temporal Lords and Commons are no
Peasants. And will they account any Person infamous for the Regularity of his
Behavior? For not breaking those Laws which they either made, or approved
themselves? At this Rate they must be a very extraordinary Assembly; and
Westminster altogether as great a Sight as the Tower. Will not the Judges and
Justices go for Gentlemen, and do you think they will avoid a Man's Company for
declining a Challenge, and yet Commit and Hang him up for succeeding in it?
Pray don't make the governing Part of a Nation so extravagantly Ridiculous.
There are many other grave Persons of Worth and Blood, who would give the Cause
against you: But I find none of these will pass Muster. It seems Beau's, and
Bully's, and their wise Admirers, have seized the Heralds Office, and engrossed
all the Quality to themselves.


Philot. When you have declaimed till you are weary, I must tell you that we
have no small Party of as much Honor and Value as any you have mentioned, who
will very hardly be brought over to your Sentiment.


Philal. I hope not. It Is true, I know some People are all Quality: You would
think they were made up of nothing but Title and Genealogy. If you happen to
encounter a Prejudice, or cross upon their Fancy, they are too Considerable to
understand you. These, I confess, I almost despair of, but hope their Number is
not great. By the way, let me tell you your Fraternity take a very great
Liberty in their Opinion; you make nothing to renounce the public Sense in
Matters of the highest Importance: And count that a noble Achievement, which
the Laws punish as a Capital Offense. Now to set up a Notion of Honor against
the Government, with such Circumstances as these, is of very dangerous
Consequence. It Is such an Affront to the Constitution, such a deliberate
Contempt, such an open Defiance of Authority, as nothing can be more. It makes
the Laws cheap and ridiculous, the Solemnities of Justice a piece of Pageantry,
the Bench a few Reverend Poppets, or Scharamouche's in Scarlet. And thus by
exposing the Administration, the very Foundations of Peace and Property are
shaken and sap'd.


Philot. Certainly you are retained by the whole Corporation of Cowards, you
make so Tragical a Business on it!


Philal. By your favor: To have our Swords ready to execute the Orders of
every paultry Passion; To put Murder into our Creed, and cut Throats upon
professed Principles, is a Tragical Business; and I believe you will find it so.


Philot. Trouble not your self; we value neither your Judges, nor your Juries.
If we kill fairly, we have always Interest at Court to bring us off.


Philal. You may set up a Science against the Government, and range Murdering
under Discipline and Rule, and call it by what fine Names you please: But your
Methods of Killing, and that of Highwaymen, are alike Fair in the Eye of
Justice; and the same Rewards are assigned to both. As for your Friends at
Court, It Is to be hoped that Princes in time will resent the Breach of their
Laws, and the Loss of their Subjects, a little more heartily: That they will
not encourage a Practice which insults their Authority, and ridicules their
Ministers, and keeps up a Spirit of Barbarity throughout the Nation. Besides,
there are Things they call Appeals, and in that Case you know your Pardon is
out of Doors.


Philot. We must take our Chance for that.


Philal. You are hardy Men some of you. If all the Subjects should take the
same Liberty, we should have wild Work. You say the Government is defective in
considering the Respects of Honor, and therefore are resolved to be your own
Carvers. What if the under Sort of People should take the Hint, and practice
upon it, in the Instance of Property? Look ye Neighbors (says a sharp Country
Fellow) the Fine Folks have gotten away all the Land from us; for my part I
want so many score Acres to live easily, and I suppose you do so too, and I
think our Industry deserves it. It Is true, Estates are otherwise settled, and I
should believe my self obliged to observe my Countries Customs, if others would
do the same: But I perceive the Gentry can set the Constitution aside, without
any Scruple. They can Tilt through one another Lungs in a Bravado, though the
Law makes Hanging matter on it. Why should we be more Slaves to the Government
than others, I Am sure we do not get so much by it? We are enough of us, let us
mind our Business. It Is true, this would be a lewd Project; but it is the
Consequence of your own Principle, therefore have a care of setting the Example.


Philot. If we take a greater Freedom with the Government than the Vulgar, our
Quality is our Excuse; that will bear us out.


Philal. Quite contrary. For first, a Gentleman is supposed to be better
acquainted with the Laws than a Peasant; therefore his Breaking them must be a
greater Fault, because it implies more of Contempt in the Action.

Secondly, Where the Example is of worse Consequence, the care to check it
should be the greater. The Influence of Men of Figure is Considerable. When
They are at the Head of an ill Custom, they have presently a Train to attend
them. The Infection spreads like Lightning; and it is a Credit to live counter
to Reason and Regularity. The slender Principles, the loose (...) of these Men,
is that which has so effectually Debauched the Age. This is it which has
exposed Virtue, and banished Religion, and almost buried the Distinctions of
Good and Evil.

Thirdly, Since Quality is a Distinction settled by Law; those who have the
greatest Share of this Privilege are most obliged to observe the public
Regulations. The Government is a great Benefactor to such Persons, and they are
very ungenerous and ungrateful, if they fly in the Face of it. A Man that
enjoys Honor and Estate by a Society, has greater Engagements to Regard it,
than he who receives only a common Protection. One has perhaps a 1000 l. per
Annum for keeping the Laws and the other nothing but his Labor for his Pains*
And pray which is most to blame then if they break them?


Philot. You seem to forget that their Fortune and Condition follows their
Birth, so that they are only obliged to their Family for the Advantage.


Philal. You argue too fast. Pray are not Descents and Inheritances governed by
Law? What Claim can we make to Privilege or Property without it? A Man when he
is about it, may as easily be born to 10000 l. a year as to 10 Pence. The
Trouble to himself, or his Mother, is much the same as to that matter. People
come into the World in Turkey the same way they do Here; and yet, excepting the
Royal Family, they get but little by it. Nature has set us all upon a Level as
to these Things: It Is only the Constitution which makes the Difference; and
therefore those who have the Advantage, should pay it a proportionable Respect.
--


Philot. I perceive you are coming on again: And to stop you a little, let me
tell you, it is my Observation, That the Custom of Duels puts Gentlemen upon
their good Behavior, it is a check upon Conversation, and makes it more
inoffensive than it would be otherwise.


Philal. An admirable Remedy! Just such a one as Death is against all Diseases.
If there must be Disputes, is not Squabling less inconvenient than Murder? Had
not a Man better have a black Eye, than a Napkin drawn through him; and Bleed
rather at the Nose than at the Heart? These Contests, though much better let
alone, make neither Orphans, nor Widows, nor perpetuate Feuds among Families.
Besides, the Disorders of Conversation may be prevented without such a
dangerous Expedient. For not to mention Religion, a moderate share of Prudence
and Behavior will do the Business. It Is not yet the Fashion for Women of
Quality to Tilt. Now though they can hate one another pretty heartily; though
their Humors are full as nice, and their Passions as strong, as those of the
other Sex; yet the Sense of Decency is sufficient to keep them from coarse
Language, and rude Provocations.


Philot. However, Misunderstandings will happen sometimes. And when they do, it
does not become Gentlemen to manage them like lesser People. Their Revenges
must be particular, as well as the rest of their Breeding. It looks as odly for
them to Quarrel, as to Salute like a Clown.


Philal. So that I perceive if Butchers had but the Manners to go to Sharps,
Gentlemen would be contented with a Rubber at Cuffs. If they must be singular
in their Disputes, let it be for the better I beseech you. Let us not be so
vain as to think it a Commendation to be more unreasonable in our Demands, and
more savage in our Resentments than the Meanest, and most Undisciplined. If
they must run counter to the Vulgar in every thing, I wonder they don't leave
off Swearing, Drinking, etc. These, by their Assistance, are grown Plebeian
Vices: Insomuch that Porters and Footmen are as perfect in them as themselves.


Philot. I grant you Clowns may Box it off, and be quiet; this way of
Satisfaction is agreeable enough to their little Pretensions. But the Honor of
a Gentleman must have other sort of Damages.


Philal. If the Dispute was between Peasant and Gentleman, you would say
something, though not enough. But you know a Gentleman is not obliged to Fight
another who is not so. Now where the Condition of the Disobliged is equal, at
least to the Degree of Gentlemen; why should the Affront be counted so mortal
an Injury? I know no reason for this, unless you will say, That Men of Quality
are obliged to be more Bloody and Implacable; and to carry their Passions to
greater heights of Fury, than other People. But this Plea proves them really
less, not greater than the common Size of Mankind; and is far wide of the true
Character of Honor. If Quality consists in such Sallies as these are; Tigers
and Fiends may put in for a considerable Share.


Philot. If this way of deciding Quarrels among Gentlemen were peculiar to our
Age or Country, your Reasoning would have more Force; but we have almost a
general Prescription of Time and Place against you.


Philal. Not so General as may be brought for the Heathen Religion, or the
Alcoran; and yet I hope you will not plead in defense of either of these. To
give you an Instance near home. The French you know are far from being an
inconsiderable Nation. Their Nobility are as numerous, and their Pretensions as
well supported; they have as much Fire in their Tempers, and as much Regard for
their Honor, as any of their Neighbors: Notwithstanding this, you see the
Practice of Duelling is absolutely suppressed, and they are all contented to
refer their Grievances to the Government.


Philot. The French King takes more care to right a Gentleman's Honor than is
done with us, which makes the Case different.


Philal. Particular satisfaction for every Affront in Conversation cannot be
awarded by Stated Laws; the Circumstances are too many to be brought within a
Rule. A Prince must be little less than absolute to do this effectually. Now
such a stretch of Prerogative would be agreeable neither to the English Genius,
nor Constitution. And is it not a hard Case that we must either deliver up all
our Property to the Crown; or our Lives to every ungovernable Passion and
Caprice?


Farther. You may remember that the Subject holds his Honor and Estate by no
other Tenure then the Laws. What a monstrous Injustice; what an Ingratitude;
what an insufferable Pride must it then be, for private Men to erect a
Magistracy of their own; to Judge and Execute in Matters of Life and Death; and
to Hang and Draw within themselves? If the Subjects may set the Laws aside with
so little Ceremony, and make Supplemental Provisions at Discretion, the
significancy of Government will be unintelligible. If Authority may be slighted
in an Instance of so high a Nature, why not in a hundred? And when the Fences
are thus broken down, Peace and Property Goodnight!


Philot. Your mentioning the French, puts me in mind of the old Romans; they
were a very brave People: Pray what was their Practice in the Case, for I have
almost forgot it?


Philal. Not at all for your purpose. It Is true, There was a sort of Duelling
among them, as that of the Horatii, and Curiatii; of Manlius Torquatus, and the
Gaul that Challenged the Army. But then there was a difference in the Persons
and Occasion. These Duellists were Enemies, Subjects of different Princes, a
sort of Fighting Representatives, chosen like David and Goliath, to decide the
Controversy of the Field. At least the Contest was allowed by Public
Authority, and undertaken upon the score of their Country. But as for one
Subjects cutting another Throat about private Disputes, they were perfect
Strangers to these Methods of Justice. When Milo killed Clodius upon the Road,
though there was no such thing as a Challenge; though Tully proves it no more
then a Rencounter; yet because there was a former misunderstanding between
them; neither the Rhetoric of the Council, nor the bravery of the Prisoner,
could prevent the Execution.


Philot. After all; you cannot deny but that the present Custom has prevailed
for several Ages.


Philal. So have a great many other ill things besides. There is scarcely any
Extravagance so singular as to want a Precedent. But Custom without Reason, is
no better then ancient Error. And since you press your Prescription, I shall
trace it to the Original. Now the Practice of Subjects Righting themselves by
the Sword, was introduced by the Lombards, Saxons, and Normans. A People, who
possibly at that time of day, had not Brains to decide the matter any other
way. For how much soever they may be of kin to us, we must own they were a very
unpolished sort of Mortals. And why should we be tied up to the Dictates of
Paganism and Ignorance? If a Man's House, and Habit, and Eating, was not better
than theirs; he would not be thought to have much of the Spirit of a Gentleman.
If we are bound to implicit Submission; if we are to follow Antiquity, without
any Exceptions of Judgment; Why don't we feed upon Mast, and lodge in Caves,
and go almost Naked? And to come nearer our Northern Ancestors; Why don't we
vindicate our selves by Trial Ordeal? Bath our Innocence in Scalding Water, and
hop over heated Plough-shares Blindfold?

Farther, We may observe that the Barbarity of this Custom was somewhat
restrained, and bound up, to certain Forms of Law. The Occasion was generally
Considerable: Either for wiping off Imputations of Treason, or prosecuting
Appeals of Murder, or trying Titles of Land. As for the Disputes of Sharpers,
of Bottles, Dice, and Wenches, we don't read of any Provisions made for the
Honor of such Sparks, and Diversions as these. We may observe,

Secondly, That the Men were just come off from Heathenism, and very
undisciplined in Life. Their Reason was in the Oar, and their Understandings as
low as their Morals. This Condition of things made their Princes either mislead
or indulge them. They had Authority to misguide their Conscience, to encourage
their Revenge, and in some measure to excuse it. The Writ of Combat was made
out in the King's Courts, and the whole manage of the Quarrel under the
Direction of the Government. 'Twas none of their way to be killed in
Hugger-mugger, and steal a Stabbing as they do now. (Cotton* posthum.)

Thirdly, If they fought without public Allowance, and any Person fell in the
Quarrel, the Survivers were apprehended and tried for Murder.

Fourthly, These Combats, though governed by these Restrictions, and under the
Countenance of Law, were always condemned by the Censures of the Church.


Philot. Do you think then, they are not capable of Regulation?


Philal. No more than Adultery. This Practice is Malum in se; and an ill thing
cannot be done within a Rule. It Is like a strong Poison, it must be Expelled;
for all the Cooking in Nature will never make Diet on it. It Is true, there are
degrees in Deformity, as well as Beauty; and therefore some Cases may be more
remarkable then others. For the purpose; when a Gentleman of Estate Fights an
indigent Bully, who possibly knows no more how to live in this World, then he
does in the next. This Man is angry to see his Neighbor in easy Circumstances.
And when it comes once to this; the strength of his Malice and the Opinion of
his Skill, will pick a Quarrel from a slender Occasion. Now should I desire him
to get an answerable Fortune before the Glove comes: To make the hazards of the
Combat equal, their Pockets as well their as Weapons should be in some measure
adjusted. To throw down a few Farthings, and make a Noise to have them covered
with Gold; would be absurd in a Wager; And a Man must be very weak to accept
it. And if Life be either valuable to keep, or dangerous to loose, one would
think the Parallel should hold. This venturing All against Nothing, puts me in
mind of Mark Antony, who after he had lost the Battle at Actium, and was Penned
up in Alexandria, would needs send Augustus a Challenge. Caesar's Answer was,
That if he was weary of Living, there was other ways of Dispatch besides
Fighting him; And for his part he should not trouble himself to be his
Executioner. Antony, I suppose, thought the return reasonable; and in a short
time did his own Business.


Philot. I confess, as you have represented the Case, it looks odly enough.


Philal. I will give you one that is more odd, if you call it so. I mean the
Mystery of Seconds, and Thirds.

This is such a Masterpiece; that I think no Description can reach it. These
Underpullers in Distraction, are such implicit Mortals as are not to be matched
upon any other occasion: A perfect Stranger shall Engage them at the first
word. To ask Questions would be ungentile. On they go without any Acquaintance
either with the Man, or the Matter. A most honorable Undertaking, to Fight
about they know not what; for, and against, they know not whom! So that for
ought they can tell, they may be under the Pious necessity of Murdering their
Father.


Philot. However you cannot say there is any Malice Prepence.


Philal. Right! There is nothing Prepence; neither Malice nor Reason. But for
all that, I don't like a Man that can hate at first Sight, and kill Extempore?


Philot. You mistake, a Second is not angry. He only engages in Complaisance to
his Principal.


Philal. So much the worse; because it argues the greater Contempt of human
Kind. For my Heart, I cannot understand a Combatant that can kill in cool Blood;
and show the utmost effects of Rage without Passion! It Is a Sign his common
Temper is as bad as the Malice, and Provocations of other People. This Stoical
Improvement, is the Philosophy of a Butcher. It makes a Beast of an Enemy, and
knocks him down with as little concern as if he were an Ox.


Philot. To requite you for your extraordinary Instances, I will give you a
pretty tough one on the other side. If a Soldier refuses a Challenge from
another, he will not only be counted a Coward, but in all likelihood Cashiered
into the Bargain.


Philal. The Case is hard I confess, but not yours; for you are none of the
Military List. To those who may be concerned, I answer.

1. You know the Challenger is punished as well as the Challenged; which
Discipline will prevent the Case from being common. But when it does happen, it
may be replied in the

Second Place, That he who professes Arms, may prove his Courage by more
defensible Instances. His former Behavior in the Field is oftentimes
sufficient to wipe off an Aspersion of Cowardice.

Thirdly, If he is not furnished with Proof this way: Let him desire his
Superior Officer that the next time he is drawn out, the Challenger may be
Posted near him. And then would I heartily convince him, and the Enemy to boot,
that I wanted no Resolution. If a Man miscarries in such a Trial, he may
justify himself to his Reason. He dies in his Calling; and if nothing else
hinders, he may look the other World in the Face.


Philot. But a Soldier may sometimes wait a long while for such an Opportunity
of purging himself: And would you have him starved, and laughed at, in the mean
time?


Philal. Let him remember he is a Christian as well as a Soldier; and that he
was first Listed under God Almighty. Now a Man of Honor will rather starve,
than be false to a solemn Engagement. And where the Cause is just, he is to be
commended for his Constancy. And if Interest strikes in too, it is not only
Criminal but Weakness to desert it. As for the point of Contempt, let him
return it with pity: It Is no Dishonor to be undervalued by those who want
either Understanding, or Conscience, or both. If bare Contempt without Reason
is so terribly Significant, a Fool would be better than a Philosopher; a Slave
than an Emperor; provided the first had but the Insolence to scorn the latter.


Philot. For all that, you will have a great many against you.


Philal. So there are a great many Sheep, but I think never the Wiser for their
Number.


Philot. Do you think then this Custom is so absolutely forbidden by Religion?


Philal. I am surprised one Baptized should put the Question! In earnest, I
believe this Notion of Honor as much an Idol, as Nebuchadnezzar's Golden
Image: It Is set up by the same Interest, and probably has done more Mischief.


Philot. If it be so, the Metal must be good, according to your own Comparison.


Philal. Yes. But the Worship is stark naught, and less to be chosen than the
Fiery Furnace. It Is great pity so much good Blood should be offered at it. That
Men who have such Opportunities for Sense, should be entangled in so monstrous
an Absurdity! That those who might be the Ornament of their Age, and Defense of
their Country, should make themselves a Misfortune to both!


Philot. I believe the danger of the Adventure makes them think it honorable.


Philal. Look you! To risque the Main without Reason or Warrant, is Rashness:
It Is to be more Stupid than Brave. If a Man should leap a Garret, or vault down
the Monument, do you imagine he would leave the Memory of a Hero behind him?


Philot. Methinks it is fine to seem above the Impressions of Fear, and to Flash
in the Face of Danger.


Philal. I grant you Fortitude is a very valuable Quality. But then it must be
under the Conduct of Prudence and Justice: Without this Assistance the best
Event will prove Ruinous, and the Victory it self a Defeat.


Philot. You mean Religion will not endure the Duelling Principle.


Philal. No more than all the Heresies since Simon Magus. It Is a Principle so
full of Pride, and Passion, and Revenge; so Tempestuous and Absurd; so
absolutely unallied to Reason and Goodnature, that polisht Heathenism would be
ashamed on it. In a Word, It Is as contrary to the Tendency and Temper of
Christianity, as Hobs's Creed is to the Apostles, as Light is to Darkness, as
God is to the Devil.


Philot. It Is a hard matter to part with the Character of a Gentleman.


Philal. Fear it not. As long as the Laws are on our side, the Heraldry is all
safe And if it were otherwise, let us remember we are Christians. If there
happens a Competition between these two Pretensions; let us drop the Gentleman
and keep the Christian; for he is a Person of the best Quality.


Philot. Say you so?


Philal. Yes. I say a Christian and no Gentleman, is more a Person of
Condition, than a Gentleman and no Christian. The former is more nobly Related,
Born to a greater Fortune, and better Founded in personal Merit.


Philot. You say something. I wish you would enlarge upon this Head.


Philal. You know my Business is not Preaching; any Divine will give you
Satisfaction.


Philot. Upon second Thoughts, they need not: A little of the Bible will do it
without them. To speak frankly, I am so well satisfied upon the whole, that I
am resolved to take no Notice of my Spark; but I am afraid he will Post me up
for a Coward, and how then?


Philal. I would mind it no more than the Railing of a Fever, or a
Proclamation from Bedlam.


Philot. I shall take your Advise. But I must tell you withal, That if he
draws upon me in the Streets, I will not be so passive as to let the Sun shine
through me if I can help it.


Philal. I have nothing to say as to that. But then you should wish the
Occasion may never happen; and keep your Resolution to your self. For to give
out this sort of Language, looks too like a Provocation: And if you should be
so unfortunately set upon, be sure you keep within the Compass of Self-defence.


OF General Kindness.
The Fifth CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes.
Philot. WHat false, humorsome, insipid Creatures are Men! Sure these are none
of the best Things God ever made! Upon the whole, I think one might as good
disband, and turn Hermit, as be troubled with them any longer. I begin now to
understand the Conduct of the first Monks, but believe their History
misreported. They fled the Persecution of Mankind, more than that of a single
Tyrant. They preferred the Wilderness to the Town, and found their Safety and
their Satisfaction better secured in Solitude, than Society. For a wild Beast
does not pretend above his Order, and is so frank as to discover his Design:
But a Man is a Beast, and yet has not the Modesty to own it. Hah! here is
Philalethes, he has overheard me: In earnest, I shall be called to an Account
for my Expostulations!


Philal. What, Mr. Hobs's Ghost! No less than a Satyr upon your whole Kind? I Am
not sorry I have interrupted your Soliloquies, except they had been better
natured.


Philot. I did not think you had been so near: But since you have catched me,
give me leave to tell you I know the World, and upon Experiment I find there is
not one in forty without Design, or Vanity, in their Conversation. Pray peruse
your Acquaintance well, and if you don't discover some Flaw in their Honesty,
or their Humor, I Am much mistaken.


Philal. Are not you a Man, Philotimus?


Philot. What then?


Philal. Then, by your own Confession, it is forty to one but that some part of
the disagreable Character belongs to your self.


Philot. However, you know Odds will not win Wagers; Difficulties are not
Demonstrations; it is unreasonable to argue from Improbabilities against Matter
of Fact. If I find my self Well; if my Constitution, or my Care, is my
Preservative, you must not charge the Plague upon me, because I converse with
Epidemical Infection.


Philal. You are resolved to keep Well with your self: I doubt not but in time
your good Opinion will reach your Neighbors: They may, to use your own
Similitude, be as free from Contagion as your self: And if they are seized, the
Plague is not always Mortal. Besides, it might have been your own Case. So that
all things considered, I hope you will not Mark the House upon bare Suspicion:
And when the Tokens appear, you will pity their Condition, and endeavor their
Recovery.


Philot. Do deal freely, I shall take care of my self, and so I suppose will
every body else that is wise. For that which People call Universal Benevolence
is but a piece of Knight Errantry: It looks prettily in a Romance, but in Life
it is neither prudent, nor practicable.


Philal. Do you think it so impracticable an Absurdity to wish all People well,
and endeavor to make them so?


Philot. What of all Persuasions, Countries, Tempers, and Conditions,
whatsoever?


Philal. Yes. We comprehend all Mankind in the League.


Philot. You have a notable Grasp: I dare not strain my Inclinations at that
rate. I love to keep fair with the World as well as you, but it may be upon
different Reasons. In a word, I take Civility to be only a Compliance with the
Mode, Friendship but another Name for Trade, all mercenary and designing.
Indeed considering the state of humane Affairs, it is next to impossible to be
otherwise. Where there is so much of Indigence, Competition, and Uncertainty,
you must expect Self-interest will govern. You may observe, That which you call
Good Nature, is most remarkable in the Young and Unexperienced. Such Persons I
confess are often very Lavish of their Favors, and Caressing in their
Conversation: But these Blandishments seem only designed for a State of
Impotence; that what they cannot carry by Force and Foresight, they may obtain
by Flattery. Like unfledged Birds, they are fond of every one, that they may be
Fed the better. And where this Reason fails, that which I am going to add will
supply it.


Philal. What is that?


Philot. Why young People generally don't Think so far as others, nor consider
a Necessity at a Distance: This often makes them more Liberal than Wise. They
are apt to be over-credulous at first Setting out; and cannot so well see
through Artifice and Pretense: So that it is no wonder if they bestow their
Inclinations too freely upon their Neighbors.


Philal. This early Disposition to Oblige, appears to me an Impression of
Nature, which was intended for Continuance: For as the Use and Posture of the
Limbs hold the same in Manhood as they were in Infancy; so one would think the
Motions of the Mind should be set Right at first. And therefore when good
Humor happens to wear off with Age, it seems to proceed from Misnanagement;
and looks more like a Degeneracy of Nature, than an Improvement of Reason. If
you please to hear me, I shall endeavor to prove Universal Benevolence both an
acknowledged, and a practicable Disposition.


Philot. Pray begin.


Philal. My first Argument then shall be drawn from Community of Nature. We are
all cast in the same Mould, allied in our Passions, and in our Faculties: We
have the same Desires to satisfy, and generally the same Pleasure in satisfying
of them. All Mankind is as it were one great Being, divided into several Parts;
every part having the same Properties and Affections with another. Now as we
cannot choose but desire Accommodations for our own Support and Pleasure; so if
we leave Nature to her Original Biass, if we hearken to the undepraved
Suggestions of our Minds, we shall wish the same Conveniences to others. For
the apprehending a Being so like our own, in prosperous Circumstances, must be
an Advancement of our selves: By this we see as it were our own Nature pleased,
and Flourishing in another. And thus much Mr. Hobs himself confesses to the
Ruin of his Cause, That the Sense of haviug communicated Satisfaction is
naturally Delightful.


Philot. But will this Notion spread wide enough to do any Execution?


Philal. Yes. For if a Man can but disengage himself from the Excesses of
Self-love, in a single Instance, he does the Business. If he can but wish well
to another, without making Interest the only Motive, he may be generous enough
to take all Mankind into his Affections. For he that can do it to one, without
any mercenary View, may for the same reason do it to a Million. It Is but
repeating the Action, where for his Encouragement the Pleasure will be likewise
repeated. --


Philot. You are going too fast. The different Capacities and Behavior of Men
will leave your Repetition neither Sense, nor Possibility: For to love
Insignificancy is Dotage, and seldom passes any farther than Children or
Relations. --


Philal. For all that; one may wish a poor Man an Estate, or a Fool
Understanding; there is no unconquerable Aversion, nor so much as any
Difficulty in these things.


Philot. I say farther; to love malicious and disobliging Qualities is
impossible.


Philal. If those Qualities were inseparable from the Object, I grant your
Meaning: But where Malice is only Accidental, and Reformation possible, the
Case is otherwise. A Physician may have a Kindness for the Patient, without
being fond of the Disease.


Philot. To illustrate your Distinction. If a Man gives me a sower Box on the
Ear; I may love the Hand, though I don't like the Blow. I assure you he that
can thus abstract the Affront from the Person that gives it, and take off a
Cuff so metaphysically, is very much a Philosopher.


Philal. If you are not satisfied, I Will consider your Objection farther
afterward. At present I shall go on to a second Proof, That Universal
Benevolence is agreeable to humane Nature, unless you have a mind to interpose.


Philot. Not just now. Take your Method.


Philal. I prove my Point, from that Compassion which generally follows any
considerable Misfortune. This Civility is so very common, and so much expected,
that those who are unconcerned at the Troubles of another, are called Inhumane.
i. e. They are degenerated from their Kind, and don't deserve the Name of Men.
And does it not plainly follow, That those who are thus sensibly Touched, must
have a real Kindness for the Unfortunate?


Philot. I think not. For Compassion is but the Consequence of Infirmity, and
bottomed upon Self-love. We are affected with what another suffers, because
this puts us in mind we are not secure our selves. And when our Neighbor's
Calamity discovers more than the possibility of our own, it is no wonder if we
are somewhat uneasy.


Philal. I grant you Compassion may be sometimes accounted for, as you say: But
then it is a Mistake to suppose it can come from no other Cause. For it is easy
to observe, That the most generous Dispositions are the most Compassionate.
Such Persons, though their Fortune is never so well Guarded; though the
greatness of their Mind exempts them from Fear, and makes them least concerned
for any Accident of their own, yet none condole and sympathize more heartily
than they. It Is plain therefore that this Pity and Tenderness, being so void of
Self-interest, must proceed from Good Will.


Philot. Go on. I shall come in with you by and by.


Philal. I affirm then in the

Third place, That it is not agreeable to the Attributes of God to suppose, that
he has made the Nature of Man such, that according to his Original
Inclinations, he should be unconcerned about the Happiness of his Neighbor.


Philot. Why so?


Philal. Because this would be a Reflection both upon the Goodness, and Wisdom,
of God Almighty.


Philot. Prove the Parts of your Assertion.


Philal. 1. This Supposition is repugnant to the Goodness of God. For can we
imagiue that God, who is infinite Goodness himself, who made all rational
Creatures that they might be Happy; can we imagine that he should contradict
the Affections of his own Blessed Nature, and form a Being wholly unlike
himself? A Being which he would not only hate as soon as it was made; but,
which is more, he could impute his Dislike to nothing but his own Workmanship?
But if either out of Indifferency, or Disaffection, 'twas contrary to the
Nature of Man to wish the Happiness of another, he must be such a Thing as I
have described. And is it possible to conceive, That Goodness and Perfection
can be the Parent of so unlovely an Offspring? That the overflowing
Generousness of the Divine Nature, would create immortal Beings with mean or
envious Principles? To be thus furnished, would make them both Miserable and
Troublesome; neither acceptable to this World, nor fit for the other.


Philot. These Inclinations you so much dislike are very common; therefore if
they don't come from Above, you must find them out some other Original.


Philal. That will be done without difficulty. To begin; The Reason which
hinders Men from wishing the Happiness of others, proceeds sometimes from the
Prejudices of Education, from the ill Examples and Flatteries of those they
first conversed with, and sometimes it is afterward contracted by their own
Fault. The general Cause of this Depravation, is Covetousness, and Pride.

1. An immoderate Love of Money spoils those generous Dispositions they were
sent into the World with. It confines their Affections to their Pockets, and
shrinks up their Desires into the narrow and scandalous Compass of their own
Concerns. Their Nature is so impoverished by their ill Management, that they
are not able to spare one kind Wish from themselves, nor expend one generous
Thought in favor of another.


Philot. The Case is somewhat worse than you have represented it. People don't
always keep within the terms of Neutrality. They are not contented to forbear
Wishing well, but are oftentimes averse to the Happiness of others.


Philal. Right. When Pride strikes in, that is the Consequence. This Vice makes
Men think their Neighbors Advantage prejudicial to their own; and that the
greatest Pleasure is to see others beneath them. Such an ill-natured Notion as
this, made Lucifer uneasy, and envious in Heaven; and we know what was the
Issue. Far be it from us to suppose, that God would stamp such Ignoble, such
Apostatizing Qualities upon any rational Being. These would not be the Image of
the Deity, but the Devil.


Philot. In my Opinion Self-love seems the best Expedient to secure
Individuals. By such a Bent of Nature, a Man will be sure to take care of one,
and not leave his Business to the Generosity of his Neighbors.


Philal. If every one could stand upon his own Legs, what you say would have a
better Color. However, your Objection leads me to show you, That it reflects
upon the Wisdom of God, to suppose Men made with such narrow inconversable
Inclinations: For by this Temper they would be unfit for Society. But God has
designed Man a sociable Creature. To this end he has sent him into the World
weak, and defenseless; so that without the Care of others it is impossible for
him to subsist. And when he is best able to Shift, if he had no Assistance, or
Converse but his own, the Indigence of his Nature would make him very uneasy,
and ill supplied.

Now there is nothing so strongly cements Society; nothing makes it flower, and
flourish so much, as a hearty Regard to the public Good. It Is general Kindness
and Good Will, which establishes the Peace, and promotes the Prosperity of a
People: To say, this Disposition keeps Men just and inoffensive, is too mean a
Commendation. It improves their Practice much higher, and makes them Munificent
and Obliging. Without this Virtue the public Union must unloose, the Strength
decay, and the Pleasure grow faint and languid. And can we suppose that God
would underfurnish Man for the State he designed him, and not afford him a Soul
large enough to pursue his Happiness? That he should give him Solitary
Principles, and yet intend him for public Converse? Create him so, that he
shall naturally care for nothing but himself; and at the same time make his
Interest depend upon mutual Affection, and good Correspondence with others? Is
it imaginable that such a comprehensive Wisdom, which has made all things in
Number, Weight, and Measure; secured the Preservation of Brutes, by Instinct
and Sympathy, and made so fair a Provision for the inferior World; Is it to be
conceived, I say, that so glorious a Providence should not proportion the
Faculties of his noblest Creatures, but send them into Being with Inclinations
unsuitable to the Condition they must necessarily be placed in?


Philot. Under favor, the^e are other Materials for a Commonwealth besides
stark Love and Kindness, and I believe the Building might last, without
tempering the Mortar with Honey. What do you say to the fear of receiving Harm,
and the hopes of Assistance? These are the Motives of Self-love, and I think
sufficient to make Men just, and willing to do a good Turn.


Philal. Truly I think not. I grant you these Motives are not insignificant:
They have an Interest in Life, but not enough to push it to Perfection, and
secure it is Happiness. For first they will not restrain a secret Mischief which
considering the unfortified State of Mankind, is a great Defect. Besides, the
Agreableness of Society must be lost this way. It Is Inclination and Endearment
that gives Life and Pleasure. But when People have nothing but Fears, and
Jealousies and Plots in their Heads, there is no Music in their Company. And
farther, I would gladly know, how these scanty Principles can explain why Men
should dye for their Friends, and sacrifice their Interest for their Country,
without Necessity? By the Maxims of Self-love, such Actions as these must be
foolish and unnatural: And yet those who are thus forgetful of themselves, have
been alwas reckoned the Noblest, and best Deserving.


Philot. You forget that there is such a thing as Honor and vain Glory in the
World. This is the Bait that catches the Men you speak of: It Is the Reputation
of the Action that fires their Spirits, and makes them so Prodigal, and
Resigning.


Philal. In earnest you are catched your self! Your Objection supposes the
Truth of what I am contending for. It supposes that Benevolence and Generosity
are possessed of the public Esteem; That they have Custom and Prescription on
their side; That they are the highest Improvements of the Will, the most
admired and heroic Qualities. Now it is very strange, so universal a Consent
should be founded in a Mistake; and none but Mr. Hobs, and some few of his
Discipling, should understand the Operations of their own Minds, and the right
Constitution of them.


Philot. Well! If this World will not satisfy you, the other shall. I say then,
That the fear of invisible Powers, and the Expectations of future Punishments,
are sufficient to keep Men upon their good Behavior; to be a check upon their
Privacies, and make them honest at Midnight. And yet after all, they may have
no great Stomach to the Matter. It Is the Rod, not the Inclination, which learns
the Lesson.


Philal. I grant you the Disciplining part of Religion is very significant.
However, it would not give a sufficient Relief in this Case.


Philot. Why so?


Philal. Because upon your Supposition the Force of it would be lost. For if
the Nature of Man was averse to general Kindness; if he could not choose but
think it unreasonable to love any Body but himself, then God in commanding him
to love his Neighbor would oblige him to an impossibility. We might as well be
commanded to taste Gall as sweet as Honey: For it is as much in our Power to
alter the Perceptions of our Senses, as to love any thing contrary to our
Reason and Inclination. Upon this Supposition therefore no Man could have an
inward Affection for his Neighbor, which yet it is certain we are obliged to
have.


Philot. If I am used well I Will never trouble my self about what People think.
If they always act like Friends, they may wish like Enemies, if they please.


Philal. Have a Care! If they are not so within, they will not be long so
without. For if we had a kind of Antipathy against minding any thing but our
selves: If we thought our own Interest prejudiced, or our Quiet embarrassed by
being concerned for others, in this Case, all Offices of Humanity and
Obligation, would be so many Acts of Penance. And since the opportunities of
Obliging return so fast; to be commanded the Use of them, would make our Lives
almost a perpetual Torment. It would be like feeding upon that we naturally
abhor; which instead of nourishing, would throw us into Sweats and Convulsions.
And at this rate a Kindness would often be a greater Mischief to the Doer, than
a Benefit to the Receiver. The Upshot is, that if the Mind of Man was naturally
averse from Wishing well to any thing but himself, the command of general
Benevolence would be impossible to be entertained in Principle, and Affection.
And as for the Counterfeit in outward Practice, that would be such a Grievance
to ill Nature, that very few would submit to it. For if Men are so unreasonable
as not to be governed by Religion Now, when it is both profitable and pleasant,
of how little force would it be, should it lie almost wholly in Violence and
Aversion? If Envy, and ill Nature, were the natural Frame and Complexion of the
Mind, Religion would signify not much toward Reformation; so that Society
could receive but small Advantage from thence. --


Philot. Hold! Don't cry Victory, I have a Reserve for you. Besides, you owe me
some Satisfaction to an old Objection.


Philal. What Is that?


Philot. I told you that the Injuriousness and the Vanity of a great part of
the World was such, That general Kindness, if it came down from Speculation to
Practice, would be quickly out of doors. I confess if we could stand clear of
the Troublesome and the Treacherous, I could be as good natured as the best of
you. But alas, we are in foece Romuli, and that is enough to stir any Man's
Spleen, that has either his Understanding, or his Senses about him.


Philal. You find Coldness and Disaffection very general, and thence you argue
from Fact to Necessity. It Is so, therefore it must be so. Under favor, that is
no Consequence. I suppose that you will grant that Men don't act always up to the
stretch of their Capacities: And that it is possible for them to be much more
Prudent, Benign, and Inoffensive, than they are.


Philot. What then? Would you have a Man a Stock, must he not be sensible of
ill Usage?


Philal. Look you, all ill Usage proceeds from ignorance and disorder of Mind.
Those that give it, are the greatest Sufferers. They destroy their own
Happiness more than ours. And under this Notion they will deserve our
Compassion much better than our Hatred: Our Charity will take them in as
naturally as Bedlam. It Is true, there may be some degrees of difference in the
Distraction, but that is all. And as we may Wish, we may likewise Attempt their
Welfare: Not only out of Pity, and common Alliance; but also from the Prospect
of a Return.


Philot. How so?


Philal. Why by our Kindness we shall either reform the injurious Person or
not; if we do, the ground of our Dislike is gone, and we have made him more
commodious for our purpose; if we are disappointed, we shall have the
satisfaction of doing Good against Evil, which as it is the most divine Quality,
so to maintain it, the Pleasure is proportionably raised. There is a secret
Triumph and Exultation of Spirit upon such an occasion. There is no one that
acts in this manner who does not inwardly applaud himself for it; which is as
much as to say. God bids him go on.


Philot. If we may be Kind to those we believe our Enemies: (...) we can fall
in Love with Malice and Opposition, then by parity of reason we may court
undisguised Ruin, and hate our selves.


Philal. If by Kindness you mean Pity and good Wishes, I think it very
practicable to go thus far with an Enemy; but if you enlarge your Sense to
Complacency and Affection, I grant it impossible. Besides, there is no need of
winding up the String thus high: We are not obliged to be pleased with those
that do us Mischief; the Goodness of God himself does not proceed thus far. For
tho he is kind to the Unthankful and the Evil, and desires the Conversion of a
Sinner, yet he does not delight in him while he continues such.


Philot. When you have made the most of it, I foresee this Latitudinarian Love
will be expensive; and therefore I would gladly be farther informed what is to
be gotten by it.


Philal. Very much. In good earnest this Quality is well worth the Courting;
it is valuable in Fortune, as well as in Beauty and Humor. 'Twill make a Man an
interest in the World. It removes Difficulties, and smooths the Passage for
Business; and like the Marriage of Princes, there is Policy as well as Pleasure
in the Alliance. You know the Trade of Life cannot be driven without Partners;
there is a reciprocal Dependence between the Greatest and the Least. And the
best Figure is but a Cipher, where it stands alone. For this reason a wise Man
will strengthen the Confederacy, and take in all the Help he can get. Now there
is nothing so engaging as a benevolent Disposition. This Temper makes a Man's
Behavior inoffensive, affable, and obliging; it multiplies Friends, and
disarms the Malice of an Enemy. He that is kind out of Principle, will be so to
all the Advantages of Decency and Compass. That which is Natural, is Uniform,
Constant, and Graceful. Whereas he who Counterfeits good Nature, he who is
civil only out of Breeding or Design, will be apt to have Breaks, and
Inequalities in his Humor. A Man cannot always stand bent; so that either
Negligence, or Passion, or Interest, will some time or other return the
Posture, and unmask the Pretense, and then the Labor is all lost. But the
natural Complexion of Goodness will hold.


Philot. Yes, till the Man breaks.


Philal. No fear of that. This Quality will do more than pay for its keeping.
Remember that Power goes in with the Inclinations of Course: Get but Men's
Hearts, and their Hands will follow. But to do this, there is nothing more
likely than a plausible and obliging Honesty. The Charms of Kindness are
irresistible; they conquer, and captivate, and return with Spoil and Triumph.
Besides, the Assistance that comes from Inclination, is generally safer, and
more serviceable, than that which is haled in by Force or Money. He that reigns
in the Affections is the happy Prince; for in Love there is neither Treachery
nor Desertion. A Man remarkably Obliging, is almost proof against the most
Malicious. They Will be afraid of attaquing one so fortified in public Esteem,
and under so sacred a Character. Though his Virtue may be over-looked, the
Infamy of the Action will prevent an ^njury.


Philot. Will this Disposition do us any farther Service?


Philal. Yes; our Affection to others gives us a share in their Happiness, and
so becomes an Addition to our own. Wishing well enlarges a Man's Capacity of
being Happy: This hinders his Satisfaction from being confined to his private
Interest. He is really the better for whatever good his Neighbor enjoys;
because every thing of this Nature satisfies his desires, and gives him that he
delights in.


Philot. I warrant you his Mind is like a Burning-glass! The Rays of good
Fortune from all diversities of Points* concenter in his Benevolence, and
excite an intense and multiplied Pleasure?


Philal. Yes. And in a great measure make him Master of all the Happiness he
sees, or hears of. All prosperous Events, all Improvements of Industry, and
Blessings of Providence which he is acquainted with, his excellent Temper gives
him an ^nterest in; for tho he has not the Possession of these things, he has
what is most desirable, the Satisfaction of them. Nay, I believe the generous
Congratulation may be improved to exceed the Occasion; and make a Man more
happy than those he rejoices for. In this Case, the Laws of Nature give way for
the Encouragement of Goodness, the Stream rises higher than the Fountain, and
the Rebound is stronger than the first Motion.


Philot. This is a new way of extracting the Spirit of Happiness; the Chemistry
of a Be is nothing to it: It sucks the Sweet, without impoverishing the
Flower. Were I Master of this Secret, I would not concern my self about laying
in the usual Provision for Satisfaction. No, I would rather choose to be happy
at the second hand, that is much the easier way; there the Gains come in a
main, without any Venture. For Instance. I would not trouble my self about
getting an Estate; 'twere only Loving a Man dearly that has one, and that will
do as well. But the Mischief is, at present I am not a Man of that fortunate
Imagination.


Philal. The power of Thought and Imagination you know is very great, and
therefore it is prudent to set them the right way at work.


Philot. Be it so. I shall allow your Argument in some measure, and make my
Advantage upon it.


Philal. Which way?


Philot. Why, if kind Wishing and Obliging are such entertaining Actions; if
they may be carried up to transport, and almost sensuality; then your general
Benevolence is nothing but a resined sort of Self-love, because it acts upon a
foreseen Reward. I told you Self would be at the Bottom after All.


Philal. So let it, since it has Company. For let me tell you, to be delighted
in the Happiness of another, is so far from being mercenary, that it is an
infallible proof of a natural and undissembled Goodness. How can we better
demonstrate the reality of our Affections to a Friend, than by rejoicing at his
Prosperity? As for the Pleasure which attends so noble a Disposition, the
Expectation of that is no vicious self design. For we are allowed to love our
selves, as well as our Neigbour: So that the prospect of being pleased does not
lessen the generosity of the Action, if His Advantage was as sincerely sought,
and delighted in, as our own. Therefore by Charitys not seeking her own, (which
you know is made a part of its Character) is only meant, that it does not seek
its own, without a joint Respect to the Welfare of another. In short, I think
the Pleasure of Congratulation is so far from a Fault, that the first
Satisfaction ought rather to create a second; we should be pleased with our
Pleasure, because it brings us the good News that our Minds are rightly
disposed.


Philot. I confess I am beaten off here, but hope to succeed better in my next
Attempt. --


Philal. In the mean time give me leave to observe, that Envy and Disquiet are
uneasy Passions; they fret and exhaust the Spirits. The Mind is as it were
sore, and put to pain at every turn, which is a fair Intimation things are not
in the Condition they should be.


Philot. And what help is there for all this?


Philal. A kind reconciling Thought is present Remedy. This Balsamic Humor
closes the Wound, and scatters the Anguish. Like the Motion of Restitution, it
returns Nature to her Ease, and sets her in the Posture she was made for.


Philot. I grant you Benevolence has a healing Quality, and sits very smooth at
first. But as the World goes the Consequences of it are more likely to make us
unhappy, than otherwise.


Philal. How so?


Philot. If you look Abroad you will find Indigence, and Disappointment, and
Vexation, much more common than Prosperity. Now this predominancy of Misfortune
lies very hard upon Benevolence, and makes the kindest People the greatest
Sufferers. Their Compassion rises in proportion to their Generosity; their
Tenderness is more passive, which makes a foreign Calamity strike deeper, and
grow more pungent. Having strong desires to Relieve, but small Abilities to
effect it; their good Nature must needs grow troublesome, because 'twill often
make 'em Wish those things which they see are impossible to compass. But others
who keep their Inclinations at Home, are not so much exposed to disquiet;
because their Passions and Expectations being confined to their private
Interest, they are concerned for no Misfortune but their own.


Philal. Supposing what you say would hold, it would be no just discouragement
to Goodness, considering how much it will be rewarded hereafter. But because
your Objection relates chiefly to the present, I shall direct my Answer against
that Sense, and give it you by Parts.

I affirm therefore, That if a Man does but join Consideration with his
Benevolence; if his Understanding be good, as well as his Will, his Affection
for the common Welfare will never hurt him. For

1. He will perceive that the unhappy part of the World is not so numerous as
at first it appeared. Those who are of low Condition, tho they may seem most
Deserted, are not the worst Provided for. Their Fortune is little it is true,
and so generally are their Desires, which makes them want as few things as
those whose Possessions are larger. They have the Pleasure of their Senses as
well as others; and what is denied in Variety, is supplied by Labor, which
sharpens the Appetite, and strengthens the Constitution.

2. As for those who are real Objects of Compassion, the old Maxim will in
great measure relieve them; Dolor, si gravis brevis, si longus levis. At the
worst, Life and Misery will be dispatched e're long; and then, if they deserve
it, they are Happy; as Happy as Goodness can wish.

3. Commiseration has a mixture of Satisfaction, as well as Trouble in it. By
this a Man is conscious he does the Office of a Friend; that he is of a
generous and humane Disposition. These Thoughts make the Pleasure of the
Sympathy equalize the Trouble, if the Person be not very near, or the Calamity
very great, which we are concerned for.


Philot. There is something in what you say; for I have observed that Women
will Weep and Condole with abundance of Tenderness and Affection: I believe
they are pleased with the Pomp and Passion of their Sorrow; and think
themselves the best Natured People in the World for it.


Philal. We should interpret all Signs of good Nature in the fairest Sense. But
I shall proceed, and observe

4. A wise Well wisher will consider there is a necessity of Discipline, both
to secure the Orderly and reclaim the Evil. Goals and Gibbets are as useful in
a State, as great Places, and Patents of Honor. Where Goodness is mutable, and
Reason unabsolute, there must be Rigor to fence in Duty, and check the Abuse
of Liberty. As things stand, it is not conceivable how Providence can Govern
without Punishing. Upon this Contemplation a good Man will no more be disturbed
at the Methods of Correction, than by seeing his Friend take unpalatable
Physic, which he knows to be proper for his Health. And as for those who are
lost beyond Recovery, tho he wishes twere otherwise, yet their obstinacy does
'not so deeply affect him as to make him uneasy.


Philot. Is not such a Sedateness a Sign of Neglect, and Stoical Indifference?


Philal. Not at all. The Saints above are not afflicted at the Punishment of
the damned, and yet they have Charity in perfection: But your Objection runs
into an absurd Inference. It dilutes the Happiness of the other World, and
gives Hell an Influence upon Heaven.


Philot. I have nothing farther to object, and therefore must be your
Proselyte: But if you have any more to say, let us hear it, for a Man can never
be too well fortified against Custom.


Philal. Yes. General Kindness may be recommended from the Nobleness of such a
Temper. It springs from a generous Root, and spreads and flourishes upon the
best Nourishment imaginable. There Is nothing in it that is Mercenary or
Fantastical. It Is not supported by Chance or Humor, by Flattery or Design: It
stands upon its own independent Strength, and holds on through all Opposition.
It Is above Discouragement and ill Usage, and not so much as checked into
Indifferency, by frequent Injury and Provocation. I need say no more for this
Virtue, than that it is the Temper of God. This Truth I shall take for granted.
Indeed the Universe proves it; all the Powers and Delights of Nature are
standing Evidence. If Omnipotence were in other Hands than Goodness, we should
feel terrible Effects on it. Now to resemble God is the Perfection of Virtue;
it is doing the wisest and the greatest Action in its Kind. To mention but one
Advantage, We cannot recommend our selves more effectually to God Almighty than
by delighting in the same Actions which he does. Love naturally arises from
Likeness of Disposition. Our Imitation of another is an unquestioned proof that
we value his Person, and admire his Choice; which lays a kind of an Obligation
for a return. Such a Consent of Wills, such an Uniformity of Desires, does as
it were incorporate distinct Essences, and makes us almost the same thing with
another; so that as long as he has a Regard for himself, he must have one for
us too. By being of the same Temper with God Almighty, we do as it were engage
his Inclinations to make us happy. While we are thus affected, he can no more
be unconcerned about our Welfare, than he can deny himself, or put a neglect
upon his own Attributes. --


Philot. You may please to hold your hand. For I am so far convinced, That
unless I am Kind to others, I shall now be forced to fall out with my self.


Philal. May the Impression continue.


Philot. I hope recollecting the Reasons, will make it do so.


Your Servant.

THE END.

