THE DESERTION DISCUSSED.
In a Letter to a Country Gentleman.
SIR,
I Don't wonder to find a Person of your Sense and Integrity so much surprised
at the Report of the Throne's being declared Vacant, by the lower House of the
Convention: For how (say you) can the Seat of the Government b^ Empty, while
the King, who all grant had an unquestionable Title, is still Living, and his
Absence forced and involuntary? I thought our Laws, as well as our Religion,
had been against the Deposing Doctrine; therefore I desire you would Expound
this State Riddle to me, and give me the Ground of this late exeraordinary
Revolution. In answer to your Question, you may please to take notice, That
those Gentlemen of the Convention, and the rest of their Sentiments, who
declare a Vacancy in the Government, lay the main stress of their Opinion upon
his Majesty's withdrawing himself: For now, especially since the Story of the
French Leagu^, and the Business of the Prince of Wales, are passed over in
Silence, most Men believe that the pretended Breach of that which they call The
Original Contract was designed for no more than a popular Flourish.

And that you may be not be shocked by seeing the Votes of so considerable and
public a Meeting debated by a private hand, give me leave to remind you, That
a Parliament, and a Convention, are two very different Things: The latter, for
want of the King's Writs and Concurrence, having no share in the Legislative
Power. If it is urged, That the present Posture and Exigence of Affairs, is a
sufficient Dispensation with the usual Preliminaries and Forms of Parliament.
To this I am obliged to answer, That this pretended Necessity is either of
their own Making, or of their own Submitting to, which is the same thing; and
therefore ought not to be pleaded in Justification of their Proceedings. For if
his Majesty had either not been driven out of his Dominions, or invited back
upon honorable Terms, they needed not to have had recourse to these singular
Methods. And since they have neither the Authority of Law, or Necessity, to
support their Determinations, I hope they will not think themselves disobliged,
if they are inquired into; and some part of that Liberty which they have taken
with his Majesty be returned upon themselves. For all private and unauthorised
Opinions are to be regarded no farther than they prove their point. Like Plate
without the Royal Impression, they ought not to be obtruded for current Coin;
nor rated any higher than the intrinsic Value of the Metal. Le^ us examine
therefore, if his Majesty has done any thing which imports, either in it self,
or by necessary consequence, That he has voluntarily Resigned his Crown, and
Discharged his Subjects of their Allegiance. Now the Author of The Enquiry into
the present State of Affairs, etc. for whose Judgment the Commons seem to have
a very great Regard, as appears from their concurrence with him: For their most
considerable Votes are, in a manner, transcribed from his 11th. Paragraph. This
Author tells us, Page 5. That when a King withdraws himself, and his Seals,
without naming any Persons to represent him, the Government is certainly laid
down and forsaken by him. Though afterward he is so good natured as to add,
That if any imminent present Danger, or just Fear, (though indeed a King can
never be decently suspected of that; I suppose his Reason is, because Kings are
invulnerable) had driven his Majesty away, it might seem a little too hard to
urge this too much.

In order to the confuting this Notion, I shall prove in the

First place, That his Majesty, before his withdrawing, had sufficient Grounds
to make him apprehensive of Danger, and therefore It cannot be called an
Abdication.

Secondly, That the leaving any Representatives behind him was impracticable at
this Juncture.

Thirdly, That we have no Grounds, either from the Laws of the Realm, or those
of Nature, to pronounce the Throne void, upon such a Retreat of a King.

But before I do this, its not improper to observe, That this pretense of a
Demise, if it signified any thing, cannot affect Scotland or Ireland: Not the
first, For there his Majesty's Commissioners acted in the usual Manner, till
they were disturbed: Nor the second, For that Kingdom continues still under the
Regular Administration of the Lord Lieutenant. Neither is it sufficient to say,
That Ireland is an Appendage to the Crown of England, and therefore it must
follow its Revolution. For allowing a Demise was really consequent upon a
Failure of Seals and Representatives; yet there would be no color to apply it
to a Case where there was no such Omission. For no Forfeiture ought to be
stretched beyond the Reason upon which it is grounded. But this only by the
way. I shall proceed to prove the first thing propounded, viz. That his
Majesty, before his withdrawing, had sufficient Grounds to make him
apprehensive of imminent Danger.

We are now fallen upon Times in which the most extravagant and almost
impossible Things are swallowed without Chewing, and the plainest Truths
outfaced and denied; as if Evidence was an Argument against Proof, and
Absurdities the only Motives of Credibility: So that now, if ever, we seem fit
for Transubstantiation. Had not some Men believed this true, in a great
Measure, they would never have disputed against matter of Fact, which was done
almost in the Face of the whole Kingdom. To speak to the present Case; Had not
his Majesty great Reason to retire, to secure his Person and his Honor, at his
first withdrawing from W^itehall? which is the time from which our Author dates
his pretended Desertion (for he will not allow him to be King at his return) I
say, had not his Majesty great Reason to retire when he had met with so many
unfortunate Disappointments, with so many surprising and unparalled
Accidents? When part of the Army was revolted, and the Remainder too apparently
unserviceable? When the People had such fatal and unremovable Prejudices
against his Majesty's Service? When there were such terrible Disorders in the
Kingdom, and all Places were either Flaming or ready to take Fire? What should
a Prince do, when he had scarce any thing left him to lose but himself, but
consult his Safety, and give way to the irresistible Evil? But our Author
pretends the King's Affairs had a much better Aspect; Let us observe how he
proves it. Why he tells us, That when the Prince of Orange' s Proposals came to
his Majesty, the Army and the Fleet were left in his Hands. They were so, that
he might pay them for the Prince's Service; for they owned his Majesty's
Authority scarce any other way than by receiving his Money, and eating up his
Meat. (It Is to be hoped they have since repented of their Actions.) But the
Enquirer goes on with his Inventory of Forts and Revenues, which the King was
to have still. He may know, if he pleases, that we have but Four considerable
Forts in the Kingdom. Now Hull and Plymouth had already disposed of themselves,
and the Tower of London was demanded for the City; so that there was none but
Portsmouth remaining. And as for the Revenues, it is to be feared, the Northern
Collections would have been almost as Slender as those in the West. And now one
would think our Father began to relent: For he owns, That some Things, which
the Prince of Orange proposed, may be called hard; viz. his demanding that the
Laws against Papists which were in Employment might be executed. But the
Enquirer is much mistaken, if he thinks the Prince of Orange insisted upon no
more than the bare Execution of the Law in this point. For the Disbanding of
all Papists (which was part of his Proposals) is much more than what the Law
requires; by which the Papists are only excluded from Offices of Command, and
Trust. But neither the Test-Acts, nor any others bar the King from Listing them
as common Soldiers. And lastly, to deliver up his best Magazine, and the
Strength of his Capital City; To be obliged to pay a Foreign Army, which came
over to enable his Subjects to drive him out of his Dominions, were very
extraordinary Demands, and looked as if there was a Design to reduce him as low
in is Honor, as in his Fortune. To forgive a Man who endeavored to Ruin me, is
great Christian Charity; but to Article away my Estate to him, because he has
Injured me, is such a Mortification as no Religion obliges us to. This is in
effect to Betray our Innocence, and Sign away the Justice of our Cause; and own
that we have deserved all that hand Usage which has been put upon us; so that
it is easy to imagine what an unconquerable Aversion the Spirit of Princes must
needs have to such an Unnatural Penance. In short, when the Forts and Revenue
were thus disposed of; when the Papists were to be Disbanded, and the
Protestants could not be trusted; when the Nation was under such general, and
violent Dissatisfactions; when the King, in case of a Rupture, (which was not
unlikely) had nothing upon the Matter but his single Person to oppose against
the Prince's Arms, and those of his own Subjects; when his Mortal Enemies, and
those were under the highest Forfeitures to his Majesty, were to sit Judges of
his Crown and Dignity, if no farther; when Affairs were in this Tempestuous
Condition, To say that a Free and Indifferent Parliament might be Chosen, with
relation to the King's Right, ^s well as the Peoples; and that His Majesty had
no just visible Cause to apprehend himself in Danger, is to outface the Sun,
and to trample upon the Understandings, and almost upon the Senses of the whole
Nation.

2. It Is not improper to examine what doughty Reasons the E^quirer advances to
prove, the Kings coming from Feversham to White Hall to be no return to his
People. The reason of his affirming this is apparent; He is sensible what
singular usage his Majesty met with, and therefore he would fain unking Him,
that it might the better suit with his Character. But, pray, what had the King
done to incur a Forfeiture by his First Retirement? Had he quitted the Realm?
If that was material, it cannot be alleged, for his Majesty was no farther
off than the Coast of Kent. Did he refuse to take Care of his People any
longer, when the Lords went down to Visit him to White Hall? No: If he had, he
would not have come back when he was at his Liberty. His return, after some
Assurances of fair Treatment, is a plain discovery of the Motives of his
withdrawing; and that he came up with an intention to Govern. For, I believe,
few People imagine that his Majesty would take such a Journey, only to have
Dutch Guards clapped upon him; to be hurried out of his Palace, and carried
Prisoner down the Thames at Noon Day. But the Seals never appeared. What time
was there for them in 24 Hours? Besides there was an Order of Council with his
Majesty at the Head of it, for suppressing the Mobile, Dated December. 18. which
was the next Day after his Majesty's return. And when he was sent back to
Rochester, he might plainly perceive his Government was at an End for the
present. For the Tower was Garrisoned by Foreign Forces: The Lords published an
Order by their own Authority, to oblige the Papists to depart the Town: The
City made an Address to the Prince of Orange, which was a Virtual
acknowledgment of his Power; and Associations came up to that purpose out of
the Country; ( Cambridge-shire Address) not to omit that his Majesty was denied
a small Sum of his own Gold to Heal with; As if they had rather poor People
should Perish with Boyles and Ulcers, than show common Justice and Humanity to
their King. From all these remarkable Circumstances, his Majesty might easily
guess how they intended to dispose of him: For no Man in his Senses, who has
treated a Prince so Contemptuously in his own Kingdom, will ever permit him
either Power, or Liberty, for fear he should remember his former Usage. From
what has been said, it is most evident, that his Majesty had all imaginable
reason to provide for his own Security in some other Country.

And since his Majesty had sufficient reasons to withdraw, these can be no
pretense for an Abdication: For we are to observe, that to Abdicate an Office,
always supposes the Consent of him whom Quits it. That this is the
signification of the Word Abdico, appears from Tully, Salust, and Livie; to
which I shall only add the Learned Grotius, De jure Belli, etc. Libr. 1. Cap.
4. Sect. 9. Where he makes Abdicating the Government, and plainly Giving it op,
to be Terms of the same importance.

And to prevent unreasonable Cavils, he adds, that a Neglect, or Omission in
the Administration of Government, is by no means to be interpreted a
Renunciation of it. We have but two Instances with us which looks like an
Abdication since the Conquest; which are in the Reign of Edward II. and Richard
II. both which were unjustly Deposed by their Subjects. However they did not
renounce their Allegiance, and declare the Throne void, till they had a formal
Resignation under the Hands of both those unfortunate Princes. And hence it
appears how unlucky our Enquirer is at citing the Laws. For Page 12. He tells
us, That since these Two Princes have been judged in Parliament for their Male
Administration, and since these Judgments have never been vacated by any
subsequent Parliaments; these Proceedings are part of our Law. From hence I
observe,

1. That our Author contradicts himself. For here he owns that Male
Administration is sufficient to warrant Deposition, and Resistance. But in his
Enquiry into the Measures of Submission, etc. (For both these Papers are
generally supposed to come from the same Hand) Page 5. Par. 14. He is much
kinder to the Crown; for there he asserts, That it is not Lawful to resist the
King upon any pretense of Ill Administration, and that nothing less than
subverting the Fundamentals of Government will justify an Opposition. Now I am
much mistaken, if Deposing of Kings is not Resisting them with a Witness. But
besides his self Contradiction; the case is not to his purpose: For,

1. These Parliaments were called in Tumultuous times, when the Subjects were
so hardy as to put their Kings under Confinement. Now if it is against the
Constitution of Parliaments to Menace the Two Houses out of their Liberty of
Voting freely, then certainly Kings ought not to be overawed by Armies, and
Prisons. These Parliaments therefore are very improper to make Precedents of.

2. These Princes were wrought upon so far, as to resign their Crowns, which
each of them did, though unwillingly; Let this Enquirer produce such a
Resignation from His Majesty, and he says something.

3. He is much mistaken in saying these judgments, as he calls them, have not
been vacated by subsequent Parliaments. For all those subsequent Parliaments,
which declare it Unlawful to take up Arms against the King, do by necessary
implication condemn these Deposing Precedents; for it is impossible for Subjects
to Depose their Princes without Resisting them.

2. By Act of Parliament the First of Edw. 4. yet remaining at large upon the
Parliament Rolls, and for the greater part recited verbatim in the Pleadings in
Bag^tt's Case, in the Year Books ( Trin. Term. 9. Edw. 4.) The Title of Edw. 4.
by Descent, and Inheritance, and is set forth very particularly; And that upon
the Decease of Rich. 2. the Crown by Law, Custom, and Conscience, Descended and
Belonged to Edmund, Earl of March, under whom King Edw. 4. claimed.

It is likewise further declared, That Hen. 4. against Law, Conscience, and
Custom of the Realm of England, Usurped upon the Crown and Lordship thereof,
and Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. occupied the said Realm by Unrighteous Intrusion, and
Usurpation, and no otherwise.

And in 39. Hen. 6. Rot. Parl. when Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, laid
claim to the Crown, as belonging to him by right of Succession it was,

1. Objected in behalf of Hen. 6. that Hen. 4. took the Crown upon him as next
Heir in Blood to Hen. 3. not as Conqueror.

To this it was Answered, That the pretense of Right as next Heir to Hen. 3.
was False, and only made use of as a Cloak to shadow the violent Usurpations of
Hen. 4.

2. It was Objected against the Duke of York, That the Crown was by Act of
Parliament Entailed upon Hen. 4. and the Heirs of his Body, from whom King Hen.
6. did Lineally Descend. The which Act (say they* as it is in the Record) is of
Authority to defeat any manner of Title. To which the Duke of York replied;
That if King Hen. 4. might have obtained, and enjoyed the Crowns of England and
France by Title of Inheritance, Descent, or Succession, he neither needed, nor
would have desired, or made them to be granted to him in such wise, as they be
by the said Act, the which takes no Place, nor is of any Force or Effect,
against him that is right Inheritor of the said Crowns; as it accords with
Gods Laws, and all Natural Laws. Which Claim and Answer of the Duke of York, is
expressly acknowledged and recognized, by this Parliament, to be Good, True,
Just, Lawful and Sufficient. Cotton's Abridgment. Fol. 665, 666.

From these Recognitions it plainly follows,

1. That the Succession cannot be interrupted by an Act of Parliament,
especially when the Royal Assent is given by a King De Facto, and not De Iure.

2. The Act 9. of Edw. 4* by declaring the Crown to Descend upon Edmund, Earl
of March, by the Decease of Rich. 2. does evidently imply, That the said
Richard was rightful King, during his Life, and consequently that his
Deposition was Null, and Unlawful.

If it is demanded, Why his Majesty did not leave Seals and Commissioners to
supply his Absence? This Question brings me to the Second Point, viz. to show,

That the leaving sufficient Representatives was impracticable at this
Juncture. For

1. When the Nation was so much embroiled, and the King's Interest reduced to
such an unfortunate Ebb; it would have been very difficult, if not impossible,
to have found Persons who would have undertaken such a dangerous Charge. That
Man must have had a Resolution of an extraordinary Size who would venture upon
Representing a Prince who had been so much disrespected in his own Person;
whose Authority had been set aside, and his Ambassador clapped up at Windsor,
when he carried not only an inoffensive, but an obliging Letter. But granting
such a Representation had been engaged in; the Commissions must either have
extended to the Calling of Parliaments, or not; if not, they would neither have
been Satisfactory, no^ absolutely necessary. Not Satisfactory, For the want of
a Parliament was that which was accounted the great Grievance of the Nation, as
appears from the Prince of Orange's Declaration. Where he says expressly, That
his Expedition is intended for no other Design but to have a Free and Lawful
Parliament assembled, as soon as is possible. Declar. P. 12.

Secondly, This Expedient was not absolutely Necessary; for the Administration
of Justice might have proceeded Regularly, without any such Deputation, by
Virtue of those Commissions which the Judges and Justices of the Peace had
already from the King. This I shall prove,

1. From a parallel Instance; King Charles the I. took a Journey into Scotland
in 41, during the Session of Parliament at Westminster; where, though he
appointed Five Lords to sign Bills in his Name, (The Continuation of Bak.
Chron.) yet the Judges and Justices acted by Virtue of their former
Commissions, without any new Authority from any Representatives of his Majesty.
Now Scotland is as much a distinct Kingdom from England, as France; and France
as much his Majesty's Dominions as Scotland: And therefore if Commissions will
hold in the King's Absence in one Place, why not in the other?

Secondly, The present Judges met in January last at Westminster, to dispatch,
some Business in order to keep the Term but were forbidden to proceed by the
Prince of Orange's Secretary: So that it is plain, it was the Opinion of these
Reverend Judges that their Commissions from his Majesty were still in Force.
But in the next place,

If his Majesty had deputed any Persons to Represent him in Parliament, this
Method would have been attended with new and insuperable Difficulties. For,

1. If they had been Limited they would not have given Satisfaction: For it
being impossible to foresee the Business and Votes of a Parliament at a
distance; If they had been restrained to certain Points, in all probability
they would have wanted Power to have passed all the Bills, and so their
Deputation would not have Answered the Desire of the Houses, and the greatest
part of their Grievances might have been counted unredressed. If it is said that
the Parliament might have requested an Enlargement of their Commission from his
Majesty. To this I Answer, That the Convention may send to his Majesty for an
Expedient now if they please. And, I hope, they will; for I hear his Majesty
has been so gracious as to send to them. But,

2. If these Commissioners were unlimited, it would be in their Power to do a
great many things prejudicial to the Crown; In such a Case they might alter the
Monarchy into a Commonwealth, or Sign the Deposing of his Majesty, if such
Bills should happen to be offered. And though there may be many Persons of
Honor, and Conscience enough, to lodge such a Trust with: Yet in regard his
Majesty has been lately mistaken in some, of whose Fidelity he had so great an
Assurance, he has small encouragement to be over-confiding for the Future.
Indeed no Wise Prince will Trust so vast a Concern, as a Kingdom, with the
Honesty of another, especially when many of his Subjects are Disaffected, and
in a Ferment. So that nothing can be more unreasonable than to expect such
Plenipotentiary and Absolute Commissioners.

3. I shall prove in the last place, That we have no Grounds, either from the
Laws of the Realm, or from those of Nature, to pronounce the Throne void, upon
such a Retreat of a Prince as we have before us.

1. To begin with the Laws of the Realm, which are either Acts of Parliament,
or those we call Common Laws. Now there is no Statute, so much as pretended, to
support this Deserting Doctrine; and if there was, it is certain no such can be
produced. Indeed a Prince must be xery weary of Governing, and void of the
common Inclinations of Mankind; who would Sign a Bill of this Nature, and give
his Subjects such a dangerous Advantage against Himself, and his Posterity.

Neither has this Opinion any better Countenance from Common Law: For Common
Law is nothing but Ancient Usage, and Immemorial Custom. Now Custom supposes
Precedents and Parallel Cases: But it is granted of all Hands, That the Crown of
England was never judged to be Demised, by the withdrawing of the Prince before
now. And, therefore it follows, by undeniable Consequence, that this Opinion
can have no Foundation in the Common Law, because there is not so much as one
Ruled Case to prove it by. Nay, our Laws are not only silent in the maintenace
of this Paradox, but against it, as I shall make good by Two Precedents.

1. From the Case of Edward the Fourth, who having not sufficient Force to
Encounter the Earl of Warick, who had raised an Army for King Henry, was
obliged to fly the Kingdom; but that he deputed any Persons to Represent him,
our Histories don't give us the least Intimation: Neither was it Objected at
his return, that he had Abdicated the Government, by omitting to Constitute a
Regent. Neither is it material to Object, that all Disputes of this Nature were
overruled by his Victorious Army; For if it had been the known Law of this
Realm, that a Prince had ipso facto forfeited his Crown by going beyond Sea,
without leaving a Deputation, though his Departure should happen to be
Involuntary: If this, I say, had been the Law of the Kingdom, it would not only
have been a great Advantage to Henry the Sixth, and made the Nation ring of it,
(of which there is altum Silentium;) but we may be well assured, King Edward
would not have conferred Honor, worn the Crown, and taken the State and
Authority of a King upon him, till he had been reestablished by Parliaments.
But that he did Exercise all Acts of Sovereignty before the calling of a
Parliament, appears from Daniell, S^ew, and Baker. And when the Parliament was
Convened, those who had taken up Arms against him were found Guilty of Treason,
and his Adherents were restored to Blood and Estate ( Daniell.) But there was
no Confirmation, or Resisting of his Title, which is a Demonstration there was
no need of it; and that this Abdicating Doctrine was perfectly unknown to that
Age.

2. To come nearer our own Times, what Seals, or Commissioners did Charles the
Second leave behind him after Worcester Fight? And yet, I believe, no Mortal
ever urged this as an Argument against his Restoration. If it be Answered,
that there was much more Danger in this case, than in that before us. To this I
reply, that if we Examine the Matter more narrowly, we shall find the disparity
very inconsiderable. For was there not a numerous Army of Foreigners and
Subjects in the Field, against his present Majesty at his retiring? What Power
or Authority, or so much as Liberty was there left him? And I am afraid that at
that time he had fewer Friends to stand by him, than his Brother after that
unfortunate Battle in 51.

And since this pretended Dereliction has no manner of Protection from the
Constitution, it has no other Refuge but the Laws of Nature to fly to; but a
very little Storming will serve to drive it from this last Retrenchment.

For the Law of Nature is nothing but the Reason of the Thing. Now impartial
Reason has always a regard to the Circumstances of Action, and makes Allowances
for Surprise, for Straitness of Time, for Resentment upon extraordinary
Provocation; and never takes Advantage of an Omission, which may be fairly
Interpreted, from any, or all, of these Causes. I mention this, not that the
present Case needs any such Allowance, but to show that the Law of Nature would
Admit it, if Occasion required. It Is true, written Laws, either through the
ambiguity of the Words, or the defectiveness of the Sense, are often abused by
ill Men, and wrested contrary to the Design of the Legislators: But the Law of
Nature is not tied up to the Alphabet, nor bound to determine by the
Imperfections of former Ages. Therefore this Principle will give the Enquirer
no just Advantages against his Majesty; for Equity has no Quirks in it, nor
ever lies at Catch. Reason is always just and generous, it never makes
Misfortune an Accusation, nor judges in favor of Violence. Indeed, what can be
more Unrighteous (though the Case was private and inferior) than that any one
should Suffer for being Injured, and be barred his Right for the Faults of
others? If a Man should forfeit his House to those who set it on Fire, only
because he quitted it without giving some formal Directions to the Servants;
and be obliged to lose his Estate, for endeavoring to preserve his Life. I
believe it would be thought an incomprehensible sort of Justice. If to proceed
in this manner be not to establish Wickedness by a Law, I have done. If Princes
may be thus roughly treated, their Birth is a Misfortune to them; and, we may
say, they are Crowned rather for Sacrifice than Empire. At this rate, the
People must even Govern themselves, for the Throne will be a Place of too much
Danger to sit on any longer. We have an Excellent Church, and we do well to
take due Care to continue its Establishment; but to dispossess our Prince, upon
this Score, has as little Divinity as Law in it. To endeavor to preserve our
Religion by such Methods will make it more Fatal to us in the event than
Atheism it self. *It Is a mistake to think the World was made for none but
Protestants; and if Dominion was founded in Grace, I am afraid our share would
not be great in the Division.

If it is Objected, That his Majesty's not sending to his People, upon his
Removal, is an Argument that he intended to govern them no longer. To this I
Answer,

1. That I am pretty well assured, That no Man, who makes this Objection,
believes the truth of it; and therefore I might safely leave it to his own
Conscience to confute him.

Secondly, His Majesty was scarcely Landed in France before the Administration
was conferred upon the Prince of Orange; which Action might very well
discourage his Majesty from sending any Messages so soon as he intended: But
since, it is known, his Majesty has sent Letters (if not to the Privy Council,
as some affirm, yet) to the Convention.

Thirdly, Those who were the Occasion of his Majesty's Departure should (one
would think) have waited on him, and invited him back. For without Question the
injuring Person ought to make the first step toward an Accommodation,
especlally when Wrong is done to his own Prince. Now whether his Majesty has
been well used in this Revolution, or not, I leave the World to judge now, but
God will do it afterward.

Thus (SIR) I have ventured to give you my Thoughts upon this Subject; and am

Affectionately yours.

FINIS.

