VINDICIAE IURIS REGII: OR, REMARQUES UPON A PAPER, Entitled, AN ENQUIRY INTO
THE MEASURES of SUBMISSION TO THE Supreme Authority.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 5. after Ingulphus, add Hist. Croyl. p. 15. l. 17. for Liberty
read Liberties. p. 21. l. 5. for Liberties r. Liberty. Ibid. l. 34. for
Canquered r. Conquered. p. 28. l. 26. f. Felo r. Felo's. p. 30. l. 3. f.
Distracted r. Disgusted. p. 31. l. 18. f. parts r. starts. p. 32. l. 28. f.
Salves r. Salvo's. Ibid. l. ult. f. into experience r. in experience. p. 34. l.
14 f. those r. these. p. 36. l. 16. after of, add that. page 37. l. 31. for
unjustifybale r. unjustifyable. p. 40. l. 20. f. strow'd r. allowed. p. 41. l.
7. f. as in r. is in. p. 42. l. 28. after from, add the. Ibid. l. 34. f.
ahainst r. against. p. 43. l. 13. f. purose r. purpose. Ibid. l. 21. f.
Character r. Charter. p. 45. l. 4. f. as its r. its as. p. 46. l. ult. f.
penalty r. penaltys. p. 48. l. 25. after more add of. Ibid. l. 30. f. the
Charge r. their Charge.

VINDICIAE IURIS REGII: OR REMARQUES UPON A PAPER, Entitled, An Enquiry into
the Measures of Submission to the Supreme Authority.
ONE Reason why I did not Answer this Extraordinary Enquiry any sooner, was
because the generality of the Nation, at the first publishing it, had their
imaginations so much disturbed with Lies and Imposture; that till the strength
of the Charm was a little spent, there was no dealing with them: But now since
they are come to themselves, and the Eclipse of their Understandings is pretty
well over; I will venture to show them the False and Dangerous Reasonings of
this Paper if I can.

Our Author lays it down for certain, That the Law of Nature has put no
difference, or subordination among Men, except it be that of Children to
Parents, or of Wives to their Husbands; so that with relation to the Law of
Nature, all Men are born Free. What? Born free, and in subordination to their
Parents too! that is somewhat hard: This Privilege, according to his own
Reasoning, has been out of doors long since, and could never be claimed by any
but those who immediately descended from Lucratius's Bladders. If he means,
that we are naturally subject to none but our Parents and Husbands; this, I
believe, will not hold neither. For it seems pretty plain from Scripture, That
the Younger Children are all born under the jurisdiction of their Elder
Brother. I shall only mention Two Texts in proof of this Proposition: The First
is, Genesis 4. 7. where God gives Cain a superiority over his Younger Brother
Abel, in the same Words in which he had before granted it to Adam over Eve. Now
it is generally acknowledged, that Adam was her King, as well as her Husband.
The Enquirer himself owns thus much, by saying, That Matrimony naturally puts a
Woman into a state of Subjection. Now this Authority which was given to Cain,
seems to be a standing Privilege of Primogeniture, for the better Government
of Families: For Cain's behavior was not so meritorious as to deserve an
Extraordinary Favor; neither had Abel done any thing to forfeit his Natural
Liberty. If it is objected, that this Privilege of Cain, thus interpreted,
destroys Adam's Patriarchal Authority, sets up Two Concurrent Jurisdictions,
and makes the Younger Children subject to Two Independent Princes, their Father
and Elder Brother.

To this I Answer, That this Inconvenience will not follow, provided this
reasonable Supposition be but allowed, viz. That the Exercise of this
Prerogative of Birthright, was not to Commence immediately upon the Grant, but
to lie Dormant till Adam's Decease, as being no more than a Reversion of Power.

The other Text is, Genesis 49. 3. where Reuben, according to the Hebrew way of
speaking, is called the Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power:
That is, He was to have been by virtue of his Primogeniture, a Person of the
greatest Quality and Authority in the Family. For though God deprived him of
this Honor upon the account of his Incest; yet the manner of his Father's
Reproof does sufficiently discover his Natural Right. And therefore the Learned
Grotius observes upon this Place, and upon Deuteronomy. 21. 17. That Elder Brothers,
as such, had not only the Advantage of a double Portion of Inheritance, but
were likewise Priests and Princes in their Families. Now if the Younger
Children ought always to be governed either by their Father, their Elder
Brother, or those who claim under him; then certainly the State of Nature is
not such a State of Liberty, as the Enquirer supposes. But this Patriarchal
Nation, being not much material to the present Dispute, I shall insist no
farther upon it.

His Second Section continues us in our Original Liberty, and therefore, I
suppose, it is designed to inform Independent Governors, of the Right the Law of
Nature allows them to defend themselves, and how far they may proceed for
Reparation of Injuries. His Assertion is, That the Duty of Self-preservation
exerts it self in Instances of two sorts; either in resisting Violent
Aggressors, or in taking Just Revenges of those who have Invaded us so
secretly, that we could not prevent them; and so violently, that we could not
resist them: In which Cases, Self-preservation warrants us, both to recover
what is our own, with Just Damages, and also to put such Unjust Persons out of
a Capacity of doing the like Injuries any more, either to our selves or others.
But here we may observe,

First, That the Case is very Generally, and consequently Obsourely Stated: For
we are not at all enlightened about the Measures of those Just Revenges and
Damages: But this Point is Prudently left to the Ignorance, Ambition, and
Ill Nature of every Man, to interpret as he pleases. And least we should not
revenge our selves deep enough, the Enquirer gives us this Encouragement, That
Self-preservation warrants us to put such Unjust Persons out of a Capacity,
etc. That is, If we were in the State of Nature, we ought to Kill, Dismember,
or lay every Man in Chains, who has done us any injury, great or small, (for
our Author makes no Exceptions for Mercy) it being impossible to disable him
without proceeding to this Rigor; for as long as he has Life, Limbs, or
Liberty, he may do the World a Mischief with them, if he has a mind to it. But,

Secondly, I do not understand what Advantage the Enquirer can make of this
Terrible Denuntiation against Aggressors and Invaders; I much question whether
he has Fortified his own Security by this way of Reasoning. But possibly this
Battery is raised against the French King, for the Service of the Empire: For
he has seemed to wish, some years since, That the Grand Louis might be reduced
to an humbler Figure. Indeed that Monarch (if he be not misrepresented) is
considerably to blame for sending an Army against the Empire, without giving
notice of it first, or demanding Satisfaction in a Public and Peaceable Way.
These Unproclaimed Expeditions have been always thought unjustifiable, and
contrary to the Law of Nature and Nations. For those who have a Just Tenderness
for the Lives of Men; who have any Regard to Justice, or the Repose of
Christendom, will try all other Arguments before they Dispute the Cause at the
Swords Point. For, besides the Roughness of such a Method, if Princes should
make a practice of Invading each other without warning, Men would be almost
obliged to sleep in Armor, and the World must be always kept up in a posture
of Defense, for fear of being surprised: Now this would be a very troublesome
and expensive way of Living; and make all Neighboring Kingdoms especially,
very distrustful of, and disaffected toward each other. I know His most
Christian Majesty complains in his Memorial, That He has been ill used by the
Court of Vienna; but then He might have pleased to have told the Emperor so,
before the Siege of Philipsburgh. And the Action was still more Unaccountable,
if he went (as who knows but he might) upon the bare Presumption of an Injury,
and relied upon the Intelligence of a few Skeptical, Obnoxious, and
Discontented Germans, who lay under the Imperial Bann. And to mention nothing
further, if this very Disputable Right was only an Expectancy which would have
admitted of Slow Forms, and kept cold well enough till had fallen; as any one
might fairly conclude from the Numbers, and Inclinations of his Friends in the
Empire; this was a further Aggravation of the Unreasonableness of his War. I
confess, if all these hard things are true of the French King, I don't wonder
if the Enquirer has levelled a whole Paragraph against Him; and I wish the
Emperor may recover just Damages for so Secret and Violent an Invasion.

All this while we have been Kings and Emperors, but now we must Reign over our
selves no longer, but descend into the Melancholy state of Subjection. However,
to do the Author right, he has put the Yoke on so favorably, that whenever we
find it galls us we may throw it off again, and return to our former
Independency. For he gives us to to understand, Sect. 3. That the True and
Original Notion of Civil Society and Government, is, that is a Com-promise made
by such a Body of Men, by which they resign up the right of demanding
Reparations either in the way of Justice against one another; or in the way of
War against their Neighbors; to such a single Person; or to such a Body of Men
as they think fit to trust with this. Now not to Examine how our Author comes
to know that the Original Notion of Society was the True one. It Is pretty
apparent his Notion of it is neither Original, nor True; not Original, because
it does not comprehend the most Ancient beginning of Government, viz. Paternal
Authority and Conquest; in which Cases Men have not the liberty of Articling
for Privileges, but must submit to their Parents, and Conquerors, whether they
think fit to trust them or not.

Secondly, His Notion is defective in Point of Truth; for he has only
restrained his Men from Acting Arbitrarily upon one another, or from Fighting a
Foreign State without Commission; but as for their Governors, they may resist
them, for all his Diffinition, when they please; for having resigned nothing
but their right of demanding Reparations, either in the way of Justice or War,
against their Fellow Subjects, or Neighboring States; it follows that one
Branch of their Natural Liberty is reserved to them, to Fight their Prince with
upon Occasion. This Conclusion, if we had nothing else to infer it, follows
evidently from his own Principle; for since Government is only a Trust
committed by the People to a Single Person, etc. and all Trusts, as he affirms
in this Section, by their Nature import, that those to whom they are given, are
accountable. Nothing is more plain, then that they may discharge themselves
from Subjection whenever they shall think fit to say, Their Governors have not
kept Touch with them.

He proceeds to tell us, That the Executive Power, when separated from the
Legislative, is a plain Trust, and no more than a Subordinate Authority.

From hence we may observe, First, That by this Authors Concessions, the People
have not the Legislative Authority, for he owns part of it is in the King; from
whence it follows, that the whole Body of the People is not the Supreme
Authority, nor consequently can call their Prince to Account, without his own
Consent.

Secondly, That part of the Legislative Authority, which is lodged in the
People, is not given them at large, to be exerted at their pleasure, but
depends upon Stated Rules and Limitations, and can only be exercised by their
Representatives in Parliament. Nay, it is so precarious a Privilege, that
without the King's leave, they can never make use of it; for it is neither
Lawful for them to Convene themselves, nor yet to Sit any longer than the King
pleases: For though there is an Act for a Triennial Parliament, yet if the King
Omits the Calling of them within that time, there is no provision made to
Assemble themselves; which is an Evidence this Power was never conveyed to them
by this Act: For if it had, the Methods of putting it in Execution would have
been Adjusted; And if the King should refuse to Issue out Writs, the Chancellor
would have been Authorized to do it: Which Power upon the Suppositition of
intermediate Failures, would have been handed down as low as the petty
Constables, as it was proposed by the Parliament Assembled in 40 to Charles the
First. Now if the People have no share in making of Laws, but by Representation
in Parliament, and the Being of this Assembly depends upon the Prince's
pleasure, then either the King is the Supreme Authority in the Intervals of
Parliament (which may be as long as the Crown thinks fit) or else there is no
such thing as a Supreme Authority in the Nation, and consequently no
Government. Further, when the Two Houses are actually Convened, when they are
Dictating Law and Justice to the Nation, and Clothed with all the Advantages
of Solemnity and Power, they are then no more than Subjects, they are liable to
the highest Penalties, if they are proved guilty of those Crimes which deserve
them, for Felony and Treason are expressly excepted out of their Privileges.

But to consute the Author's Notion of Government more fully, and especially to
make his Application of it Unserviceable, I shall endeavor to prove Two things
against him.

First, That a Trust does not always imply the Person accountable to whom it is
made. Secondly, That the Kings of England hold their Crown by right of Conquest
and Succession; and consequently are no Trustees of the People.
1. A Trust does not always imply the Person accountable to whom it is made,
which I shall briefly make good these Three ways.

First, From the common Notion of a Trust. Secondly, From the Enquirers
Concessions. Thirdly, From a considerable Instance in our own Government.
First, From the common Notion of a Trust: For what is more generally
understood by trusting another, than that we lodge our concerns with him, and
put them out of our own disposal? When I trust a Man with my Life or Fortune,
all People agree, that I put it in his Power to deprive me of both. For to
deliver any Property to another with a Power of Revocation, is to trust him, as
we say, no farther than we can throw him. He that can recover a Sum of Money he
has deposited when he pleases, to speak properly, has it still in his Custody,
and trusts his Friend no more than he does his own Coffers. And therefore if we
consult our thoughts, we shall find, that a Trust naturally implies an entire
reliance upon the Conduct and Integrity of another, which makes us resign up
our Liberty or Estate to his Management, imagining them safer in his Hands than
in our own. In short, a Trust where there is no third Person to judge of the
performance, as in these Pacts between Subjects and Sovereign there is not. In
this case a Trust includes a Translation of Right, and in respect of the
Irrevocableness of it, is of the Nature of a Gift; so that there seems to be
only this difference between them, that a Gift ought to respect the Benefit of
the Receiver, whereas a Trust is generally made for the Advantage of him who
conveys it.

Secondly, By our Author's own Concessions a Trustee is sometimes
unaccountable, for he grants a Man may Sell himself to be a Slave. ( p. 1.) And
when he has once put himself into this condition, his Master has an Absolute
Sovereignty over him, and an indefeasable right to his service; so that
notwithstanding all the unreasonable Usage he may meet with, he can never come
into his Freedom again without the consent of his Lord. This I take to be an
uncontested Truth, and if it was not, St. Peter's Authority ought to overruled
the dispute; Who charges those who were in this state of servitude, to be
subject to their Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward, 1 Ep. 2. 18.

Thirdly, I shall prove the unaccountableness of a Trust from a considerable
Instance in our own Government. The House of Commons V. g. are certainly
Trustees for the Towns and Counties who choose them; the People resign up the
disposal of their Rights and Properties into their Hands, in hopes of a good
management. But suppose they prevaricate in their Employment, and betray their
Electors, does this Empower the People to lay their Representatives by the
heels when they come into the Country, or to punish them farther as their
Wisdoms shall think convenient? If so, then the last resort of Justice must lie
in the Sovereign Multitude, who have neither capacity to understand the reasons
of Government, nor temper and tenderness to manage it. It Is pity the Mobile in
Henry the 6th. his Reign had not this discovery, when the Right of choosing
Members was limited to Forty Shillings per Annum Freehold; whereas before all
Tenures, if not all Persons, had the liberty to elect, without exception; but
this Act in all likelihood barred no less then a Fifth of the Nation from this
principal Post in the Government. And if Columbus had not given them a lift by
finding out the West Indies, and abating the value of Money, their Grievance
had continued to this day as heavy as ever. We see therefore that the Author's
Notion of a Trust will not hold Water, and if it would, it can do him no
Service, for I shall prove in the Second place, that the Kings of England hold
their Crown by Right of Conquest and Succession, and consequently are no
Trustees of the People. I shall begin with the Point of Succession, which
because it is generally received, I shall only mention an Act of Parliament or
Two for the proof of it.

In the first of Edward the Fourth, ( Rot. Parl.) where the Proceedings against
Richard the Second are repealed; it is said, That Henry Earl of Derby,
afterward Henry the Fourth; Temerously against RightWiseness and Justice, by
Force and Arms, against his Faith and Ligeance, rered Werre at Flint in Wales,
against King Richard the Second, Him took and Imprisoned in the Tower of
London, in great Violence; and Usurped and Intruded upon the Royal Power,
Estate, and Dignity. And a little after they add, That the Commons being of
this present Parliament, having sufficient and evident knowledge of the said
Unright-wise Usurpation and Intrusion, by the said Henry late Earl of Derby,
upon the said Crown of England; knowing also certainly without doubt and
ambiguity, the Right and Title of our said Sovereign Lord thereunto true; and
that by God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature, He and none other, is and
ought to be their true, right-wise, and Natural Liege and Sovereign Lord; and
that He was in Right from the Death of the said Noble and Famous Prince his
Father, (Richard Duke of York) very just King of the said Realms of England, do
take and repute, and will for ever take and repute the said Edward the Fourth,
their Sovereign and Liege Lord, and Him and his Heirs to be Kings of England,
and none other, according to his said Right and Title.

In the first of Richard the Third, there is another Statute very full to this
purpose, which begins, The Three Estates, etc. But I shall pass over this, and
proceed to the Act of Recognition, made upon King James the First, his coming
to the Crown: Wherein it is declared, That He was Lineally, Rightfully and
Lawfully, Descended of the Body of the Most Excellent Lady Margaret, Eldest
Daughter of the Most Renowned King Henry the Seventh, and the High and Noble
Princess, Queen Elizabeth his Wife, Eldest Daughter of King Edward the Fourth.
The said Lady Margaret being Eldest Sister of King Henry the Eighth, Father of
the High and Mighty Princess of Famous Memory, Elizabeth, late Queen of
England. In consideration whereof, the Parliament does acknowledge King James
their only Lawful and Rightful Liege Lord and Sovereign. And as being bound
thereunto, both by the Laws of God and Man, They do recognize and acknowledge,
that immediately upon the Dissolution and Decease of Elizabeth, late Queen of
England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all the Kingdoms,
Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same; did by Inherent Birthright, and
Lawful and undoubted Succession, Descend and come to his Most Excellent
Majesty, as being Lineally, Justly and Lawfully, next and SOLE HEIR of the
BLOOD Royal of this Realm, as it is aforesaid. And thereunto they do most
Humbly and Faithfully submit and oblige themselves, they Heirs and Posterities
for ever, until the last drop of their Bloods be spent.

So much concerning the Succession, where by the way, we may observe the
Deposing Doctrine is directly pronounced unlawful, as appears from the first of
Edward the Fou^h, which Act continues still unrepealed.

I shall proceed to prove the Norman Conquest, (for I need go no higher) which
I shall make good from the best Historians, who lived either in, or near that
time; from Doomeseday Book, and Acts of Parliament.

1. From Historians, etc.

Eadmer ( Hist. Nov. Fol. 6.) a Monk of Canterbury at the time of the Conquest,
and very intimate with Archbishop Lanfrank, and with him when News came of the
Conqueror's Death; Writes, That William designing to Establish those Laws and
Usages in England, which his Ancestors and Himself observed in Normandy; made
such Persons Bishops, Abbots, and other Principal Men, who could not be thought
so unworthy, as to be guilty of any incompliance with his new Model, knowing by
whom, and to what Station they were raised. All Religious and Secular Affairs
He managed at his pleasure. And after the Historian had related in what Points
he disallowed the Authority of the Pope, and Archbishop, he concludes thus. But
what he did in Secular Matters I forbear to Write, because it is not to my
purpose, and likewise because any one may guess by what has been delivered
already, at what rate He ordered the State.

The next Testimony shall be fetched out of Ingulph Abbot of Croyland, an
English Man born, Secretary to William when Duke of Normandy, and made Abbot by
him. This Author informs us, That by hard Usage He made the English submit,
that He gave the Earldems, Baronies, Bishoprics, and Prelacies of the whole
Nation to his Normans; and scarce permitted any English Man to enjoy any place
of Honor, Dominion, or Power Hist. Croyl. f. 512.

But Gervace of Tilbury (a considerable Officer in the Exchequer in the Time of
Henry the Second, and who received his Information from Henry of Blois, Bishop
of Winchester, and Grandchild to the Conqueror) is more full to this purpose;
which he thus delivers. After the Conquest of the Kingdom, and the just
Subversion of Rebels, when the King himself, and his great Men, had viewed and
surveyed their new acquests, there was a strict Enquiry made who there were
which had fought against the King, and secured themselves by Flight. From
these, and the Heirs of such as were Slain in the Field, all hopes of
Possessing ei^er Lands or Rents were cut off; for they counted it a great
Favor to have their Lives given them. But such as were called and solicited to
Fight against King William, and did not, if by an humble Submission they could
gain the Favor of their Lords and Masters, they then had the Liberty of
Possessing somewhat in their own Persons, but without any right of leaving it
to their Posterity. Their Children enjoying it only at the Will of their Lords:
To whom, when they became unacceptable, they were every where outed of their
Estates; neither would any restore what they had taken away.

And when the miserable Natives represented their Grievances publicly to the
King, informing him how they were spoiled of their Fortunes, and that without
Redress, they must be forced to pass into other Countries. At length upon
Consultation it was Ordered, That what they could obtain of their Lords by way
of Desert, or Lawful Bargain, they should hold by unquestionable Right; but
should not Claim any thing from the Time the Nation was Conquered, under the
Title of Succession, or Descent. Upon what great Consideration this was done is
manifest, says Gervace: For they being obliged to compliance and obedience, to
purchase their Lords Favor; therefore, whoever of the Conquered Nation
Possessed Lands, etc. Obtained them not as if they were their Right by
Succession, or Inheritance; but as a Reward of their Service, or by some
Intervening Agreement. Gervase of Tilbury, or the Black Book in the Exchequer,
Lib. 1. Cap. de Murdro. de necessar. observe.

The next Testimony I shall produce, is out of Gulielmus Pictaviensis (who
lived about the time of Ingulph,) This Writer speaking of King William's
Coronation, adds; cujus Liberi atque nepotes, etc. i. e. whose Children and
Posterity shall Govern England by a just Succession, which he Possessed by an
Hereditary Bequest; Confirmed by the Oaths of the English, and by the Right of
his Sword, Gul. Pict. fol. 206.

Farther, Ordericus Vitalis, who lived in the Reign of William the Second,
tells us, How William the First Circumvented the Two great Earls of Mercia, and
that after Edwin was Slain, and Morcar Imprisoned, then King William began to
show himself, and gave his Assistants the best, and most considerable Counties
in England, and made Rich Colonels, and Captains of very mean Normans, Oder.
Vital. fol. 251.

The same Author relates, That after the Norman Arms overcame England, and King
William had reduced it under the Government of his own Laws; he made Fulcard, a
Monk of St. Omers, Abbot of Thorney, Ibid. fol. 853.

Henry Archdeacon of Huntington, who lived in the Reign of King Stephen, is
full to the same purpose. Anno Gratiae 1066. perfecit Dominus Dominator, etc.
i. e. In the Year, etc. the great Ruler of Kingdoms brought that to pass, which
he had long intended against the English; for he delivered them over to be
destroyed by the Rough, and Politic Nation of the Normans, fol. 210. And in
another place more particularly. When the Normans had Executed the just Decree
of God upon the English, and there was not any Person of Quality of English
Extraction remaining, but all were reduced to Servitude and Distress, insomuch
that it was Scandalous to be called an English Man, William the Author of this
Judgment dyed in the Twenty first Year of his Reign, Ibid. fol. 212.

Matthew Paris, Who wrote toward the end of the Reign of Henry the Third,
agrees with the forementioned Testimonies, his Words are these, fol. 5. Dux
Normannorum Willielmus, etc. i. e. Duke William having fortified the Cities and
Castles, and Garrisoned them with his own Men; Sailed into Normandy with
English Hostages, and abundance of Treasure, whom, when he had Imprisoned and
Secured, he hastened back into England, that he might liberally distribute the
Lands of the English ( who were forcibly disseized of their Estates) amongst
his Norman Soldiers, who had helped him at the Battle of Hastings to subdue the
Country; and that little that was left, he put under the Yoke of perpetual
Servitude.

And in another place he tells us, That King William brought Bishoprics and
Abbys under Military Service, which before that time had been free from all
Secular Servitude; but then every Bishopric and Abbey was Enrolled according to
his Pleasure; and charged how many Knights or Horsemen, they should find for
him and his Successors, in times of War, fol. 7.

I might add many more Authorities of Ancient Historians, but these I suppose
are sufficient. As for Modern Writers, I shall only cite Mr. Cambden, who thus
delivers his Sense of this matter, Britan. p. 109. Victor Gulielmus, etc. i. e.
William the Conqueror, as it were to make his Victory the more remarkable,
Abrogated the greatest part of the English Laws, brought in the Customs of
Normandy, and ordered the Pleadings to be in French: And outing the English of
their Ancient Inheritances, Assigned their Lands and Manors to his Soldiers;
Yet so as he reserved the Paramount Lordship to himself, and his Successors by
Homage; That is, that they all should hold their Estates by the Feudal Laws;
and that none but the King should be Independent Proprietors, but rather a sort
of limited Trustees, and Occupants in Tenancy.

From these Citations we have all imaginable Marks of an entire Conquest. The
Laws, and Tenures, and in some measure the Language of the Country, were
changed: The Saxons were Transplanted into Normandy and dispossed of their
Estates, as appears not only from the forementioned Historians, but from
Doomse-day Book, where we find, that almost all the great Proprietors were
Normans. Now this Survey was made at the latter end of the Conqueror's Reign,
many Years after his taking the Oath, which is by some so much insisted upon,
as appears from Ingulphus.

If it is Objected that William the First granted King Edward's Laws.

To this I Answer. 1. That most of King Edward's Laws were only Penal, and
respected Criminals, as we may learn from Ingulph, Hist. Croyland in fine.

Secondly, These Laws of King Edward were not granted by the Conqueror without
his own Amendments, and Refinings upon them, as is evident from the Charter of
Henry the First, as it stands in Matthew Paris, fol. 55. Lagam Regis Edvardi,
vobis reddo cum eis Emendationibus quibus Pater eam Emendavit Consilio Baronum
suorum, i. e. I Grant you King Edward' s Laws with those Amendments which my
Father made in them, by the advice of his Barons. And that these last Words may
not be thought to weaken the Testimony, it is not improper to observe, that
these Alterations are said to be made only by the Advice, not by the Authority
of the Barons; and yet these Barons were Normans too, as is sufficiently plain
from what has been discoursed already. But,

To Conclude, the proofs of this Argument, several of our Parliaments
acknowledge William the First a Conqueror. The Acts (all of which it would be
very tedious to name) run thus in the Preamble, Edward V. g. by the Grace of
God, the Fourth after the Conquest, etc. Now this is a plain Concession, that
the Rights of the Subjects were derived from the Crown; and in all likelihood
was intended to hint as much. And therefore, unless the Norman Conquest had
been evident and unquestionable, the Lords and Commons, who were always very
Tender of their Liberties, would never have consented, that the Statutes should
have been Penned in such a Submissive Style.

If it be Objected, That the Conqueror took an Oath to observe the Laws of the
Realm.

In Answer to this I observe. 1. That we have seen already in some measure what
sort of Laws these were, and how they were managed by him

Secondly, Neither Pictaviensis, Eadmerus, Ordericus, Vitalis, Henry of
Huntington, or Matthew. Paris, Write of any Oath taken by the Conqueror. Florence
of Worcester, is the first that mentions it. Flor. Wigorn. fol. 635. The Words
of the Oath are these, Se velle Sanctas Dei Ecclesias, ac Rectores earum
defendere, nec non and cunctum Populum sibi subjectum justa and Regali
Providentia Regere, rectam Legem Statuere and tenere Rapinas Injustaque Iudicia
penitus interdicere, i. e. That he would protect Holy Church, and the
Hierarchy; that he would Govern all his Subjects fairly, and take a Royal care
of their welfare. That he would make Equitable Laws, and observe them, and
wholly Prohibit Rapine, and Perverting of Justice. From this I observe Two
things.

First, That the Legislative Power was all of it lodged in the Conqueror; Why
else did he Swear to make Equitable Laws? For if the Constitution had been
settled as it is at present, the Parliament could have hindered him from making
any other.

Secondly, The Oath is Couched in very general Terms, and admits of a great
Latitude of Exposition, so that the Conqueror was in a manner left at his
liberty, to interpret the Obligation, as he thought fit.

Thirdly, This Oath was voluntarily taken by the King some Years after he had
forced the whole Nation to Swear Allegiance to him.

We are therefore, if it were only for this reason, to interpret the Oath to
his advantage: And to suppose, that he would not Swear himself out of his
Conquest, and Reign at the Discretion of those he had so entirely Subdued; so
that it should be in their Power to Unking him, either upon a real or pretended
Breach of his Oath.

Fourthly, We may observe, that the Kings of England are in full Possession of
the Crown, immediately upon the Death of their Predecessors, and therefore King
John, Edward the First, and Henry the Fifth, had Allegiance Sworn to them
before their Coronation. From whence it follows, that as Swearing does not make
them Kings; so neither can Perjury, though truly Objected un-make them again,
which will appear more evidently if we consider,

Fifthly, That Perjury in it self, does not imply a forfeiture of any Natural
or Civil Right; Indeed, the dread of it ties up a Man's Conscience faster, and
if he proves guilty, makes him liable to a severer Vengance from God Almighty
than simple unfaithfulness; upon which account an Oath is counted a
considerable security for the performance of a promise. And therefore, for the
greater satisfaction of their Subjects, Princes usually Swear to observe those
Stated Measures of Justice, which were either fixed by themselves, or their
Predecessors. And if they happen to fail in the performance; though they
forfeit their Honor, and the Divine Protection; yet there accrues no Right from
thence to the People, to re-enter upon their fancied Original Liberty. For the
Duty of those under Authority, (except where it is expressly conditional) is not
Cancelled and Discharged, by the mis-behaviour of their Superiors. For Example;
supposing a Father Swears to remit some part of his Authority in the Family,
and that he will Govern only by such a prescribed Rule; his forgeting his Oath
afterward, does not void or lessen his Power, nor excuse the Children in their
Disobedience. And to make the Instance more direct, if possible. The Kings of
Persia were Sovereign Monarchs, (...), as Plutarch calls them, and were
Worshipped as the Images of God, and could never be set aside, but by Death.
Yet, these Princes took an Oath at their Inauguration; as Grotius observes from
Xenophon, and Diodorus Siculus. Neither was it lawful for them to alter certain
Laws, as appears from Daniel and Josephus.

The Kings of Egypt likewise, as Grotius relates from Diodorus Sic. had a
full, and unaccountable Authority, they did as he speaks summo Imperio uti; yet
they were bound to the observance of a great many things, which if they
neglected to perform, they could not be charged with these Failures while they
were living; But after they were dead the Custom was to Arraign their Memories,
and deny them the Honor of a Funeral Solemnity: Which punishment was likewise
inflicted upon the Jewish Kings, who had been very irregular, and oppressive in
their Government, 2 Chronicles. 24, 25, and 28. 27. From all which it appears, that
a King's Swearing at his Coronation does not make his Crown forfeitable, or
subject him to the Censure of the People.

And since the Breach of an Oath does not imply a forfeiture of Right; since
the Kings of England claim their Authority by Conquest and Succession, from
hence these Two Corollaries naturally follow.

First, That with us Power always proves it self, unless it appears that it is
given up or limited, by any special Agreement.

Secondly, That the Liberties of the Subjects are not founded upon the
Reservations of an Original Contract. For a Conquered People must not pretend
to make their own Terms. And therefore, their Privileges are not of their own
Creating, but Acts of Royal Favor, and Condescentions of Sovereignty.

Indeed, when the People are not forced into Submission, but freely Elect their
Monarch; there all remote Inferences, and doubtful Cases, ought to be
Interpreted in favor of the Subject; because the Form of the Government had
its Beginning from them; and in this Case only it is, that Liberty proves it
self. But where the Limitations of a Monarchy, are the Condescentions of a
Conqueror, or his Successors, there we are not to stretch the Privilege of the
Subject, beyond express Grant.

So that whatever Rights, or Branches of Government, are not plainly conveyed
away, must be supposed to be still lodged in the Crown. For since the Prince
was once Vested with Absolute Power, and has afterward bounded himself by his
own Voluntary Act, The Abatements of his Authority are to be measured by his
own evident Declarations, and not by any conjectural and consequential
Arguings. And here that Celebrated Maxim takes undoubted place, That all Acts
which are made in destruction of Common Law, or Antecedent Right, are to be
Construed strictly, and not drawn out into Corollaries, and parallel Cases.
From whence it follows, That if it was unlawful at first for the Subjects to
resist their Sovereign, it must still continue so, unless they can prove he has
relinquished this part of his Prerogative, and given them an express Liberty to
take up Arms when they think it convenient; which, I believe, will be hard to
find in our Constitution.

I Confess, there is a Resistance Charter granted by King John, but such a one
as is no ways serviceable to our Author: For,

First, It Is a plain Concession from the Crown, and consequently far from the
nature of a Mutual and Original Contract.

Secondly, Here is no Deposing Power given in case the Articles were broken:
But on the contrary, upon the supposition of a Rupture there is an express
Proviso for the security of the King's Person and Royalty; for a little after
the Clause of Salva Persona nostra, we have these remarkable Words; Et cum
fuerit Emendatum Intendent nobis sicut prius fecerunt; That is, if the King
should fail in his Promise, and constrain them to make use of Force, When their
Grievances were redressed, and they had put themselves in Possession of their
Rights; They should then be obliged to obey him as formerly, Matthew. Par. p. 219.

Thirdly, This Charter was extorted from the King in a Menacing and Military
manner. The Barons were up in Arms, the City of London declared for them, and
received them, and the King was deserted by his own Army; whereas before this
Grant, the Subjects had no color of Authority to Levy Arms against the King.
Now Rebellion is a very ill bottom to found our Liberties upon: The advantages
which are gained by such Monstrous Violences as these, are no more to be
insisted on than the Acquisitions of Piracy; and therefore,

Fourthly, This Charter being obtained in such an undutiful and illegal way, is
without doubt one great reason among others, why it has been always counted a
Nullity; for that it is no part of our Law, I shall fully evince.

First, From the Transactions in the Reign of Henry the Third, for first in
this King's Charter there is no notice taken of any Grant made by King John;
whereas in the Confirmation of Magna Charta by Edward the First, the granting
it by Henry the Third is expressly mentioned, and the Liberty recited at large:
Which is a plain Evidence, that the one was not looked upon to have the same
Authority with the other.

Secondly, That the Magna Charta of Henry the Third was a pure Act of Grace to
the Subject, and no Confirmation of an Antecedent Right, appears from the
Instrument it self, where in the Preamble the King declares, That out of Our
mere and free Will We have given, etc. And toward the end, That for this Our
Gift and Grant of these Liberties, Our Archbishops, Earls, etc. have given us
the fifteenth part of their Movables. Now besides the wording of the Act,
which runs as clear for a Voluntary Concession as is possible; the very
consideration which was given the Crown, is a sufficient Argument, that the
Subjects had no Title to these Liberties before: For who can imagine they would
have purchased that which was their own already, at so dear a rate.

Thirdly, This Charter of Henry the Third, though it contains much the same
Liberties with the former, yet it has none of the same Ratification, there are
no Proviso's for Resistance in it; but instead of Distraining and taking of
Castles, etc. there was a Solemn Excommunication denounced by the Bishops
against all Violators of this Law. So that now the Subjects were evidently
returned to their former State of Passive Obedience. And therefore those
Barons, who, toward the latter end of this King's Reign, took up Arms in
defense of their Privileges, as Matthew. Paris relates, were disinherited by a
Parliament at Winchester; which was soon after confirmed in another Parliament
at Westminster. (Sir W. Raleigh Priv. of Parl. Ap. 31.) More to the same
purpose may be seen in the Law called, Dictum de Kenilworth: For though this
Order was made by no more than a Committee of Twelve Peers; yet they having an
Absolute Delegation as to this Point from the King and the Members of
Parliament, what they agreed upon has the full Validity of a Law.

Fourthly, That King John's Charter, which warrants Resistance (though within a
Rule) had never any Legal Authority, is evident from the Militia Act (14 Car.
2.) where the Parliament declares, That the Militia was ever the undoubted
Right of his Majesty, and his Predecessors But this was a great Mistake, if
King John's Grant had been Law: For by virtue of that Charter, provided the
King receded from his Articles, the Militia was lodged in the Barons, and the
People were obliged by Oath to assist them against the Crown. Now, if the case
had been doubtful, the Judgment of a Parliament ought to have put an end to the
Controversy. This Legislative Council has a Power to interpret, as well as to
alter, or enlarge the Constitution; an Authority to tell us what has been, as
well as what shall be Law. Such public Determinations are as it were first and
self-evident Principles in our Government; they have a kind of Practical
Infallibility in them, and ought not to be disputed, except where they plainly
contradict the Laws of God.

Fifthly, and Lastly, If this Singular Charter had ever been part of our
Constitution, as it is plain it never was, yet now it can have no manner of
Force, because the forementioned Statute concerning the Militia, not only
declares it to have been, but likewise to make the Case more incontestable,
Enacts it unlawful, to Levy War, Offensive or Defensive, against the King. But
of this more hereafter.

If it is Objected, That unless we are allowed to Assert our Rights by Force
when they are Invaded, the Laws which secure them to us are insignificant;
because the King may break down these Fences when he pleases. To this I Answer,
That these Laws upon this Supposition are far from being insignificant; because,

First, They are the Boundaries of Right: They clearly distinguish the Property
of the Subjects from the Prerogative, so that the Prince can seldom encroach
upon them in any considerable Measure, without being Conscious of the Injustice.

Secondly, By virtue of the Laws we are better assured of the Prince's
Protection against the Injuries of all our Fellow Subjects; which is no small
Advantage.

Thirdly, We have the Prince's Honor, and Conscience, and Interest, to secure
us: I say his Interest; for notwithstanding the Subjects were never so well
convinced, that Resistance is utterly unlawful; yet it is by no means
advisable, for Princes to try their Patience too far: For Religion has a very
slender Influence upon the World now a days. Nothing is more frequent than to
see Men live in those Practices which they know to be Immoral. Now Oppression
is apt to make wise Men Mad. Nothing touches them so much to the quick, as the
breaking in upon their Properties, and the undermining the Public Securities.
And therefore when the Government sits thus uneasy upon them, they will be apt
to fly out into Disorders, notwithstanding all the Restraints of Law and
Conscience to the contrary. Now since Princes are supposed to be acquainted
with the Frailty and Degeneracy of Mankind. This consideration of danger will
generally keep them within compass, and check their Arbitrary Designs, though
the Principles of Honor and Integrity should happen to prove insignificant.
This one would think a sufficient Security; and more than this, is neither
allowed by our Government, neither can it be by any other.

First, We have no reason to believe our Government permits us to maintain our
Rights by Arming against our Prince, not only because our Laws plainly declare
against all Resistance, (as I shall show afterward) but because the Libertys
of the Subject were Acts of Grace from the Crown; and since they had no right
to demand them by Force, they must take them upon such Conditions as they are
offered. Now things standing thus, we have no imaginable reason to conclude our
Kings had any intention to forego their irresistible Authority, except they had
signed it away in so many Words; we are not to suppose they would part with
such an inestimable Jewel, and be so Prodigal of their Favors, without the
plainest Evidence. Indeed the granting this Liberty would be equally
prejudicial to Prince and People, and render all Government Impracticable. For,

Secondly, The Ignorance and Partiality of the greatest part of Mankind is
such, that to make it Lawful to resist our Governors, whenever we think it
necessary, is an infallible Expedient to keep a Nation almost always embroiled,
and to banish Peace and Happiness out of the World. Such an allowance as this,
does in reality dissolve all Government, and throw us back into a State of
Nature. For when a Man may make use of all the Force he can get to redress his
Grievances, to carve out his Satisfaction, and to possess himself of all those
Rights he fancies he has a Title to; his owning Authority is but a Complement;
for he is certainly under no Government but his own. He is bound to do no
injury it is true, but this does not hinder his being independent of Society.
For his Obligation to Justice results from the Law of Nature, which binds him
to abstain from Fraud and Violence, whether it is enforced by any Municipal
Constitution or not.

If it is Objected, That this liberty of Resistance is not to be allowed, but in
Cases of extreme Necessity, when the Government is in danger of being wounded
in its Vitals, and the Fundamental Laws are struck at. To this I Answer, That
since the People must be Judges of the Exegencies of State, this restraining of
Resistance to Cases of Necessity, is no Security to the Common Welfare. For by
this Principle whenever a Man, either through Mistake, or Design, believes or
pretends to believe, that the Fundamental Laws are broken, he has a Warrant to
take up Arms and form a Party to dispossess his Governor; and if he can
discharge himself of his Allegiance when he pleases, he is actually free,
because his Will is in his own Power.

Farther, Except the People are barred from Uniting their Forces against their
Governors, there can be no determination of Civil Controversies. For in regard
most People are apt to say, they are wronged as often as they lose a Trial, if
they have the liberty of Appealing from the Bench to the Neighborhood, and may
raise all their Friends and Dependents to oppose the Execution of the Judges
Sentence; then Right must be resolved into Force, and Justice will be all Sword
without any Balance.

Now that the Doctrine of Resistance gives this dangerous Allowance is plain.
For though our Author will not permit us the freedom of raising a Civil War,
upon the account of Male Administration in the Execution of the Laws; yet he
has not given us any assurance that other Men will be of his mind. For may they
not object that the prospect of having Justice observed, was the principal
reason of combining in Society. For all Laws how Fundamental soever, are
designed only as means for the distinction, and security of Property, for the
punishing of violence and circumvention, and therefore they ought not to be
valued above the End. For if the Prince has an unlimitted Privilege of
corrupting Judges, suborning Witness, and forcing the Execution of unjust
Sentences; all other Provisions for Liberty are to little purpose. If we are to
submit to all this hardship, because it falls within the compass of Male
Administration, What do our Fundamental Laws signify? When at this rate, may
some Men say, We can neither have Life, Liberty, nor Estate secured to us: So
that if Resistance was allowable in any Case, Oppression and Violence in the
Administration of Justice would Warrant the use of such a Remedy. And if every
one who imagined himself injured might beat up for Volunteers toredress his
Grievances; the Judges and Laws would be the only Criminals in a short time;
and all Disputes would be decided by Blows and Blood.

Besides supposing Men were generally agreed, That nothing but the Breach of
Fundamental Laws would justify Resistance; since the People are made the Judges
of this Distinction, they need only be at the Expense of a hard Name for their
enlargement; for it is but calling any disgust, or petty Injury a Breach of
Fundamentals, and the Work is done.

If it be said, That the People are always quiet when they are well used; and
never attempt to displace their Governors, but upon just Occasions. To this I
Answer, That if the generallity of Mankind were Masters of so much Sense and
Honesty, as this comes to, Why did they not continue in that State of Nature
some Men fancy them in at first? If they had been wise enough to have
understood their true Interest, What need they have brought themselves under
the Guidance, and Obligation of Laws? If they are so Virtuously inclined, Why
did they submit their Wills and Powers to a Public Regulation? Why should Men
so well qualified for the use of their Freedom, be bound to their good
Behavior, and come under the restraints of Pacts and Subjection?

All Authority and Law is a great Reflection upon Mankind; it plainly supposes
the generallity of us are Weak, Deceitful and Turbulent Creatures. But if we
are so full of Understanding and Conscience, as some Men would make us believe;
all Governments ought to be broken up, and every Man have his Original Charter
of Liberty returned him. For if we are so fit to be Trusted, and to dispose of
our own Actions; it is highly unreasonable to keep us in a State of Ignominy,
and Bondage any longer: But Englishmen of all others, have the least reason to
make Panegyricks upon the Discretion, and Governableness of the People. For not
to mention the Barons Wars, How many Tylers and Cades, and Kets and Flammocks,
have we had within the compass of Four hundred Years? What formidable Bodies
did those Massianelos bring into the Field; and how near was the State being
overturned by the Rebellious Levity, and Madness of the Multitude? And after
all these Instances of Confusion, we have certainly little reason to think that
Vox Populi and Vox Dei, are the same; or that Right and Wrong depends upon
Numbers.

From what has been said it is apparent, That there must be an irresistible
Power in all Governments: But our Two Houses (whose Authority is nearest to the
Kings) have no share in this inviolable Privilege. For least their Legislative
Office should make them forget their Duty to his Majesty, they are obliged to
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Subjection to him, before they are capable of
Transacting any business in Parliament, 7 Iac. 1. Cap. 6. Sect. 8. 30 Car. 2.
Cap. 1.

From whence it follows; That with us the King, and only he, is the
irresistible Power. Neither must this Prerogative be restrained to his Person;
but extend to his Authority. For a King cannot be every where himself, neither
is he able to punish Offenders by his own single Strength: He must govern by
his Ministers, and sometimes by his Armies. Therefore if those who are employed
by him, may be opposed, and hindered in the Execution of their Ch^rg^ he is as
much disabled from pursuing the ends of Government* as i^ Violence had been
offered to himself. Of this Consequence those who made the late Act of
Uniformity, were well aware; and therefore in the Declaration, which they
obliged a considerable part of the Kingdom to make, the Subscriber does not
only declare, That it is not Lawful to take up Arms against the King upon any
pretense whatever, but likewise, That he abhors that Traiterous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority against those Commissionated by him.

Therefore that Objection which is usually made, does not come up to the Point,
viz. That it is Lawful for a private Person to resist an Illegal Commissioner of
the Kings, when he comes to dispossess him of his Property, or to outrage him
in any other respect. For though a Man has the liberty of defending himself
from Encroachments in a private way; yet if he calls in Hundreds and Thousands
to his Assistance, without the King's Authority, he falls under the censure of
the Law. Now the reason why the Constitution permits the use of Force in one
Case, and not in the other, is because private Defense, though never so
unjustifiably managed, cannot bring any public Mischief along with it.

But if Men were allowed to arm Towns and Countries when they thought fit to
complain; this would be of dangerous Consequence to the State, and make it
liable to perpetual Convulsions; so that we should always either feel or fear
the Miseries of a Civil War.

But to proceed with our Author. In his Fourth Section we are told, That no
consideration of Religion binds us to pay more than we owe, not to extend our
Allegiance farther than the Law carrys it.

Which though it is True, yet it is foreign to the Argument. For I shall make it
appear farther afterward, that the Laws extend our Submission, which is one
part of our Allegiance, to all Cases whatsoever.

I suppose this Advice was intended for a preservative against over
Dutyfulness, and that his Reader might not be misled by the Church of Englands
Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

Now how proper soever such Hints as these may be to some Phlegmatic Climates
and Constitutions of Liberties, I shall not dispute; yet certainly the Enquirer
could not have thought them over-seasonable Directions for our Conduct; if he
had pleased to consider either the legal Advantages of the Crown, the temper of
the English Nation, or the time of his own Writing: But his generous Zeal for
the freedom of Mankind, makes him think he can never say, nor do enough.

His Fifth Paragraph supposes an Original Contract, and that the Measures of
Obedience are to be taken from thence, i. e. Once upon a time, when every Man
was weary of Governing himself any longer; they agreed by ^^^eral consent to
set one of their own Countrym^ (...) ^ome Stranger they had a fancy for, upon
whom (...) (...) Term of King, Sovereign, or Supreme, i. e. (...) glorious
Titles without conveying the Power (...), ^ther to make the Royal Pageant
ridiculous, (...) him ^n occasion to over-rate his Authority, which (...) make
him stretch it into a Forfeiture, in a short time: (...) the People forfe^^ing
that they should quickly be out (...) with being governed might over Title
their Monarch, and ^e the Principles of the Con^tution weak on purpose, that so
(...) ^pse to them the sooner. But that neither Willlim (...) or his (...)
Succe^ors received their Crowns by way (...) i^ ^vident to every one, who has
seen any thing of our H^stories; so that this Notion of the Enquirers is
perfectly Chimer^al as to us.

For granting, as Mr. Hunton Observes, (Treatise of Monarchy, page 16.) That
Subjection is not immediately founded in Conquest, but in Cons^rt; yet Consent
in such a Case is forced, necessary and unavoidable* and includes an entire
Submission to the Conquerors pleasure. (...) when a King has his Enemies (for a
Canquered People are no (...) at first) (...) such an Advantage, he will
scarcely be pers^^ded to put any conditions of Forfeiture into his Title, and
Reig^^^^ their Courtesy. For how frank soever he or his Successors may be in
other respects, it is unimaginable to suppose they will (...) them any
Dethroning Power in their Charter.

And (...) the Case stands thus, we may fairly conclude, That that Magnificency
of Style, with which our Kings are always mentioned, has a suitable Authority
belonging to it; that those August Names of Imperial Crown, Sovereign, Supreme,
etc. which we meet with so often in our Courts of Justice, Conveyances, and
Acts of Parliament, are no empty insignificant Sounds, nor ever designed to
describe a Precarious Prince, who may be Resisted or Deposed at pleasure.

In his Sixth Section he will allow no Prince to have a Divine Authority,
unless he can prove his Delegation by Prophets, etc. And yet St. Paul calls the
Roman Emperor the Minister of God; and I believe the Enquirer will grant that
neither Claudius, or any of his Family were Proclaimed by Bath. Coll. or
Crowned by an Angel from Heaven. I somewhat wonder that our Author should
advance such Propositions as these; who grants (Sect. 10.) That the Submission
of the People together with a long Prescription makes a Prince a legal
Governor, and when his Power is once settled by Law, he has a good a Right to
it as any private Person can have to his Property.

And immediately after he affirms, That though a Man has acquired his Property
by Humane means, such as Succession, etc. yet he has a security for the
Enjoyment of it from a Divine Right.

Now if Prescription and Succession gives a Prince a good Humane Title, and
this Title is confirmed by the Rules of Natural and Revealed Religion. One
would think since he is thus secured in his Government by a Divine Right, he
had a Divine Right to govern.

But after all I freely yield the Enquirer, That we cannot reasonably conclude
from bare Possession, that it is the Will of God such Persons should be our
Governors; for the most part we ought to conclude the contrary, because, as he
well observes, this Argument from Possession Iustifies all Usurpers when they
are Successful.

By his Seventh Paragraph we are to take Our Measures of Power, and by
consequence of Obedience, from the express Laws of the State, from the Oaths
which are sworn by the Subject, etc.

To make this reasoning applicable to the Case in hand, I shall only observe at
present, that by his own Concessions (Sect. 13.) There are many express Laws
made which lodge the Militia singly in the King, that make it plainly unlawful
upon any pretense whatever, to take up Arms against his Majesty, or any
Commissionated by him, and that these Laws have been put into the Form of an
Oath, and sworn by all those who have born any Employment in Church or State.

How well he reconciles the Doctrine of Resistance with these Remarques, will
be seen afterward.

The Eigth Section brings us from Natural Religion, to the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, but it is only to show That they are not to be made use of in
this matter.

Now under favor, I conceive, These Scriptures are not so foreign to the
Point, as the Enquirer supposes. For though the Jewish Government was
particularly designed for that People, yet being settled by Divine appointment,
it ought to be highly esteemed and imitated in its standing and general Maxims,
by the rest of the World. God perfectly understands the Tempers, Weaknesses,
and Passions of Mankind; which makes him infinitely more able to judge what
sort of Polity best Answers the Ends of Society. So that whatever is not of a
peculiar and temporary Nature in his Establishment, should be the Model of
their Government.

And to apply this Observation; since there were no allowances of Resistance in
the Jewish Government: But certain Death was the ordained Consequence of
Disobedience to the Civil Power, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. We ought to conclude that such a
general Submission is most rational, and advantageous for the public Good, and
therefore are to take it for granted, that all Christian States especially are
settled upon this Passive Principle, where there are not express Proofs of the
contrary. For it is no Honor to the Memory of our Forefathers, to infer by
remote and strained Implications, that they thought themselves wiser than God
Almighty.

To the former part of his Ninth Section I have nothing to object, but am ready
to join Issue with him upon his Notion. As to what he mentions concerning The
State of the Primitive Christians, I shall have occasion to touch upon it
afterward.

I shall pass over his Tenth Section, as being in a manner comprehended in his
Ninth, and proceed to the Eleventh which brings us home to our English
Government. Where as a Corollary from his former Discourse, he concludes, That
the Question in debate Must be determined by the fixed Laws and Regulations of
the Kingdom.

Which is some comfort; for then we ought not to be overruled by any General
Considerations from Speculations about Original Liberty, or Arbitrary
Constructions of Salus Populi: Nor yet by the Authorities of Civilians,
especially those Foreign ones, who have had a Republican Bias clapped upon
their Education. In this Paragraph he informs his Reader, That the King's
Prerogative is bounded, and that it is Injustice to carry it beyond it is Legal
Extent, which no one denies. As for his Instance, I cannot well imagine what he
brought it for; I hope it was not to try if he could make some People believe
that his Majesty had Levied Money by his Army, for this he knows is not True.
But when any of this Violence happens, he tells us the Principle of
Self-Preservation seems to take place, and to warrant as violent a Resistance.

It seems to take place, i. e. he is not sure on it. But by his own Concessions
he may be sure of the contrary; if the exercise of this, which he calls
Self-Preservation, be restrained by the Constitution, whether it is, or not,
besides what has been said already, will appear farther afterward.

There is nothing more certain than that as he observes, Sect. 12. The English
have their Liberties and Properties secured to them by the Constitution. But an
allowance of fighting their Prince in Defense of these Liberties, etc. is so
far from being Reserved to them, that it is plainly forbidden by Many Possitive
and Express Laws.

Indeed how is it possible such a Liberty should be Reserved in our Government,
which as the Enquirer acknowledges, lodges the Militia ( i. e. the Power of the
Sword) singly in the King. So that without his Order, none of his Subjects can
Form themselves into Troops, or carry the face of an Army, without being liable
to the highest Penalties. And whereas he urges, That if we have a Right to our
Property, we must likewise be supposed to have a Right to preserve it. He means
by Force. To this I Answer,

First, That a Man may have an unquestionable Right to some Things, which he
has no Warrant to recover Vi and Armis, but must rest the Enjoyment of them,
with the Conscience and Prudence of another. E. G. If the Father of a wealthy
Person falls into deep Poverty, he has an undoubted Right to a Maintenance out
of his Sons Estate, and yet he cannot fairly recover it by Force, without a
Legal Provision for this purpose. To bring the Instance nearer home: The Right
of making War and Peace, is an Indisputable Branch of the King's Prerogative;
yet unless his Subjects assist him, this Authority can seldom be exerted to any
Successful effect, because his Majesty cannot Levy Money (which is the Sinews
of War) without the consent of Parliament.

Farther, every one who is injured in his Property, and endeavors the
regaining of it by course of Law, has without doubt a Right to have Justice
done him. But if the Court, where the Cause is depending, happens to be
mistaken, or corrupted, I desire to know whether it is Lawful for him to raise
his Arrier Ban upon such a Disappointment?

Our Author is obliged by his Principle to say no; and therefore he must either
Answer,

1. That the Party aggreived ought to appeal to a higher Court; to which it may
be replied, That it is possible for him to meet with the same misfortune the^re;
for our Constitution does not pretend to any Insallible, or Impecable Judges.

2. His Second Answer, must be that this is a Private Case, and therefore a Man
is bound to submit to ill usage, rather than disturb the public Peace. But to
this I return, that we may suppose a general failure of Justice through
Subornation, Bribery, etc. and then the Oppression will be of a public and
Extensive Nature; and yet if a grievance of this Magnitude should continue
unredress'd after complains, our Author will not allow us the benefit of any
rougher Methods; for he frankly tells us, That it is not lawful to Resist the
King upon any Pretense of ill Administration in the Execution of the Law. Page
14. so that by his own Argument, we may have some very considerable Rights,
which it is not justifiable to demand of the Government with a drawn Sword.

Secondly, This Liberty of Resistance dissolves all Government* For as I have
already Observed, when every man is the Judge of his own Privileges, i. e.
when he is made the Authentic Interpreter of the Laws, and may use all the
force he can get, at his discretion against the State; he is then most
certainly to be governed by no body but himself. And therefore,

Thirdly, This Liberty must be the worst security for Peace and Property
imaginable, as I shall show more at large by and by.

As for his limiting Resistance, To plain and visible Invasions. This is a very
feeble Remedy against Confusion. For since every one is made Judge of the
Evidence, and the generality are naturally over credulous, and apt to believe
ill of their Governors, when designing Men have once imposed upon their
understandings, and almost har'd them out of their senses, then every thing
will be plain to them but their Duty. Thus it was plain that Charles the First
intended to introduce Popery; though possibly never any Person since the
Reformation gave ^etter proof of his Adherence to the Church of England than
that ^rince.

Thus likewise at the beginning of this present Revolution, it was plain to the
greatest part of the Nation, that his Majesty had made a League with the French
King to Extirpate the Protestants and their Religion. Though now the World sees
there never was a more Malicious, and unreasonable Calumny invented: But though
Reports of this Nature are never so monstrous and nonsensical, yet at this rate
we shall never want a Demonstration for a Rebellion; as long as such loose
Principles, as the Enquirer advances, are allowed.

His Thirteenth Section contains nothing but Objections, which to do him
Justice, are fairly put, considering the small compass they are drawn into. How
well he gets clear of the Difficulties he was sensible of, the Reader must
judge; for now we are coming to his

Fourteenth and Dead doing Paragraph, in which he offers to take off all the
Arguments, which are made for Non-resistance. Now before I reply distinctly to
his Answers, I shall endeavor to offer something more than I have urged
already in Consutation of his main Principle.

And here it is not amiss to observe, That the Enquirer in his Ninth Section,
Makes the Measures of our Submission much shorter, than those of the Ancient
Christians, because Our Religion is Established by Law. By virtue of which
Distinction, he makes our Faith fall under the consideration of Property, and
from thence concludes by Implication, That we may resist our Prince in defense
of it.

But we are to consider though our Religion has a legal Settlement, yet we have
no Authority to maintain it by Force. Nay our Laws are express as it is possible
against all manner of Resistance (as himself acknowledges.) Now the Law is
certainly the Measure of all Civil Right, and therefore to carve out our selves
a greater Security than the Law allows, is Destructive of all Government. If
the Mobile get this hint, it is to be feared they will give him no occasion in
their Second Expedition, to admire them for Burning and Plundering with so much
Temper and Moderation.

Further he grants, by Consequence, That the Roman Emperors were irresistible.
For I don't find that he allows the Primitive Christians a Liberty of
Resistance, though they were invaded in their Lives and Properties, as well us
in their Religion.

Now if these Emperors were irresistible, I desire to know what made them so;
if he Answers the Laws, I Reply, That the English Constitution is as full
against taking Arms to oppose the King as is possible. If he Replies, That it
was unlawful to resist the Roman Emperors, because the making of Laws was
wholly in their own Power; but where the Legative Authority is partly in the
King, and partly in the People, the Case is otherwise. To this I Answer, That
the Division of the Legislative Power does not weaken the Obligation of a Law,
when all the Distinct Authorities concur to the making of it. E. G. I Question
not but our Author will grant that the English Laws, though the People have a
share in Enacting them, are as perfect, and ought to be as inviolable, as those
in Turkey, where all depends upon the Princes Will: Therefore if the Authority
of the Kingdom Declares their Prince Irresistible, this makes him as much so,
as if he had given himself this Power by Conquest, and had been the most
Absolute Monarch in the World.

And as this Privilege is clear, so he may make it Immortal if he pleases,
provided he has a Negative upon the Remainder of the Legislative Power (as the
King has upon the Two Houses) so that the Constitution cannot be altered
without his own Consent.

Nay if the People have given up their Rights of Resistance by their own
voluntary Motion, they are bound in Honor as well as Justice to maintain their
own Act. So that it seems more unaccountable not to Acquiesce in this Case,
than if they had been forced into such a submission.

Though it is not improper to Observe, That the Act which I have now in view (
viz. 13 Car. 2) which tells us, It Is unlawful to Levy War Offensive, or
Defensive against the King. Does not so much pretend to vest the King with any
new Authority, as to acknowledge his Antecedent Right, where it is likewise
Declared that The Militia has ever been the undoubted Right of his Majesty and
his Predecessors.

Which is as plain a Concession as can be, that this Parliament did not believe
our Government began upon Hobs his Pacts, or that the King had his Power
Originally from the People. But supposing the Government was Founded in the
Voluntary consent of the People (the contrary of which has been proved;) yet
after they have once by the most Solemn and Deliberate Act bound up their
Hands, and made it Unlawful under the highest Penalties, to use Force against
the Magistrate; in this Case it is unreasonable to suppose they can resume their
Ancient Liberty at pleasure. For that which a Man has Alienated by his own free
Grant, is as much out of his Power, as if he had never been possessed of it at
all. So that it is as great Injustice to wrest back that, which I have once
given away, as to invade my Neighbor in his Original Property.

If it is Objected, That such Laws of Non-resistance as this are to be
understood with a Tacit Exception. Viz. Provided the Magistrate does not press
too hard upon the Constitution, and Violate the most Fundamental Parts of it.
To this I Answer,

First, If a Law which is so absolutely against all Resistance, as appears both
by the clear and comprehensive style it is Penned in, and by the time in which it
was Enacted, which was immediately after we were emerged out of the Miseries of
a long Rebellion, so that we have all imaginable reason to believe the Wisdom
of the Nation designed to make the most effectual Provision to secure us from
the like Calamity. If I say a Law thus remarkquibly worded, and
circumstantiated, may be eluded by Distinctions, and Reservations; then the
Statute Book is little better than wast Paper; for at this rate there is
nothing so plain, but may be glossed away into insignificancy.

If he Objects, That the Natural Right we have to preserve and protect our
selves, will justify the Defense of our Lives and Liberties against all
Invaders whasoever, notwithstanding any positive Municipal Prohibitions to the
contrary.

To this I Answer, That to Object thus is to Argue against himself, as well as
against Reason. For he grants by undeniable Consequence, (Sect. 9.) That the
Primitive Christians were obliged to Non-resistance, because they Lived under a
Constitution in which Paganism was Established by Law. He should have said, In
which Christianity was prohibited, for it was possible for both Religions to
have been Established, as they were in the time of Constantine: Now if a
Municipal Law ought to be overruled by the Law of Nature when they happen to
clash; then the Christians who lived under the Heathen Emperors might Lawfully
have taken up Arms against the Government, because they were deprived of their
Lives and Fortunes against all Equity and Humanity. For to persecute Men so
remarquibly Regular and Peaceable, both in their Principles and Practices, is
as manifest a Violation of the Law of Nature as is possible. And if it was
Lawful for them to resist, then they seem bound in Conscience to do it,
whenever they had a probability of prevailing. For without doubt it is a great
fault for a Man to throw away his Life, impoverish his Family, and encourage
Tyranny, when he has a fair Remedy in his Hand. But our Author has not yet been
so severe, as to bring* in the Martyrs Felo de se. But,

Secondly, The Law of Nature obliges all Men to stand to their Contracts,
though they have made them to their Disadvantage. They must not, as the
Scripture spea^^, change, though they Have sworn to their own hurt, Psalm. 15.

Except the Matter of the Contract be Malum in se. But for Men to bar
themselves the use of some Liberties (though never so unquestionable) with
respect to some particular Persons, and to tie up their Hands in reference to
their Governors, is no Malum in se, for in such a case they dispose of nothing,
but what is their own, and that upon a valuable consideration. Thus much is
acknowledged by our Author (Sect. 1.) For he tells us, That by the Law of
Nature a Man may bind himself to be a Servant, or sell himself to be a Slave,
by which he becomes in the Power of another, so far as it was provided by the
Contract. So that where the Contract is clear, it ought to be punctually
observed. From whence it follows, That when a Nation shall Deliberately, and
Authoritatively declare, either that it always was Unlawful for them to take up
Arms against their King; or at least that it should be so for the future. After
they have thus Solemnly disclaimed all manner of Right, or pretense to
Resistance, to defend themselves by Force, is a notorious Infraction of their
Promise, and as much a breach of the Moral Law, as of the Statute Book.

Thirdly, Because the Authority of the Constitution must be weakened, and the
Ends of Government lost, by allowing the Subject a Latitude of Exposition,
therefore the Wisdom of the Nation has thought fit to stick by the Letter, when
it is plain and unquestionable, though it is apparently against the intention of
the Law.

Of this Practice I shall give a considerable Instance.

In the Reign of Henry the Sixth there was an Act made (which I have already
cited to another purpose) in which all Persons not possessed of Forty Shillings
per Annum Freehold, are declared incapable of Electing Knights for the County.
The Design of which Act was to strike the Mobile out of the Government, and
that none but Persons of presumed Discretion might have a share in choosing
their Representatives.

But the value of Money being so prodigiously altered since that time, Fifteen
Shillings now, probably being not more than one then; This alteration has
thrown the Elections upon Multitudes of People, who are apparently excluded by
the intention of that Law. Yet to preserve the Majesty of these public
Provisions inviolable, this Act has always been Religiously observed in the
literal Construction, though it is manifestly against the meaning of those who
made it.

Fourthly, The Government, and consequently the public Liberties, are best
secured by adhering to the utmost extent of the Words of this Act, i. e. by
perpetual Non-resistance, and therefore if we had nothing else to determine us,
we may be well assured, it was the intention of the Legislators to oblige us to
the Letter.

In order to the proving this more at large, we are to consider, That the World
was never yet so happy, as to be Wise, nor I am afraid Honest in the greatest
part of its Numbers. Now as long as the gross Body of Mankind are thus
unfortunate in their Understandings and Morals, the Peace of Society would be
very indifferently secured, if it might be disturbed by a Civil War, as often
as Weak, or Designing Men should allege their Grievances would Warrant them in
Resistance.

Which will appear further if we consider, That in all Governments though never
so unexceptionably managed, there will be always abundance of Male Contents.
Some are Distructed because they think they are not sufficiently taken notice
of, which makes them endeavor to subvert the present Establishment, in hopes
of being better considered in another Revolution. Others are Angry because they
are removed from Places of Profit, and Reputation, though possibly they have
lost their Post by their own Misbehavior, or at most the Prince shows no more
Arbitrariness in this Case, than is allowed every private Man, who has the
liberty of changing his Servants at his pleasure. A third sort happen to have
some private Dispute with the Ministers, whom because they cannot Displace,
they are resolved to revenge their Quarrel upon the King, as if a Man should
murder the Master of the Family, or blow up his House, only because he is
fallen out with some of the Servants.

This Man has debauched away his Fortune, and if he cannot plunder upon
another, he is under a necessity of starving his Vice; which makes him lay hold
of every Opportunity to embroil the State. In short, some Translate their
Allegiance out of Indigence, and some out of Spite. Some Conspiracies are
strengthened by Compliance, because a Man will not be so morose, as to be Loyal,
when his Friends and Acquaintance are on the other Side. Some Engage out of
Curiosity to satisfy their restless humor, and that they may try something
that is New. And some Revolt to show their Parts, that the World may see what
an admirable Scheme of Rebellion they can contrive, and how Powerful they are
to Harangue the People out of their Senses and Loyalty. Which is far from being
an impossible Task, for the Multitude are as unstable as the Wind, always too
inclinable of themselves to Envy, and censure their Governors, which makes them
so easily debauched by every Seditious Impostor.

They have not Capacity enough to discover the Designs of these pretended
Patriots, nor to foresee the Miseries, which are consequent to Intestine
Commotions, nor yet the Compassion and good Nature to make allowances for the
necessary Miscarriages of State* They are Naturally uneasy, jealous, and
over-credulous, which makes them apt to swallow the most extravagant and
impossible Relations. Tell them that One Man will attempt the assaulting of Two
or Three hundred, though he knows they have all as strong Arms, and as little
Passive Obedience as himself. Tell them that their Prince intends to Massacre
all his Subjects, and to Reign over nothing but Carcases, and Deserts: That he
intends to sell them to a Foreign Nation, though he necessarily make himself a
Slave by the bargain; yet all these Absurdities go down currently with them,
when they are confidenly reported: Though in reality to suppose that Princes
will resign their Authority, and throw away their Crowns, is the most improper,
and impracticable Thought, we can possibly fix upon them.

Those who are born and bred to Empire and great expectations, and accustomed
to the Charms of Sovereignty and Power, who are remarkable for a Noble and
Magnanimous Spirit, for sedateness and freedom from Passion, such Persons don't
usually fall into those excesses of Mortification and Bigottry, as to throw
away their Kingdoms, either out of Zeal, or Contempt: But the Populace seldom
consider these things; Nay, though it is apparent that it is nothing but the
Conscientiousness, the Religious Integrety, and great affection the Prince has
to promote the happiness of his Subjects, which makes his Conduct unacceptable
to them in some Cases; though his mistakes proceed from no worse Cause than
misinformation, or some uneven parts of his Virtues; yet they want either the
Apprehension or Candor, to make just abatements for so harmless, and generous
a Principle: But are as violent in their Censures, and Disobedience, as if he
had fetched his Design from Hell, and been the most imperious and ill-natured
Tyrant in the World.

And since Men are generally such untoward and ungovernable Creatures; Since
the Great Vulgar* and the Small, are liable to such fatal Miscarriages, and so
apt to deceive and pervert each other: Since Ambition and Caprice, and
Covetousness have the Ascendant over the Generality, and Shams and Stories are
oftener believed than Truth; in such a State of Degeneracy and Weakness as this,
the Government must be built upon a very Sandy Foundation, if every one is made
a Judge of the Case of Resistance, and all the Fools and Knaves in a Kingdom
may Rebel when they please. Such a Scheme of Politics we may imagine would
fill all Places with Tumults, Blood, and* Confusion, and in a short time almost
Depopulate the World.

But I understand some Persons Object, That Popery and Arbitrary Power were
breaking in like a Torrent upon us, that our Lives, and Libertys, and Religion,
were just upon the point of being Ravished. And when such important Interests
lie at stake, and we are in danger of losing Two Worlds at once, it is time to
look about us. In such Cases of Extremity singular methods are allowable, For
Necessity justifies whatever it forces us upon. All Oaths of Allegience all
Provisions against Resistance, though never so peremtory and strict, are to be
understood with such Exceptions as these: For Laws were made to preserve, and
not to destroy us. I shall endeavor to give an Answer to all the parts of this
Objection, excepting what relates to Arbitrary Power, which shall be considered
afterward. And,

First, As for our Religion which is the main Concern, we could not have lost
that without our own Faults; no Man can rifle our Thoughts, or rob us of our
Understandings. There is no storming of a Creed, if it is not betrayed by
Cowardice, or Treachery, it is Impregnable.

To which I may add, That Adversity is the best Trial of Men's Sincerity, and
gives them Opportunity for the Exercise of the noblest Virtues. Christianity is
far from being endamaged by the Patience and Constancy of its Professors. To
speak properly, a Church can never flourish so much, as when we have frequent
Instances of Fortitude, Resignation, and Contempt of the World, and all other
unquestionable Marks of an Heroic and Invincible Honesty.

Secondly, by our Religion, therefore can only be meant, the free, and
unmolested Profession of it, which though it is a very desirable Privilege, yet
we must not contend for it in Opposition to the Laws of God and our Country. To
repel a Persecution by the assistance of Perjury and Treason, is a most
unjustifiable and fatal Remedy. It Is a Cure far above the Malignity of the
Distemper, and conveys Plague and Poison in the Operation; It makes us destroy
the very Life and Essence of that which we are so zealous to maintain, and damn
our selves to secure our Religion. The Primitive Christians were perfect
Strangers to these Salves for Ease and Self-Preservation, and yet their Laws
could not be plainer against all manner of Resistance than ours.

Besides, no State can subsist upon such Reserves of Interpretation as these.
For, as has been observed already, if Resistance is warrantable in any case;
then every individual Person must be made a judge of his Prince's Conduct, and
determine what sort of Provocations, and Opportunities are sufficient to
justify a Revolt. Now if such a Liberty was granted, the Foundations of the
Earth would quickly be out of Course: Such lose Maxims as these do no less than
Proclaim an Indulgence for Anarchy and Licentiousness, and tear up the very
Principles of Society by the Roots. For granting the People were generally
Honest (though this I am afraid is a supposition, which has much more of
Charity than Judgment in it,) yet in regard of distance, into experience,
credulity, and shortness of Thought; they are neither fit to pronounce upon the
Administration of their Governors, nor capable of distinguishing Imposture from
Truth; nor discerning enough to foresee, what Plunderings and Rapes, what
Faction and Atheism, what extensive Ruin and Desolation are the inevitable
consequences of a Civil War. Now what can we expect but frequent returns of
such a Scene of Misery, if every Man may hang out the Flag of Defiance against
his Prince, whenever his Weakness or his Wickedness shall promt him to it. When
the Subtle and Ambitious can practice without control upon the unstable, and
unthinking Multitude, and play their Spleen and their Rhetoric against the
Government. When Men of Turbulent and Tempestuous Spirits, who love to live in
a Storm, that they may gratify their Malice with the Wreck and their Avarice
with the Booty. When such Men are allowed to blow up the Simple, and
over-credulous into Jealousy and Discontent; and all the Seditious
Incendiaries may throw their Flambeaus, and their Wildfire about a Nation.
When such dangerous Freedoms as these (which yet are no more than the Natural
consequences of the Doctrine of Resistance) are given; and varnished over with
the specious Titles of The Laws of Nature and Self-Preservation: We may then
easily imagine that Justice and Peace would soon take their leaves of this
World, and Mankind would need no other Judgment, but the Effects of their own
Vice and Folly to destroy them. But,

Thirdly, Supposing extremity of rigor in Governors would absolve us from our
Allegiance (which we see it will not;) yet this was none of our Case.

Indeed if we were to form an Idea of his Majesty's Government, by the Tragycal
Harangues of some Men, we could not imagine any thing less than the Ten
Persecutions had been amongst us; and that a great part of the Nation had been
Massacred; and yet, God be thanked, we lived in great Prosperity, free from the
Exactions, and Tributary Burdens of other Reigns, and if nothing but his
Majesty's Severity could have taken us off, we might, for ought appears, have
been all Immortal.

Well, say they, Though we were not actually swallowed up, yet we were upon the
brink of Destruction; and if our Deliverers had not timely Interposed, the
King's Dragoons were just going to make their Fire upon the Bible, and the
Statute Book; and we must either have been converted to Popery, or Ashes. But*

First, I would gladly know of these Men, why they always twist Popery and
Slavery together. For this I can imagine no other reason, except it be to make
their Monster more frightful to the People. For it is certain there is no such
inseparable Connection between these Two things, as is pretended. For had our
ForeFathers nothing which they could call their own till the Reformation?

Is not Magna Charta a Popish Law? And are there not many liberal Concessions
from the Crown before Edward the Sixth? And as their Argument has notoriously
failed for the time past, so I hope it will never be tried for the future.

Secondly, This supposal of Severity has as little reason, as Duty and Decency
in it. The Clemency and Goodness of his Majesty's Temper (which Character his
Enemies are so Just to allow him.) The generous Protection, and Assistance he
gave the Hugonots; his Employing the Protestants in his Court and Camp, and
Trusting them with the most important Places and Secrets, those are mighty
Evidences that nothing of this horrid Nature was intended.

Besides what Force was there to perform this extraordinary Exploit? I suppose
few People are so far overgrown with the Spleen, as to fancy the Protestants
would have helped to destroy one another. Now before the certainty of the
Invasion, I believe I may safely say, there was not above 10000 Papists in Arms
in the Three Kingdoms, and probably not much more than the Tenth part of those
in England. Oh, but the Irish came over! Not above a Regiment or Two till the
Dutch were ready to make a Descent upon us; and when they were most numerous,
the English Roman Catholics, and themselves scarcely held the Propotion of One
to Two hundred Protestants: And, I believe, they did not perceive we were so
charmed with the Spirit of Loyalty, or Religion, as to let them cut our Throats
without Opposition: For we Protestants, at that time, gave broad Signs, that
though our Principles were Passive, yet our Hands upon a provocation would be
as Active as our Neighbors. Therefore as to those Irish who were last sent
over, the Kingdom was then threatened with such a powerful Enemy, and the
necessity of Affairs was such, that there needs no manner of Apology for their
coming; and as for the others who were Transported before, their Numbers were
very inconsiderable; and though we did not foresee the Dutch Storm, it is likely
his Majesty did.

This is certain the preparations in Holland were visible long before their
Design was owned, and therefore his Majesty had reason to be upon his Guard.
Besides at that time the English were under apparent Discontents, for then the
Mystery of Iniquity began to work, and those Hellish Stories, which drove his
Majesty out of his Dominions, were reported with great confidence; and a Man
was not counted a good Protestant, who would not believe them. How well they
have been proved since the World knows.

And here I cannot omit taking notice what a Frantic, and Ruinous Maxim it is
to assert, That it is Lawful for the People to set their Kings aside upon a bare
jealousy, and apprehension of Rigor. Give them but this Liberty, and an
Impostor will easily fright them into a State of Nature, and carry them whether
he pleases. If we may renounce the Government as often as any bold Pretense is
made against it, and translate our Allegiance upon conjecture and report, the
contests about Dominion would be so frequent and terrible, yet we had better
Disband into Solitude, than live any longer together* If Calumnies and
Aspersions (and all undemonstrated Reports ought to go for no more) are
sufficient to cancel our Obedience, then no Prince can have any Title as long
as there is either Knavery, or Folly in the World. This Principle lays a
Foundation for a Rebellion every Week, and renders all Government
impracticable. By acting in this manner we put it in the Power of Slander and
Perjury to determine the weightiest points of Justice; and make it an easy
Task to over-turn a Kingdom with a Lie.

If it be urged that it is needless to search after farther proof that the
Subversion of Protestancy was intended, because a Prince of his Majesty's
Persuasion and Zeal must necessarily think himself obliged to pursue a design
of this Nature.

Before I return an Answer, I shall just Observe that Religious Zeal, though it
acts upon misinformation is really a commendable Quality: For it is an
Infallible sign of a good Intention, it argues great Charity to the Souls of
Men, and a generous desire to propagate Truth, and to promote the Glory of God.
To speak freely, I cannot be heartily angry with a Man (though his Methods of
Discipline are never so unacceptable) who, I am persuaded, has no other Design
than to carry me to Heaven; though I had much rather he would permit me to go
thither my own way, because it is almost impossible I should go any other. For
Rigor is usually very unfortunate both to the Proselyter, and Proselyted; It
creates Prejudice and Aversion to the one, and makes no more than a Hypocrite
of the other.

But to proceed to the Objection, in order to the confuting of which, I shall
endeavor to prove these Two things.

First, That his Majesty is not obliged by the Principles of his Church to
attempt the Converting his Subjects by Severity. Secondly, That in all humane
probability such a Method would prove Unsuccessful.
First, That his Majesty is not obliged by the Principles of his Church to
attempt the Converting his Subjects by Severity. The Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, I conceive, is to be collected these Four ways, Either from her eminent
Divines, The Bulls of Popes, The Decrees of Councils, or the usual Practice;
which when a Case is doubtful, ought to be taken for the Sense of a Communion.

To begin with their Divines; Cassander, a Person of great Learning and
Judgment, and whose Writings were never censured, insists upon gentle Methods
for the propagation of Religion, disapproves of Severity, and tells us it has
been a miserable occasion of the spreading of Schism, ( De Offic. Pii Viri,
page 187. 196.)

But because it may be objected this Author was more gentle in his Censure, and
allowed a greater Latitude than the generallity of Communion; I shall subjoyn
the Testimonies of others of a straiter Principle; and who are well known to
carry up Popery to the height.

1. Thomas Aquinas yields 22 ae. q. 10. Art. 11. c. That Unlawful Worship,
Ritus Infidelium (under which Words he comprehends an Heretical Religion, as
appears both from this Conclusion, and from his next Question, 22 ae. q. 11.
1.) May be tolerated in some cases. Which he proves,

1. Because the Church ought to take her Measures of Government from the
Administrations of Providence. Now God permits many ill Practices in the World,
least a forcible Restraint should prevent a greater Good, or prove the occasion
of a greater Evil. Therefore Infidels and Heretics have been sometimes
tolerated by the Church, when their Numbers were great, and Discipline could
not take place without the hazard of giving great Offense; without occasioning
a Commotion ( or civil Disturbance) and hindering the Salvation of those who by
fair means might by degrees be won over to the Catholic Faith. These Arguments
for Toleration are much stronger now, than they were either in Aquinas his
Time, or before it: And therefore if he had lived since the Reformation, we
have reason to believe he would have pressed them more at large.

Which probably is the reason why Cardinal Lugo, who wrote since the Counsel of
Trent, is more full and particular in the point. For though he will not allow a
Tolleration but upon a very great Occasion, yet in such a case he acknowledges,
That a Catholic Prince may give Liberty of Conscience to his Heretical
Subjects. For this Opinion he quotes Acquinas, and says he, Was followed by the
rest of the Divines, particularly naming Suarez, Coninch and Hurtado. He adds,
That this Practice has been used by many of the most Pious Christian Princes,
who Tolerated open Heresy when they could not oppose it without the danger of
a greater Inconvenience. For this Urgent Occasion ( causa gravissima) is then
supposed to happen (as he proves from Hurtado,) When Religion is likely to be
more damnified by the denial than by the grant of such an Indulgence, when the
People are in danger of growing Mutinous and Diserderly by strict Usage. And
therefore in an Heretical Country such a Liberty of Conscience may be granted
without any difficulty: And in a Catholic one too when things are desperate.
He proceeds farther, and tells us, That such an Allowance to Heretics is a
thing Lawful in its self; and therefore when a Prince has passed his promise,
he ought punctually to keep it. Lugo. de Virt. div. Fid. Disp. 19. Sect. 4.
Numb. 121. 123. 128. 130.

We see therefore, That in the Opinion of these Schoolmen (though none of the
kindest) we are not to be roughly managed till the Major part of us are gained
by dint of Argument, which is so improbable a supposition in England, that I
think we need not trouble our selves about the Consequences of it.

It Is true Bellarmine ( de Laicis Lib. 3. Cap. 18.) pretends to prove by
Scripture, the Fathers, and Reason, That Kings ought not to permit a Liberty of
belief, but then he supposes their Authority to be Absolute; as appears from
his Instances of the Jewish Kings, and Roman Emperors. Therefore his Doctrine
does not oblige Princes, who have only a Part (though a Principal one) in the
Legislative Power, especially when a different Communion is Established by the
Laws of the Realm, which cannot be Repealed but by consent of Parliament. A
King when he exceeds his Prerorogative, is in some measure out of the Sphere of
Royalty: For though his Subjects are not to resist him, when he Persecutes
against Law, yet his Actions, having no Warrant from the Constitution, are
altogether Private and Unjustifybale.

Secondly, and Thirdly, The Application of this Remark will give the Decrees of
Popes and Counsels, relating to this matter, a fair Interpretation: For neither
the Bulls of Paul the Fourth, nor Pius the Fifth, against Heretics, nor the
Bulla Caenae of Urban the Eighth, nor the Third Canon of the great Counsel of
Lateran, in which places, if any where, we have reason to expect this Severity
of Doctrine, I say it is neither openly asserted, nor can it be collected from
any of these Authorities, That a limited Prince is obliged to break through
the Establishment of his Country, and Act Arbitrarily for the sake of Religion;
or (which is all one) that a private Man ought to propagate the Orthodox Faith
Vi and Armis, though he violates the Laws of Civil Justice, as well as Humauity
by so doing.

Fourthly, If the Point was dubious, the Practice of the Roman Church ought to
determine the Controversy. Now matter of Fact carries it clearly for the
favorable Side. To begin with France; It is certain that from the time of
Henry the Fourth till within these few Years, the Hugonots have had little or
no disturbance about their Religion, notwithstanding the Absoluteness of that
Monarchy, and the vast Majority of Roman Catholics amongst them, and yet this
Indulgence of their Kings has never been condemned as a prevarication of their
Duty. To proceed, In the Cantons of Switzerland the Protestants at this Day
enjoy their Persuasion with Ease and Security enough (Dr. Burnet's Travels.)

The same Liberty is allowed the Reformed in Germany by several Princes of the
Roman Communion; viz. by the Duke of Newburgh, the Bishop of Montz, the Prince
of Salzback, and the Bishop of Hildershem, etc.

And having showed that his Majesty is not obliged either by the Doctrine, or
Practice of his Church to push things to extremity; I shall prove in the

Second place, That in all Humane probability such a Method must prove
Unsuccessful, and consequently the use of it is apparently against his
Majesty's Interest.

He that considers the present Circumstances we are in, and takes a full view
of the State and Complexion of our Affairs, must conclude it a Romantic
Enterprise to endeavor the Establishing the Romish Faith in this Kingdom.

This Religion is not only against the Conscience, but the Grain of the English
Nation. Many things they are firmly persuaded are Erroneous and Unaccountable,
and others they can very hardly reconcile their Temper to, though they thought
them True.

In short, there can be no danger that Popery should become the Religion of the
Kingdom, since the Abbey Lands are possessed by the Layety, and most of the
Clergy, by having Families, are engaged in the same interest: Besides some
believe the Church of Rome too Indulgent, and some too strict a Mother. For we
have enough among us who will neither stoop to the submissions of Consession,
nor bear the overgrown Grandeur of that Church: So that if they had no other
Arguments (as they have the best imaginable) their Spirit would secure their
Protestancy.

Now when a People have such strong Convictions to keep them where they are,
and such an Unconquerable Aversion to the Roman Communion. When Argument and
Inclination lies the same way. When there is Sense and Reason, Scripture and
Antiquity, Numbers, Humor and Interest, (all the Motives that Heaven and Earth
can suggest) against a Religion, there is little likelihood of its prevailing.

Besides, the circumstance of time would be no small Obstacle to a Design of
this Nature. For the Controversy between us has not only been lately handled
at large, and drawn down to every vulgar Capacity; but the Victory has fallen
indisputably, and entirely on the Church of Englands Side. And though the Roman
Catholics may think otherwise, yet as long as the Protestants are of this
Opinion, the Effect will be the same. Insomuch that if we had another
Advantage, the fresh Sense of Success and Triumph would almost make us
Impregnable. And when things stand in this Posture, as every one that has but
half an Eye must now see they do. How well soever a Man may be assured of the
Truth of his Religion, he is no more bound to drive against all these
Difficulties and Oppositions, than he is to stand in a Sea Breach. Those
Spiritual Directors are fit for Bedlam, who will run Princes upon such
dangerous Impossibilities, where there is so much hazard without the least
glimpse of Success.

Since therefore his Majestys Communion does not force him upon such rigorous
and impracticable Designs, as his Enemies would make us believe; since he has
neither Duty to oblige, nor Hopes to succeed, nor (for ought appears)
Inclination to execute. It seems Uneasonable as well as Uncharitable, to
suppose he will disquiet his Age, and disgust his Subjects, and hazard his
Kingdoms any more about Disputes of this Nature.

Can we imagine any Prince will venture upon an Expedient, which is
demonstratively Feeble and Insufficient, and which to speak softly, has proved
so Unfortunate upon the bare* presumption of a Trial? Will he stand a Course,
where he knows there are nothing but Rocks and Shallows, without any prospect
of Advantage by the Voyage?

No; Self-Preservation and Common-Instinct will keep a Man from such Attemps as
these.

But to return more directly to our Author (though, I hope, this has been no
unseasonable Digression.)

Having shown therefore what an insecure distracted Condition a State must be
in, if Subjects were permitted to take up Arms, as often as they were abused,
or ill disposed: I shall proceed to show how much safer their Liberties are
under the Protection of that Unreputable, as well as Unpracticed Virtue of
Passive Obedience.

And here (as has been already hinted) We have the Honor, and Conscience, and
Interest of Princes to secure us; and how defective soever the Two former
Principles may be, the latter must certainly take a firm and universal hold of
Mankind.

Few People in their Senses will pursue those Methods, in which the hazard is
so apparently over-proportioned to the probability of Success. Now every one
knows that Rigor and Oppression is apt to make the Subjects run Riot, though
they are under never such strict Obligations to submission. And therefore
Princes who have more to lose than others, will be more cautious of giving a
colorable Provocation: Besides when they find their Subjects under peaceable
Principles, and aknowledging Themselves bound never to disturb their Governors
upon any Pretense whatever. This will make them have the less Temptation to
Oppress them. This will encourage them to enlarge the Freedom of their People,
when they are so well assured their Favors will not be abused. But when Maxims
of Resistance are strow'd, and the whole Multitude Authorized to determine when
this extraordinary Privilege is to be used, which must be allowed, otherwise
its perfectly insignificant; for I suppose the Prince will scarcely tell them
when they are to Rebel. When such singular Positions as these are Advanced,
Governors must needs be alarmed, and uneasy, and take the first opportunity
to crush their Subjects, and disarm them of that dangerous Power which is so
likely to be turned against themselves; which Design if not actually compassed,
would be often attempted; and consequently the People must be either Enslaved,
or Embroyled. These are the natural Effects of such Licentious Tenets; they
either prove the Inlets of Arbitrary Power, or else keep us in perpetual
Commotions, and deprive us of all the Advantages of Society.

Farther, though the Supreme Magistarte is unaccountable, yet his Ministers are
not. Those who Execute his Illegal Commands may be punished for their
Compliance. And if the present Authority should protect them from Trial, and
stop the Course of Justice. They have the uncertainty of their Princes Humor,
the Fears of his understanding their false Conduct, but especially the
Vengeance of another Revolution to keep them in awe. Now the Conjuction of all
these Arguments for Passive Obedience, are found both in Reason and upon
Experiment, to be a much better Fence for the Prop^^^y o^ the Subject than to
authorize Resistance upon any account whatever. For this cannot be done without
making every individual Person a proper Interpreter of so dangerous a Law; and
giving the People leave to discharge themselves of their Allegiance whenever
they please. Now to give Pride, and Poverty, and Revenge, a general Liberty to
disturb the public Peace, to allow the Subjects to fire upon the Crown, as
often as they are either ambitiously inclined, or unreasonably frighted and
imposed upon; as in effect to let loose the Principles of ruin upon a Nation;
and to arm all the wild and ungovernable Passions of Mankind to its own
destruction.

And since Non-resistance has so many Advantages above the contrary Tenent, we
ought to interpret the Law I have been speaking of to this Sense; since not
only the plain Words, but the Common. Interest and Safety, require such an
Interpretation: For the Design of all Laws being to provide for the general
convenience, they are by no means to be set aside, though the keeping of them
should prove uneasy to some particular Times and Persons. There is no absolute
Security in this World, and therefore we ought to stick to those Measures which
afford us the best; especially when they are legally Established, so that we
have no liberty to change them though they were less commodious. And though the
Doctrine of Non-resistance may sometimes press hard upon the Subject, yet this
very rarely happens, for generally speaking the most Arbitrary Rigors of the
Prince are more tolerable than the Miseries of Disobedience, and Civil
Distractions.

I shall give a very gentle Instance; viz. The late Expedition of the Mobile,
who besides the Terror and Barbarity of their Irruption, have in a few Days
violated more Property than probably has suffered by the stretch of the
Prerogative in an Hundred Years.

Therefore since unconditional Submission is the best Expedient to prevent
perpetual Broyls and Insurrections, and the only solid Foundation to fix the
Government upon; we ought in Duty to God, and our Country to adhere unalterably
to this Doctrine. And if we happen to fall upon a less fortunate Age, we must
take our chance contentedly, and rest the event with Providence, and not fly of
from those Principles which carry so vast an odds of Advantage in them; by the
Practice of which our Forefathers have been, and our Posterity is likely to be
happy.

And now having shown the unsoundness of his main Principle, a little trouble
will Answer the rest of his Arguments.

First, He tells us, That all general Words are supposed to have a tacit
reserve in them, where the matter seems to require it.

To this I Answer, That in this Case the matter does not seem to require any
reserve, because such an Exception would frustrate the Intent of the Law, and
undermine Government.

As for his Instances in Children and Wives, they come very much short of his
Point: For though Children (notwithstanding the general Words in Scripture) are
not to do every thing their Parents may command them, yet certainly they are
not to enter into Confederacies against them, to Fight them, and turn them out
of their Houses upon any provocation whatever; and therefore much less is the
Father of their Country to be used in that manner.

His Instance in Marriage is as unlucky as the former. Where the Parties swear
unconditionally to cohabit together till Death, and yet as he observes, it is
not doubted but that Adultery disengages them from their Contract. But the
reason why the universality of the Terms are limited in this Case is, because
we have an express Determination of our Savior to Warrant it ( Matt. 19. 9.)
Let him produce any such Authority for Resistance, either from Gospel, or Law,
and we will yield the Point.

In return to his saying, Odious Things are not to be suspected, and therefore
not to be named.

I desire to know of him what is more Odious than Knavery, yet all Securities
in Law are plain suspicions of such Scandalous dealing, and make express
provisions against it, though the Quality of the Persons contracting are never
so unequal.

So that if there had been any such Contract between our Kings and People, as
some Men fancy, the Terms of Forfeiture would no doubt have been as plainly
expressed, as they are in private Concerns. And that this is more than a
conjecture, is evident from Practice of Flanders and Poland, where such express
Allowances of Resistance have been actually made, (how Politickly I shall not
determine) as appears from Meierus, and Chytraeus, as they are cited by
Grotius, ( de Iure Belli, etc. Annot. ad Cap. 4. Lib. 1. Sect. 14.)

Nay himself vindicates the Dutch from the charge of Rebellion ahainst Philip
the Second upon this Ground, viz. Because it is confessed by Historians on all
sides that there was an express Proviso in the Constitution of their
Government; that if their Prince broke such and such Limits, they were no more
bound to obey him, but might resist him, which Original Contract was
notoriously broken by the Duke of Alva their Governor. Reflections upon
Parliam. Pacif. p. 6.

I shall give another Instance out of Thuanus to this purpose, relating to
Hungary. This Historian ( Lib. 133.) informs us, that the Protestant Nobility
of that Kingdom, wrote to the States of Bohemia, Siesila, and Moravia; in which
Letters they Complained very much of the hard Usage They had received from the
Emperors Ministers, etc. And after a recital of their Grievances, (which were
of the most provoking Nature imaginable) They add, that amongst their other
Privileges, (which ought to be Confirmed in every Convention) they have this
remarkable one, Granted in the Reign of King Andrew the Second, An. Dom. 1222.
the Tenor of which is as follows, viz. That if his Majesty, or any of his
Successors should happen at any time hereafter to Act contrary to those
Provisions, by which the Privileges and Liberties of the Kingdom were
Established, that from thenceforth it should be for ever Lawful for the
Subjects without the least Blemish of Disloyalty to Resist and Oppose their
Prince.

This was a Decree to purose, by virtue of which (as Thuanus observes) the
Protestant Hungarians Justified their Arms against their King: And we may take
notice in Contradiction to what our Author Affirms; That such Odious Things,
and their Remedies too, where they are allowed, are particularly Named, and
Provided for. Therefore we may fairly Conclude, that where none of this plain
Dealing is to be seen, the Constitution does not admit of any such singular
Reservations.

Indeed to talk of a Character for Resistance in a Country which has been
Conquered so often, and all along Monarchically Governed, seems to be a
Romantic Supposition. For can we imagine that when our Kings had sought
themselves into Victory and Power, and forced a Nation to swear Homage and
Submission to them, that they should be so easy as to Article away their
Dominions, make their Government Precarious, and give their Subjects leave to
Disposess them, as often as they should be pleased to say they had broken their
Agreement: But the Silence of our Laws and History as to any such Compact, is a
sufficient disproof of it; For if there had been any such Enfranchising
Instrument, how prejudicial soever it might have been in its Consequence. yet
the natural desire of Liberty would have occasioned the preserving it with all
imaginable Vigilance: And as it would not have miscarried through Negligence,
so if Violence had wrested such a pretended Palladium from us, the Calamity
would have got into the Almanac before this time, and been as certainly
Recorded as the Destruction of Troy.

Since therefore we have no Evidence either for the Possession, or so much as
for the Loss of this supposed Privilege, we may certainly conclude we never had
it, or at least must grant that no claim can be grounded upon such an
Improbable conjecture, for Idem est non Esse and non Apparere.

Secondly, Our Author urges, That when there seems to be a Contradiction
between Two Articles in the Constitution, the Interpretation ought to be given
in favor of that Article, which is most evident and important. From whence he
proceeds to assert, That there is a seeming Contradiction between the
provisions for the public Liberty, and the renouncing all Resistance.

And therefore the Constitution ought to be expounded in behalf of the former,
as being most advantageous to Government: Now one who had never read the
Statute Book, would imagine by this Authors Argument, that we had some Laws for
the taking up Arms against the King, as well as others which forbid it, and
both equally plain, than which nothing is more false. And upon supposition
there was any such Clash in our Acts of Parliament, the Law for Non-resistance
being last Enacted must necessarily take place, and Repeal whatever was before
Established to the contrary. But,

Secondly, I Answer, That I have already proved that the Rights of the Subject
are best secured by Non-resistance, and therefore they are no ways
inconsistent, or contradictory, to each other. So that our Liberties had much
better lie at the Discretion of Kings, who have much greater Motives than
others to do Justice, and give general Satisfaction, than to depend upon the
Management and Mercy of the People, and be liable to such Fatal Convulsions
which must happen as often as Discontent, and Ambition can impose upon the
Weakness and Inconstancy of the Multitude.

Thirdly, His Third Argument is the same with his Second, which he has given us
in different Words, That what we want in Weight, may be made up in Number. It
begins somewhat Remarkably, Since it is by Law that Resistance is condemned, we
ought not to understand it in such a Sense, as that it does destroy all other
Laws.

First, Now one would have thought that the condemning Resistance, or any other
Action by a Law, had been the only way of doing it to any purpose. But this
Author seems to draw a consequence of Abatement upon this Doctrine from its
Authority, as if it was to be less observed because it is Established by Law.
But,

Secondly, To give him rather more advantage than the Construction of his
Period will allow. I Answer, That I have already made it appear, that to wrest
the Laws from their plainest and most obvious Sense, is to make them perfectly
Useless; and that Nonresistance is the best Expedient to preserve the Laws and
every thing else that is valuable: And therefore though its plain that the Law
did not design to lodge the wole Legislative Power in the King; yet as its
plain that it intended to forbid Resistance in case he should set about it: For
the Lawmakers declare in in as full Intelligible Words, as can be conceived,
that the Militia, the Posse Regni, was always the undoubted Right of his
Majesty and his Predecessors, and that its Unlawful to take up Arms against him
upon any Pretense whatever. Now if its possible for a Law to make, or declare a
Monarch Irresistible, which I suppose no man will deny; I desire to know
whether it can be drawn up in more significant, and demonstrative Terms, than
this Act before us? If it cannot, then our Author has no imaginable reason to
dispute this Part of the King's Prerogative. As for his Instance, That the
Legislative Power is Invaded, and the Constitution of Parliaments Dissolved.
This Charge is Aggravated beyond all Decency and matter of Fact: For its well
known, that the King did not pretend to make his Proclamations Equivalent to an
Act of Parliament; and what his Majesty acted by way of Dispensation, was not
only directed by the present Judges, but grounded upon a solemn Resolution of
all the Twelve in Hen. 7th. Reign, in a Case seemingly Parralell, which
Sentence has been followed by eminent Lawyers since, and never Reversed by Act
of Parliament.

As to the Regulation of Corporations, That was a Method begun by Charles the
Second, a Protestant Prince, and Applauded by all the Loyal Party of the
Nation: Besides the Buroughs were not so prodigiously altered, but that we
might have had a good Protestant Parliament out of them, as appears from the
Elections made upon the Writs Issued out in August last, where those who were
against Repealing the Penal Laws and Tests, carried it with great odds against
the other Party: And since we know his Majesty has returned the Charters to the
State of 79.

And here it may not be improper to observe, That Prerogative has been as
Remarkably misunderstood at Court in former Ages; of which several Instances
might be given, but I shall consine my self to the Reign of one, who on all
Hands is accounted a most Excellent Prince: I mean King Charles the First.

Now the Lords and Commons in their Petition to the King complain, That his
Majesty's Subjects had been charged with Aids, Loans, and Benevolences contrary
to Law, and Imprisoned, Confined, and sundry ways molested for non Payment.
That the Subjects had been detained in Prison without certifying the Cause,
contrary to Law. That they had been compelled to quarter Soldiers and Mariners
contrary to Law. That notwithstanding several Statutes to the contrary, diverse
Commissions had been Issued out under the great Seal of England to try Soldiers
and Mariners by Martial Law (Quarto Car. 1. Rushworth's Coll.)

To this I might add the Levying Ship Money, Coat and Conduct Money, etc. but I
am not willing to enlarge upon so unacceptable a Subject, non to discover the
Misfortunes of the Father any further than Justice and Duty to the Son obliges
me; I say the Misfortunes, which we see the best Princes through
misinformation, or improper advice may sometimes fall into: However I must
crave leave to take notice, that these were other manner of Grievances than the
Dispencing with Penal Laws, both in respect of the Evidence and Consequences of
them; and, yet I am sure, the War which was made by the Subjects upon this
Score, is by our Laws declared an Horrid and Notorious Rebellion.

This I mention not to justify the Conduct of the Ministers, but to show that
under these Circumstances a mistake in his Majesty ought rather to be lamented
than exposed, and Magnified at such an enflaming Hyperbolical rate. And to this
modesty of Behavior we are now more especially obliged, since his Majesty has
promised to Redress past Errors, Letter to the Convent.
which is a plain Argument that some of his former Measures are unacceptable to
himself, as well as to his Subjects, and that he will not pursue them for the
future.

Fourthly, Our Author proceeds to argue, That the Law mentioning the King, or
those Commissionated by him, shows plainly that it designed only to secure him
in the Executive Power, for the Word Commission necessarily imports this: Since
if it is not according to Law it is no Commission.

From whence, I suppose, he infers that those who have it may be resisted. Now
that this Inference is wide of the Mark appears,

First, Because when this Law was made, the King was not restrained from
Commissionating any Person whatever in the Field, and therefore the Legislators
could have no such Design in their View as the Enquirer supposes.

Secondly, The Test Act which was made several Years after the former, though
it bars the King from granting Military Commands to those* who refused to give
the prescribed Satisfaction, that they were no Papists; yet this Statute only
declares their Commissions void, and subjects them to some other Penalty; but
it does by no means Authorize the People to rise up in Arms and suppress them,
and therefore by undeniable Consequence it leaves the other Law of
Non-resistance in full force.

Thirdly, This Law which declares it Unlawful to take up Arms against those who
are Commissionated by the King, was designed (as may reasonably be collected
from the Time) to combat that pernicious distinction between the King's Person
and his Authority, which has been always too prevalent; though in reality it is
nothing but the King's Authority which makes his Person Sacred, and therefore
the same inviolable Privilege ought to extend to all those who Act under him:
Yet notwithstanding this, it has often happened that those who pretend a great
Reverence for his Person, make no scruple to seize his Forts, sight his Armies,
and destroy those who adhere to him, under the pretense of taking him out of
the Hands of Evil Counselors, which has been the most usual, and plausible
Color of subverting the Government. This Act therefore which was made soon
after the Restoration, we may fairly conclude, was particularly levelled
against this dangerous Maxim, which had so Fatal an Influence upon the late
Distractions.

Fourthly and Lastly, The Enquirer urges, That the King imports a Prince
clothed by Law with the Regal Prerogative, but if he goes about to subvert the
whole Foundation of the Government, he subverts that by which he has his Power,
and by Consequence he Annuls his own Power, etc.

First, To this it may be Replied, That bare endeavoring to do an Action,
though the signs of Executing may be pretty broad, is not doing it in the
Construction of humane Laws, E. G. Drawing a Sword upon a Man is not Murder.
The intention of the Mind is often impossible to be known; for when we imagine
a Man is going to do one thing, he may be going to do another, for ought we can
tell to the contrary; or, at least, he may intend to stop far short of the
Injury we are afraid of. And supposing we had an Authority to punish him, there
is no reason that conjecture, and mere presumption should make him forfeit a
Right, which is grounded upon clear and unquestionable Law. But,

Secondly, If with reference to the present Case, our Author means that the
Government is actually subverted, as he seems plainly to affirm page 7. Then I
grant the King's Authority is destroyed, and so is the Property of the Subject
too. For if the Government is dissolved, no Man has any Right to Title or
Estate, because the Laws upon which their Right is founded, are no longer in
Being. But if the Government be so lucky as not to be dissolved, then the
King's Authority remains entire by his own Argument, because it is supported by
the same Constitution which secures the Property of the Subject.

In his Sixteenth Paragraph we have a mighty Stress laid upon the difference
between Male Administration and striking at Fundamentals, as if it was Lawful
to resist the Prince in the latter Case, though not in the former. But if this
Distinction had been owned by our Constitution, we may be assured we should
have had a plain List of Fundamentals set down in the Body of our Laws;
particularly we have all imaginable reason to believe that these Fundamentals
would have been mentioned, and saved by express Clauses and Provisoes in those
Statutes which forbid Resistance. For without such a direction it would be
impossible for the Subject to know how far his Submission was to extend, and
when it was Lawful to make use of Force. Such an unregulated Liberty would put
it into the Power of all popular, and aspiring Male Contents to corrupt the
Loyalty of the unwary Multitude, as often as they thought fit to cry out Breach
of Fundamentals. And at this rate it is easy to foresee what a tottering and
unsettled condition the State must be in. And therefore according to the old
Maxim, (for which there was never more occasion) Ubi Lex non Distinguit, non
est Distinguendum.

I have now gone through his Principles, and I think sufficiently shown the
Weakness, and Danger of them. And if so, his Catalogue of Grievances signify
nothing to his purpose, though there was much more aggravation, and Truth in
them than there is.

But time has now Expounded the great Mystery, and made it evident to most Men's
Understandings that our Authors Party has failed Remarkably in Matters of Fact,
as well as in Point of Right. For they have not so much as attempted to make
good the main and most invidious Part of the charge against his Majesty; though
(to omit Justice) Honor and Interest has so loudly called upon them to do it.
Their giving no Proof after such Importunity of their own Affairs, is a
Demonstration they never had any: For how defective soever they may be in other
Respects; we must be so just as to allow them Common Sense.

THE END.

