The VINDICATION of Liturgies, Lately Published by Dr. FALKNER, PROVED NO
VINDICATION OF THE Lawfulness, Usefulness and Antiquity of SET-FORMS of Public
Ministerial Prayer, to be Generally used by, or Imposed on all Ministers; And
consequently (...) Answer to a Book, Entitled, A Reasonable Account why some
Pious Nonconformists judge it sinful, for them to perform their Ministerial
Acts in by the Prescribed Forms of others.

Wherein with an Answer to what Dr. Falkner has said in the Book aforesaid,
the Original Principles are discovered, from whence the different apprehensions
of men in this Point arise.

By the Author of the Reasonable Account, and Supplement to it.

Prove. 18.7. He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his neighbor
comes, and searches him. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and
Bible in the Poultrey. 1681.

To those Honorable Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, Who Are, or Shall be
Chosen, To Represent the Commons of England, In the Next Assembly of PARLIAMENT.
1. BEfore you (most Renowned Patriots) we most humbly spread our Cause (to
whom should the Commons of England make their Applications, but to those whom
they have chosen, to represent them in their Circumstances of Distress and
Grief? Especially when their most Gracious Sovereign, has so often declared,
the Benignity of his Royal Nature to them, and readiness to join in any Act or
Acts declarative or confirmative of it; and when the most Noble Lords in the
years 1672 and 1673; together with the Commons, (then assembled) had gone so
far as to our Relief in the Cause, as ^^ey did, notwithstanding which the
mutability of your Honorable House seems to require a new Application to your
Honors. How far we have applied our selves to the Reverend Bishops, will
appear to your Honors by the Account of the Proceedings of the Commissioners
of both Persuasions, appointed by his Sacred Majesty, etc. Printed 1661; and
several other overtures. That the case was the same then that is by us now
pleaded for, will appear to your Honors by that Printed Account, p. 5. in
their 7 Proposal expressed in these words:

That the Gift of Prayer, being one special Qualification for the work of the
Ministry bestowed by Christ, in order to the Edification of his Church, to be
exercised for the profit and and benefit thereof, according to its various and
Emergent necessities; It is desired that there may be no such Imposition of the
Liturgy as that the exercise of that Gift be thereby totally excluded, in any
part of Public Worship. And that the Commissioners on the other side so
apprehended, appears by their Answer then to this Proposal p. 35. where they
replied, This makes the Liturgy void, which is very true as to Universal use,
and Imposition, but not otherwise.

2. Nor is this Opinion, a Novel Opinion, or the liberty desired, a Novel
Request: It appears by the Book called, The Troubles of Frankford, that it is
older than our Reformation by Q. Elizabeth, and coaevous in England with the
first hours of Reformation; much older, in the Churches of Suitzerland (the
oldest Reformed Protestant Churches.) The Opinion and Practice of the Waldenses
and Bohemians (whose Churches I do not call Reformed, but look upon them as
continuing in their Integrity and succeeding in the Primitive Doctrine and
Practice of the Church in a great measure, whilst other parts of the World were
in their Apostasy for more than a thousand years together) None ever showed us
any Liturgy of Prayers they had, nor do they mention any in their accounts
which by their Deputies they in gave both of their Faith and Practice to Luther
an Oecolampadius, which are extant in Sc^lt^tus's Annals Evang. That the
practice we desire is the same with that in Scotland, New England, Holland is
not to be denied.

3. The persons (most Renowned Patriots, on whose behalf we desire it, are
neither few n^r inconsiderable. Two thousand Ministers were turned out 1662.
Some are dead, but possibly, not a much lesser number are sprang up either in
the Ministry, or Candidates for it: Of those let men say what they please,
there will not be found a tenth part, that can think it lawful to perform their
Ministerial Acts in Public Solemn Prayer by the Prescribed Forms of other Men.
And Dr. Falkner in his Epistle tells the World, That the Genius of that party
is much set against them, and in their Practice, they reject them almost
generally with some eagerness; which is very true, and so appears, in that
the far greater part of them can neither (upon eighteen years Trial) be
persuaded that it is lawful for them to hear them, nor yet by any sort of
Cudgells be Cudgelled into such a Belief or Practice, tho I must profess my
self of another mind, and in that am my self a Dissenter from I believe 9 parts
of ten of our Dissenters, whom yet I love and honor (I take in both Ministers
and People unto my Account.) Nor are they Inconsiderable, considered, as to
their Intellectuals or Morals, or Quality in the World, or usefulness to our
English world; which must be owned, and will readily be (I am sure) by your
Honors, who are the Eyes of the Nation, seeing in every corner of it, and
^^^ng able better to judge of Numbers and Qualities of Persons, than we, that
sit in our Studies, or any that take an Account from Registers, etc.

4. Nor are they invaluable, or the worst sort of men for Morality, and which
is much higher True Piety and Godliness. Of late years your Honors have had
many of them brought before you in your public Sessions, and Assizes. Might
not you say to those that brought them, as the Town Clerk of Ephesus once said,
Acts 19.37. You have brought hither these men, that are no Robbers of Churches,
nor Blasphemers of God. I may add further, no Murderers, no Adulterers, no
Drunkards, no Profane, or false Swearers, no Perjured Persons, no Robbers by
the High way, only accused of Questions about a Law, not profitable to men,
nor necessary for the glory of God. A Law which is but the Will of King and
Parliament, whose Will has been since sufficiently declared (tho not yet in
that formality) that it should not be so rigorously pursued, nor ever was, that
it should be exdecuted in that manner and with those circumstances that it has
been. For their Religion, let it be judged from what your Honors have
observed, in their behavior both in Religious Duties, and as to t^^^r Civil
converse with men. For their Religious* Conversation, let it be observed,
Whether the generality of them, when they are in Gods Public Worship, are
they, who when they should be joining with the Minister in putting up Prayers
(whether he be praying by Forms or no) have their Eyes up and down, here and
there; are whispering and talking to those that are next them, it may be
sleeping; or rather be not those who (natural infirmities allowing it) do stand
up or kneel, keep their Eyes shut, or fixed upon God, and (so far as man can
judge) mind what they are about, with all Indication of Reverence and Godly
fear? Whether they be the Persons that talk, or sleep out Sermons, or that hear
the word of God (so far as men can judge) with trembling? Not that none but
they do so, my concern is not to discourse of others, but for them. Whether
they generally be not a People against all Idols and Idolatry, that dread to
use the name of God idly, or to swear by it or by any Creatures Profanely?
Whether they be those that profane the Sabbath, by unnecessary Journyings, or
Labors, or Recreation, and do not ordinarily spend it in the public and
private Duties of Gods Worship? For their behavior toward men, Are they
generally the Sons and Daughters of this age, that dare curse their Fathers and
Mothers, and reproach the Womb that bare them? Are they Murderers, Thieves,
Adulterers, Fornicators, Perjured Persons? Do they not generally make
Conscience to Owe nothing to any, but to love one another, to deal justly with
men? I will not speak for every Individual (Christ had a Judas in his Flock.)
Nor do I reflect on any others; I know there are many that are no Dissenters,
who are Pious toward God, Righteous toward Men. I would only have these on
both sides made one. What have their worst Enemies to Object, but disobedience
to an Humane Law in matter of Divine Worship, wherein they do in all sincerity
profess they cannot do, or omit the thing commanded or, forbidden without
sinning against God. In the mean time your Honors see their bitterest Enemies
can disobey Laws against Pluralities and Non-residents. Others of them can
disobey Laws against Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing Adulteries, etc. and not
see the beams in their own eyes, tho they cannot but say these Laws, are
against things plainly, and syllabically forbidden in the Word of God. And
indeed none lives on either side but violates some Humane Laws. Nemo sine
crimine vivit. Optimus ille qui minimis urgetur, said an Heathen Poet, and
truly without doubt.

5. Nor (most Honored Patriots!) are the Arguments of those who are charged as
disobedient (as to this very point of Prayer) invaluable, nor can any man's
confidences make them appear so to your Reasonable and Generous Souls. It is
not so evident as some Infallibles of our age would make it, That the Holy
Spirit of God, has not or may not have a special and immediate influence upon
Pious Ministers Souls, as to their words in Prayer, as well as upon Gods
Peoples words in Confession, or Ministers words in Preaching (both which the
Scripture asserts) which ought not to be excluded in that Prayer where words
are to be used. Nor is it certain that words are not an Essential Part of all
Ministerial Prayer, and these or these words an Essential part of this or that
Prayer: Nor that any Superior can direct an Essential Part of Gods Worship: nor
that in an Act of Worship, where God has left any thing to Ministers or
Peoples Liberty, that they may do this or that, any Superiors can determine
them to one part against the other: Nor many things more in the following
sheets, which are enlarged upon. Some parts of some of these Questions may
appear clear to some, the other part to others. But this will conclude the
things in themselves not to be plainly and clearly lawful: Your Honors abhor
an Infallible Judge boasted of by the Papists, let it not be pretended to in
the Tents of Protestants. Nor one Infallible person suffered to triumph over
others, in the near concerns of Divine Worship. In things necessary for all by
a Divine Law, we humbly allow it the Kings and your Honors duty to command us:
But if they appear not such upon plain evidence to our Superiors, we beseech
their Pardon, if we say, They cannot with any security to themselves from the
Divine Law, enjoin them to, or enforce them from those who judge them sinful in
Divine Worship.

6. And as it is not possible, that any Divine Rule should be produced to make
such a thing as this necessary to be brought into, or continued in Public
Worship: So these two last years have given abundant Evidence that it is not
Expedient to tie all men to the use of them. We are sure your Honors will
grant, from the Instances of the Songs of Thanksgiving Recorded in Scripture,
both those of Moses and Miriam and Deborah, and David, and from the Prayers in
Scripture, of Solomon, David, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Ezra, etc. That when
Persons are under Signal Providence, whether of Deliverances or Distress, or
in respect of some general Sin, the Servants of God, have not thought it
sufficient in Public Prayer, To give thanks in general words for all Mercies
and Preservations, but to tell him of his particular wondrous works; to
recognize him, the Author of this, or that Salvation: To confess and bewail
those particular Sins, if they be the Sins of the generality of the People: To
put up Petitions suited to those particular distresses the Church or State is
in. This is plain in all Scripture: And where it is not done, God is eminently
restrained in his Glory; our duty is eminently neglected: We are sure God
within these two years has made England as remarkable a Stage of Provividence
as ever any Nation in the World was made. We have been in most eminent
distresses, and have had most eminent deliverances: Both of them concerning the
whole Nation, and all that in the Nation can be dear to every good man. The
life of our Sovereign, the life of our Religion, The life of our Ancient
Government, The lives of several of our Noblemen, multitudes of our Gentry, and
many thousands of our Commonalty. Plots upon Plots have been discovered, -- Uno
Succiso Pullulat alter. We have had to deal with an Hydra. Now we humbly refer
it to your Honors to judge, what particular Homage, either of Prayer or
Praise, God has had, relating to these distresses in all our particular
Congregations: And whether the limiting all Ministers to Old Forms of Prayer,
has not been the cause of this High Omission? The Practice of our Ministers
satisfied as to Confirmity is twofold. Some take themselves obliged, not only
(as all are) in the Desk to add nothing to the Forms. But in their Pulpits to
keep to the Bidding of Prayer in the Canon; or at least to Preface their
Sermons with half a dozen lines taken out of some Collect, and conclude them
with either Gloria patri, etc. or that excellent Collect our Vindicator tells
us of, Grant we beseech Almighty God, etc. those (and these are not a few)
could never put up one Prayer (except upon 11 April 1679, for which were indeed
good and particular Forms made) for any deliverance, nor yet offer up one
Public Thanksgiving. Others there are, who conceive that though the Statute
gives them in the letter of it, no further liberty, yet the continual Practice
of our Church, not controlled by any Law, has otherwise expounded the Statute.
I doubt not but in many of their Congregations, Prayer and Praise, as to these
Providence, has not been restrained from the Almighty. But your Honors know
what is truth in the Affair, more than any private Person can; and who knows
not, that the particular Emergencies, respecting several Congregations, and the
Members of them, are such, as had need of Forms to be made every week, to have
them comprehensive of all just matter, of Prayer and Praise for that
Congregation.

7. Nor finally, are the Sufferings of Multitudes, both of Ministers and People
things invaluable, not to look back further, than the manifestation of His
Majesty's and the Parliaments good will, for Dissenters liberty, Anno 1672, and
1673. (though it was not formally perfected by an Act.) It would fill a Volume
to tell your Honors, how many and how great the Sufferings of good men have
been since that time; all have been bottomed in this, (or at least most of
them) that the most of the Sufferers have not thought it lawful, either to
perform their Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others, or
to hear such a Ministration; and therefore Ministers, who thought themselves
obliged to Preach, have been constrained to do it in private, and People, who
could not satisfy themselves without hearing somewhere, have been enforced to
hear in Private Meetings. Hence both Ministers and People, have been most
woefully pursued in Ecclesiastical Courts, at Assizes, and Sessions; some, to
the loss of two Thirds of their Estates; some, to Imprisonment for six Years
together; some one way, and to one degree; others in another way, to another
degree. Some more legally in Courts, where some have been found to defend a
righteous Cause: Others more illegally, they have had doors broken open, their
Goods taken away to great Values, when some (Ministers) have been 20 Miles off
at that time, when they were sworn to preach at Meetings. Others (private
Persons) at great distances from home, or sick in their Beds, yet have not been
able to remedy themselves. But it were infinite to run into Particulars, we
doubt not but your Honors have seen and heard enough, as if some men had
designed to leave none to whom the King and Parliament should show any mercy.
All this while the Papists (scarce one of whose Names we heard of in any
Courts) were hatching their most Hellish Designs against the Life of the King,
our Religion and Government; since which time their Designs have broken out,
and been made manifest to our English World: and certainly the madness of some
Protestants (to speak no worse) and their apparent inclinations to more charity
for Papists, than Protestants (whose very Name some of these men do not like;
Catholics, they say, pleases them better: it is easy to be judged they do
but keep the Epithet within their teeth for a while) lays an high obligation
on all true Englishmen to unite all Protestants, that we be not made a common
Prey.

8. Yet did we ask of your Honors to take away all Liturgies, our desire might
be more liable to Exception, (why should we prescribe to others Consciences?)
Nor did they in 1641. it was the Act of a Parliament, in which not the Tenth
part were either Presbyterians or Independents. They only desire the leaving it
at liberty, as in most, if not in all other Reformed Churches. Nor are they
ambitious of Bishoprics, Deanaries, Prebendaries; they can truly say, Nolumus
Episcopari, let the King give these things to whom he pleases. Let us but have
Bread, and a liberty to Preach the Gospel without the wounding of our
Consciences.

9. Now may the Great God of Peace, grant an happy understanding betwixt His
most Excellent Majesty and Your Honors. May the King live, and live for ever,
and the Parliament be as a sheaf of Arrows in His Hand, to strike through the
loins of all those who have ill will to Him, to the Reformed Religion, or
Ancient Government of this Nation. And may Your Honors have the glory of
causing your Banished to return, and being called, The Repairers of our
Breaches, The Restorers of our waste places to be inhabited. So shall all
Posterity call you blessed,

And your Petitioners ever humbly pray, etc.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ENSUING DISCOURSE, Offered to every Intelligent and
Pious Reader.
Good Reader,
I. THou have found me so unhandsomly Represented in a Book of Dr. Falkners,
which he calls, A Vindication of Liturgies: To which I have here returned an
Answer, that I cannot but judge it reasonable, that I should introduce thee
into my following Discourse, with a Character of my self I had my time of
Childhood and Vanity as well as others, and, perhaps, did my self once think,
that there was no such Service of God as by Forms of Prayer. But since I began
to write Man, since I understood any thing of Communion with God, since I
entered into the Ministry, (which is now Thirty four Years) I have seen what I
judged reason to be of another mind. My whole Ministry has been ordinarily
exercised in one and the same place, where my Conversation has been exposed to
a sufficient view. As the time of my appearing to the World will clear me from
having Concerns in the late Wars, from having any thing to do in press^ng the
Covenant, or the Ejecting, Silencing and Imprisoning Men for the refusal of it.
So it is enough to tell you, that I never came near an Army, nor ever saw the
face of Oliver Lord Protector, nor ever had the least Preferment from him, or
Concernment with him. I was always a man of a very open and free Converse, and
have had the honor of an Acquaintance and Converse with the most Learned men
of the Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Congregational Persuasions, in the place
where I lived, and elsewhere in some degrees. Tros Tyriusque mihi, etc. Where I
saw Learning and Sobriety, I never made a difference, thinking, That the
Kingdom of God lay not in these things. I have had many opportunities, as to
men of an Episcopal Judgment, to do them signal Kindnesses or Injuries; of the
former I did many, of the latter none, to any one Learned and Sober Man. I
always thought England was short enough of them for its Ministerial Uses, so as
we should not make a particular Persuasion an occasion to render them useless.
In the late Times I constantly pleaded the cause of any Minister in question,
if he were questioned only for using the Common Prayer, not for any fundamental
Error, nor for any Debauchery in his Life. I must confess I always thought a
Sottish Minister was the vilest of men, and never had an heart to plead one of
their Causes, though I think there is not one of them can say I did them
further injury, than by leaving them to plead for themselves. This freedom of
Converse I kept till His Majesty's Restoration, and several Years after, until
I saw that some (as I judged at least) shunned my Company, and I never yet
wanted enough so far as to tempt me to be an Intruder upon any. How little I
was concerned in any Public Affairs will appear from this, That (if I remember
right) from 1646, when I entered the Ministry, till 1653, I never but once saw
London, nor I think twice more betwixt that and 1659. I much kept home, and
could hardly be a month from my People, but my Conscience was ready to ask me,
in the words of Eliab, With whom have thou left those few sheep in thy trust?

II. Upon the coming out of the Act of Uniformity, I was concerned (with Two
thousand Ministers more) to examine whether no more were by it required of me,
than I might without sinning against God do? I saw so many things made
necessary to the keeping of my station, that I suspected what I found, and more
too, viz. That it was by some contrived to throw out of the Public Ministry a
sort of men, and all of them who were possessed of my Principles in Doctrine;
and though it would not do as to all, yet it did as to a very great part, even
all those who though they believed the same things with many that did conform
in points of Doctrine, yet had some stricter Notions as to Worship. I was
afterward the more confirmed in this, from a Reverend Minister, (now I doubt
not but with God, who lived and dyed a Conformist) who told me, that in
discourse with a Brother of his, a Member in that Parliament, and lamenting to
him the Turning out of so many Ministers, and putting so many terms upon
Ministers, as they could not but know would Turn out the greater part of
Ministers so and so principled as to Doctrine, etc. He told him, It was their
design to do it. It is very like he did not speak the Sense of the House of
Commons, of which he was a Member, but of many he doubtless did; That for those
of Puritan Principles, (as they called them) Jehu might slay such as escaped
the Sword of Hazael, and Elisha those that did escape the Sword of Jehu. But
when I came more narrowly to look into the Things required, I discoursed with
Divines (and those who were most Learned) of the Episcopal Persuasion, I
offered my Arguments, heard their Answers; I read the generality of Books wrote
on all sides, but upon the whole judged, that o^ eight or nine things required,
I could not judge three, or not above three, in any degree lawful. I resolved
to lay down my Public Ministry; but being set apart to the Ministry, having
solemmly promised not to take away my hand from that Plough, I could not then
think my self discharged from it^ further than in Public Temples, (places in
Superiors disposal.) Amongst other things, I was then fully possessed of the
Unlawfulness of performing Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms
of others. Three or four of those Arguments, truly I think I may say all but
one of them, were my Arguments 1662. and then freely discoursed with diverse of
my own Brethren, and several Learned men (some of whom are dead, some yet
alive) at this time, and the Heads of them by me were drawn up in writing, and
the most considerable Inlargements, as to the proof of them. From that time,
till 1673, they lay by me; some little before that, all knew at what a rude
rare all Nonconformists were treated in several Books, as the veriest Dunces in
the world, men that opposed themselves to Authority merely out of Stubbornness,
judging the things lawful, being able to give no Reasons for their
Nonconformity, Men fit for Galleys, Prisons, etc. This made me review what I
had Eleven Years before drawn up for my own private use, with some Additions,
and particularly Answers to some Arguments which in that time I had met with,
and Dr. Falkner's Book coming at that time out, I could not baulk what he had
said. Whosoever reads what I wrote, will be my Compurgator, that I did not
give any a Presumption, that I thought my Cause weak, by any uncivil treating
of the Doctor. I saw he was a man of some Learning, that he had read many
Authors; nor had I ever heard an ill word of him as to Sobriety of Life, or
Warping in Doctrine. I treated him with that Civility which I thought became
me, merely answering his pretended Reason and Arguments. I did indeed see, that
the making good the Notion I was fully possessed of, would make any further
answer to his Libertas Ecclesiastica needless, and am very much for the Rule of
Frustra fit per plura, etc.

III. But though I quickly concluded this sinful to me, to perform my
Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others, yet I never
intended to trouble others with my Notion, till I was challenged to it, by the
worlds being told, We had nothing to say for our selves. I never that I
remember preached it in one Sermon, I never affirmed it sinful for People to
join with others that use Forms, (though, by the way, I do not think that
People in the worship of God may lawfully do whatsoever they judge just lawful,
if they be commanded to do it) I was a little tender my self as to Total
Separation. This has made me from the Year 1662, not decline hearing Ministers
that used it, nor (as occasion offered) receiving the Sacrament with sober
Ministers, and a sober People, though the Minister used the Liturgy in doing of
it, although withal neither have I refused to hear others, and receive it with
them too as I had occasion; nor, I think, shall I be detered from it, by the
Scare-crow-word Separation. I fear not separating from any, with whom I am but
morally persuaded by Arguments which I cannot answer, that I cannot join,
without separating from the Will of God, and further I will separate from no
Christians in the world. This, Reader, is known, to as many as know me by any
ocular observation of my Converse.

IV. Further than this, my Nature disposes me to such a Benignity, as I am
Enemy to none but such as are open Enemies to the Glory of God, or led by their
Lusts and Passions to Acts disturbing Humane Societies. Upon the first account,
I always thought Atheists, open Blasphemers, professed public Idolaters, were
to be punished by the Judge with the severest punishments. Profane Swearers and
Cursers, and Violation of the Sabbath, with proportionable punishments; and
those who detected such, did a good action. Yet as to these, I never thought an
Inquisition might be set up, nor an Oath Ex Officio, administered, to make them
to accuse themselves. Nor as to Idolatry, did I ever think that the Magistrate
ought to punish any thing but Open Profession of it, or Seduction to it. Upon
which account, until this late Plot convinced me, that nothing would serve the
Papists less than the whole Government; and that to get it, they thought
Assassinations, Poisoning, Lying, For swearing, any thing lawful, I never heard
of a Papist punished, whom I did not pity. For the latter, I discerned God so
great a Lover of Humane Society, that all the Precepts of the Second Table are
apparently calculated for the preservation of it, as I could not but abhor
those who without a just and apparent cause, made any attempt upon the quiet of
it. Upon this account, I never was a Companion of any of these, but in my heart
abhorred them: But for Errors, which had nothing of these in them, I could
always give an allowance to them, always judging that I was not Infallible; and
there was the same distance from my Neighbor to me, as from me to him. Though I
always thought, that a particular Church might, as to its own Communion, judge
of such persons, yet I never thought the Magistrate concerned to burn Houses,
imprison any, because some Churchmen made an Outcry against them as Heretics,
Schismatics; or that an whole City must be put into Arms, (as in Madrid and
Lisbon) because there is a Cry made for the Holy House. And amongst all the
Enemies of Humane Society, and indeed Mankind, I always thought some of the
worst, and least able to give account of their actions either to God or Men,
who pursue others to any signal Suffering, because they differed from them in
some Opinions, which could neither be accused with Blasphemy, Atheism,
Idolatry, or any apparent profanation of the Name of God, or apparent
disturbance of the Peace and Civil Government under which they lived.

V. These being my Principles, this my steady practice, (Reader) one would have
thought I might have passed the few remaining days of my Pilgrimage, without
the strife, or dirt of Tongues, or without (at least) any considerable
Suffering; but it has not been my lot: yea, possibly, I have met with more
than others who have been in greater opposition to some Gentlemen of the
present Age, which puts me in mind of what a great Churchman, not long since,
said to a Reverend and very worthy Friend of mine, (rather of further latitude
than my self, and pleading it to him against a most unreasonable molestation) I
know you can and do go far, we must make you go further; or words to that
sense: which is a little temptation to me, to suspect I have gone too far: And
brings to my mind, what an Eminent Person (since dead) said to me almost Thirty
Years since, (being a Young man at that time, and advising with him about a
compliance in some things with those who then Ruled, desiring to strengthen my
self with his Reasons, he would give me but two:)

First, I know (says he) they will fall, and I will not willingly fall with
them.

Secondly, I am says he) resolved not to go two Miles with them, and therefore
I will not go one. This latter is applicable in our Case, I see those who go
one Mile, must voluntarily go another, or be cudgelled. But, I thank God, I
have moved on better Principles, and such as I hope, will relieve me, though I
be cudgelled for not going further.

VI. But though I had not met with the kindness I expected from others, yet one
would have thought I might have expected it from Dr. Falkner, (a person whom I
never saw, and of whom, when I wrote that Book, I never had had any but
Reverend and worthy thoughts) to whom, in that Discourse, and the Supplement to
it, I had not given the least unworthy or diminutive word; but whether I have
met with it or no, Reader be thou Judge. He takes all imaginable advantages
(and mostly without any just cause) to make me to appear a Dunce as to
Chronology, Critical Learning, any true Exercise of Reason, a most irreverent
person to Superiors, a Calumniator, a Devil, and this, for saying we have many
ignorant, sottish, and lazy Ministers) an Enemy to the Church, a Separatist;
and this he is as confident of, as if he had a Revelation about it. Now I am as
confident of the contrary) and who has made him more infallible than his
Neighbor, who, possible, is neither inferior to him in age, n^^ in the time of
his ministration in sacred things? though, it may be, he is not so versed in
Justinian's Code, or in Rabanus Maurus, etc.

VII. I hope, Reader, this will excuse me to thee, for not Complementing him
with the Title of Reverend Brother any more. I perceive though he once thanks
me for my civil treating him, yet another time he is angry, and thinks it was
for nothing but to cully him into a Justification of Separation. Alas! it was
never in my thoughts; I desire no other Patronage of it than my own Conscience,
besides what I confidently expect from one Higher than him. If I have in this
Reply reflected more sharply upon him, he has found out my excuse from St.
Paul's dealing with Peter, Gal. 2.11. and from zeal and love for the Truth.

VIII. I shall not introduce thee into my Book, with telling thee the
Vindicators Book had nothing in it, of any great weight; False and Erroneous
Assertions, that undermine the Exercise of Religion, and the Peace and Welfare
of the Church; a strange undertaking that it has in it unaccountable
Positions. These should be the Conclusions of Books, not the Beginnings; and
the putting them in Epistles, and Introductions, is but a setting the Cart
before the Horse. I shall leave the Reader to read what has been said by him,
and is replied by me, and then judge of his Ergo as thou please, or see
Reason.

IX. Only to make thy Labor as short as I can, I have considered the Principles
in which we seem really to differ, (for in all Controversies, the business lies
in a little room) There are some Original Principles wherein the difference
lies, which till they be known and agreed, the difference will never be truly
understood or healed.

A Sylloge or Collection of the Original Questions that seem to be in
difference, betwixt the Author of the Reasonable Account, etc. and Dr. Falkner
in his Vindication of Liturgies. As to the point of the Lawfulness of Forms of
Prayer to be generally imposed, or used in our Ministerial Acts.
1 Quest. WHether the distribution of Prayer, into that which is merely Mental;
and that which is not Mental only, but Vocal also, be a just distribution? I
affirm it, because the latter has an essential part, which the former wants.
The Vindicator seems to deny it, Vindication, p. 30. l. 1, 2, 3.

2 Quest. Whether words be not an essential part of Vocal Prayer; and these, or
those words, an essential part of this or that Vocal Prayer, which no mere man
can institute? I affirm it. The Vindicator denies it. Vide Vindication, p. 177.
and seq.

3 Quest. Whether in an Act of Worship, or any part of it, any can determine
what God has left free to his Ministers and People, excepting those to whom it
is so left free? I deny it.

4 Quest. Whether an ability fitly to express our minds to God in Prayer, may
be properly called the Gift of Vocal Prayer? I affirm it. The Vindicator denies
it. Chap. 1.

5 Quest. Whether in Acts of external instituted Worship, or any part of it,
any thing can be called Order or Decency: Or be said to be Pious, Religious,
Devout, and for Edification, antecedaneously, or without respect to the Divine
Will, revealed in the Law of Nature, or in Holy Writ? I deny it. The Vindicator
affirms it, Chap. 4, etc.

6 Quest. Whether, considering the infirmity of our Nature, a Person in Prayer,
can keep his thoughts as close to, and have his affection as warm in the Duty,
reading a Form, as in speaking from his own conceptions? I deny it. The
Vindicator affirms, page 75.

7 Quest. Whether, where God has left Minister or People, a liberty to use
one, or another mean in an Act of Worship, but commanded all to serve him with
the greatest fervor of spirit they can, they be not, by a Divine Precept,
obliged to use that means, which, upon experience, they find most conducive to
the attention of their thoughts, or fervor of their spirits? I affirm it.

8 Quest. Supposing Superiors should command Ministers and People in the
Public Worship, or in their Families, to pray by Forms only, which they
appoint; such a Command were lawful and obliging to them? I deny it. The
Vindicator affirms, page 193, etc.

9 Quest. Whether there be not equal reason for Superiors to command Ministers
to perform their Ministerial Acts of Preaching, by reading other men's Sermons:
as their Acts of Prayer, by reading orb^rs Forms of Prayer? I affirm. The
Vindicator denies.

10 Quest. Whether the Promises we have in Scripture, of the influence and
assistance of the Holy Spirit in Prayer, may not, or do not extend to words, as
well as pious and devout affections; or our contending for a liberty, as to
words in Prayer, he not a mere Contention for showing our Parts, and a varying
of Phrases? As to the first part I affirm, as to the latter I deny. The
Vindicator affirms the latter.

11 Quest. Whether Prayer, Preaching, and Administering the Sacraments, be not
the main works and parts of a Gospel Ministers ministration? I affirm it. The
Vindicator denies it.

12 Quest. Whether if Ministers perform their Acts of Prayer and Preaching, by
prescribed Forms of others, and administer the Sacraments by other Forms, than
Christ has given them to use in the case, they, by it, do not transform
themselves from Ministers of Christ, to mere Ministers of men? The last has
not been touched, and may make a new Argument in my Case; I must confess the
dread of it, is not the least thing that aweth me. The Russian Priests are
brought to think they fulfill their Ministry by reading their Liturgy, and in
stead of Preaching, reading an Homily out of Chrysostom. But in these things,
whether they approve themselves indeed Ministers of Christ, or mere Servants of
Men, may be considered. The famous Ministry of England has ever been judged
another thing; as soon, Reader, as thou can, fix thy answer to these
Questions, satisfactorily to thy own Conscience, thou will be able to
determine, whether what I have said in the Reasonable Account, etc. or what Dr.
Falkner has said in his Vindication, be of most weight; and whose Positions
are most extravagant, false and erroneous.

Legate, and penes Lectorem sit Judicium.

THE INTRODUCTION.
The Vindicator's Title not proper to his Work, nor justly proportioned to the
Title or Matter of the Book he pretends to answer. The Author of the
Reasonable Account, pretends to no Oracular infallibilities, only to Reason,
working on Scriptural Principles. The design of his Book. The Vindicator's
false account of it in his Epistle Dedicatory. His slighty apprehensions of it.
The Policy of that. The Undertaking not so strange as the Vindicator would make
it. The reason why the Arguments may appear to have no weight to the
Vindicator, yet may not be so light. The Vindicator's unkind reflection upon
the Author, for his want of skill in Chronology, as to the times of Gregory the
Great and Charles the Great, showed to be only produced for sport, and to have
nothing of charge in it; but the Vindicator himself has committed a greater
Error about Gregory the Great, making him to have died F^fteen years before
Platina says he was Pope. The Vindicator's declining Syllogistical Arguing.
The seasonableness of the coming out of the Reasonable Account (through the
intervention of Gods Providence) tho the Author at the writing of it had no
prospect of any such thing. The Conclusion of the Answer to his Epistle
Dedicatory, and Introduction.

1. THE Author has entitled his Book, A Vindication of Liturgies [that is, of
what strictly taken, none of any sound mind, ever found fault with] for a
Liturgy (it ought to be wrote Liturgy, tho it be by vulgarer ror neglected)
fignifies nothing, either according to the notation of the word (coming from
(...)) or the Scriptural usage of it, or the usage of it in the ancientest
Writers in Philology; or in ancient Ecclesiastical Writers (without an addition
to it (...), or the like) but a Public Service or Ministry; but he, by and by
adds, Showing the Lawfulness, Usefulness and Antiquity of performing the
Public Worship of God by Set Forms of Prayer. Nor has any that I know denied
this. It is only the Lawfulness of an Universal Use or Imposition of Set
Forms, and those too prescribed by other men, and imposed on all men, that is
the matter in question, which by the Title of his Book it seems the Author had
no mind to vindicate.

2. He goes on, In answer to a late Book entitled, A Reasonable Account why
some pious Noncon. Ministers judge it sinful for them to perform their
Ministerial Acts in Public Solemn Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others.
But how shall a Vindication of Liturgies, showing the Lawfulness, Usefulness,
and Antiquity, of performing the Public Worship of God by Set Forms; ever
answer that Book which meddles not with the Lawfulness of Liturgies, but Forms
of Prayer only composed by those who do not use them, and imposed on them? Nor
does it say they are unlawful, only shows the reasons of some persons why they
cannot judge that it is lawful for them to use them.

3. Neither the Author of that Book nor his Friends, pretend to have the
Propositions they delivered, suggested to them by the Roman King's Goddess
Aegeria; nor yet whispered to them by Mahomets Pigeon, nor yet impressed upon
them, as John of Leyden pretended at Munster, that his were; nor yet to have
had them from the Possessor of any infallible Chair; they pretend to no more
than that Light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the World. They
think, There is a Spirit in Man, and the Almighty has given him Understanding;
that God has given all men a Principle inabling men to dis-Course conclusions
from Principles (which we call Reason.) That these Principles are partly
connate and natural, partly revealed in Holy Writ; that in matter of Gods
Worship their Reason is to work not so much upon the first, as second sort of
these Principles; hence they form Conclusions, from comparing Scripture with
Scripture, in the light of which they walk. And even in this ratiocination they
do think Optimus Philosophus non nascitur, and therefore judge none, but walk
in their own Light, making no Men's Dictates or Decrees, the Rule of their
Practice in the things of God, but crying out, To the Law and to the Testimony,
and for the determination of the sense of that (as to their own practice)
finally resting in the practical judgment of their own consciences. If any
represent them to the World as Dunces, Men that have nothing to say for their
dissent from others, but doing what they do, out of mere Faction, Rebellion,
Disobedience to Rulers: They are ready to give a reasonable account of their
Actions.

3. This was the apparent design of that Book, composed immediately upon the
coming out of the Vindicators Libertas Ecclesiastica, and more than two years
since given to a friend, after which the Author never saw it till he saw it in
print, and (abating the Errors of the Press) the Author sees no cause to put it
into his Retractations, nor does believe that one leaf of it will be a grief of
heart to him when he comes to die, nor be charged upon him as guilt (with
reference to the main matter of it) in the day of Judgment.

But because we will not believe, because the Church (that is some who call
themselves so) believe that Faith and Fervency are the gift of Vocal
Ministerial Pr^yer (which is no better than Nonsense) and that there is a
Natural, Eternal, Order and Decency (left to the liberty of Rulers to specify
in particulars) antecedent to the will of God concerning external Worship, to
which the plain precepts of God for attention and fervency in Prayer must give
place, and be by it regulated; or that words are no essential part of
Ministerial Public Prayer, and some other such like unintelligible things; and
as unscriptural, we must be exposed at this rate for most unparalleled Dunces,
and Rebels to Authority, and persons, who (to use our Vindicators words in the
close of his Introduction) vent Notions to widen our Breaches, and such as are
inconsistent with the public establishment of a Church, and which put
advantages into the hands of other Enemies; the drift whereof tends to
confusion, and the matter of them is unsound and untrue: when as in truth the
imposition of Forms of Prayer on all Ministers, and enforcing them to use, and
all the people to hear them, has been the source of all our Breaches; and most
if not all, and those the purest Churches, are established without any such
imposition: and they are only used amongst our greatest adversaries, from whom
it is that we are reformed (as all men know) such mysteries of sense some men
speak in their passion.

4. From hence may appear how truly the Vindicator tells his Reverend Diocesan
in the Epistle Dedic. That for justifying our Separation, I have adventured so
far as to charge the general use of Forms of Prayer to be sinful, which (if it
were true) would indeed be a high accusation against our Public Worship.

The matter is neither so, nor so, if the Vindicator does not judge this good
Logic. What some pious men judge as to themselves unlawful, is certainly and
absolutely so; which is so weak, as every one will see the inconsequence of it.
Our Vindicator will hardly be pleased to hear me tell my Reader, That there is
not much truth to be expected from him who so manifestly prevaricates in the
first leaves, nor consistency from him; the second p. of whose Epistle
Dedicatory agrees no better with his Title page; tho p. 138, he minds his
Reader, That he may not rea^onably expect any accuracy in the right computation
for the birth, and first product of Liturgies, from me who talks so loosely and
falsely about the Age wherein Gregory the Great lived; when yet the mistake was
his own, not mine, as I shall hereafter fully show.

5. I am beholden to the Vindicator, for allowing me both in his Epistle Ded.
(and else where) to have stated my Question plainly, and then produced my
Arguments, but I am not so far engaged to him, for owning no more in my Book,
than slender and weak appearances of Reason, and what was not like to prevail
much with understanding men -- wanting strength of Argument. But these things
being yet in Issue, I shall say nothing to them, save only this, That in some
causes it is necessary to fore speak Readers, and more politic to prejudice
them, then to leave them to their own judgments; for the strength of the
Argument I shall once more try that with them, and examine whether he indeed
has as he says, This great advantage to have manifest truth on his side.

6. In his Introduction, p. 1, 2. He tells us he thought my Undertaking
strange, and that in my Book he found nothing of any great weight. I am not
much concerned at his thinking my Undertaking strange (nothing freer then
thoughts.) But why strange? Was it not the contrary Opinion that broke the
Church at Frankfort in the beginning of our Reformation? Was it not 100 years
since disputed in Latin betwixt one Carpenter, and an English Minister fled
into Holland? My self has the printed Copy of it; has not Mr Cotton long
since declared his judgment against the lawfulness (a Prophet without Honor
from a party in his own Country) but whose name is not only very honorable to
multitudes at this day in England, but over all the World where the Gospel is
Preached. Has not the judgment of the Churches in New England, been the same,
if not more rigid then mine? Has it not been the judgment of the Church of
Scotland ever since the Reformation? Nay is it not the judgment of all Reformed
Churches at this day, where Liturgies are only prescribed, and left at liberty?
Why then should this undertaking be so strange? Especially considering, that
himself tells us in his Epistle Dedica. That the Genius of the Non-con. Party
is much set against them, and in their Practice they generally reject them
eagerly.

3. Tho indeed he says in his Epistle, That the more cautious and wary Men
amongst us dissenters will not Affirm the constant use of Forms Sinful, because
they think such a Position not defensible. But the question is, Whether those
Cautious, Wary Men, will not affirm. The Universal use and imposition of Forms
of Prayer in Public Worship, and such Forms too, as were never prescribed by
God, or Christ, or any Prophets or Apostles unlawful. I never yet met with one
such Dissenter, tho never so Wary and Cautious; and thus much I dare say, That
in the whole County where our Vindicator lives, there is not one single
Dissenting Minister would take up a Living upon that single Term, tho many of
them endure hardship enough. But this is a trick used to persuade our Rulers,
that that is a point of difference betwixt very few Dissenters and them,
whereas they know the contrary; and as to our Brethren of the Congregational
Persuasion, and the Anabaptists, they cannot but know that there is not a man
of them judges Forms of Prayer generally used or imposed, lawful; and I dare
assure him, that of the Presbyterians, there is not one of forty so judges
them.

7. But I am more concerned to inquire whether there be nothing in my Book of
any great w^ight etc. I have observed in Sho^s, that the judgment of the Weight
of Wares has much depended upon the Scales and Weights used, and the hand of
him that pretends to set the Balance even; an Vnrigh^^^^^^s Thumb and Finger,
often makes a Commodity appear light, which has weight enough. I must
therefore crave leave to examine the Scales and Weights, by which our
Vindicator has taken his Measures, and see whether some unlucky Thumb and
Finger of Prejudice, or Passion, has not caused my Ware to be prenounced so l
ght, and entreat my Reader to weigh it over again in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, with the Sealed Weights of Scripture and Right Reason, and then to
pass a deliberate Judgment; and shall only tell our Vindicator, that it was no
good Logic, to put the ergo before the Premises: he should first have showed
the Weakness and Lightness of them, and have left these expressions for his
Conclusion, others (and those learned Men) are not all of his mind; and because
he is so confident, upon me let it rest to justify their Weight, and further to
prove that he has been so far from proving any Antiquity for any general use,
or Impositions of Forms of Prayers to be used by all Ministers in their public
Ministrations for 600 years after Christ, that it is a thing not proveable, and
which no wise and learned man can undertake^ the proof of, only Aliquid
dicendum, in nihil dicant; and what is wanting in just matter, must be made up
with many and big words.

8. He says right, That the design of his former Book is made void by my
undertaking (if what I say be true) which I very well knew, Es frustra fit
perplura, etc. be the particular Forms used in our Church, as good as they
will, it is nothing to us, who would never have entered the Ministry, if we had
not thought we had, and been judged by those who set us apart to the work, to
have had some ability to Pray as well as Preach, and having so, judge it Sinful
not to perform our Ministerial Acts in the use of that gift.

9. The Author of the Reasonable Account, etc. did not set his name, not
desiring that his Arguments should derive any Repute, or Disrepute from him:
What matters it whether the Author be a wise Man or a Fool, the question is,
What his Arguments in the Case are, Saepe etiam tolitor est opportuno locutor.
But he charge me deeply, when he says p. 3. That it is observable, that when
I write concerning the Ancient Practice of the Church after the Apostles times,
or any thing written in those days, it is generally done so loosely, and
sometimes with such wonderful extravagancy, as may surprise an intelligent
Reader, with some kind of Admiration. Says he so? Wherein? He will give but one
instance, which he says is in my 68, 69 pages, speaking of the Original of
Liturgies, I say,

We do believe, that Gregory the Great, under the Protection of Charles the
Great, was the Father of all those that dwell in these Tents, and that 800 or a
1000 years after Christ. My words in that place are these,

To bring this point to an Issue, there was a Book published 1662, called, A
sober and temperate Discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer. The
Reader may there at large see what we judge concerning the Original of
Liturgies, when our Reverend Brother, or any for him, shall have given a strict
Reply to the 3. and 4. Chapters in that Book, we shall think they have more to
say for their Antiquity, then we have yet seen. In the mean time we do believe
that Gregory the Great (usually said to be the worst of all Popes that went
before him) under the Protection of Charles the Great was the Father of all
those who dwell in these Tents, and that 800 or 1000 years after Christ. He
leaves out the first part, and the reference to the other Book.

The truth is, it was too Elliptically expressed, toward a Person that sought
an occasion to Carp and Reflect; which that our Vindicator did too much appears
from his taking notice of what was p. 68, 69. of a book which had not above
180. pages in it, or thereabouts. In the 4 p. of his Answer, and then again in
p. 138. of his Answer, in both which places, he makes sport with it, at such a
rate as were unpardonable, but that it was just about Prevarication time at
Cambridge, and indeed it was a thing fitter to make sport for boys then men,
who understand any thing of Sense, and have any judgment.

10. He comes upon it with a Firstly, Secondly, Thirdly, then makes Application
suitably, which he pursues p. 138. and amplifies with a Rabbinical Story, and
shuts up his Reflection with a very pretty Jest. His words are these,

To speak of Gregory the great 800 or 1000 years after Christ, is far enough
from truth, when he dyed about the year 1604; and Secondly that Gregory the
great should be under the Protection of Charles the great, is impossible, when
he was dead about 200 years before Charles the great began his Reign. And 3ly.
It is altogether as inaccountable that Liturgies had their Original, either in
the time of Gregory or Charles the great, when they were in use many 100 years
before them both, Quod est demonstrandum. Then he comes to Application. This
mistake concerning these Persons, whose Names are so famous in History, that a
Man of ordinary reading could not be unacquainted with them, is, as if any
person should presume to give account of the Church of the Israelites and
should assert that the offering of Sacrifices under the Mosaicai Law, had its
beginning in the days of Eli the Priest, in the Reign of K. Jehosophat, 600 or
800 years after the Israelites came out of Egypt. This is a great piece of
ignorance and error: That Is the first use. Surely it is a strange confidence
for any person to vent such things and to write positively what he no better
understands. The Author therefore of the Reasonable Account, is an ignorant
confident person. That is the 2d. use, p. 138. Therefore we must not reasonably
expect any accuracy in the right computation of the time of the birth and first
production of Liturgies from him who talks so loosly and falsely, about the Age
in which Gregory the great lived; whom he would make the Father of them.
Therefore Sirs you are not to believe any thing this Author says on this
Argument. That is the 3d, and main use. And it is speaking enough at random, to
fix their Original now at 600 after at 800, then at a 10000 years after Christ;
for the Author contradicts himself, and cannot tell whether it was at 6 or 800,
or 1000 years after Christ (that is the English of this, and inforceth the last
branch of Application) I shall repeat our Vindicators words no further, let him
please himself and such Readers (as such trifles will please) with his
Rabbinical Tradition about Phinehas, and his fancy (to reconcile my words to
truth) that Gregory might live 400 years, and then have need of Charles the
great to govern him in his dottage: I shall reconcile what I said, to truth and
sense, at a more intelligible rate.

11. What a Magnus conatus, here is Nugas agere! 1. In the first place every
Scholar knows, that in matters of Chronology; it is our Custom to consult some
Chronologer or other Pro re nata, and that it is no piece of Learning to carry
in Memory the Years of Men's Births or Deaths (Reason being not at all concerned
in the case) but when we have occasion to take notice of any such thing, we use
to look into them; and Dr. Cave's Tables are continually in mine eye while I am
in my Study, and Helvicus within a reach; the one of which presently tells me
Gregory the greats time, and the other Charles the greats; so as the Vindicator
has not shown much of his own Judgment or Ingenuity, in making one so mightily
defective in learning, merely for mistaking the time of a Pope or Emperors
Reign: and as confident as himself is that Gregory dyed 604,

I am sure Platina says, he entered his Popedom 610, which (according to our
Vindicator (who is so severe a Critic in Chronology) was six years after he
was dead; which would make a better Argument than any of the Papists have, to
prove Gregory a most Holy Father, having spent six years in Heaven, and
received a better Canonization than the Church of Rome could give him, and then
came down (not without Gods leave sure, to be his Sons Vicar, and to rule his
Church on Earth. Now who so considers, that Platina was a later Popes
Secretary, and so had doubtless the command of their Archives, and Abbreviator
Apostolicus; so as it was his business to search into the things of that
Church, may reasonably think he much better knew than our Vindicator could, his
Chronology, yea, or than any other Monk, or more ordinary Religioso; and to
correct Platina by any of them, is much like setting the Sun by ones Watch. Qui
alterum incusat probri ipsum se intueri oportet. If any one object that my self
says, Gregory was not Pope till about 600 (as I believe I have said more than
once in this Discourse) or that he lived Anno 600, every one will understand me
as expressing Numerum Rotundum, the number of the age only, not the particular
year; and that my meaning was at the close of the 6th, or beginning of the 7th
Age; but if one will pretend to the very year of his death, and say he died
604, he is tied to more exactness, for fear a Resurrection be proved upon the
Assertor, admitting his Assertion.

12. But this being premised, let us more strictly inquire, Whether there was
such a mistake or no? In very deed there was none' and all this noise is caused
from our Vindicators applying that to persons which I never intended but of the
practice and usage; for what else could I understand by the Father of all these
that dwell in these Tents? but the Father of those who have introduced into the
Church, the general use and imposition of Forms of Prayers to be used by all
Ministers, in their Public Solemn Prayers?

I said and I say it again, That Gregory the Great was the Father of these men;
he first made a Canon in the case. I mean a Rule or Decree; I think Durandus or
Platina, use the term Redegit in Canonem. This Canon was charged but with
Powder, and did no great execution, till Charles the Great, near 200 years
after that, added a Bullet to Gregorys Powder; this did great Execution, for he
enforced all men with Fire and Sword; and this I think was a great protection
of Gregory the Greats Canonical Sanction. Charles his Empire was large, and we
must imagine that a year or two, or twenty, would not perfect so great an
alteration, no not in the Roman Empire (which was not all the Christian World)
so as I do think that it is no large conjecture, to guess it might be 1000
years before this practice got any general usage. This Cubb was whelped by
Gregory the Great, but all his Authority and Canons, etc. could not lick it
into a just form, till Charles the Great put his Mouth to it, and his Hand and
Sword also; which must be in the Ninth Century, and cannot well be imagined to
have been perfected in a small time. I believe when I come to our Vindicators p
156, 157. I shall find (if not a designed Cheat) a grosser Error in Chronology
than this amounts to; for this indeed is none. The Vindicator might have seen
in the Book to which I referred in that Paragraph, that I did know, or might
have read there (and I will assure him I read it once or twice) what time
Gregory the Great lived, and at what distance from Charles the Great. And the
World may see by a Supplement to the Reasonable Account, which came out the
very same week with this Vindication of Liturgies, and is wholly about the
pretended Antiquity of Liturgies; that I was not ignorant of this abstruse and
mighty piece of Learning, and needed not his Instruction in it.

13. Our Vindicator in the next place ( Introd. p. 5.) declares against his
meddling with any part of the Reasonable Account, wherein I answered others,
which I am well content with, and shall likewise desire my Reader, not to
expect I should strictly follow him in his large Digressions, wherein he
speaks nothing to my Arguments. But he further tells us, That he shall wave
the Repetition of my long Syllogisms, which is a tedious way of proceeding, and
in rational discourses of this nature is acceptable to few others, than those
who may admire the Art of making a Syllogism; but I shall give a faithful
account of the substance of his Arguments, etc.

14. I must confess I never thought it much material, whether a Syllogism were
in Cesare, or Darapte, or Jerison, nor thought it worth the while to dispute
the mysteries of the structure of a Syllogism; but I am to learn that a
Syllogistical disputing is more tedious than that more ungirt way, which it
seems pleases our Author better. A Prosyllogism I always thought very proper,
and I have troubled him with no more in any Argument. But Latet anguis in herba
(I fear) had our Vindicator tied up himself to Syllogisms, he would hardly have
been able to have crowded in this momentous Proposition -- The Author of the
Reasonable Account, did not know what time Gregory the Great or Charles the
Great lived. Nor got in this conclusion. Ergo, He was an ignorant man,
defective in learning, very confident, from whom no accuracy is to be expected.
But let him run his looser method (for certainly Logic and Syllogistical
arguing, is the Palma contracta) if he so discourses that I can but
understand, whether he denis the Major or the Minor, or the Conclusion only,
it shall be enough for my purpose.

15. For what follows, I have said enough before to excuse me from any
imputation; as to the time of my Book coming out, which was in 1679, about
Mich. it was printed beyond Sea six months before; I had no concern in it, nor
seen it since April 1677, when I gave it to a friend, who begged it of me.

But so various are our Apprehensions, that my opinion is, it could never have
come out in a more seasonable time; when it is in the heart of our Rulers to
unite all Protestants, which I am sure cannot be, while the Imposition of Forms
of Prayer on all Ministers, in their public Ministerial Service in Prayer
holds. But may easily be, by leaving such Forms to liberty. I do very well know
what a clamor some make for Imposed Forms; and therefore think it is highly
necessary we should tell them why we judge them (as to our practice) unlawful,
that our Rulers and People may judge, whether we be such illiterate,
nonsensical, irrational, persons, such strange undertakers, and mere confident
men, as we are represented to the World to be: Or whether these Clamours be
merely Cries of Interest, like that of old, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. So
I have done with our Vindicators Introduction. Only desiring my Reader may know
that I am not arguing Forms of Prayer (now most generally used and imposed)
unlawful; but justifying the Reasons which I have formerly given, why we cannot
judge them, as to our practice, lawful, let them be in themselves what they
shall be evinced to be. If our Vindicator can quit himself of the Arguments I
have brought, I I have no more at present to say.

CHAP. I.
An Answer to the Vindicators First Chapter, concerning the stating of the
Question.

1. I Am beholden to the Learned Author, for allowing me, or any Noncon. an
ability to state a Question, with sufficient plainness and clearness; and shall
requite him, owning that he has truly repeated my stateing of it (a favor not
ordinary in this age.) But his Observations deduced from my Concessions, must
not pass wholly unexamined.

2. That our Prayers must be directed to God (as he observes) needed not the
attestation of two of the Fathers. 2. That our general wants (such as Pardon,
Sanctification, Daily Bread, etc. I like not so well to say all our ordinary
wants) may be expressed in Forms, I doubt not. Nor 3. That a pious Soul, not
able to pray from his own Gifts, may truly worship God mentally, by reading a
Form, I doubt not; but to make this true external worship, I think will be
required a command from God. It is also true, that one difference betwixt
Praying with and without a Form, is that in the former way, the same words and
methods are constantly used, in the other not so. But if by praying we mean the
Action of a Man, the main difference contended for, is, That he that prays in
the use of his Gitfs, does the will of God; whether the other does so, is the
very Question.

3. And so indeed the Answerer tells us, only represents it something too
invidiously; for no man says, That God is pleased with our varying of phrases,
or altering our methods; but we are sure God is pleased with our doing of his
will, in as little things as those are. It certainly had been vain Philosophy
under the Jewish Paedagogy, to have argued that it was not probable that God
saw any beauty or valuableness in the killing of a Beast, for he was a Spirit,
and true Goodness, Piety, and Sincerity are the things which he delighted in.
Who knows not all this? But he is pleased in obeying his will in the least
things. The Question therefore is, What is Gods Will in the case.

To obey God is certainly better than Sacrifice, and needs must be, because all
the value of a Sacrifice lay in the obedience testified by it. If it be the
will of God that his Ministers should serve him in the use of their own Gifts
(from whence must necessarily follow the altering of Phrases and Methods)
though there be no intrinsic value in these things, yet they are better then
all other Sacrifices.

4. But our Author thinks not this probable. And why? 1. Because our Savior
rebuked the vanity of them, who think they shall be heard by their much
speaking; Mat. 6.7. And as a Remedy, taught his Disciples that comprehensive
Form of Prayer. Austine from hence judged superfluity of words needless; What
he says as to the Lords Prayer, is elsewhere spoken to.
so did Hilary; and it is a piece of Reverence enjoined by Solomon Eccl. 5.2.

5. But what is all this but a wasting of Ink and Paper? May not then a
Minister pray in the use of his own Gifts, unless he prays to an unreasonable
length? Must he needs use a superfluity of words, or a multitude of words,
because he does not use those words others have prepared for him? Who sees not
these inconsequences?

6. In the next place, p. 14. he argues, Because under the Law God did not
require daily various changes of the real expressions of Religious Worship and
Service, but appointed them to be continually the same; Number. 28, 2, 3. which
makes it more than probable that the variety of verbal expressions is not
requisite to obtain his acceptance under the Gospel.

I do not wonder that our Author at first (though of Learning enough to make
them, and answer Arguments in that Form) declared his dislike of the use of
Sylogisms; for if such Arguments as this be put into those Forms, they would be
too much exposed. Is there the same reason for the Service of God under the
Gospel, as under the Law? because Typical Services prefiguring one Christ, were
invariable; must therefore Spiritual Services under the Gospel be so too?
consider then why the Minister does not always preach the same Sermons, because
the Jews were to offer Morning and Evening Sacrifices, and we under the Gospel
are also bound to pray in all parts of time; must therefore the Will of God be
that in all things else they should agree? Is there the same reason for the
performance of Acts of Worship, after the plentiful effusion of the Spirit in
the days of Pentecost as before? Nay, is our Author sure, that in the Jewish
Worship they all used the same Prayers and Exhortations, because they always
killed the same specifical Beasts for Sacrifices? In their very Sacrifices
there was a great variety, and they agreed in nothing, but that they all were
what God prescribed.

7. What he says in p. 15. is granted him, nothing but the will of God is
worth naming in the cause, words in themselves are nor valuable, but obedience
is. What makes then this trifling about the Opinions of Heathens, the
invaluableness of words in themselves, the way of Worship under the Law, etc.
What is all this to any purpose, but to prepossess the unwary Reader?

8. His next observation is, That the Author does not account himself certain
of the truth of this Position. What does he mean by certain? The Author is none
of the Infallibles of our Age, and has more modesty than to dictate to all the
World, and pretend Demonstrations of a thing that it may be is not capable of
it: But he is morally certain, certain, as far as probable Arguments can make
him. But what then? Therefore it appears not to him unlawful? Will any weighed
Divine in the World say. That a thing is not unlawful to him, that upon
Arguments, which to him appears highly probable, appears unlawful? Let the
Author answer a Book called, (...), wrote on this very Argument.

9. The Author values not a rush, whether the Answerer blames, or not blames
him, for the thing, some persons in this Age calls Separation. He falls not by
Man's Judgment. There was in Apostasy which Luther gloryed in; and there is a
Separation which a good Christian may glory in; 1 Cor. 6.17. The Question is,
Whether the Nonconf. be guilty of a sinful Separation? That Nonconf. are guilty
of that, here is no Argument to prove; but the Author accounting himself
certain, mentioned p. 21. which is a new Topic; for I hope it is no
Demonstration.

10. The Vindicator, p. 22. in the next place, comes to tell us of considerable
prejudices against the truth of my Assertion. 1. That it is against the Opinion
of the Church of England, and the most famous Churches in the Primitive times.
But to the latter part of this he very honestly adds -- a Quod est
Demonstrandum; referring it to be afterward proved. And against the
constitution of many eminent Churches abroad. This he says he before observed;
and I do not deny, observe good Reader how I have not denied it, ^69p.

An imposed Liturgy, unless in a particular Province, for a time, in a
particular case, such as was that of the spreading of Pelagianism, we can not
find. And for a Liturgy to be proposed only, and left at liberty, we know most
Reformed Churches have such a one, and we have before declared our judgments
for the reasonableness of it.

It is true which I also said, That the continuance of Liturgyes, owes it self,
in a great measure, to Churches not having Men enough able pray without Forms.
But what is this to the purpose of Universally Imposed Liturgies? From this
appears the exceeding vanity of what the Answerer adds, p. 23. The Author
condemned none of the first Reformers of Sin, nor has reason to believe that
all of them used any such thing, if they had he condemns them not.

11. But the Author (and those of his mind, p. 23.
are such pitiful men, as determine in these weighty things, according to their
present humor. For one while he says, Authority or Practice is a lamentable
Argument. His words are these:

While we are disputing about what is lawful, or unlawful, Authority or
Practice, is a lamentable Argument. They must be lamentable Divines that will
say otherwise. That the Practice of Men should determine to us the will of God.

Well, But he says in another place,

The Sensus piorum, neither is nor ever was judged light, by persons of
sobriety and worth, for the truth of a proposition, especially a practical
proposition, not plainly determined in Holy Writ.

Is then the Authority and Practice of particular men, that have the good hap
to get into a Chair of Government in the Church; and the Sensus piorum, the
same thing think we? I beg the Answerers favor if I do not believe it; but
believe there must be, to say no more, the odds of 200 to one. The Sensus
piorum is the general sense of persons in such or such a place, minding the
things of God, and regulating their lives in a conformity to his will: I take
this in practical matters, to be a thousand times more probable Argument, then
some particular persons (tho Governors) Authority and Practice.

12. But it seems I so stated my Question, p. 24.
as to overthrow the main foundation and the chief Arguments of my Discourse.
That indeed is great weakness. But I pray how does this appear to be any thing
but a most false calumny.

I granted, That Forms of Prayer by God commanded in Scripture, must be used,
and other Scriptural Forms may be used as part of our Prayer; yet I declare, it
sinful for such Ministers as can pray otherwise to pray by Forms: From the duty
of using their own Gifts. And 2. From the hinderance of pious Disposition,
Attention, or Fervency, from the use of a Form of words in Prayer.

Do I so? Judge good Reader. The Minor of my first Argument is this:

But for a Minister having the gift of Prayer, Reasonable Account p. 6.
ordinarily to perform his Ministerial Act in Prayer, by reading or reciting
Forms of Prayer composed by others, confessedly not divinely inspired; is for
him to omit a natural and proper means, given him by God, etc. It is true, in
my Second Argument, p. 23. all these words are by the Printers carelessness
left out [by Forms of Prayer composed by others, confessedly not divinely
inspired] nor could I help it; but a man of any ordinary candor would have
supplied them, from the state of the Question, and from the preceding Argument;
which will make it appear, that I never said that it was unlawful to perform
our Ministerial Act in Prayer, by Forms, but by Forms composed by others, who
confessedly are not divinely inspired. I never was so simple as not to allow
God to dispense with his own Law, upon which ground any Forms commanded by God
must be lawful; nor yet to think we might not use Scriptural phrases, in any
part of worship, and yet use our own gifts at the same time time too.

13. For to pray nothing else, but using a Scriptural Form, I believe we must
have a special Command of God to make that lawful to us.

Besides, I doubt not but the Answere^ saw what I wrote, p. 51. That there is a
vast difference between the pure words of God (for the which God both has and
ever will secure a Reverence in all Religious Souls, and Forms composed by
fallible men without any direction from God. Let any Christian experience
whether it be possible for him, to read any Book of man's making a thousand
times, with that Gift and holy Reverence, and with so little taedium, as he may
so read the Books and Chapters of Holy Writ. So as all he says is just nothing
to the purpose, the Author at first restraining his Question to Forms composed
by Men, that are confessedly no part of Holy Writ. For Forms, that are part of
Holy Writ, they are throughout his Book excepted, nor does he any where
conclude they hinder pious Dispositions, or that they may not be used as part
of the exercise of the Ministerial Gift. But something must be said to expose
Authors instead of answering him.

14. In his 25 page, to raise up a prejudice against the Author, he very
learnedly passes from Prayer of one kind to Prayer of another kind, and
concludes; That because he sins not, who joyneth with another ministering in
Prayer, when it is apparent by all Scripture, that he is not to pray vocally,
but only to pray in his heart: Therefore he sins not who does it ministering
in Prayer, when he is to pray vocally not mentally only. It is easy to raise
such prejudices, and for ordinary Readers to see through them.

15. Our Authors last prejudice mentioned against the Authors Opinion [That a
great part, and he thinks the greater part of the Nonconformists, will not own
his Notion] I fear will appear an hasty prejudging the Nonconformists.

16. Though the Answerer speaks warily in the case of the Commissioners
appointed, 1662 (for he only says, They made this no part of their
Objections) yet he would plainly suggest they (who by the way, except the
Episcopal men, were all Presbyterians) were of another mind. What to say for
those who attended not the Commission, I cannot tell, but for those who
appeared, and daily met, till they had wholly drawn up what they intended to
propose to my Lords the Bishops, I can tell. The Bishops desired them to meet
by themselves, which they did at Mr. Calamy's House, till they had agreed all,
which afterward they offered at the Savoy to the Bishops. What they agreed in
this point may be read in these words in their Seven General Proposals:

That the Gift of Prayer being one special qualification for the work of the
Ministry bestowed by Christ in order to the Edification of his Church, and to
be exercised for the profit and benefit thereof, according to its various and
emergent, necessities, It is desired that there may be no such Imposition of
the Liturgy, as that the Exercise of that Gift be totally excluded in any part
of Public Worship.

17. That Men may not please themselves with Dreams, and think those last were
mere completory words, upon which no stress was laid, I will assure them, that
that Proposal had never been agreed without them; they being brought in by the
Reverend Mr. Mat. Newcomb, after (as I remember) three days spent in debates
about that Proposal. I do know but three Men of those who appeared and would
declare their minds, who would hear of any Liturgy Universally, Imposed. Those
three indeed were great Men. The most Reverend Bishop Reinolds was one, Mr.
Calamy was another, the third yet living I shall not name. Mr. Calamy often
urged, That if forms of Prayer were lawful, the Imposing of them did not make
them unlawful.

It was answered, If forms of Prayer were Universally lawful, Imposing could
not make them unlawful: but it was denied, That they were, as to use in public
Devotion, Universally lawful.

18. The debate of the 19 General Proposals, was the ordinary work of the
Commissioners met together. In the mean time they had, according to the
Instructions of their Commission, committed the several Offices of the old
Liturgy to several Brethren, to be reviewed, that they might see what
exceptions were reasonable to be offered. The drawing up a New Form was
committed to another. These in their Seasons were brought in and read. But the
far Major part of the Commissioners present, having obtained the 7th Proposal,
and in that a perfect liberty of the use or not use of any, were very
incurious, as to those things, only listened so far to them, as to see there
was nothing but what they might own. This is the truth of that story, so far as
it passed, before they came to give in what they agreed, to receive the Bishops
Answer, and to make their Reply, What was then done, the Printed Account fully
tells us.

19. This is enough to have spoken to this Chapter of the Reverend Doctors;
only I must requite him, with thanks for his Complement, the good Milk
wherewith he suckles me, and tho he presently with an oblique stroke of his
heel throws it down again, yet I have such a value for it, as in the following
Chapters I shall endeavor to gather it up, and (if such a thing be possible
for a Non-Con.) redeem my reputation, from such an ugly imputation as the
writing of (...), inconsistencies.

CHAP. II.
An Answer to the Vindicators Second Chapter, concerning the Gift of Prayer.
Whether the Gift of Prayer, as to Vocal Prayer, be properly an Ability to
express our minds to God in Prayer, or whether it be the same with the Grace
given us to be used in Prayer, or an Extraordinary Gift, peculiarly relating to
the Apostles and Christians, in their Age?

1. ALL this while methinks I have been in a Drapers Shop, staring upon the
lofty and Oblique Lights, which I discerned in it, and wondering wherefore (^o
make up a judgment whether the Sun shined or no) I must be put to a troublesome
elevation of my Eye, stretching my Nerves, and contracting my Eyelids, till at
last I discerned the Art, and that a nearer and more direct light, though it
might have been (possibly) of more advantage to the buyer, yet to the seller
would have been less profitable, giving his Customer a too near an advantage to
judge of his Wares and the Arts used about them.

2. I had thought that in the beginning of the former Chapter, The Issue was
joined, or (as the Civilians speak) we had had Litene contestatam: The Question
was stated. The Opponent agreed it clearly and plainly sta^ed. The Arguments
were brought: What had an Answerer to do, but to deny one or other Proposition,
or to distinguish of some Terms? Twelve Pages since that have been spent, and
nothing of this done: To what purpose is this prejudicating a Reader? but to
possess his mind one way before the cause is tried; and to raise his passion
with strange stories, before he be suffered to use his Reason to judge who has
the best cause upon hearing what each party can say: But at length we shall (it
may be) come to something which is to the purpose.

3. The first Argument was stated thus.

To omit a mean for the performance of a Religious Act given us by God for the
performance of it, and being natural, and proper, Reasonable Account. p. 5.
at the command of man, when we perform that Religious Act, is sinful. But for
a Minister, having the Gift of Prayer, ordinarily to perform his Ministerial
Act in Prayer, by reading or reciting Forms of Prayers composed by others
(confessedly not divinely inspired) is for him to omit, a natural and proper
mean given him by God, in order to the performance of such Religious Act, and
in the Omission of it to perform such Religious Act. Ergo,

The Major Proposition shines so much in its own light, that it was not to be
denied, but by affirming, That it is lawful for us at the command of Men, in an
Act of Gods W rship to omit a mean given us of God for that end, and to perform
that Act in the use of other means, under no s^ecial prescription from God;
which is to say, it is lawful to allow Men to ^e wiser then God in directing
the means of his Worship; which certainly is a strange position.

4. Yet our Answerer, tho he will not in plain terms deny the Major, p. 57.
tells us, That a mean given us of God, if it be only capable of being used, and
not a necessary mean to be used, may lawfully be omitted, especially when there
are several means. What does he mean by several means? Several means given by
God for that end, that are Natural and Proper, then it is most true. But it
lies upon him to prove that God has in this case prescribed several means.
But if he means several Humane means under no Divine Prescription, it amounts
to no less then I said before, the praeference of the Wisdom of Men to the
Wisdom of God.

5. What does he mean by telling us, A Divine mean may be omitted, if it be not
necessary to be used, when the very drift of the Argument is to prove, That it
is necessary to be used, because it is a Divine Mean, and there is no other can
lay claim to that Notion, nor can be so Natural, nor is so Proper. Now this
quite spoils the retorting the Argument.

6. But although our Answerer thinks fit to nibble a little about the Major, yet
plainly discerning, that was not to be denied by any Person of his Reputation
in the World, his whole force is spent about the Minor Proposition, as to which
he says much; which himself summeth up, p. 57.

1. That an ability fitly to express our mind to God in Prayer, is not the gift
of Prayer nor any singular or peculiar gift of the Spirit of God.

2. That it is neither a duty nor yet expedient, that such abilities should be
used and constantly used, any further then is agreeable to the Rules of
Edification and Order.

7. Whatsoever our Answerer says upon the first head (which is very much, one
while confounding the Gift of prayer, and the Grace of Prayer, as one and the
same thing; another while telling us of an Extraordinary Gift of Prayer) is so
much from the purpose, that our Author owns it as a digression p. 28. So as I
am not concerned in any thing of that discourse further then to mend a Term in
my Minor, and make it to run thus: But for a Minister having an Ability fitly
to express his mind to God in Prayer, to perform his Ministerial Acts in Prayer
ordinarily by reading or reciting etc.

Nor was there any need at all thus to mend it, but to save my self trouble of
a Word-bait.

8. But yet to vindicate my self from being as much out, as to proper speaking,
as it seems to this Author, I was in my Chronology of Gregory and Charles the
great; we will have a few words about the Gift of Prayer, for I do suspect that
this multitude of words, is but to darken knowledge. It shall go under the
Title of a Digression, in Reply to a Digression of the Answerers concerning the
Gift of Prayer. I hope the Reader will pardon my going out of my way, seeing it
is but to follow my Leader, and to Vindicate my self from improper speaking
[that is, not to this Learned Man's mind, or Sentiment] and who but Men of his
Principles can speak Properly?

9. He does p. 40. acknowledge, That there is an Ability in many Persons,
whereby they can express their Minds in some degrees fitly to God in Prayer:
But this he says is not properly the Gift of Prayer, but rather of Speech:
Here then is the Question, The Scripture no where mentioning the Gift of
Prayer, whether an Ability to express our Minds fitly to God in Prayer, may not
properly be called the Gift of Prayer? My opinion is, That it may; which I thus
prove.

10. By the same reason, That an Ability to speak, to Men to Edification, and
Exhortation, and Comfort. 1 Cor. 14.3. is in Scripture, called the Gift of
Prophecy; 1 Cor. 13.2. 1 Cor. 14.1. An Ability also fitly to express our Minds
to God in Prayer, may be properly called the Gift of Prayer. But such an
Ability is in Scripture called the Gift of Prophecy, as appears in the
forementioned Texts. If our Answerer can show a disparity of Reason, he may, I
cannot fancy any; by the same reason that Abilities to Actions are called
(...), by the same reason they may be and are properly called Gifts, for what
is the English of that Greek, word but Powers or Abilities: and it is past all
contradition, that what the Apostle calls (...) [Powers] 1 Cor. 12.29. He
calls the Gifts of Healing in the very next words. Have all the Gifts of
Healing? What tho these were Gifts given at an extraordinary time, or in an
extraordinary manner (which indeed they were) yet I appeal to any indifferently
Learned Man, to determine, Whether this alters the Genus, or only distributes
the Species. All Spiritual Abilities are Gifts, but they are not all Saving
Gifts, or extraordinary Gifts. And this is enough to vindicate my self from
impropriety of Speech.

11. But says our Author p. 29. That is eminently and especially to be
esteemed the Gift of Prayer, which disposes and inableth to the performance of
the duty of Prayer (very true, Vindication p. 29.
and is not this all I have contended for?) And therefore since Prayer is not
so much a verbal thing, as a pious address of the Heart, Soul, and Spirit to
God, the Supplies and Assistances of his Grace which kindle and excite pious
Dispositions, in seeking unto God, with earnest and affectionate desires, a
lively Faith, and the exercise of inward Devotion; this is most properly his
vouchsafing and bestowing the Gift of Prayer; and our having and exercising
them, is our having and using the Gift of Prayer.

This now is well said as to Truth, but not a tittle of it to the purpose: Here
is a manifest Transition, from one kind to another. That a Christian may in his
heart Pray, tho his Lips move not, is out of doubt (Hannah did so.) But can any
Minister discharge his Ministerial Duty in Public Prayer thus? Nay can a
private Christian in his Family, or Closet do it? If not, there is another kind
of Prayer besides this, and our Author knew well enough, that it is that we are
speaking of. The Question is, What is the Gift of Prayer relating to Vocal
Prayer? Our Answerer grants, It is that which inableth and disposes to the
performance of the duty. Now I appeal again to any one that understands
sense, Whether those things which the Answerer mentions, enable any person to
Vocal Prayer, as it stands contradistinguished to mere heart Prayer, which is
that we are not at all speaking of? It is manifest it is not, for then no
Unbeliever, no Wicked Man, has any Ability to pray, and St. Paul had given
very impertinent Counsel to the Sorcerer to Pray, that the thoughts of his
heart might be forgiven him; which it seems he had no Gift, no Ability to do;
for it is certain he had no Faith, nor Pious Affections. It might have been
expected, that he who Faults others for Impropriety of Speech, should himself
have spoken Ad idem at least, i. e. to the thing in Question, which whether he
has done, or no, I leave to any one who understands sense to judge. The Author
of the Book he answers, had often enough told him, that he spoke not
concerning Heart Prayer but Vocal Prayer, that Praying wherein in obedience to
the command of God, the voice is used, to express the desires of the heart. It
is an easy thing to answer at this rate.

12. For what he says p. 31, 32, 33. in Answer to what the Author had spoken
from Zech. 12.10. Romans 8.26. to prove a Gift of Prayer to be a Divine Gift,
issues in this, Whether by the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and the
Spirits helping our Infirmity in Pra er, be to be understood, as well the
Spirits giving us an Ability fitly to express our minds to God in Prayer, as
furnishing us with Gracious Habits, disposing us so to Pray as we may find
favor with God. It is our Answerers concern to affirm the latter only: But
the Author is of another mind; because he finds in Scripture, Gifts that are
not saving, called Spiritual Gifts; 1 Cor. 12.1. and 1 Cor. 14.1. and the
Manifestations of the Spirit; 1 Cor. 12.7. where are reckoned the Word of
Wisdom, the Word of Knowledge, the Gifts of Healing, Working of Miracles,
Prophecy, Tongues; some of which are by the same Apostle determined no saving
gifts; 1 Cor. 13.2, 3. The Author is of the mind that all these are
comprehended under the Promises of pouring out of the Spirit, mentioned in the
Old Testament, And tho an Ability to Pray be not mentioned in that 1 Cor. 12.7.
yet he never thought to have met with any who regarded what he said, who would
have denied, That it is a gift, and a Spiritual gift; nor does yet believe it
shut out of those Promises, Zech. 12.10. Rom 8.26. tho not solely, perhaps not
Principally intended in them: both which, the Author grants to the Answerer, if
he can make any Market with them.

13. Our Answerer is again at it p 34. As that Ability of Expression whereby a
Man largely professes the particular Doctrines of the Christian Faith, is not
properly the Gift of Faith, of Believing, so neither is the like Ability of
expressing the matter of our Prayer to be accounted in any proper sense the
Gift of Prayer. Still we are upon the old fallacy, and whatsoever I Answer, our
Answerer will avoid us, by telling us he spoke of mere Heart Pra^er, where no
words are needful; that is, nothing to the point in Question: Is Believing a
Vocal Action think we? Or is it a mere Action of the Heart, and to say an
Ability fitly to speak, is that Gift, were to own my self simple enough: But I
hope an Ability fitly to speak, is the Gift of Confession of Faith with our
Lips. Let our Author speak out and tell us, If a Praying with our hearts be
all the Prayers God requires of Ministers in their public Ministrations: If
it be not, he says nothing to the purpose, for still the Gift of Prayer in
that sense (and I spoke of another) is an ability fitly to express our Minds to
God in Prayer.

14. But he tells us, This is but the Gift of Speaking, Utterance, or
Elocution, p. 34. I have scarce patience for such Assertions: Then every one
who has an Ability to speak, utter, or to speak out, or Oratoriously, has the
Gift of Prayer, which is demonstrably false, and contrary to the experience of
every day.

15. But at length our Answerer can find a Gift of Prayer, and with the Spirit;
this he says, was that whereby Christians in the beginning of Christianity,
were enabled by the extraordinary Impulses, and immediate Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit upon their Minds, so to Pray, either in their own, or other
Languages, that those Motions of their Hearts, and inward Desires, and also
their Words and Expressions, were the proper, and extraordinary Works and
Dictates of the Holy Ghost. Admit this true, what follows? Then an Ability to
Pray is the Gift of Prayer, only given to some in a more extraordinary, to
others in a more ordinary way. I freely grant him all he says, if he does not
say, or by this cunningly go about to persuade people, that now no people have
an Ability to express their Minds fitly to God in Prayer; which he must not,
because he is so liberal as to grant the contrary p. 40.

16. But he says these extraordinary Gifts were peculiar to the primitive
times; Who denis it? But is there not a more ordinary Gift of Prayer still
continuing, and the only question is, Whether this be omitted in the
performance of the Act?

17. He tells us p. 36. that those who had these extraordinary Gifts, were to
use them only so far as was consistent with the rules of Order, Decency, and
Edification: Who denies this too? But these Rules of Order and Decency, were
such, as either Nature it self showed, or the Infallible Spirit, by the
Apostles directed; let him prove any thing further if he can, and if he
understands no more it is freely granted.

18. As to what he says in Reply to what I answered to that which he objected
from 1 Cor. 14. I know not what his Intentions were, but his words are these,
Libertas Eccles. p. 120. The Argument against the lawfulness of set Forms,
because they limit the use of Gifts, needs not much consideration, since it
is manifest that by the Will of God, bounds and limits were set, even to the
use of extraordinary Gifts of Gods Spirit, that the Church might be edified; 1
Cor. 14.26, 27, 28, 30, 33.

Could any one make this less than an Argument a majori ad minus affirmando, if
the greater Gifts might be Limited, then the lesser may. In my Answer, I
observed the fallacy might lurk under the term Limited, and distinguished
betwixt the Regular use and the Irregular abuse of Gifts, and denied that
consequence: That because the Irregular use of Gifts might be restrained,
therefore the Regular use of them might. I shall leave the Reader to judge of
what I said, and he has here answered, whether he has taken off the least of
my Answer. Only adding, That an Argument from the Power of the Apostles to the
Power of any Superiors now (till the Author has proved those now empowered,
Possessed of the same Infallible Spirit, and of the same Divine Right, to make
new Rules of Order for the Church) is very inconclusive.

19. In his 41 p. He tells us that This faculty of Expression in Prayer,
Vindication p. 41.
is procured and enlarged, by men who have a competent Natural freedom of
Speech by use, and exercise, and advanced by various Methods. I acknowledge
(says he) that in some an Affectionateness of Devotion, does contribute much
thereto; in others confident self conceit, and an heated fancy, and (as I have
read some particular Instances) even Diabolical Contracts, have promoted the
same. What he calls facility of Expression, is the same with what I called an
ability fitly to express our minds to God in Prayer; and of this he speaks, or
he says nothing to the purpose. This he says is procured and enlarged by use
and exercise (he says true, provided the Person has first a due knowledge of
God, and of himself, and of the Scriptures; which till one has acquired, all
Use and Exercise is to no purpose.) This also must be supposed to
Affectionateness of Devotion, which he (truly) says contributeth much thereto;
but how confident self conceit, a mere heated fancy, or Diabolical Contracts
should do it, (which the Answerer it seems believes, he would never else have
troubled us with a Romance) are matters of wonderful subtle disquisition,
especially that, How the Devil should help a Man (if he would be so kind) fitly
to express his mind to God in Prayer. I tremble while I mention such a thing,
as ever spoken by a Divine, to help the already too much Atheistical and
Blaphemous World with an Authority (and that no less then Dr. Faulkners) to
say, Godly Ministers do that by the Devil, which they do by the assistance of
the Holy Spirit of God. The Answerers granting it may be, will be warrant
enough to harden hundreds in such Blasphemies. How much Evil speaking soever I
be charged with, I hope I shall avoid that Evil speaking, because of those
Texts, Mar. 3.28.29. and that Matthew. 12.31, 32. The Crime there, was the
Pharisees asserting that what Christ did, by the Spirit of God, v. 28. Was done
by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. The Doctor does not indeed boldly assert
such a thing but he has so phrased what he says, that besides, the Scurvy
Innuendo in his words, he plainly grants it nut be. But surely the Devil fills
none with the Knowledge of God, or with Affectionate Devotion. Now whether the
Pharisees guilt there, were not an intituling the Devil to the Operations of the
Blessed Spirit, I leave to his serious thoughts. Nor can I be so uncharitable
even to the Pharisees, as to think, that they in saying so, Lied against the
Holy Ghost, speaking what they knew to be otherwise: I do judge, they thought
as they spoke, which if they did, I know no difference in the case, but in the
means of Conviction they had further, then any can now have, that the People
of God Praying in the use of their Spiritual Gifts, Act by the Spirit, because
of the Miracles they saw wrought by Christ; which indeed was a great means: but
the judgment of a true Miracle from the Phenomenon of it, in one of Satan's
lying Wonders mentioned 1 Thessa. 2.9. is so difficult, that I cannot see the
height of their guilt lay there so much, as in their speaking Evil (with
reference to the blessed Spirit) in a thing which they knew not, but had good
Evidence to the contrary: I pray God that it may not he laid to the charge of
so Worthy a Person, that by this unaccountable Suggestion He has (as David was
charged in a case wherein the Holy Spirit was not so immediately concerned, 2 Samuel 12.14.) made the Enemies of God to Blaspheme. That to Pray in the Spirit,
or with the Assistance of the Spirit, is to perform the duty of Prayer, with a
pious mind (as he tells us so many times over ((...)) is what none denies, but
that this is the whole of it, that it is not also with such words as the Spirit
teaches them to utter, which Spirit is therefore called the Spirit of
Supplication, the Spirit of Adoption, sent into our hearts; by which a Child of
God cries Abba Father, is what the Dr. neither has proved nor ever can.

20. He tells us p. 43. that he acknowledges a sober and due freedom of
Expression to be a Gift of God, in the same manner that the capacities of Men's
Understandings, and all other Abilities of Mind and Body, are Gods Gifts: But
it is plain, this liberty of Expression is the product of the Natural
Capacities Men receive from God, which are improved in well disposed Persons by
ordinary means under Gods Blessing, etc. Socinus in his Dialogue of
Justification, says the same of Faith (a Spiritual Gift of a more Salvifick
Nature) Faith (says he) is such a Gift of God as God gives to all, and a
little before, Hearing is the Gift of God, etc. I do not compare Faith and the
Gift of Prayer. I know Faith is a far more excellent gift: But I believe he
speaks as much truth, with reference to Faith, as our Answerer speaks as to an
Ability to express our minds fitly, to God in Prayer; for Faith in the
exercise, is the exercise of the Natural Capacity of a Soul, to put a
confidence in a person, or Assent to a Proposition which is evidenced to it to
be truth; and every man has a Natural Power to Assent and Rely on proper
Objects: But to Assent to a Spiritual Truth above the Evidence of Sense and
Reason, to receive Christ and Rely on him for Life Eternal, these are no
Natural Capacities: So to speak, is but a Natural Capacity, the generality of
Men have a Natural Capacity to express their Minds, by Speech, but an Ability
fitly to express our Minds to God in Prayer, is no product of a mere Natural
Capacity, but of the Spirit of God, having first enlightened the Soul with the
knowledge of God.

21. If he says it is but such a Gift as Men may have, and Perish eternally,
it is granted him; but such were Prophecy, the Mysteries of Knowledge,
Miraculous Faith; Romans 13.1, 2. Yet I hope they were Spiritual gifts, and not
the meet products of Natural Capacities, and different from such Natural
Abilities as are necessary to make a Man perfect in Naturalibus; and it is
easy to prove, that common gifts in the Service of God are of use and means to
Spiritual Acts. I know none that ever called the Gift of Prayer a Spiritual
saving Gift, nor is that any part of the Question, but whether it be a
Spiritual Gift? Yea in mere Natural gifts, the neglect cannot be dispensed
with, when the Act to which they have a Relation, cannot be performed without
the use of them. The Question is, Whether the Gift of Prayer be not a mean in
order to the Act of Prayer, and if it be so, and given of God for that end,
whether in the performance of the Act it can be omitted Lawfully, and the Act
performed, by a mean which is neither Natural, nor under any Divine Prescript?
And to this I find the Author as yet speaking very little.

22. In his next Paragraph, p. 44. he tells us, That it is a considerable
Objection against the necessity contended for, of a Ministers using a
particular Gift or Ability, merely because it is a Gift, in that this would
equally make it his duty to use his present or extempore Ability, of Conception
and Expression in Prayer, or Preaching. -- And the use of his Memory in
declaring what he has conceived, or thought on before, and also his Reading,
what has been before Composed by himself or others. -- But the use of all
these is an impossibilit^. None contends for the necessity of using a Gift,
because it is a Gift, but because it is a means bestowed upon him by God for
this purpose, that by the use of it, he should perform such an Act; bur it is
most extravagant, concluding, that because in the performance of an Religious
Action, a Man is tied to the use or such a Gift, as is a proper mean in order
to the performance of such an Act, and given him of God purposely for that end;
therefore he is tied to make use of all his Gifts in such an Act, which are no
means, or no direct and proximate means to the performance of that Act. There
is no Gift but this Ability we speak of, that has any direct and present
influence upon the Act: I mean no common Gift, Gracious Habits are of another
Nature.

23. The Authors next Argument is weaker, For how does it follow, that because
a Minister is bound in Prayer to use the Ability which God has given him fitly
to express himself in Prayer, therefore he is bound to do it in any language he
pleases, directly contrary to another Rule of the Apostles, which obliges him
to have respect to the Peoples understanding; or in many Languages at one time:
but this is all our Auth^r says p. 41. n. 17 Who sees not through these
Cobwebs? Does an Obligation to use a Gift in a Religious Act, proper to it, and
given of God for that end solely, oblige us also to the use of other Gifts not
proper to the Act, nor given us of God solely for that end? Or does an
Obligation to use our Ability fitly to express our selves to God in Prayer,
infer an Obligation to do it so many ways as we can do it? I see there is some
need of Arguing Syllogistically, which if we had done, we had avoided these
Impertinencies.

24. And it is every whit to as good purpose, that our Answerer tells us, We
may omit our Gifts in Criticizing, in Expounding Scripture, p. 46.
or of Fatheming deep Controversies, in our Popular Sermons.

When the Answerer has proved, That Critical expounding of a Text, or
resolving deep Controversies, are Acts of a Gospel Ministers Ministry toward
his People, who understand little or nothing of such things, then I shall
consider what he has said; for he may remember that my Argument was limited to
Public Ministerial Acts, which are parts of the Worship of God; as to which
these Instances are apparently Impertinent. It will be proper to bring such
Instances as these, when he finds me making such a Proposition as this: If a
Man cannot without sin omit, the use of his Gifts, in his Ministerial Acts of
Worship: Then it if Sin for him to omit it, in his Scholastical Acts, or any
other Acts of his Life.

25. Of the same nature are his Instances of Private Abilities, to Interpret
the Scriptures out of the Original, to make Confession of Faith and Creeds. Are
any of these ordinary Ministerial Acts? Or Acts of Worship, which are the
Duties of every Minister? If they be, let our Answerer show us their
Establishment in the Word of God (for there all Acts of Worship must have their
Establishment, or lose their name, and so I think all Pro^estants agree) if he
cannot make this appear he has not spoken any thing to the purpose, but
proceeds Ex Ignoratione Elenchi; p. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, and 56.
We acknowledge that the Version of the Scriptures must proceed from an ability
to do it, and such an Ability, as stands in need of Gods great Assistance; but
we say it is no Minister^al Duty, no work that God has entrusted to ordinary
Ministers, no Act of Worship, etc. The Apostles Practice proves this, who made
no New Versions themselves, nor gave any Ministers such a thing in charge; but
enough was spoken to this in the Book our Answerer answers, and much more
than he is pleased to take notice of. Let the Reader but consult the Reasonable
Account, p. 19, 20. for Creeds, and Confessions of Faith, the case is the same;
they are Good and Prudential things, and the Duties of all Men to give, when
they are required: But are these Acts of Worship? and to be performed, by any
Divine Law, when ever any Congregation meets to Worship God? They may be made
then, because they are Modes of Teaching and Instructing, and so fall under the
general precept of Teaching. But what are any of these to the Question? Which
is stated concerning the Ministers Duty in their Public, Solemn, Ministerial
Acts of Worship? Before our Answerer undertook his work in answering, he was at
liberty whether he would meddle with the Reasonable Account or no. But when he
had undertaken the Vindication of Liturgies from what is there said, he ought
certainly to have spoken to the Question, as the Author had stated it, p. 5.
especially considering he did the Author the Honor to say he had done it, with
sufficient clearness and plainness: Then surely the Author of the Vindication,
ought either to have let it alone, or to have spoken to it, as it was
sufficiently, clearly, and plainly stated.

26. He tells us 55. p. that in Public Prayer (I have nothing to do with
what he says of Versions of the Scripture, and Declarations of the Articles of
Faith, which he joins with it, they were both Excluded the Question, as I
stated it) but in Public Prayer, it may well be presumed that what is well
considered and settled, or prescribed as a form, is more perfect and complete,
in the compusure, than can be expected, in any method of ordinary variation;
and to assert that these things may be always better, or as well performed, and
composed by every Minister, or even by the most Eminent Person, whomsoev^r, in
a constant way of varying in the use of their own Abilities, then in well
considered and digested Forms, is as much as to affirm, that the varied
Expressions of Men, at every particular time, are more propper, pithy, and
expressive, and full, then the best composed Prayer, that is at any time made,
and reviewed, with the greatest consider and care; for so it may he expected,
that a publikly established Form is.

This is now a fine flourish, and harangue of words, but that is all; for if he
means it concerning our own Liturgy, what might have been expected I will not
say; but if our Author inquireth, whether any one part of it, were so much as
once read over by the House of Commons (and being now part of an Act, many
think it should have been by the Law of England, all read over thrice) and when
it was read over in the House of Lords, what a mistake was found in it by their
Lordships, will see no reason to presume, that it was by our Ecclesiastical
Superiors (who yet without a Parliament, are not our Superiors, in the point
of Legal Establishments) reviewed with the greatest Care and Consideration. 2.
If it were so, surely the Nonconfor nists-Adversaries, would not all this time
have only contended that there were no Phrases in it but might Lawfully be
used, but they would have pleaded, That there could no better Forms be
composed, or used; which I do not know that any of them has gone about to
demonstrate. What in a Legal Establishment, is not once reviewed, by one part
of the Legislative power in any place, cannot certainly be said to be reviewed,
with the greatest Consideration, and Care, tho possibly it might be by some
said to be reviewed with a sufficient Consideration; as to which I say nothing,
but cannot allow Superlatives in the case. 3. This very Argument will conclude
for Forms of Preaching, every whit as much as for Forms of Prayer. But I shall
give a strict Answer to it.

27. In the Sacred Worship of God that is best, which God has prescribed and
directed. In the cleansing of the Leper, Levit. 14. the poor man's Two Turtle
Doves, or two young Pigeons, such as he was able to get, v. 22. was (though of
far less intrinsic value) yet every whit as good, as the Rich Man's Lamb,
mentioned v. 12, 13, etc. and therefore when the Question is, What is the Will
of God in the case, all these discourses which is best or worst in Humane Eyes,
or according to Humane valuations, are woeful Impertinencies: That is best,
which it is the Will of God we should use or do. Nor is Superiors
Establishment, any evidence in which my Soul ought to rest without further
enquiry to guide my Practice, who am to search the Scriptures, after St. Paul
has preached, Acts 17. That what is Established is the Will of God in the
Case, if it were true, instead of proving all things, that I might hold fast
that which is good, I should prove nothing but presume it best because
Superiors have established it. This is the very thing that Eccius the Popish
Lawyer replied to Luther at the Diet of Worms Ann. 1621.

Ne que tuum est ea quae Conciliorum authoritate sunt olim definita rursus in
quaestionem aut dubium vocare. Sleidan. de Statu Religionis, etc. l. 5. What is
the English of that but this, That is best which your Superiors have
determined; and how far such a Notion is improveable to the ruin of all true
Religion, appears by the Council to which Eccius related; which consisted of as
vile a pack of Men, as ever met in Council: For it was the Council of
Constance, which determined the Pope above all Councils, contrary to the
Council at Basil just before; and in conformity to the Factious Council of
Pisa, Assembled by Julius 2. to confront another Council sitting, it was that
Council (of Constance, I mean) that burnt John Huss and Hierome of Prague, who
had both the Popes and Emperors security, for safe coming, and returning, and
established another Cursed Doctrine of Popery, That Faith is not to be kept
with Heretics. In this case before us, the difference betwixt us and our
Adversaries (for I see I must call Brethren no more) lies here. We say, That is
best in the Worship of God, which appears to be the Will of God; and what as
to our own practice, so appears unto us, is best unto us. Our Adversaries
say, That is best which has a Legal Establishment, and as to your Practice
ought to be presumed best, tho you do judge the quite contrary, from Arguments
which appear to you very probable, and you cannot answer: So in short our
contest is for no less, then the Foundation of the Reformed Religion. But it
may be this Harangue of our Answerer, did not come in, because he thought it
pertinent, but to give him an opportunity to lash him, whom he had to deal
with, which is the next thing he attempts, but never touches him.

He goes on: And he who talks of this our Church, That if all her Ministers
cannot constantly in their daily Prayers equal or outdo the perfection or
exactness of a well considered Form (for this must be his Sense, if he speaks
to any purpose) that this may be spoken to the shame of the Church of God in
England: These raw and extravagant speeches will be to the shame of those that
utter them, so far as they will be ashamed of uncharitable and reproachful
calumnies against the Church of God, and of speaking against all Sense and
Reason.

When I read this, I wondered who he meant, till I saw in the Margent the Book
quoted which he pretends to answer, p. 157. there I find in answer to the
Vindicators arguing the Necessity of Liturgyes, That needful and comprehensive
Petitions for all Common and Ordinary, Spiritual and outward wants, of our
selves and others, with fit Thanksgivings; may not in the public Supplications
of the Church be omitted; which considering men as they are, can no other way
be so well or at all assured. That the Author of that Book had said,

Let it be spoken to the shame of the Church of God in England, and it shall be
for a Lamentation in it, if in a Church (whose Territories are so large) there
cannot be found persons enough sufficient without others prescriptions to them,
to put up needful comprehensive Petitions, not only for common and ordinary,
but for the Emergent and Extraordinary Spiritual and outward wants of any
persons with fit thanksgivings.

What makes the man in such a passion for this? -- Here is not a wotd of all
Ministers being able to equal and out do the Perfection and Exactness of a well
considered Form, (but this he says, must be his sense, or he speaks to no
purpose) E Cathedra dictum.

1. But in cool blood (when men are least subject to let their tongue outrun
their reason) was the Author bound to say more in his Answer then his Objector
had said in his Objection? The Objecto^ had not in his Objection said, That all
Ministers might put up Prayers in the greatest Perfection of Phrase or Matter
or Style and Exactness, he only spoke of needful Petitions, that should
comprehend all Common and Ordinary, Spiritual, and outward wants. 2. There is
no need, nor does God any where require, that all his Ministers should pray
with the greatest perfection and exactness, but that they should do the best
they are able to do, according to the best abilities God has given them. 3.
Does the Author say, or was it the Vindicator, that suggested, that all
Ministers are not able to do this; I think it was the Vindicator, who upon this
Argument pleaded the necessity of Others Prescriptions. 4. The Author indeed
did say, If it were so, No B. he had said the same in the Reasonable Account,
p. 1^4.
it was ashame to the Church of God in England; he says so still, for no such
Ministers are able to preach without such Prescriptions. 5. But to reconcile
himself to the Vindicator, he does from his heart believe that in the Church of
England there are twice ten thousand men (which is as many again as there are
acting Ministers) who without others Prescriptions, are able to put up needful
and comprehensive Petitions, for all Common, and Ordinary, Spiritual and
Outward Wants, of themselves and others, with fit Thanksgivings. Yea and
something more than this, for all Emergent Occasions, as to which Forms cannot
provide; which it may be is the reason that it will be hard to prove, that such
Petitions, and fit Thanksgivings, have not Universally been put up with
reference to the late Horid Popish Plot, and most Eminent dangers of the
Nation, as every good English man's common reason, may have judged needful. 6.
From hence appears, that tho he be first Impeaching, yet it is not the Author,
but the Answerer, who in the place quoted, has Calumniated and Reproached the
Church of God, and spoken rawly and extravagantly: The Vindicator plainly
asserted the necessity of Liturgies, because there were not in the Church
persons so able. The Author says no such thing, but says, It is a shame for
us, if there be not; in the mean time believing there are so many, either
actually employed in the Ministry, or who may be so, when they please But, Vt
canem caedas facile est invenire baculum.

29. All this while it seems the Vindicator has said nothing to the Authors
Argument. The great thing which seems to be the Question betwixt us in all this
Discourse, is, Whether there be any such thing the duty of Ministers as Verbal
Prayer, or whether words have any necessary concern in Ministers Public
Prayers, since Prayer is not so much a Verbal thing says he; p. 30. But is it
not a Duty that cannot by a Minister be publicly performed without words: if
not, by his leave words are essential to it (for certainly that is essential to
a thing without which that thing cannot be.) He comes now to the Authors
Argument, after 26 pages spent in Prologomena. The first thing, which he says
p. 57. has been before spoken to in the beginning of this Chapter, when I did
not think fit to have spoken any thing to his long digression, tho afterward I
saw it necessary to make good my Minor Proposition.

30. The second thing, he says is p. 58. That Ability of Expression is not
peculiarly and particularly given by God to M nisters, that they might thereby
perform the public Office of Prayer. This he would prove, Because it is given
to others beside Ministers -- Because then our Lord would not have given his
Disciples a Form of Prayer: -- But is this the Question? I assume no more, then
that it is a Mean given by God in order to the performance of the act, natural
and proper. What if it be given to others as well as Ministers? then they are
also bound to perform the Act in the use of it: The giving of it to others as
well as Ministers, surely does not make it cease to be a Gift, a Ministerial
Gift, a Gift in order to the Act; which is all I have said. And Dato non
concesso, supposing our Savior did give his Disciples the Lords Prayer for a
Form of words, does it follow this is not a Divine Mean natural and proper,
because that (although not so Natural) yet it is as Divine and Proper, being
appointed by him who is God over all, blessed for ever; or that because we may
doubtless use any Mean of Divine Institution, therefore we may neglect a Mean
given us of God, and use a Mean under no Divine Prescription? Certainly it will
not follow, that because a Form Composed, and Instituted by Christ, is a Divine
Mean, therefore Forms Instituted by men, are; till Christ's Commission to them
to do as much in his Church in this case as himself, be well proved. I leave
this Answer to any fair intelligent Reader's Judgment, whether it be adequate
or no?

31. In the next place he tells us the Authority of Governors is of
considerable weight: Indeed it is, but not in this case, because it cannot be
pleaded without begging the Question, as may be seen by the clear and plain
stating of it p. 5. and certainly, the answering of an Argument by a plain and
open begging the Question, speaks the Vindicator to be as Defective in his
Logic, as the Author was supposed to be in his Chronological learning.

32. He tells us p. 60. That the Author says, That a man's own Gift and Ability
is a Divine Mean. He does so, and it is true. But a Form of Prayer is a mere
humane Mean. A Form of Prayer prescribed or composed by others, to be used by
me, if those others were not authorized by God, is but an Humane Mean; nor is
it possible that it should be other. -- Now (he says) this must be upon a
Supposition that an ability to compose a Prayer, to speak it, is a Divine
Ability; ( he should have said Mean) but the same ability, to compose the same
Prayer if it be written, is a mere Humane Mean ( for so he should have said if
he intended to speak Sense, as every Reader will own.) An Ability to express
our minds fitly in Prayer to God, is a Divine Mean relating to the Action of
Praying. An Ability fitly to express the matter or style of a Prayer in a Book,
is also a Divine Mean, in order to the action of writing such a Form. But how
does it appear that another Man's Ability, fitly to express the matter or style
of a Prayer in a Book, is also a Divine Mean in order to my Action in Prayer?
He that can prove this, must use another Medium, or else assert, That what is a
Divine Mean for A. B. as to one Action, is also a Divine Mean for C. D. as to
another Action of a quite differing Species. This is now what Logicians call
Ignoratio Elenchi. What he says p. 60, and 61. in his 36 Paragraph, is much of
the same strength. The Author did say, That if none have an Ability to express
their own and others Minds fitly to God in Prayer, then no Man has an Ability
to make public Forms; for in them there must be such an Ability exercised.
What does our Answerer conclude from hence? Then, The Ability to make Liturgies
is the Gift of Prayer, and consequently must be a Divine Mean for the
performance of Prayer: How does this follow? It will follow indeed, that it is
a Divine Mean, for the composure of a Prayer, but not for the Action of Prayer;
because it it not the ability of him that prays, but of other Men, whom God
never employed (so far as we yet see proved) to find out means for others
Actions in his Worship. But I am not difficult to grant, That an Ability to
make Forms of Prayer is a Divine Mean for some persons, viz. such as have not
attained to an Ability of themselves, fitly to express their mind to God: but
will it therefore follow, that it is so for them, to whom God has given
another mean, more proper and natural?

33. The Answerer p. 61. comes to answer my Proofs, which were drawn from those
Texts, where Ministers are from God commanded, not to neglect their Gifts, 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Romans 12.3, 6. As to the first Text, he tells us, 1.
That it was a charge not to neglect his Office. 2. That there is not a word
spoken of Prayer. To which I reply, 1. That (...), which in many other places
signifies a Gift, or Ability to a Religious Act, in this place signifies an
Office and not a Gift, is spoken without any proof. 2. That both the words
before-going, Give Attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, Doctrine, -- and
those immediately following: Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to
them, -- Take heed to thy self and to thy Doctrine, are vehement Presumptions
to the contrary. 3. I will not deny but it may signify both Gift, and Office,
if that will please our Answerer, and that it does signify both is plain from
20 Texts in the New Testament. But it seems that it will not, for he goes on
and tells us there is not a Word about Prayer: Who said there was? I only
urged it as a general Prohibition of the neglect of any Ministerial Gifts, of
which surely the Gift of Prayer is one. The Argument is, Ministers must neglect
no Ministerial Gift: Therefore not that of Prayer. But he says, The Gift of
Prayer is not given by the laying on of hands, nor does the Text say so; it
says, By Prophecy with the laying on of hands. By Prophecy, that is, that you
might prophecy (so Piscator, Vatablus, and Beza render it) or with Prophecy, so
the Syriack, Arabic and Aethiopick Versions expound it, or by Prophecy, so the
Vulgar Latin and our Translation, which is hardest to expound, unless (as
some) we will expound it per oraculum, immediately from God. With Impositions
of hands, that is with the Office of the Ministry, in which sense (...) here
cannot signify the Office, but the Gift. But besides, may not, are not
Ministerial Gifts in a more plentiful measure given at the time, when God
calls a man out to the Pubiick Ministry, I am Sure the Scripture tells us, of
another Spirit, given to Persons at their calling out to Places of Magistracy.
I believe the same as to the Ministry. But our Answerer says it might be meant
of Extraordinary Gifts, which might not be neglected. May then Ordinary Gifts
be neglected? And is not this an Infallible Answer as to any thing we can
produce of this Nature? It is but saying, Those Texts refer to the
extraordinary Gifts, tho no pretense can be brought of proof for it.

Our Vindicator p. 63, seems again a little displeased, That I should bring a
Text to prove an obligation, as to the manner of Performance of Prayer, in
which there is no mention of Prayer; who p. 142. cried out upon it as
Ridiculous for another to argue from Romans 15.16. Because the Apostle praying
for likemindedness, prayed, That with one mouth they might Glorify God, he
might have told the Reader also, that in that place, I fairly stated the
Argument which could be drawn from that Text, thus: Those who are to speak the
same thing, and are with one mouth to glorify God; may lawfully, or must use
set Forms of Prayer.

But Christians are to speak the same thing, 1 Cor. 1.10. and with one mouth to
glorify God -- Ergo -- If our Vindicator can make more of it, why does he not.



I denied the Major, and told him, the same Argument would prove, Forms of
Preaching necessary, and the same Forms to be used in all Churches, Families
and Closets; yea and that it was necessary for all Christians to speak the same
words in all Religious Discourse, but then I should not have used the same
Logic. It is true none ought to do that himself, which he disalloweth in
another: But have I done it? Let us try. My Argument from that Text, 1 Timothy
4.14. lies thus, Those who ought not in their Ministry, to neglect their
Ministerial Gift, ought not to neglect their Gift of Prayer.

But Ministers in their Ministry in Prayer, ought not to neglect their
Ministerial Gift, 1 Timothy 4.14. -- Ergo.



I think this Arguing is according to an old Rule in Logic, Quicquid
praedicatur de genere praedicatur etiam de specie. Let but our Vindicator
prove, That Ministers all Praying by one and the same Form of Words, is a
Species to Glorifying God with one Mouth, as I will prove that Gifts of Prayer
are Species of Ministerial Gifts: and he will say something: otherwise this is
nothing but an ugly Reflection, of which his Book is too full.

What his quotation from Grotius means, I cannot tell: He was no Father, no
Divine, but a Learned Politician, very Erroneous in his Divinity; of what
Authority his Sentiment should be with any sober Divine, I cannot imagine.

35. He comes p. 64. to my Quotation of 1 Pet. 4.10. in the case, as every one
has received the Gift, so let him minister the same (...) The same, what? The
same Gift. As to this he says, Many understand that Text of Alms; and why?
Because the verse before spoke of Hospitality. Why may not others understand it
of Spiritual Gifts, considering that the following words are, As Stewards of
the Manifold Grace of God, (...) (is that Alms) If any man speak, let him speak
as the Oracles of God. Then he refers us to the second and third Answer which
he gave to the aforementioned Text, that is, by Gift may he meant Office; but
whether is more proper to say, Men minister their Office, or their Gifts in
their Offices? But (which was his third Answer) it might be understood of
extraordinary Gifts. Then this Text now signifies nothing of Duty to us, thus
any thing may be avoided, nor is there the least shadow of Reason for what he
says. Yes, says he, he speaks of ministering one to another; now he that
prays ministers only to God. He speaks of Officers in the Church
ministering, now surely they in Prayer, Minister not to God only, but to the
Church, or else the Church and they pray diverse things.

36. He comes to answer what I urged from Romans 12.6. Having Gifts given
according to the Grace given us, whether prophesying, let us prophecy according
to the proportion of Faith, or Ministry, let us wait on our ministry; or he
that teaches on Teaching, or he that exhorts on Exhortation. He that gives,
let him do it with Simplicity, he that Rules, with Diligence, he that shows
Mercy, with Cheerfulness.

As to this he only refers to his former Answer to 1 Pet. 4.10. and tells us
there is no mention of Prayer there, but the other gifts which the Apostle
means are there named. Let me a little enlarge on this Theme, because it will
give some light to that text, 1 Timothy 4.14.

The Apostle is plainly there speaking of the Whole Church Service, which he
distinguishes into Prophecy and Ministry. Ministry distinguishes it into the
Ministry of him that gives or shows Mercy (which is that of Deacons) or
Ruling; under Prophesying he comprehends all other Acts of a Gospel Minister:
for though Prophets and Prophesying, in the New Testament sometime signify
persons or acts, predicting things to come, as it is used with reference to
Agabus, Acts 21. sometimes some Acts which were the extraordinary gifts of the
Holy Ghost, as is in some places in 1 Cor. 12.13.14. yet it also signifies the
Ordinary Ministry of all those who had something to do, besides Ruling and
showing Mercy. These we call Ministers (tho the Apostle speaks otherwise in
this Text, to distinguish them from Deacons, and mere Rulers; and therefore
calls their whole Ministration Prophecy.) That precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Despise
not Prophesying, is not to be restrained to Praedictions, or immediate
Revelations, but comprehends all Gospel Ministrations of the Ordinances of
Christ, tho expressed by one of the Eminentest among them, which is Preaching
the Gospel. Now as to these the Apostle says, Having Gifts let us Minister.
Being in these Offices, let us Minister, (...), according to the grace of God
given to us; that is, according to that Ability which God has given us. I
Appeal to any thinking Reader, whether this bids not very fair for the true and
plain sense of that Text; which if it does, 1. Prayer is there spoken to,
included in the general term Prophesying, tho no more particularly named, then
Baptizing, or Giving the Lords Supper, or Visiting the Sick, etc. 2. If that
difficult Phrase, 1 Timothy 4.14. be not to be understood, By Prophecy, that is by
God who is the Author of Prophecy, but To, or for Prophecy (according to
Vatablus, Piscator, and Beza) a very fair Sense may be put on that Text,
without restraining it (most unreasonably) to the Extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit.

37. The Answerer saying no more, to deliver these Texts out of my hands,
comes p. 67, etc. to except against my description of the Gift of Prayer for
the public Service of the Church, as very defective especially in two things.
My Description was, An Ability to express our Minds fitly to God in Prayer. 1.
He says the Conception: of the Ministers mind, must be sober, well ordered,
comprehensive, suitable to the Nature of the Duty. Is not all this comprehended
in Fitly? To what purpose so many words? I never loved long Descriptions. 2. He
tells me the Minister is not to ex^ress his mind, his desires or wants, but
(the Mind he should have said) the wants of the whole Assembly. I would gladly
know how he should know the Wants and Regular desires of the whole Assembly,
but from the Scriptures; and whether their ordinary wants be not his also? For
emergent wants, how they who made Forms 100 Years ago could know the Wants and
Desires of the several Assemblies of Christians at this day, more than the
Ministers now living and conversing with them, and whether this be in the least
probable (if God or Christ, who did know all things past, present, and to come,
did not draw those Forms) I am not able to conceive.

38. Another place he must except to, that is, p. 9, 10. and put a Marginal
Note upon it too: that is this, I said, We thought it would be hard to find
Nine or Ten thousand Scholars in England, furnished with the Gift of Praying
or Preaching, in any tolerable manner. Is not this one of their own Arguments
for the necessity of Forms of Prayer? I have read and heard it forty times from
them: I hope he will now be reconciled to me, who have told him, and do from my
heart believe it, that there are twice Ten thousand Persons in England, who
either are, or might be Ministers, who have the Gift of Prayer. He might before
have been Friends with me, if he had pleased, for I find I had told him so
before, Reasonable Account, p. 154.

CHAP. III.
An Answer to what the Vindicator says in his Third Chapter; beginning at p.
73. Whether any can with equal Attention of his Mind, read in a Book, as speak
the Conceptions of his own Heart? Whether Ministers can by Forms Pray with
equal Fervency and Devotion? The contrary proved. The People not so much
concerned in it, etc.

1. THe Argument which our Answerer comes to answer in this Chapter was falsely
Printed, and I thank him for not imputing the Error of the Printer to me, who
saw not the Book till it was too late, to Correct any thing in it. I shall
therefore transcribe and amend it here: It lies thus:

To use such a mode in the ordinary performance of our duty, in public Solemn
Prayer, as either from the necessary workings of Humane Nature, or otherwise
upon experience we find, either hindering the Attention of our own or others
thoughts to the duty, or the Intention of our own or others Spirits, in the
performance of the duty, when we can so perform it, as neither of them will be
to that degree hindered, is unlawful.

But for him who has the Gift of Prayer [I now expound that term, by an
Ability fitly to express his Mind to God in Prayer] to perform his Ministerial
Acts in Public Solemn Prayer, by the Prescribed Forms of other Men, not
divinely inspired, (these words were left our) is for him to use such a mode in
those Acts of Worship, as either from the Natural workings of Human^ Nature or
from some other cause scarce ^voidable, is upon experience found, to hinder our
own Attention, and also the Attention of others thoughts to the duty, and the
intention and fervency of our own and others Spirits in the duty, when in the
mean time we have an Ability so to perform it, as neither of them will (at
least) to that degree be hindered Ergo.

All the question here lies upon the Minor. The Answerer very honestly grants
the Major, he only says there may be too great stress laid upon Zeal and
Fervency, but I hope not upon Holy Zeal; if he looks back, he will find himself
acknowledging that which I said p. 43.

2. In his 75 p. he seems to fault my leaving Arguments, and propounding three
questions. He has no reason to be displeased at that, considering he told us
in his Introduction, that it was acceptable to few but those who admired the
Art of making Syllogisms. And tho I judged a Prosyllogism, containing the head
of an Argument, very reasonable, to keep those that argue within their bounds;
yet in a Book, I never thought following discourse reasonable to be tied to
those Forms My first question was: Whether it be possible for any to read any
discourse with that degree of Attention of thoughts as he must pronounce the
same with by heart? It is manifest this Question was stated only with reference
to the Attention of him that ministers in the duty.

Our Answerer replies, It is certain this may easily be done. I am clearly of
another mind, considering, 1. That there is not a wilder thing, then Man's
imaginative power; nor its wildness at any time more seen, then in Holy Duties.
Who is able to keep his thoughts fixed upon God, and the matter of his
Supplications for one quarter of an hour in Prayer? The Lord Pardon me, I
cannot. 2. While I am Reading by the help of my Eye, Why a Man cannot read any
thing with like Attention of thoughts, as he may speak it by heart from his own
Conceptions.
my thoughts are more at liberty to wander from what I am about, then while I
am speaking, from the Conceptions of my own Heart. I have an Eye to see, and a
Tongue to speak, let my thoughts be where they will, as to the main Operations
of them, after an habit of Reading once acquired, they have no great business
to do to help me to read right. It is no great business for me to think how to
sound those Letters which my Eyes have before them. But while I speak from my
own Conceptions, my thoughts must attend my Tongue, or I shall speak nothing
but Nonsense. This I did say, and do say, is to me next to a Demonstration,
only I crave leave to make one term in the Question plainer [by heart.) I
meant, by it from the Conceptions of his own heart; and so let it stand or
fall, by any discreet Judgment.

3. But says our Answerer, How usual is it to read the Scriptures and other
Books, with at great Attention as the same things can be spoken without
Reading? Attention to what? To the matter he reads? I do doubt that. I am
sure a Man's thoughts in such Services are most inclinable to wander, and be
employed about other things, and I am sure they are more at liberty to wander.
Now considering both these things, this possibility is (confidering our
imperfect state) very questionable; yet will it not follow that then we must
not read the Scriptures, but always recite them by heart, because God has made
Reading of them our Duty. As to this Question let all truly speak as they find,
I own the wildness of my heart in this thing.

4. Our Answerer, p. 77, 78. comes to the Second Question which I propounded.

Whether any thing ean more conduce to fix the thoughts upon the Duty and upon
God, then when a man can trust his Affections, to thrust out words? Our
Answerer says, That a Devout Sense of Gods presence and of his Purity, etc.
may, but he never considered that all these were pre-necessary to Pious
Affections, and without these the Affections are not rightly ordered for the
duty. The Question was, Whether the Affections being rightly disposed, their
thrusting out words did not more conduce, then any Form made by Men could, to
fix the thoughts? Dr. Ames was of the opinion it did; De Casibus Consc. l. 4.
17. cap. qu. 4. the learned Author of Altar Damasc. is of that mind; in short
I never met with any that denied it; of necessity it must be so, for there is
no Medium betwixt such Affections and such words to divert or give scope of
devagation to the thoughts. For our Saviors repeating the same words in his
Prayers upon his Agony, neither is it so in the Greek, neither are the words
the same; but for this I refer the Reader to a Supplement to the Reasonable
Account, where this silly Argument is fully spoken to p. 99. 100, 101, 102,
103, 104.

5. The third Question which I propounded was,

Whether any such Attention, is to be expected from people to Forms of Prayer,
which they often hear, as to a conceived Prayer?

The Author thinks it may be given to the matter of the Prayer: I think so too,
there is no impossibility in the case I know of. But the Question was, Whether
it be to be expected, or hoped for, considering the infirmity of all our
natures? This he wisely leaves out, and as wisely replieth nothing to the true
Question.

6. For what our Author adds in answer to an observation which I called at
least ingenious, tho none of my own; That God to stir up peoples Attentions,
tells his people he will do a new thing, he may find it Isaiah 42.9.43.19.
Besides Is. 42.9. new things are opposed to the former things.
it is this that the Scripture calls Admirable things new; Number. 16.30. Jer. 31,
32. But was not their Newness one thing which made them admirable? I hope both
his instances were new things in the strictness of Sense, for when did the
Earth before open and swallow up men alive? When was any before Christ so
miraculously conceived? We do not much use to admire things we have seen a
thousand times. 2. He asks, If God never intends to stir up men's Affections by
his Word, but when he tells them he will do a new thing. What is that to the
purpose? Is not therefore newness of a thing one means to stir up Attentions
and a great one too, so far as it may be used without Sin? Then surely it may
be used. He tells us further that True Religion and Devotion does always
incline to the same things. Very true, as to the matter and substance, but does
it so also as to Words and Syllables? Our Answerer has heard of (...) speaking
the same things in a new manner; and certainly Experience will tell us that the
doing this in Divinity, as well as in History, contributes to the generality of
Peoples Attention.

7. He comes p. 82. to consider what I said to prove that Forms in Prayer
hindered Fervency. This I proved, 1. On the Ministers part, from the vast
difference betwixt words following the Affections, and Affections following of
Words, urged both by Dr. Ames and Mr. Calderwood, in his Altar Damascenum.
This our Answerer grants as to the first use of any Form (but if it cannot be
once lawfully used how shall it be lawfully used a second, third, fourth time?)
But it is not to be helped after once reading without Previous Preparation, as
our Answerer grants. So as the Question is, Whether it can be expected that
ordinarily men should use such a Preparation, as should inflame their
Affections to such a degree, as the heat should not abate before they come to
their Work. For what he says of the Peoples Fervency as it is not here spoken
to, (for himself quoteth me saying no more then -- As to him that ministers,
there is a great deal of difference betwixt words following the Affections, and
Affections following the words) so neither are the People to use any words at
all, when they join with Ministers in Conceived Prayer; therefore their
Fervency is not hindered by Conceived Words. It is a quite different Species of
Prayer. The Minister Prays Vocally, the People only in their Hearts; as to
which the Ministers conceived Words and Fervency does help, not hinder them,
coming with prepared hearts; and this is a sufficient Answer to what he says
again p. 84. as if I had spoken very absurdly, in saying p. 28, 29. That I
could not think it possible, That the words of another should so well fit our
hearts and be so expressive of raised Affections as our own: He says, I did
not consider that what I thus spoke tended to declare, that the People cannot
with Fervent Affection, join with the Minister in any Prayer soever, because
his words are not theirs, and then all Public Prayer fitted to the People must
be ^ondemned and we must take up with Quakers or Papists? Still he seeks
occasions against me, and exposes me without Wit or Reason.

8. Now I would have him know that I did consider it. But I also considered
that there is a Vocal Prayer and a merely Mental Prayer, both of them our
Duties at several times, the latter only the Peoples Duty in Public
Assemblies, where it is Gods Ordinance that one should minister to the rest. I
do believe that no one of the People can be so Fervent when he joyneth with the
Minister ministering words to him, as when in his Family or Closet, his
Affections thrust them out of his own heart: But yet they may be so fervent as
God requires of them in such a service, where he has to avoid confusion,
forbidden them the use of that Mean of geater Fervency. By which it appears our
Answerer here triumphed before the Victory.

9. He comes p. 85, 86. to speak to something which I had said p. 29. That the
Minister reading his Forms, there was a manifest impossibility of the like
degree of Intention; for it is the Soul, which looking through the Eye,
directe^h it so as a Man reads true, and so it is plainly diverted from its
immediate Contemplation of and Fixation upon God. I think it beneath me to
speak any thing to what he afterward speaks, p. 96, 97. reflecting on me for
saying in Prayer there is or should be a Contemplation or Intuition of God, as
if none could say so, but those who had outdone St. Paul. The Answerer knew
well enough, that St. Paul there speaks of a seeing God in Glory: And that I
was speaking, of Beholding him in this life. Where I hope tho none can see him
as he is, nor face to face, yet they may immediately contenplate God. not with
their bodily eyes, but the E^es of their mind. In all Meditation of God in a
man's closet there is such an immediate Contemplation. It is nothing but the
Souls direct Motion to God. In all Prayer there is such a contemplation, or
should be at least. This was therefore nothing but another attempt to expose me
to such as know nothing of a Souls Communion with God in the Spirit. Let it
pass, Et valeat quantum valere potest. Our Answerer (to return to his 85 p.)
says, That this Argument does not only recoile with equal violence upon my
self (unhappy me to be Felo de se so often) but it is against all Vocal Prayer
(I should be sorry for that, but how does that appear?) For says he, The
considering Words, Phrases, Method and Sense, is a different thing in Conceived
Prayer, from the directing the Heart to God, and must take up more of his
thoughts then the looking upon a Book does. But did I say then that in Prayer
the Soul had nothing more to do, then to direct its Eye to God? I desire to
know where; if I did not, this is nothing to the purpose. If he had but
considered p. 30. of the Book, he would have found a great part of an Answer to
this. The Soul in Prayer is to consider what it has to say to God; which being
considered or known, it is to direct it self unto God, with the greatest
Intention and least Diversion that it can. Now this I say cannot be done so
well by a Form, as in Conceived Prayer; for tho it is true, he who Prays De
pectore from the Conceptions of his own Heart, must first consider his Matter
and Words, yet. 1. This is necessary, so are not Forms. 2. The Soul is all the
while employed upon the work of Prayer, and its Acts are merely Spiritual, and
immanent Acts within its self. But so are not its Acts in looking upon, and
reading a Form, these are plain Diversions of the Soul to objects without it
self, neither naturally necessary, nor from any Divine Precept necessary to the
Action. So that he sees I have not by my Argument destroyed all Vocal Prayer,
but only reformed and established it. And for what he faith of the Peoples
hearing and observing the words spoken by the Minister, it is naturally
necessary, for they cannot else say Amen. It is necessary by all those Divine
Precepts which have established Mental Prayer, as the Peoples duty, in
Communion with him that ministers.

10. He comes in the next place p. 87. to prove, That Conceived Prayers, as the
public Service of the Church, may be an Impediment of Devotion. I have proved
that Forms must be from a necessity of Nature (as to the Ministers Devotion at
least) He only undertakes to prove, That Conceived Prayers may be concerning
the Devotions of the people; and of this he gives us a five-fold Account, 1.
They are not certain that they can join in the matter of a new Conceived
Prayer, till they have considered it. 2. They may be too apt to give their
minds too much liberty, to observe the manner or composure; to judge of it or
imitate it. 3. They hinder Peoples Praying with one Accord. 4. Some want
quickness of Capacity to go along with New Prayers, who can Devoutly and
Piously join with those they have been aequainted with. 5. All Impertinencies,
unbecoming Expressions, results of Passions, Imprudencies, etc. which may be
inconceived Prayers; hinder Devotion.

For the first of these, There is no need of any such thing, that People should
aforehand be certain what Petitions their Ministers will put up in Prayer, nor
does God any where require it, nor any right reason enforce it. How does it
appear that all the Congregation of Israel were certain beforehand what
Solomon would, and did pray for, 1 Kings 8.22? Or what Hezekiah would, and did
pray for, 2 Chronicles. 30.18. or Jehosaphat 2 Chronicles. 20.5. or Ezra, Ezra 9.5. It is
wonderful these great Men could not see the necessity of this Device, for
promoving Peoples Devotion. Nor does any Reason show it. I know nothing any Man
or Woman has to do, who is to join with another in Prayer, but keeping his
heart in Heaven as much as he can, to attend to the words said, or read by the
Minister, and making up a judgment on each Petition, if he or she apprehends
it to be according to the Will of God, earnestly and believingly to desire it:
this they may as we l do upon hearing a Conceived as a Read Prayer.

For his Second Particular, it is a May Be, rising from Men's Lusts, easy to be
avoided without providing Forms, which will as little secure the Devotion
against other Lusts of a far more heinous Nature. 3. The Third is non
intelligible, why People may not pray with one Accord, whilst the Minister
without a Form ministers words to them; especially, if as our Answerer told
us, in the last Chap. Prayer be not so much a Verbal thing. I am sure Prayer in
the Congregation by the People is not a Verbal thing, but merely Mental. For
what he says Fourthly it may be true, where People study Starcht Prayers, such
as Dr. Featly reflects on in his Ancilla Pietatis, but in no case else. 5. For
Impertinencies, Inconvenient Expressions, etc. which we are so often told of. I
have heard more (some within these 28 days) from Ministers false reading the
Forms, then ever I heard from Conceived Prayers; both proceed from a non
attentive mind, which I am sure Forms will not prevent, but rather give
Temptations to (by allowing the thoughts more liberty to the contrary.)

11. I have nothing to do with what our Answerer says, p. 89, 90, 91, and 92.
being not concerned to oppose his Vindication of himself, from what I never
charged him with: But he has three Observations, which begin p. 91. which I
must concern my self with. The First is: That Attention, Intention, and
Fervency, P. 91, 92.
is not the whole business needful to be minded and taken care of in the
Public Service of the Church, but rightly ordered Matter, due Expressions, and
Behavior; and here Forms have the advantage.

I answer, not at all. As to Behavior, a law may help that, but sure a Form of
Prayer cannot. For the other Two things, they are no more necessary to be taken
care for, as to Prayer, then as to Preaching. Then it seems all Ministers must
Preach by Forms too, or else the Church ought to take care, that Ministers for
Matter and Phrase speak fitly in the Peoples name to God; but need take no care
that Ministers speak fitly in Gods Name to the People. 3. The care the Church
ought to take, should be, That none be admitted as Ministers in it, who are not
able to do both; and when all is done, some Errors will be. Another thing he
says that must be cared for, is, That Men's Devotion may be so, as not to cross
other Duties. It is impossible it should, for it would no longer be Devotion.
But what other duty will be hindered by Conceived Prayer? That which he
instanceth in is Preservation of Unity and Obedience to Superiors. But are
these Duties, when the business contended for, is that this thing (so far as
the Persons concerned can judge, and as they are ready to argue) is not lawful?
And when they oppose the first and great Commandment. To which the Second (tho
like to it, I and to which both these relate) is and ought to be subordinate.

12. His Second Observation is, That there may be a want of due Devotion,
Attention, and Fervency, in those that use Forms, and yet this not proceed from
the Form. This is doubtless true, if he means solely, and chiefly; but what
is this to the purpose, when the business of the Argument is, to prove that in
him that ministers, a Form must necessarily hinder degrees of Attention and
Fervency? This observation is true, or false, as his answer to the Argument is
good or bad; which I leave to the Reader to judge from my reply to it.

13 His Third observation. p. 95. is: That Public Service ought to be so
ordered, as may fit the General Temper of the true Christian Spirit, but must
not be censured if it fit not with the Inclinations of all particular Persons.

Agreed, therefore said the Author, let it be so ordered, that those who desire
it, may have a Minister to pray with and for them, by a Form, and others may
have one that may pray with and for them, from the Conceptions of his own
Heart. It is very like the True Christian Spirit may be found in the latter, as
much as in the former, if that Spirit be a Spirit of Holiness, and of the Fear
of the Lord, of Love to God, and Communion with God, as I think it is, and
believe most Christians are of my mind.

CHAP. IV.
A Reply to the Vindicators Second Section of his Second Chapter; concerning
the judgment of other Divines. What is in the Reasonable Account concerning the
judgment of the Leiden Professors, Dr. Ames, the Divines of the Walachrian
Classis further considered, and vindicated. Whether in Acts of External
Worship, there be any thing which has in it, an Intrinsecal Piety, Religion,
or Devotion, Antecedaneous to the Revealed Will of God? Whether God requires
the same degree of Attention and Fervor in all Duties?

1. THe Answerer begins his Second Section, p. 98. with telling us, That he
proposed it as useful, to try the Issue of the thing in question, viz. Whether
Forms of Prayer were any prejudice to Piety or Religion.

To consult the judgment of them who are least partial, and yet able to make a
true estimate, and especially to consider the Evidences of Reason, which may be
produced. He says, I agreed it. But how? take my words, p. 44.

Indeed it is very reasonable in this case, That if the Proposition be not of
that Nature, with reference to several Persons, that the experience of
Christians be variable in the case, it is reasonable that the Major part of
pious and able should be taken into Judgment, or rather Counsel. -- But I
further told him, That we believe the Experience of Christians may be really
different in this case: some may find the use of their own Gifts more
advantageous, others may possibly find Forms more advantageous; it depends much
on the degree of the Gift each one has received. But every one, is bound to
use that lawful means which he b^ experience finds most conducive to himself,
to keep his thoughts attentive, and his affections fervent; so as one may be
under an obligation a divine obligation not to use Forms, another for the
present to use them. So as I did not think this matter of a Superiors command,
because an Universal command here, must necessarily trespass (as to some) upon
a Divine Obligation, which has pre-obliged them to the contrary; the command
of Attention and Fervency in Prayer; which they must not violate, in obedience
to any man, as all Divines agree. I think this is Sense and Divinity.

Now good Reader observe what our Answerer (who has so often told the World,
there is no weight no strength, no truth in what I say) replyeth to this.

2. He tells us, That He who seriously minds his duty, must also have a
conscientious regard to Unity, Order, and the Duty of due submission: and the
observing them, are not the way to make him less devout, and fervent -- That
the Exercise of one duty will not hinder us in another -- That the Promises of
Gods Grace and Presence, are chiefly made to them who embrace Peace and Unity.
I do very well know that there are Precepts for, and Promises, to Peace and
Unity, and those that follow it, and some of those Precepts, which also direct
us how to follow it; as Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men and Holiness,
Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
Men: So that Unity and Peace is no further our duty, then it is consistent with
Holiness, which surely lies in the discharge of our Obligations to God: No
further then it is possible for us, and as in us lies. Now it is not Morally
possible for us, it lies not in us, to be at Peace and in Unity with them, who
will be in no Peace and Unity with us, unless we will consent to please them,
to quit what we verily believe is our Obligation to God, viz. To Pray with the
greatest attention of our thoughts, and fervency of our Spirits. Fathers, and
Authority of Men enough, might be quoted in this case, but that I fancy no such
Ostentation. There are Precepts also requiring order and due submission to
Governors, but they must both be expounded as the other. Will any one then in
his right reason urge us with Precepts to Unity, Order and Submission, in a
case where the question is, Whether we can follow these Precepts with Holiness,
yea or no? Whether they be morally possible, or lie in us yea or no? Or,
Whether before ever any such precepts of Men were, we were not pre-obliged to
the contrary by God?

3. To as little purpose is his Text, Matthew. 5.23, 24. brought; for our Brother
neither has nor can have any thing against us, (tho he be offended at us) if
he be offended at us merely, because to be at Unity with him, or to please him,
we will not violate an Obl^gation which we believe was ever upon us from God.
Now that we have such an Obligation upon us, this Argument was brought to
prove, Because we have an Oblition upon us, to the greatest attention of
thoughts and fervency of Spirit in Prayer, and this we cannot discharge (as we
upon experience find) by Praying by Forms. But he promises us a discourse
hereafter, about Superiors power in this case: To which time we shall adjourn
this discourse, only minding him, that my instance of a command to Pray with
our Eyes shut or open, was not brought as a Comparison, but as an Instance.
That there are some things ind^fferent, that are not the object of Superiors
commands. Yet we cannot but judge such a command as momentous, as a command one
while to pray standing up, another while kneeling down, what speaking evil of
Dignities, this is, I cannot understand; but I am sure in this and many other
things as causelessly, he pleases himself to speak evil of me; which speaks him
not very confident of the Validity of his own Answers. It uses to be the
policy of Commanders in an Army, when they know they have beaten their Enemy,
to multiply their Adversaries Numbers, and magnify their Courageous Fighting;
but I see my Adversary is ruled by other Politics.

4. He comes in the next place, p. 10. to tell us, There can be no Public
Worship in any Church, unless it be first determined to be either with, or
without a Form, we desire no other determination then, That it may be
determined lawful for Ministers to Pray with, or without a Form; and thus this
point is determined by the Churches of God in France, and Holland. It is
determined in New England, and Scotland, that it shall be without a Form. I ask
not so much, yet surely there is with this Doctors leave Public Worship in all
these places and therefore if his meaning be, that there can be no Public
Worship, unless one way be fixed of them two, and the other destroyed, he
condemns all the Public Worship of France, and Holland, where either of them
is at liberty. There is therefore no necessity for the determination of all Men
in this case, before there can be any Public Worship of God, no not by him
that officiateth; unless he means as to a Particular Act, and therein he says
true; but in the same Congregation Public Worship may for ought I know be this
day performed, by one that uses no Form, and to morrow by another who uses a
Form (not having Gifts, or being nor confident he has, or being hindered by God
at this or that time, as to the use of them.)

5. At length he comes to the two Testimonies, that of the Divines of Leyden
and that of the Walachrian Classis, which he had brought to prove, that they
judged it lawful for all Ministers in their Ministerial Acts of Prayer, to use
Forms of Prayer composed, tho by Men not Divinely inspired; tho he tells us p.
3. he laid no great stress on them, yet because he charge me with not giving
a true account of them, and calls it, an high degree of Carelessness and not
Faithful dealing, I must examine the matter again.

1. He agrees (as I said) p. 46. of the Reasonable Account, that the
Walachrians professed to agree with Amesius, and he agrees that Amesius was not
for preferring Forms before conceived Prayer. Well then, where was the Error I
committed, showing my self careless and unfaithful? He tells us that the
Walachrians only declared their Agreement with Dr. Ames in that Question,
Whether Forms were lawful for Prayer and administering the Sacraments, or those
Churches that used them were guilty of Superstition and Will Worship; and
whether men might retain Communion with those Churches that used them? In these
words the Walachrians state the Question, and that in the very place quoted in
Dr. Faulconers Libertas Eccles. p. 121. Considerat. Cap. 7. qu. 2. The very
first words in Answer to this Question are, Nos in hac controversia faciles
accedimus iis, quae ab Amesio super hac Quaest scribuntur. What says ou^
Answerer? I acknowledge this to be the sense of Amesius. But it should have
been observed by our Author, That the Walachrians only declared their
Agreement with them in that Question, which was by them propounded; then he
repeateth the Question which I have translated Verbatim. Does our Vindicator
call this an Answer, or a Vindication? He told us the Walachrian Classis in
Zealand, do in like manner declare public Forms to be lawful, and profitable
for the direction of the attention of the Auditors, and preserving Uniformity;
Libertas Eccles. p. 121. to prove this he quotes Consid. Cap. 7. Qu. 2. I look
that Chap. that Qu. I tell him, That the Walachrian begin their Answer to that
Q. with saying: They easily agreed to what Dr. Ames had said upon this Question
(which is the Question before stared) the Question quoted in Libertas
Ecclesiastica.

Now faith he, I should have considered that they declared their Agreement with
D. Ames in that Question by them proposed. Very good, and that Question
proposed is the very Question Libertas Ecclesiastica referred me to. Is not
this enough? But he tells us it is another Question, Whether Praying by Public
Forms be the most useful way of performing that Service? What have I to do with
another Question? I was only to speak to the Question quoted, and this is that
Question I am sure. Neither is there any other Question in all those
Considerations stated about Forms of Prayer: Besides our Question is about
Lawfulness, for all Ministers to use them, Dr. Ames with whom the Walachrians
profess to agree in this Question, says expressly, Cas. Consc. 14. c. 17. qu. 4.

None ought to acquiesce in Praying by Forms, Liber^as Eccles. p. 121.
but to labor for an ability that he may Pray without this help. And gives
four reasons for it. The first is:

That while a prescribed form does not follow our affections, Reasonable
Account p. 46, 47.
but plainly lead them; he who so prays, does that which is of the Nature of
Prayer less perfectly. Now with this man (as to the Question before translated)
the Walachrians who spoke to no other Question about Prayer in all their Books,
Vindication p. 106.
profess they readily agree. Judge good Reader who has dealt less faithfully
with thee, I, or the Vindicator, look but the Books set in the Margent.

6. But he tells us, They could not agree with those of Leyden and Dr. Ames
too. Synopsis pur. Theol. Disput. 36. Sect. 33.
They plainly say they do agree with them both. Let us see that. The words of
the Leyden Professors in the place cited, are these:

There is a Question usually made (so it is no novel Question) whether it be
lawful to use Forms of Prayer, publicly or privately? We say, If they be
pronounced with due attention of Mind [mark pronounced] and with due attention,
they are not only lawful, but very profitable. 1. Because every Christian has
not an Ability, and the attention of the People in great Meetings is not a
little helped by usual Forms. Upon which account God himself directed the
Priests a Form of Blessing under the Old Testament, Number. 6.24. etc. And Christ
upon the Cross is observed to use that Form of Deprecation, which David. (who
was a type of him) used, Matthew. 27.46. and the Disciples of Christ, Luke 11.2.
asked Christ to teach them to Pray, as John taught his Disciples. To whom
Christ answered, When you Pray, say Our Father, etc. from which Circumstances
of the Words, it is manifest, that this Prayer of Christ was not only a Rule to
Pray by, but also a Form of Prayer, as all the Ancient Church thought
unquestionable.

Sect. 34. But in the mean time we do confess, That it is profitable, yea
almost necessary, that all grown Believers, and especially the Pastors of
Churches, should stir up in themselves, the Gift of Praying, publicly without
praevious Forms; that as occasion se^veth, and necessities renew, they may pray
and give thanks; as we read, that Holy Men, Prophets, and Apostles did often
do, both in the Old and New Testament; which will not be difficult for them, if
they observe the Method of Prayer, and be frequently exercised in it.

7. This is all which those learned Professors say. Now I must profess I see no
reason for what our Vindicator says, That the Walachrians could not agree with
Dr. Ames, and the Leyden Professors too; one thing is, Dr. Ames is put first:
Whether they also agreed with the Leyden Professors, is not much material, let
those word^ be blotted out. I have enough to make me understand their Sense
upon the Question, in their telling me, They readily agree with Dr. Ames in
this Controversy. If it be not possible they should agree with the Leyden
Professors too, then their Testimony against us signifies nothing, for they
contradicted themselves, and Dr. Ames did not agree with those of Leyden; but I
do not think so. It may be our Answerers mistake only.

8. Nothing can be certainly concluded in the cause, but I think I shall offer
what any unbiast Reader shall judge very probable in the Cause. All Divines
that will speak clearly and distinctly in this Cause, must distinguish betwixt
such as are more imperfect and low in Knowledge and Gifts, and such as are more
grown and perfect. So that Acute Casuist Dr. Ames distinguishes; and certainly
so do the Leyden Professors, and it is apparent from their words: 2. They (like
Divines) accordingly deliver their minds in two Theses. The one (which is the
33) relating only to Christians and Ministers, in a more Imperfect State, while
they have not the Gift of Prayer: As to these, they determine Forms of Prayer
both lawful and necessary, especially where such Ministers in a low state of
the Church, have great Congregations, for there their hearers are more
advantaged doubtless by a Form, then they would be by the use of such Persons
own Abilities (for they are not two Sentences, but one; because every Christian
that is to Minister, has not an Ability, and [in such cases] the hearers are
more advantaged by Forms, and the Person ministering does well, for tho he
offers a Female, he has no Male in his flock; for of all the instances they
give, there is not one other. Such was the state of all the Ministers of the
Jews, of all the Disciples of John, and of Christ his own Disciples, before the
days of Pentecost; prophesied of under the Old Testament, by the Prophet Joel,
when God would pour out his Spirit on all Flesh, Acts 2.17. Joel 2.28. that is,
imperfect comparatively, with what it was after the Effusion of the Spirit.
Upon this Account Christ says, Tho to that day there had not appeared Born of
Women, one greater then John Baptist, yet the least in the Kingdom of God,
should be greater then he; greater as to Spiritual Gifts, Knowledge, Utterance,
able to speak greater things then he could. And the Promises are to Christ's
Disciples for doing greater things (not then Christ could do, but) then he did
do, because he was ascending to his Father, John 14.18. with many others of
like import, proves this. And it is certain that till that time, the Apostles
had very imperfect Knowledge of the great Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven,
the Union of Christ and his Father, John 14.8, 9. The Sitting at Christ's right
hand in his Kingdom, etc. And in this state, and during this state, it is not
unreasonable to think Christ should give his Disciples a Form of Prayer at
their request, yea of words to be used in Prayer.

9. In the 34 Thesis these Learned Professors determine in the case, as to such
as are Provectiores, better grown, for these they judiciously determine (and
especially for those amongst them, that are Pastors of Churches) that it was
advantageous, yea upon the point necessary for them, To stir up in themselves
the Gift of Praying Publicly, without Forms. 1. That they might be able to
Pray upon all occasions and emergencies. 2. That they might be like the Holy
Men, Prophets, and Apostles, who so Prayed, and tells them this was no hard
thing to attain, if they observed the due Method of Prayer, and frequently
exercised themselves in it.

10. So that I see no difference betwixt the judgments of Dr. Ames and the
Professors of Leyden in the case. Those of the Province of the Walachrians tell
us, They as to this Question agree with these. If they afterward say any thing
which does not agree with them, we are not concerned to justify or to follow
them. For Mr. Calvin's opinion in Epist. ad Protectorem. 87, If our Reader will
but consider that it was wrote at a time, when Popery was but turning out of
England, when the Nation h^d but very few Bibles in our own Languages, and very
few Protestants that could read them, he will not wonder at Mr. Calvin's
^udgment. Those who are most against imposing Forms Universally, now, would
have been as much for an Universal imposing of them then, during such a state;
and do think it necessary now, if Spain or Portugal, were Reformed: The Priests
in corrupt Churches (I mean the generality of them) seldom complying with a
Reformation, and the number of others who will humble themselves (as they
think) to the work of the Ministry, and have any abilities for it, being every
where very small. Our Vindicator laying no great stress upon this Testimony (as
he tells, p. 111.) we see no great reason to contend for the Sense, it being
but the Sense of a particular Clasis, and we being fully of the mind of those
great persons with whom they profess to agree, it is no great matter whether we
agree with them or no, because they cannot agree with themselves as our
Answerer notes.

11. Our Vindicator goes on and tells us, he had in his Libertas
Ecclesiastica brought three Arguments, to prove, That forms of Prayer were of
no disadvantage to Piety. The first was From Gods prescribing a constant form
of Prayer for the Jewish offerings, and for the Priests blessing, our Saviors
directing the Lords Prayer, but the Holy God, our Blessed Savior, would not
impose what is of its own nature an hindrance to Godliness, Piety, and
Religion. My Answer was to this Sense. That it was wild (in a matter of Worship
especially) to conclude, man's power from Gods fact. That because God might
prescribe, therefore man might prescribe. Our Vindicator here now tells us, He
is not so void of all Reverence to God, as so much as to think so. I truly
hope so, much less so void of all sense and Reason, but what then is that which
our Answerer would conclude from thence? That these things cannot prejudice
Religion, he says.

12. If we could once agree upon terms, I would hope all sober and good men
would agree. That which makes us differ, is we use General terms of Religion,
Piety, The Church, Schism, Separation, etc. and will never let one another
understand what we mean by them. Piety and Religion here are these aequivocal
Terms that deceive one party. We are here arguing about Prayer, as it is a part
of the Instituted Worship of God, and in no other sense. Instituted Worship, is
not what is commanded by the Law of Nature, but by the Will of God revealed in
his Word. We say that it is thus commanded by God, not only that we should
pray, but that we should pray with the utmost Attention of our thoughts, to our
work, and with the utmost intention of our mind, and pious fervor. This (say
we) we profess we cannot do by forms. Yes (says our Vindicator you may, or
else God would never have prescribed forms of Prayer and Blessing to the Jewish
Priests, nor Christ to his Disciples. How does this follow? Is God then
obliged, in a piece of Service, (which is no service to him, but only because
he so willed it) to will it to all Persons and at all times, under the same
Circumstances? Who will deny a Prince the liberty to direct one Subject to
perform his Homage to him one way, and another to pay it another way; yea
though the Act of Homage be specifically the same? And shall we deny God that
liberty, who is the most free of all Agents, and the King of Kings?

14. So that the Answerer either very weakly, or very invidiously says, That
the sense of my Answer is, That the God of infinite Goodness, and Purity, may
appoint, and enjoin, and consequently may be pleased with such things as in
their own Nature are hurtful to Piety, and oppose Piety and Goodness in the
World: when as the sense of my Answer (as is obvious to every understanding
Reader) is no more then this, That the God of infinite liberty to direct his
Homage in what manner he pleases, may appoint several persons in several ages,
and under several dispensations, yea, and several persons in the same age, to
Worship him in the same specifical Acts of Worship, several ways as he
pleases, and each of them because he so appoints them, shall be Pious,
Religious, Good, and Pure, and that as to those Persons whom he so commands,
most Good, Pious and Religious.

14. And upon this foundation it was, That it was Pious to the Jews to Worship
God by the Levitical Offerings, etc. which to us would be impious, not only
because he has expressly forbidden them, but because he has not commanded us
any such thing: And if God or Christ did prescribe Forms of Prayer or Praise to
the Jews, or to some particular Christians, under some particular
Circumstances, the use of them as to them, or any under the same Circumstances,
may be Pious, and Religious, and doubtless is so, and yet not so to others, who
are or may be under other Circumstances, and other Precepts, relating to them
as under such Circumstances; and this is our very Case. Persons that have not
Abilities fitly to express their Minds to God in Prayer, are under different
Circumstances, from those who have such Abilities, and so may be under
different Obligations of Divine Precepts in the case. God not commanding those
to whom he has not given the best means, to pray with the greatest Attention
of thoughts, and Intention of Mind and Fervor, who are not able to do it, but
only to do it so far as they are able. But in the mean time, these precepts
oblige all to their utmost Ability to do it. And this is a full, or at least a
sufficient Answer to what our Vindicator says in his long Vindication of his
Argument from his 113 to his 129 page. For, not to multiply words to no
purpose, let men believe what they will, whether the Form of Blessing was to be
used as a Form, and the Lords Prayer to be used as a Form, yea or no. (Great
Authors are in both sides in the case) It proves no more, then that Forms of
Prayer are not in themselves so evil, that God himself cannot prescribe and
legitimate them; which none but mad men will say they are, or (as this Author
phraseth it) that they are not in their own Nature hurtful, and so hurtful, as
God cannot command the use of them, which is a degree of badness, which very
few things have. In the mean time they may be sinful enough, as contrary to the
Divine Will, and that tho not to all Persons, yet to some Persons; which is all
I contend for.

15. And here I must crave pardon of my Reader for giving some instances of
things which God by his command could not legitimate, as to those persons to
whom he gave the command. Murder and Incest, I admire how they slipped my pen
(tho our Vindicator who lasheth me sufficiently for much lesser Errors then
this, takes no notice of it) for tho it be true, God cannot make Murder and
Incest lawful, yet that is but trifling, because they will not be Murder or
Incest when he has commanded them. But God by a Special command to particular
persons, may make those actions lawful, which if any others did without such a
special command, they would be Murder and Incest, and unlawful: So it was
lawful by virtue of Gods command to Abraham for him to think upon, and design
the killing of his Son, to prepare means for it and go about it, and also to
have done it. But I hope our Vindicator does not think this would have been, or
is lawful for any other persons, under the circumstance of no such special
command; and this will let the Reader see how little to the purpose the
Vindicator speaks of this p. 116. I appeal to every man of Sense, whether that
instance was not good enough to prove, That God by his command may make some
things lawful, which without such command to those particular persons, had been
unlawful, and are unlawful, as contrary to his Revealed Will, as to any others
who have no such command, but his General Rule to the contrary. What but the
special Command of God to Magistrates, makes it lawful for them to execute
malefactors, or by their Soldiers to kill men in just wars? What but the
special permission or license of God, makes it lawful to kill men breaking open
their houses, or in their own defense. The General Precept is, Thou shall not
kill. But this is abundantly enough to show his poor Vindication of his first
Argument founded on this Mistake, That we say, Forms of Prayer do in their own
Nature hinder Piety.

16. The truth is, there are some things so intrinsically evil that God cannot
make them lawful; but these are very few (nor are all men agreed in this) for
my own part I do agree with those who think, there are Eternal Idaea's both of
Good and Evil (I know it is a Subtle Question) but I cannot think that God can
authorize a person, to deny his Being, or to Blaspheme himself: God cannot deny
himself, nor expose his own Essential Glory. But that God cannot make the same
thing both lawful and unlawful, the doing of which at all, or in such or such a
manner, does merely depend upon his Will, is to me little better then Nonsense.
Now whether God would be worshipped, or should be worshipped by Vocal Prayer or
no? certainly depends upon his Will, and nothing but his Will; and if it be his
will that all Persons should do it with the utmost attention of thoughts, and
intention of mind, and fervor of spirit, they are able. And if one person be
not able to do it, by forms prescribed by other men, and another be best able
to do it so, it is plain that the Will of God in the case is different as to
these two persons: and to tell us, that the first person may do it, without
prejudice to his piety in the action, when all the piety of the action lies in
Obedience to the Will of God, sounds in my Ears, very Atheologically, and
awkly, to say no worse concerning it.

17. This miserable arguing makes me quite weary of replying (my hand is in,
and I shall go through, but I think never to take up a pen again in this Case)
p. 129. the Vindicator comes to Vindicate his Second Argument, which was from
the lawfulness of Singing Psalms in Meeter, and Reading the Scriptures: We must
put it into Form, or the Reader will never see the force or weakness of it. His
Argument could be but this, If the Scriptures may be read with utmost attention
of thoughts, and fervor of Spirit, and Psalms may be sung (and that in Meeter)
with the utmost intention of Spirit, and attention of Thoughts, and they yet be
Forms, and not the the dictates of our Hearts to our Lips; Then Prayers may be
put up to God by Forms composed by other Men, not divinely inspired, with the
utmost attention of our thoughts, and intention, and fervor of our spirits. --
But. Ergo,

The sum of my Answer was a denial of the consequence. My reasons were, and
are: Because these were Duties of different species, and the same Motions,
Affections, and Degrees of Affection, are not by God required of us in all
Duties.

It is no Rule of Logic, or Reason, that whatsoever may be affirmed or denied
of one Species, may be affirmed of another; for then we might conclude in
Animals, that an Horse can discourse, because Man can. It is as true in
Actions, in Religious Actions. Worship here is the. Genus, Reading the
Scriptures, Singing Psalms, Praying, Preaching, etc. are Species contained
under Worship, as the Genus: We can neither affirm nor deny, all things
concerning one of these Species, that we may affirm or deny of another. This is
evident now to all, and might be justified in forty instances. The Question
therefore is, Whether God requires the same affections, and the same degree of
fervor of Spirit, in Reading the Scriptures, and Sing ng of Psalms, that he
does require of us in Prayer? If he does not, the Argument is fallacious,
because of the manifest Transition De Genere ad Genus.

18. It is plain he does not. Prayer (as I told him, p. 61.) is in Scripture
called, a crying to God, a wrestling with him, a pouring out of our Souls, it
must be with strong cries and groans. Is there any such thing said of Reading
the Scriptures? Or of Singing Psalms? Attention of our thoughts indeed is
required in all, so are such degrees of Fervor as are proper to those duties;
but what if God will require some degrees of Homage to be performed to him one
way, some another, some in a way not capable of the like degrees of Attention
and Fervor, as others are (such I take reading the Scriptures to be) is it not
enough for us to do that duty, with such degrees of Attention and Fervor, as
he requires in that duty, tho we do not do it with such degrees of Attention
and Fervor, as in that duty he has not required? Or shall it be concluded by
any man of reason, that the mean which God has appointed by which we may serve
him in one duty (as in Reading the Scripture, it is nothing but the use of our
ability to read) which is not by reason of the infirmity of our nature capable
of such an attention of our thoughts (which will wander if they have the least
liberty) may be used in another duty of another Species, where God requires
other degrees of Attention and Fervor: or that the mean which he has given us
for that duty is not necessary, but that duty also may lawfully be performed in
the use of a mean, which does hinder such degrees of Attention and Fervor?

19. This was the substance of one of my Answers (tho a little further opened.)
now what says our Vindicator to this? Truly little, what he says is p. 135.
in these words and no more. But what he says That there are different workings
of the Soul toward God in Singing, and in Prayer, I suppose he will upon
further consideration discern to be an oversight, since the Application to God
for the same things, require the same Pious Exercises of Mind, whether it be in
Prose, or Meeter; and it was another oversight, that he declares me to know and
confess what he thus asserts, when I never declared any such thing, but know
the contrary. -- As to the last Clause Reader judge, see Libertas Eccles. p.
123. -- Both in reading the Scriptures, and in Prayer, our hearts ought to be
religiously moved toward God, tho in somewhat a different manner. Wherein have
I wronged him here? Neither see I reason to acknowledge the oversight: let him
prove if he can, that we are obliged to Sing Psalms with an equal degree of
Fervor of Spirit at all times, as we are to Pray. Though we may sing the Words
of a Prayer, yet it is more then I know, that we are to make those words our
Petitions, or to address our Souls unto God for the same things which are the
matter of the Psalm we Sing. If I thought so, I should hardly sing many of
David's Psalms, having no occasion for the things he asked of God. Nor do I
think Singing is the Application of our Souls to God for obtaining Mercies, but
the Praedication of the Holy Name and Will of God, and only to differ from
Reading the Scripture, as the first is done with the Modulation of the Voice,
the other not so; which Modulation is required, as having some force in it to
excite several Affections, either of Joy or Grief, according to the matter
sung. Further in the same page he says:

Tho there be different Acts of the Mind exercised in these duties, yet that
Consideration, Reverence, Faith, Submission, and other Gracious Dispositions,
which suit the special parts of Divine truth; does require as much seriousness,
diligence and care in reading the holy Scriptures.

But does it require as much Fervor of Spirit and Affections? That is the
Question; and the contrary was showed by the Phrases wherein Prayer is in
Scripture expressed: but as to this not a word, only he had showed before,
that a Form of Words in Prayer does not hinder any Exercises of Piety therein.
What he has formerly said, I have formerly answered. I leave the Judgment to
any Intelligent Reader.

20. I had further told him, That the Scriptures are Divine Forms, and reading
them is a Divine Precept, and the Forms we Sing, Divine Songs, and the Singing
of a Congregation by a Form naturally necessary, and the duty impossible to be
performed, but by a Form. The Question was only stated about Humane Forms, and
in a Case where no such thing is necessary; all the World will see the
inconclusivenes of such Arguings. I shall not trouble my self to answer such
things further, which nothing relate to the Question in issue, which himself
owned to be plainly and clearly stated. I wish I could say that on his side, it
had been as plainly and clearly Argued against.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to what the Vindicator has said in his Third Section of Chap. 3.
concenring the General use, or Impositions of Forms in the Primitive Church.
Some further things noted of the Canons of the Provincial Councels of Laodicea,
Carthage and Milevis. Further Discourse upon the head of this Argument waved,
because the Argument it self, if true, concludes nothing, as to Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness.

1. I am now come to the Argumentum Palmarium of our Adversaries; in this
Question the pretended Practice of the Church for 1300 years. Indeed I always
looked upon the Practice of Men a very poor Argument, where the Question was
about the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of an Action. And it is doubtless no
Argument, tho Ex Abundanti. I did speak something as to that point, and since at
the request of some Friends, have spoken much more in a Supplement to that
Book. I shall now say little, but refer my Reader to my former Book, and the
Supplement to it.

2. Our Author has told us, That it is not probable that such excellently
Devout and Judicious Men as the 4th. and 5th. Century abounded with, should not
discern helps and hindrances of Devotion. -- I told him it was possible. Like
one in Cathedra, -- he tells me, This is a rash and contumelious Expression.
What is? That some particular Men, may be mistaken in a particular point: This
is all can be made of my words, and such a point too, as is of a mutable
Nature: for I have showed before, That that may be an hindrance to Devotion to
one, which is not to another (which is most certainly true.) Is this a
contumely? when David says, All Men are Liars, and tho he spoke it in haste,
yet it has thus much truth in it, that there are in all Men grains of Falsehood
and Error and Fability. Did ever any modest and judicious man, talk at this
rate? When our Articles tell us, That the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria,
Antioch, and all Rome, erred, both in matters of Worship, Ceremonies, and
Doctrine. Artic. 1562. n. 19. may not we say it was possible that some Churches
in the 4 and 5 Centuries might mistake?

3. I am not concerned to make good what Smectymnuus said, tho I knew the Men
that made that Book, and know that none of them wanted learning: but for the
Commissioners of the Savoy, their saying they could find no entire Liturgies
within the first 300 years, does not argue that they found any then; for I am
sure they did not, but those being the times of the purer Primitive Church,
they by their Commission were concerned to speak to no more. I do say it again
that they might have said, That they find no Record of any Liturgy universally
used, or imposed, and commanded to be used by all for 600 years, till the time
of Gregory the great; nor then by any imposed, but by Gregory the worst of all
the Bishops of Rome before his time, whose Judgment and Practice in this case,
signified little; but under the Protection of Charles the Great, 200 years
after that. I repeat not here an Answer to the Answerers silly Reflection p.
138, I believe I knew what time Gregory the Great and Charles the Great lived,
before our Vindicator could construe his Cato: and that his Book did not
enlighten me with this glorious piece of Learning; the Supplement will inform
him, and all those who have a mind to laugh at such lamentable Exceptions. We
must attend hereafter to what our Author can say to prove Liturgies of Prayer,
generally used or commanded to be used, before the time of Gregory the great.

4. In the mean time he takes notice, that I will not allow that the three
Canons which he quoted, that of the Council of Laodicea cap. 18. of the third
Council of Carthage can. 23. of Milevis can. 12. had any res ect to Liturgies
and their establishment. Where have I denied they had no respect to Liturgies?
Or what does he mean by Estab ishment? (For still it is not our Interest I
perceive to speak plainly and distinctly) I have denied and do deny that those
Canons have the least tittle of proof. That Liturgies in the time when those
Canons were made, (and yet the last of these was more then 400 years after
Christ) were generally used, or commanded to be generally used; one of which
they must prove, before they have proved that my Opinion [T^at the Universal
use of Liturgies is not lawful in all probability is false, because contrary to
the judgment of the Church for 1300 years past.

5. I had reason to say so, when the last of these Councels was not till 402,
and then made for a particular Church, and in a particular case (which I have
else where largely showed and given a full account of it) and for the Two
first, Supplement p. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
it is doubted whether ever there were any such Councils; and tho this Author
produces something out of Justellus to prove there was such a Council of
Laodicea yet there is no Canon of it, enjoining a Form of Prayers should be
used morning and evening. Other Collectors of Councils, very ancient too, have
no such Council; there was but 22 or 42 at it; and for the other 3, Carthag.
Justellus tells our Vindicator the 23 Cannon could not be theirs, for that
Council made but 21; nor is the 23th to be found in Justellus his Code of the
African Church, where it should have been if it had been of any authority: And
our Vindicator tells us too, this Code was extant 451, so as at that time they
knew of no such Canon. And though the first mentioned Canon of Laodicea was
taken into the Code, which Code was approved by the Council of Calcedon Anno
451. yet there is no proof that Forms of Prayer were then generally used, or
imposed. For the Canon it self mentions no more, then a public Ministry of
Prayers (as to which Forms are not necessary.) In the late times in College
Chapels, there was morning and evening (...), where no Forms were used, but a
certain Order observed, all the Week, and Year long. And indeed this is an
usual Cheat in these debates, when Men hear or read of a Liturgy of Prayers,
they presently think there is a proof for Forms of Pra^er, when it is but of
late years, that the term Liturgy has been appropriated to signify a Common
Prayer Book. And admit there were such a Council of Carthage, and they made
what is called the 23 Canon, which Justellus denies, yet that (as I have
showed in my Supplement) determined no such thing; that of Milevis or Mela
indeed did, but in a very small Corner of the Church, and for a very particular
reason, and the Vindicator cannot say these 2 Canons were ever brought into
Justellus his Code, or confirmed by any general Council. But of this matter I
have elsewhere said enough.

6. For what our Author objects p. 143. to prove the Laodicean Canon enjoined
more then the same Ministry or Order of Prayer, even Forms. From the next
Canon, it speaks not a word of Forms more then the other, only three Prayers
were made, (...) are the words used, neither of them signifying the reading of
a Prayer out of a Book by a Form. See at the end of the Book in the Review, a
full Answer to all said by Dr. Faulkner on this head.
Whereas our Answerer p. 144, complains I have not read over or considered what
he has said, to prove that the Canon of Carthage (contrary to the plain sense
of the words) commanded a Form, he will find it taken notice of in my
Supplement, largely enough, p. 28. For the Council of Milevis, it proves no
universal use, nor any Universal Imposition. Now that Forms may be used by some
Ministers and at some times, and that in some particular Exigent they may be
Universally Imposed for a time (which was the cause then) I do not doubt: but
enough is said of that Council, Supplement p. 30.31, etc. I leave to any Reader
to judge, whether it is not like a very great part of their Ministry were
tainted with Pelagianism, whatever our Vindicator says.

7. I shall not trouble my self further about this Section, the Argument, if it
were good, concluding nothing as to the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness. I have
said in my Supplement as much as I think can be said, at least as I can say;
and so I think has our Answerer: let the Reader judge who has spoken with
most probability, and from most Credible Authority. So far as we understand the
truth of Church Affairs for the first 300 years (which we can have no great
certainty of, for the generality of our Editions are from the Papists, who
would let us know as little of the truth as they could, where it was contrary
to their Practice) what was held, practiced, and retained in the Church (not
being matter of Faith) within two hundred years after Christ, is no great guide
to our Practice, tho I said and do believe, that Forms of Prayer were not
generally used, nor by any Persons universally imposed on any considerable part
of the Church, till Pope Gregory's time Anno 600, nor then, more then
Canonically, till 200 years after this, and am assured of this by Durandus a
Papist, and my Lord of Morney a learned Protestant; yet whether this be true or
false, is not a farthing matter in the case; and I have something else to do
then disputing De lana caprina, or whether it, or that be the truest
Orthography. No understanding person that minds to keep the Protestant
Religion, as to Rites and Ceremonies, will value any quotations at any rate, as
to Rituals, which are out of Writers that lived at the distance of 300 years
after Christ.

8. In his next Section, he does not pretend to Answer any Argument of mine,
but only to reflect upon some passages which (how justly let my Reader judge)
he calls Reviling, and he has (if it be so indeed) answered it, with full
measure pressed down, and running over. I am not concerned to Reply to him, nor
to the Authorities of Capelus, all whose words were no Oracles, as our Answerer
himself also judges p. 180.

CHAP. VI.
A Reply to what the Vindicator says in his 4 Chap. beginning p. 177. Whether
in Vocal Prayer, words be not an Essential part of the Worship, which no
Superiors can institute? Whether things in Acts of Worship, by Gods
Institution, left to liberty of Ministers, or People, may be determined by any,
but those to whom the liberty is left? About the Power of Superiors to command
in Divine things, Whether he can command, what he judges to be indifferent,
and the Inferiors judge Unlawful.

1. OUR Vindicator in his 4 Chap. which begins in his 177 p. pretends to
Answer the Authors third Argument, which he had thus laid: To use a Mean in an
Act of Worship, which God has neither directed by the light of Nature, nor by
his Word prescribed; no natural necessity compelling us so to do, is sinful.

But for us or any of us, to whom God has given the Gift of Prayer, ordinarily
to perform our Ministerial Acts in Prayer, Reasonable Account, p. 71.
by the prescribed Forms of other Men, read, or ricited, were for us (no
natural necessity compelling us so to do) in Acts of Worship to use means,
neither directed of God by the light of Nature, nor yet by him in his Word
prescribed. Ergo.



In proof of the Major I said, 1. That Divine Worship, is nothing else but an
Homage performed to God upon account of his Excellency. 2. That it belongs to
God to appoint those Acts, and Means by whom this Homage should be paid. 3.
That God has determined (by the light of Nature, and his Word given us)
sufficiently both as to Acts and Means, of this Homage. 4. That he has
forbidden any other Means in the Second Commandment, where under the Notion of
Graven Images, he forbids all Acts and Means of Public Worship which himself
has not appointed; and if this were not the sense of it, it were impossible to
reduce to that Commandment, all the Precepts in Scripture as to External
Worship and Adoration. I also further referred to what Mr. Cotton has said in
this Case, in his Advertisements upon a Discourse of Set Forms of Prayer p. 17.
18. etc. In my further Discourse upon this Argument, I was led (in Answer to
another) into a discourse about The power of Superiors, in Gods Worship, to
command, what they judged indifferent; but their Inferiors or Parties commanded
judged sinful, and unlawful.

2. Possibly that discourse, contained two Questions in Divinity, upon which
the main hinge of this Controversy lay; viz.

1. Whether man can lawfully institute at his pleasure Parts or Means of Divine
Worship? 2. Whether Superiors can command Inferiors, in Divine Worship, to do
any thing, which they the Superiors judge indifferent, (that is neither
commanded, nor forbidden by God) but the Inferiors judge sinful, upon
Arguments which to them appear highly probable.
Let us but be agreed in these two things, and we shall in this Controversy
have little to contend about. Our Vindicator, who (in the Section immediately
preceding, had spent 6 leaves in nothing but Reflections, spends but 8 leaves
about this Chapter, which I doubt not but to show him (except he had spoken
closer to the thing in question) was much too little. But what does he say?

3. He grants p. 177. That all the parts of Divine Worship must be such as
the light of Nature, or the Revealed Will of God directs. Tho this be very
true, yet what is it to the purpose? The Argument spoke not of Parts, but of
Means of Divine Worship, nor does the second Commandment, speak only of Parts
but of Means. Why does he not either affirm or deny, that the Means of External
Worship, must be directed from God, either by the light of Nature or
Scripture? But instead of this he runs to his usual way of Observations.

4. He first observes, That this contradicts what I had before said, That
Forms of Prayer may be lawfully used [by some men, and at sometimes] what if it
did contradict what I said before? The Argument may be good enough,
notwithstanding Nemo omnibus horis sapit. 2. But this is not so, for we are
discoursing of what is lawful or unlawful, not as to what is merely Mental
Prayer, but as to Ministerial Vocal Prayer, which is the most perfect kind of
Prayer: I have told him, that I believed, that he who prayed by the Use of
Forms, only prays in his Heart. Now as to that Act, Forms may be helps, and
so lawful to be used by those to whom God has not given due means for
Ministerial Prayer, which must be Vocal, where the heart inditeth a good
Matter, and the tongue (the proper Secretary to the heart) is as the Pen of a
ready Writer. Now supposing (what our Answerer so zealously contends for) that
God prescribed Forms to the Jewish Ministers, and that Christ Prescribed his
Disciples Forms of Prayer to be ordinarily used. Means as to Heart-Prayer, are
prescribed by God in his Word, as to which kind of Prayer, words are not
necessary, for it may be performed without words, so as words are no parts of
it.

5. Forms not directed by God or Christ, or any where in Holy Writ, cannot be
an External Homage to God, or part of External Worship; for our Author grants,
that Parts of Worship must be directed by Nature or Scripture; now such Forms
are not directed by Scripture; I am sure they are not directed by Nature.
Besides, if they were an External Worship, or part of it, they must be never
omitted. Now that Vocal Prayer is a part of External Worship, distinct from
what is merely Mental, cannot be denied; for that Prayer which is merely in the
heart, I am sure is not the Publik Worship of a Minister in the Congregation.

6. Hence it follows, That he who prays by Forms only, prays Mentally, as
all the People do, who joyneth with him who Ministers in Prayer: For the
Ministers reading a Form, can be no part of External Worship, because in it, he
is neither directed by the Light of Nature, nor by the Will of God in
Scripture. It is only an help to himself or others, or both, to order himself,
and people by, in their Mental Prayers.

7. Neither can I see how it can properly be called a Mean (unless the Form be
particularly by God directed) of Mental Prayer. For in reason, the mean of mere
internal adorotion must be, an Ability so to adore which a man has partly from
Nature; (whence is his Ability to think and conceive) partly from the influence
of the Holy Spirit of Prayer and Supplication.

8. His next Observation is as idle, as his Reflection in that Paragraph
founded upon it is impertinent: it is this p. 179. That according to this
Argument, the conceptions and expressions of him who Prays without a Form,
are as much forbidden as the use of Forms is pretended to be, because God has
not prescribed these Expressions. I had told him, that both the Light of
Nature, and the Will of God declared in his Word, 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Pet. 4.10.
Romans 12. have showed us, That an ability fitly to express our minds that is our
wants and desires] to God in Prayer, is the means which God has prescribed for
Vocal Prayer; how well he has disproved what I said, let the Reader judge from
my reply; so that in further answer to this his Observation, I shall but oppose
another observation, and commend it to my Reader; viz. That he has answered my
Argument learnedly, by begging the Question, for this was the (...) betwixt us.

9. But yet because our Author has no mind to treat of Means, and to grant us
that Means as well as Acts and Parts of Divine Worship, must have a Divine
Institution; Let us take him at his own concession. That parts of Worship must
have such an Institution; this he yields in terminis, p. 177. I say that
words in Vocal Prayer, are parts of Worship; his friend Capellus he owns has
affirmed it, That by keeping to the constant use of a Form, men make it a
proper part of Worship. This he does not like. But why then in the very same
case about Forms of Prayer, does he choke us with what Capellus has said.
Vindicat. p. 167, 173, 201.
It is a just Rule in Law, That he who has produced a Witness in the same
cause for himself, has granted him a sufficient Witness, and shall never be
allowed to except against him as not such. I hope if Capellus his Authority be
valuable against us, it is so for us.

10. But I have another Argument to prove, that Forms of Prayer Universally
imposed, are parts of Prayer, proper parts of Prayer, that is Vocal Prayer,
which alone is Ministerial Prayer: For the parts of that religious Action are
Two; The one is Internal, which lies in the Motions of the Heart and
Affections: The other is External, which are Our words. And these are the two
Essential parts of Worship in that Prayer; take away either of them, and it is
no Prayer, that is no Ministerial Vocal Prayer: And these or those words are
essential parts of this or that Ministerial Vocal Prayer. Now if Men without
express direction from God, may prescribe us words, they may prescribe an
Essential part of Worship; which our Vindicator justly denies they may.

11. His third Observation, p. 182. is, That in his Libertas Ecclesiastica. 2.
Sect. Chap. 1. He has largely proved, That it is a false and dangerous
Position to say that nothing may be used, or appointed in Gods Worship (besides
necessary Circumstances of humane Actions) but what is appointed by God
himself. -- He adds here, That it is destructive to Public Worship and
Religion. For since God has commanded us to pray, but has not in all Acts of
Worship enjoined our words, or the performance of this duty with or without a
Form, it must needs according to this Position, be done neither by a Form nor
without, because both by consequence are forbidden being not prescribed. Then
he tells us, That God has not prescribed what sort of bread, or wine, should
be used in the Supper of the Lord, nor what Psalms should be sang. To which I
reply,

12. I am not at leisure to reply to all he has said in 72 pages of his
Libertas Ecclesiast. but I do not remember that he has there said, That Men
may appoint Essential, or integral parts of Worship; if he has, I am sure he
has denied it here, p. 177. Now I have both said, and proved, that words are
an Essential part of Ministerial, Vocal Prayer. If there be no words used,
there can be no such thing; therefore by our Answerers own concession words in
this Prayer, must be directed by the Light of Nature, or by the Will of God
Written in his Word. I have showed, that Gods Will, is revealed in the cause,
both in the Light of Nature, which directs us to express our own thoughts in
our own words, and by his Will revealed, commanding us to Minister our Gifts,
and according as we have received the G^ft, or Grace. Neither do I remember
that our Vindicator has asserted, That Men not divinely authorized and
inspired for that end, may appoint Means of Worship. I am sure in this Book he
is very shy of it, if he has said any such thing elsewhere, it is false, and
contrary to the Second Commandment. For any appointments of other things, in,
about, or relating to the Worship of God, we are not here disputing, nor was
the Question stated, with reference to them.

13. It is rashly (if no worse) said, That there can be no Public Worship or
Religion according to that Position. For it plainly infers, That in the
Churches of God in Scotland, Holland, France, New England, etc. there is no
Public Religion or Worship; for it is certain that in all, or most of them,
there are no Forms of Prayer Universally used or imposed, tho there be in some
of them, some made and left at liberty to be used or not used.

14. Whereas he says, That according to this Position, there can be no
Administration of the Sacraments, because according to this Principle, all
Bread, and Wine, is forbidden to be used in that Ordinance, because the
particular kind of Bread and Wine is not prescribed: It proceeds upon this
Hypothesis, which is false; That we say, That nothing is left to our liberty,
in, about, or relating to the Worship of God, because we say no Acts, Parts, or
Means of Worship, are left to liberty. We say, that particular Phrases in
Prayer and Preaching, so the particular kinds of Bread and Wine, to be used in
the Lords Supper, are left to liberty but yet words are not left to liberty.
Nor whether any Bread or Wine should be used, are not left to liberty; and
where God has left any thing to liberty, it ought not to be determined by
Superiors; because it was the Will of God, that his People should have liberty
in the case, and that liberty is a part of the Institution.

15. In the Old Law, where a strict Prescription of all Acts, Parts, and Means
of Worship can be modestly denied by none, yet in the burnt offering of Fowls,
Levit. 1.14. the people were left to liberty, to bring either Turtle Doves, or
any other Young Pigeons, and in the Woman's Purification, Lev. 12.6. she had
the like liberty. I would gladly know now if our Vindicator, or any sober man,
thinks that the Superiors in the Church or State of the Jews, might have
determined the Jews, and by their commands enjoined all the Jews to bring none
but Turtle Doves? Or none but Young Pigeons of another kind? Or what president
there is in Scripture of any Ecclesiastical or Civil power, that ever arrogated
and assumed such a liberty, or declared that they judged such a thing lawful?
This I think sufficient to have spoken to what our Answerer says as to the
first Question.

16. The Second Question was about the Superiors power of commanding in
Religious Acts. A grave and weighty Question, an Agreement in which will bring
us to a present issue as to all our Religious differences. Let us see what our
Vindicator will grant in the case. He tells us p. 185.

That if any Inferior, or any person whatsoever, accounts any thing to be
forbidden, proceeding upon any good and true grounds, no such thing may be
appointed, being in it self evil, whether the Superior think it not necessary
or by a mistake thinks it necessary. We thank him for this, it is enough for
us, nor shall we need repeat any thing more he has in this Chapter said. I
have only this Question to ask, Who, as to the Inferiors Practice, must judge,
whether the Inferiors judgment proceeds upon just and true grounds. Let us
but have this point freely and clearly spoken to. If he says the Superior must
judge, all this is just nothing, for those Superiors must be prodigiously
wicked, that shall command their Inferiors to do that, which they judge the
Inferiors upon good and true grounds judge unlawful. This were for him to
command things, which he knew to be sinful.

17. If he says (as he must do if he will maintain the Religion of
Protestants) That tho the Superior be the judge of the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of his commands, so far as concerns his own Act in commanding;
yet every Inferior must judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of his Act, in
obeying, and the truth and falsehood of the grounds upon which he proceeds. It
is what we hold and agree in.

18. But still the true Question remains, upon supposition, That the Superior
and Inferior differ in their Aprehensions of a thing, the Superior thinking
upon such as he thinks good and true grounds, that the thing is lawful, The
Inferior judging upon (what he thinks) true and good grounds, that it is
unlawful.

Whether the Superior can command his Inferiors such things in the Worship of
God, Qu.
which he judges not necessary from the Light of Nature, or Revealed Will of
God, and the Inferior judges sinful and what he may not do. So then there are
two things we yield in the case.

19. That as to things which are merely Political and secular, the Magistrate
may command what he judges necessary, or expedient, for the ends of his
Government? of which things, he has no Judge (save God alone) Superior to him,
and the Inferior must obey him, where Gods Will does not plainly control; and
if it does control him, he must patiently suffer the penalty for not doing
them; for his private Conscience is no Judge of these things further then as to
his own practice, whether they be contrary to the Rule of Gods Word or no.

20. That as to things of a more Spiritual Nature, which concern the Worship of
God, the Magistrate is bound to command, what he, after diligent inquiry into
the law of God, judges necessary; that is commanded by God in his Word: and to
forbid, what he judges there forbidden, and in these things the Inferior is
bound to obey. If in these things he judges diversely from his Superior, he
cannot do the things, but must patiently suffer, and the matter in difference
must be by God determined at the last day, where the Magistrate (tho it then
appears he was in a mistake) may hope for Mercy, because he did what he did, in
the integrity of his heart, provided he neglected not due means for finding out
of the Will of God, nor in his Punishment for disobedience, exceeded the Rules
of Scripture, and right Reason, and Justice.

21. But we do not think, that in the Worship of God, especially as to the
Acts, Parts, or Means of it (those being things of the truth or falsehood of
which the Will of God alone can determine, and which he has sufficiently
determined in his Word.) The Superior without sin, can command, what himself
does not from the will of God judge necessary, but he knows the Inferior
judges to be sinful.

1. Because he has no power in commanding things of this nature, more then the
Kings of Israel and Judah had, who had no power to bind up all the Israelites
to bring Turtle Doves, when Gods prescription had left them at liberty, either
to bring them, or young Pigeons; nor was ever any such power assumed by
Magistrates under the ordinary Circumstances of Magistrates (that is being no
Prophets, and divinely inspired, as were David and Solomon) who both were
Penmen of Scripture.

2. Because such commands must necessarily be for Destruction, not for
Aedification, and the Apostle declared he had no such power, 2 Cor. 13.10. such
commands must necessarily be against Charity, tending to destroy Peoples Souls.

22. But as to this, our Vindicator tells us, That real Charity providing for
the good and profit of the Souls of Men, is of far greater value, then that
which I call Charity gratifying and complying with men in their mistakes.

How properly this is spoken, and how prettily the Question here begged, let
any ordinary Reader judge; was not I arguing for the good and profit of Peoples
Souls and Bodies too? That which I call Charity is what the Apostle calls so,
Romans 14.15. If thy Brother be grieved with thy Meat (which thou may eat, or
let alone) now walk thou not charitably (that is in eating and so giving him
occasion to sin) destroy not him with ^y meat, for whom Christ dyed. Can any
Divine think that God in that Text has not said to all Magistrates, in the
matters relating to my Worship, make not him to sin by thy commands, which thou
may or may not (as thou think) at thy pleasure give out, for whom
Christ dyed.

23. I appeal now to all rational and intelligent persons, whether the
Vindicator or I, have spoken here most sense and pertinencies as to the matter
in Question, Whether Forms of Prayer in the public Ministry, may be
universally used or imposed. This is all which I can find in this Chapter of
our Vindicator worth any notice as to the Question in hand; for what is spoken,
as to other Rites, Ceremonies, and Gestures, the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of
them, it does not concern our present purpose. Let us first have done with this
single Question, and then we will if he pleases, discourse other things; in
the mean time I intend not to swell a Book with Discourses De Omni Ente.
Besides it may be, that by our close discourse upon this Question, we shall be
better prepared for others, which in my mind are much lighter, by understanding
upon what principles we distinctly argue, and first exposing the truth or
falsehood of them to the judgment of the World. Our Vindicators Principles in
this Chapter seem to be, 1. That words in Vocal Ministerial Prayer, are neither
parts nor means in that Worship. 2. That Superiors may determine whatever he
judges God has left at liberty in his Worship, though the Inferior thinks
they are not there left at liberty. I am not of his mind.

CHAP. VII.
Containing a Reply to what the Vindicator has said Chap. 5. p. 193, etc. The
Vindicator grants, the Superior may tie up Ministers and People to Forms in the
public Congregation, and in Families, but not in Closets. His reason, why not
in Closets, holds, as to Congregations and Families. They have new Emergences
daily. The Evil of tying up, all to Forms expressed, exemplyfied, in the
neglect or omission of Praises to God for deliverance from the late Hellish
Popish Plot, and of Prayers for the perfecting of that Salvation: The
Vindicator says nothing cogent to prove that Forms of Sermons ought not to be
as Universally imposed and used, as Forms of Prayer.

1. THe Answerer p. 193, comes to my fourth Argument, which I laid thus: To
agree a Principle, which (being agreed) is of sufficient force to restrain the
total exercise of the Gift of Prayer, is sinful. Reason. Account p. 93.


But to agree it lawful for Ministers ordinarily, in their Solemn Prayer, to
perform their Acts of Prayer by the prescribed Forms of other Men, were to
agree such a Principle. -- Ergo.



I supposed, none would deny the first Proposition, because it could not be
denid^ without allowing man, to suppress the total exercise of a most eminent
Gift of the Holy Spirit of God. I proved the Second Proposition, by an
inductio^ of the several kinds of Prayer, and showing, That the Superior had as
much Authority to command the use of Forms in the Pulpit, as in the Deske, in
our Families as in either, yea' and in our Closets too, and the Inferiors
Obligation to Obedience would be as much concluded as to one place as another,
because it related to the Superiors Dominion; and so far as that extended, so
far the Inferiors Obligation to Obedience must extend. This was the sum of
what I said, what says our Vindicator to all this?

2. Will he deny the Major? I find not a word in his whole Chapter that way.
But it is the Minor which his loose discourse seems to deny, but before he
does it he must again be premising. 1. That he has before showed that Men's
Ability of Expression (which is not properly the Gift of Prayer) are not on
other accounts necessary to be used, unless where they be requisite for the
better performing the Worship of God. What he has said about the Gift of
Prayer I have answered, and proved, That an Ability fitly to express our minds
to God in Prayer, is properly the Gift of Prayer, if we speak (as we do) of
Vocal Ministerial Prayer; For the other part of this sentence, besides what I
have further said before to prove them a Divine, Natural, Proper Mean, I would
again know of him, whether every man, as to his own practice, must not be judge
of his better performing the Wo^^hip of God; if he must, he has said nothing.

3. As to his premising that he has before showed the usefulness of set Forms
in themselves for the Pablick Offices of Religious Worrship. I have pr^ved that
as to Prayer, they cannot be established (...) without man's taking upon him to
appoint one Essential part of Worship in Vocal Prayer, which himself denies
man a power to do: I have also proved, Gods Institution of another mean, viz.
our own Abilities.

4. But he tells us, That he not founding their lawfulness and expediences
merely upon obedience to Superiors, can be no ways concerned to determine and
enquire after the extent or boundaries of the Authority of our Governors in
this thing. But yet I hope we neither being able to see, nor yield any such
usefulness of them for all Ministers, must enquire, whether we be not obliged
to the use of them from the mere command of Superiors, and if in that thing
they be not our Superiors, that is, have no power to command, we can have no
obligation upon us to obey; nor are any of those great Topics from an
Obligation to Unity and Submission to be used toward us; for why should not
those who are so Zealous for Forms, as well unite with us, as we with them,
especially considering that words in Vocal Prayer are an Essential part of
Worship, the Calves of our Lips, which must be creatures only of Gods making.
If our Vindicator will only argue them lawful, because they are useful, we are
not of that mind: so let it be a Problematical Question, but then let not us be
railed at as Schismatics and sinfully disobedient to Governors, who judge
them not lawful, and so not the object of Superiors power.

5. Besides, in so tender a thing as Gods Worship; every thing as we can fancy
useful is not therefore lawful. Indeed the usefulness of things in Gods
Worship, must be concluded from a preceding Prescription of God. No Act, Part
or Mean of Worship is useful, which God has not directed by the Light of
Nature or in his Revealed Will.

6. As to what he tells me, p. 194. n. 4. I answer, That no good Christian can
yield a Reverence to Superiors, where he cannot save his Reverence to God, in
the first place; and that he cannot do, till he be satisfied, that his Superior
is his Superior in that case; i. e. That God has given him a power to command
and to determine him in the case, if it be the Will of God, that another Mean
should be used in that case, by those that have it; Or if it be the Will of
God, that as to any Act of Worship a mean should be left to his Peoples liberty
as under the Law it was in case of the Turtle Doves, or young Pigeons, before
named. It is no Reverence to, but a sinful flattering of Superiors, to tell
them by our Tongues, Pens or Practice, that they may appoint such means, as God
has not appointed, or that they may appoint and determine where it is the Will
of God that his Ministers or People should be left at liberty. And Christians
ought not to yield Principles, which are improveable against them, to carry
them on to further sins.

7. But in the next place he comes to consider, Whether it be not lawful to
forbear Prayers, (conceived Prayers at least) before and after Sermons, he
thinks it is. Well then if it be lawful (say our Conformable Divines) it may be
commanded by Superiors, and such commands ought to be obeyed by Inferiors. Then
it is true which I said, That Superiors may wholly in Public Worship suppress
the Gift of Prayer.

8. But what shall we say for Families? p. 200, he thinks a well composed Form
may be used in a Family. I think so too, if he that Ministers has not the
Gift of Prayer, or if it be a form composed by himself. But the Question is,
Whether Superiors may command the use of such, and no other. He seems to
conclude they may, for he determines them lawful, and according to the
Principle, That Superiors may command even in the Worship of God what is
lawful, not what is necessary only; They may also as to Families suppress the
use of our Gift of Prayer, or Ability to express our selves to God in Prayer.
So it is granted, that by a Superiors command, the Exercise of the Ministerial
Gift of Prayer may be shut out of all Churches and all Families; and indeed it
is so as to a great many.

9. Well then, may we pray otherwise then by Forms in our Closet, admitting
Superiors did command us also there to pray only by Forms? He tells us p. 203.
That Forms of Prayer are of excellent and singular use in Families and Closets?
But p. 202. he tells us as to Closets, That if any Superior should forbid all
such Confessions and Petitions [in Closets] this being against the duty of a
Creature and a Christian, ought not to be submitted to. So then, the Superior
in this case is no Superior: But I pray why? Where has God given the Superior
a license to determine the words of Vocal Prayer in one place, more then in
another? I am sure it is not in Scripture, and I cannot conceive how it should
be in Nature.

10. Our Answerer offers but one thing in reason for it, Because there are many
things concerning the Persons own particular wants, which cannot be comprised
in a Form, are needful matters of his private and retired Devotions; p. 201.
Will not the same reason hold for leaving Forms of Prayer at liberty to be used
or not used in public Congregations? What State, what Church almost is there,
that every Month has not some new particular wants, I will not say which
cannot be comprised in a Form, but which cannot be comprised in the same Form;
and if Forms for the Public must upon this account be renewed every Moon, why
may they not, or should they not, for persons be renewed every night (that is
only matter of trouble.)

11. Here Is one great evil of standing Forms, they cannot provide for the
greatest Emergencies. Within these Two years last past, we have had as great
issues of Providence, with reference both to our most Sacred Sovereigns Life,
our Religion, and Civil Government, as ever any Nation or Church in the World
had: as great things to give God special thanks and great praise for: as great
things to beg of God, for our Bodies, our Souls, our Posterity. What has
there been in all our public Forms for it? How many Congregations have there
been, where God has not had one Thanksgiving for so great Discovery; or one
Prayer imploring him either to avert the dangers feared, or his assistance to
our King and Councels for the fuller discovery of the wickedness, and
perfecting our deliverence. I believe since Christ had a Church upon the Earth
and an interest in any Kingdom, of the Extent of ours, an instance cannot be
given, where the King and Parliament, unanimously and without any persons
contradiction of it, declared, That they were fully satisfied by the proofs
they had heard, that there then was, and for diverse years last past ^ad been,
an Horrid, and Treasonable Plot, and Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by
those of the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of his Majesty's Sacred
Person, and for subverting the Protestant Religion, and the Ancient and
Established Government of the Kingdom. Which was done both in October and
November 1678, and again March 25. 1679.

And God received so few special Praises for our deliverance, or heard so few
Special Petitions in reference to it, from multitudes of the Ministry of the
Nation in their Public Services; nor indeed could it be helped, considering
they were tied to Public Forms, composed many years before any such thing
appeared.

12. Another mischief is this, That upon public Emergencies, all Ministers are
tied to such Petitions, as those who make the Forms will prepare, which very
little, or nothing at all concern the special providence, and where they
concern it, very little, or nothing at all. How much is God either mocked or
deprived of his Glory? We have had so late and famous an Instance, as no more
plain one can be. The King and Parliament in Nov. 1678, had declared their full
satisfaction as before, and the Parliament applied themselves to his Majesty
for a Solemn Public Fast. His Majesty proclaimed it: 13. No. 1678. and in
order to it, gave Order for Forms of Prayer proper for it to be made. One Form
was made, in which was not any thing new of that nature. This was complained of
in Parliament. They Voted another Address, complaining of it, and desiring some
special Forms might be made, taking notice of an Horrid Popish Plot, etc. His
Majesty gave present Order accordingly. A Second was made, which came out but 4
or 5 days before the Fast day, but time enough to be sent into the Country. But
on the Lords day a Member of the House complained to the House of Commons that
in that, there was not one word of Popish Plots, etc. upon this the House Voted
a third Address to his Majesty about it, his Majesty presently Ordered it, then
the words Popish Plots came in, but it was too late to send it in that Form all
over England. We trust the King and Parliament of England will from hence
conclude, how unreasonable a thing it is, to tie up all Ministers to Public
Forms. Since that time, how many occasions have been for special Petitions and
Thanksgivings, but in very many (I will not say most) Congregations, God has
lost that acknowledgment of his influence upon Humane Affairs, because the
Ministers have been tied to their Old Forms. And from hence I doubt not to say,
but in a great measure it is, That not a few Ministers, and multitudes of
People, have found no difficulty, either to deny there was any such Plot, or is
any, or to lessen it, and turn it to a ridicule, or to insinuate that honest
Protestants were the Plotters. The often repeated Declarations of it by the
King and Parliament, the several Declarations of the Council, the proceedings
against the Plotters by the Reverend Judges, are not enough to make these Men
believe a matter of Fact so often proved before them. Let this be in answer to
the Provision for particular Emergencies by Collects, p. 199. This is enough to
have spoken to this Chapter of our Vindicators; where the Principles we seem to
differ in are, 1. That all Ministers may be lawfully tied up to Forms of
Prayers made by others, in the Church, and all People in their Families; and
they are useful for those who have Abilities to Pray in their Closets. 2. That
Forms of Prayer for any States and Churches, may be made, comprehending all
wants of Churches and States, upon particular Emergences of Providence. I
utterly deny the former, and the latter too, if there be not a renewing of them
every Month or Week.

CHAP. VII.
A Reply to what the Vindicator has said, Chap. 6. p. 206, etc. The
Vindicator's great esteem for reading other Men's Sermons instead of Preaching.
The tendency of Principles to be considered, before we grant them by our
Practice. He has said nothing cogent to prove that Superiors may not as well
impose Forms of Sermons, as of Prayers. His Notions about Man's power to
Spiritual good examined, as also his Notion, as to Justification, and the
imputed Righteousness of Christ. How consonant to the Articles of our Church,
and those of Ireland. The mischief of the Scheme of Doctrine which he in this
matter defends.

1. I laid my fifth Argument thus, To agree a Principle, which agreed would
also allow a power in man, Reasonable Acco. p. 98.
when pleased to suppress all Ministerial Gifts in Preaching; is sinful.

But to agree, it is lawful for Ministers to obey Man, in performing their
Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of other Men, is to agree a
Principle which agreed, would allow man a power when he pleased, to suppress
all Minsterial Gifts in Preaching. Ergo, The Major is evident upon the
Principle before laid down, That it is not in the power of Man to suppress,
extinguish or render useless, any Ministerial Gift; for this were to frustrate
Christ's design in giving them; which was not to be laid up in Napkins, but to
be used for the good of Men. Nor will our Answerer say, that it is lawful for
Superiors to suppress all Ministerial Gifts in Preaching, and tie Ministers
only to read other Men's Sermons. He says p. 211. It is lawful to cite other
Men's Sentences. Or to use a larger Portion of other men's Discourses, owning the
Authors. All this is true, but what is it to the purpose, which is not about
sentences and quotations, but about the whole contex^ure of Sermons.

2. Nay further then this, It is lawful to read to People whole Sermons, and
H^milies, but this is no Ministerial Act, tho it be a good Action, and the
People had better have this means of Instruction then none at all. But every
good Action is not a Ministerial Act. By a Ministerial Act, I mean an Act which
Christ, or any of his Apostles required of, or directed the Ministers of the
Gospel; not that which Christ meant when he commanded his Disciples to go and
Preach, nor (as it appears by their Practice) did they so understand it.

3. Our Answerer seems to deny the other Proposition, but for Answer to it, he
first refers to what he premised to his Answer to the former Argument, as to
which I shall also refer to my former Answer, only adding this: That whereas
out of Reverence to Superiors, he seemed to hint, that we should first stay
till any such thing be commanded. The plain English of that is this, Stay till
you have condemned your selves, and shall have nothing to say if such a thing
be commanded (having first granted the Principle on which it is founded) and
then complain, that is, When the Steed is stolen, shut the Stable door; let us
first hook you past escaping us without rending your jaws, and then if we catch
you and pull you up, complain. Every wise man ought to consider whither his
Principles or Practice will carry him, before he allows the one, or ingageth
in the other.

3. Next he tells us, That he has manifested, the ordinary and constant
usefulness of Set Forms in Prayer, in Public Worship, for the advantage of
Religion, if I be able to prove the same concerning the ordinary using the
discourses of others in preaching, he has then, and not till then made the
Cases parallel; but this he thinks I never can. Let me try a little. I remember
p. 87, 88, he has given us a summary of these pretended advantages.

1. To ascertain the people, that nothing shall be prayed for by the Ministers,
but what they can say Amen to. And is it not as great an advantage from Forms
of Sermons, that then the People shall hear nothing, but what they may
aforehand consider, and be assured they may by Faith agree to?

2. That the people might be under no Temptations to give their minds a liberty
for ill ends to observe Expressions, and the manner of composure of the Prayer.
And is it not of as great advantage there should be Forms of Sermons, that
Ministers may not have a Temptation to make their Preaching, a business of
Rhetoric or of Raillery, or mere Philosophy, which too many have done, and do
do: Witness Mr. Hickringill's Curse ye Meroz.

3. That there may be an Unity in Prayer. And is not an Unity of Faith and
Doctrine of as much advantage to Religion, as an Union in the words and
syllables of our Devotion, and something more too? Might not Forms of Sermons
both contribute to, and also testify that?

4. Dull Capacities would be so helped. And are not people ordinarily more dull
in comprehending the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the Doctrines thereof, then
in understanding the words of a Prayer?

5 To prevent Impertinencies, in advised Expressions, results of Passion,
Imprudence, Negligence, Weakness, bad Principles, Erroneous Opinions. Would not
Forms of Sermons as much advantage Religion, by preventing all these ten times
more ordinary in Sermons then in Prayer? Thus I (...) made ^he Cases parallel I
think. But (...) Divine Institutions we argue without ^^^rd to the Will of God
as the only Di^ect^^ in the case from such things as we ^a^^y would be
advantages of Religion, we d ^ but set the Sun by the Dial, God knew better
than we, what would be advantages to Religion: There Is no arguing in these
cases, but concerning the Will of God in the case. They are not our fancied
advantages, that will prove the Will of God in these cases.

4. In the next place he tells us, The Ancient Church appointed Forms of
Prayer, but not Forms of Sermons. Admit this were true, that the Ancients for
500 years after Christ did either generally use, or impose Forms of Prayer,
(which I am very far from believing to have any truth in it) and not Forms of
Sermons; does this prove that the one is more lawful then the other? Are the
Opinions and Practices of Men, things to be urged argumentatively to prove a
thing Lawful or Sinful? They may be urged indeed to put us upon a strict
Enquity, but no further. I may consider these differences, when I believe the
thing is true in matter of fact; but I shall never so consider them, if I knew
the thing was true, as to determine lawfulness, or sin from them.

5. But Preaching is directed to Men (therefore there must be no imposing Forms
as to that) but Prayer to God (therefore Forms may be appointed as to that.)
Can any Mortal understand, why there should be more care taken, what a Minister
speaks in man's name unto God, then in Gods Name unto Man? Has not an
Ambassador more reason to take care what he speaks in the Princes, name unto
People, then what, and how he speaks, in ordinary Petitioners name unto his
Prince? But Men may be taken with varying of Phrases, but God cannot. But God
may be pleased I hope with the doing of his Will, and by the exercises of those
Abilities in his Service, which he has given us on purpose for that Service;
and it speaks no great Reverence for God, for any to express these things by
the Puerile expression of Varying Phrases.

6. The next thing he says p. 208, is very admirable, That Erroneous Notions
and Practices, cannot be so well beaten down by Forms, as by every Ministers
Abilities. This is to say that Errors may be better confuted, and Arguments for
them better answered by any Ministers private Conceptions and Expressions on a
small premeditation, then by a Book or Forms, deliberately by many composed and
written; for Forms may be made every Month of this nature, if they be lawful
and necessary.

7. He tells us thirdly, p. 209. That by leaving men to the use of their own
abilities, in Preaching, Ministers may acquaint People with such things as are
suitable to them, and in a Phrase suitable: It is much, that he could not
consider also, that if Ministers were left to pray by their own Abilities, they
might also pray to God for such things as new Emergencies make needful for
them; which they can never do by Forms, except they were renewed every Week.
And surely God never left his Church so ill provided for, that if at any time
he bestowed a new Mercy upon them, or the particular Members of any particular
Congregation, either preventing or removing some great Evil, or conferring some
great benefit, or by his Providence brought them into some great distress, they
could not obey his command, calling upon him in the day of Affliction, that
they might be delivered; nor being delivered praise him, till a Council was
called to make a Collect for the purpose.

8. Our Vindicators next difference, or further need of Forms of Prayer then of
Sermons assigned by him is, Because in public Prayers, must be comprehended
Adoration, Thanksgiving, and Supplication, for all ordinary good things, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. (what he means here by Adoration, as a part of Worship, distinct from
Confessions, Supplications, and giving of Thanks, I cannot imagine, the Apostle
1 Timothy 2.1. speaks of nothing but Supplication, Prayers, Intercessions,
Thanksgivings. I hope he does not mean bowing at the Name of Jesus, or toward
the Altar, for they are neither of them mentioned, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. For such
things indeed, there is need, (yet not so much of Forms of Prayer, as) of a
Rubric; for there is nothing about them, In Albo S. Scripturae. -- He says to
secure this Comprehensiveness, there is need of public Forms, But it is no way
(he says) neeedful that every Sermon should contain all the necessary points
of Doctrine and Practice. Now here all the Fallacy lies in the term every
Sermon, for there is the same need of one as of the other but not indeed in
every Sermon. But how does this prove, that there is no need of Forms of
Sermons? Suppose that in a thousand such forms there might be all comprehended,
were it lawful for the Superiors to impose them? Or Ministers to use them, when
all Ministerial Gifts in Preaching must necessarily be so suppressed? He seems to
think it is; for his next words have a scurvy hint, that the contrary liberty
is but indulged to comply with the humor and temper of the present age: And he
says much more in his 6 and 7 Paragraphs p. 210, 211, in commendation of
instructing people by Set Forms, as a Ministerial Act.

9. He is not pleased, p. 212, that I should call Preaching the greatest
Ordinance of the Gospel, or from the Commissioners at the Savoy tell him, That
Preaching is a speaking in Gods Name unto People, so that if we speak falsehoods
there we make God a liar. I must confess (so dull was I) that I did say so; for
if that be not, what is? Preaching is the publishing of the great glad tidings
of the Gospel, to the Children of Men. It was Christ's great work, for he left
Baptizing to his Disciples, and himself Baptized none John 4.2. and St. Paul
tells us, 1 Cor. 1.17. That Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to Preach the
Gospel, that is, the administration of the Sacraments was not his principal
work, for he tells us there v. 14.16. That he did Baptize Crispus, and Gaius,
and the household of Stephanas, and v. 21. he tells us, that Preaching is Gods
Ordinance to save them that believe, and Romans 10.14. How shall they believe on
him of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Is
there any such things spoken of any other Ordinance of the Gospel? Or are there
any other greater things, then saving of Souls to be expected from any
Religious Institution? And to speak Untruths in Preaching is (as much as in us
lies) to make God a liar, for it is a speaking to People in the name of the
great God. The Commissioners at the Savoy it is like, understood as much as our
Vindicator what Preaching was, and whether our Vindicator be of their mind or
no, signifies not much. I must confess from some Men's Sermons which I have
heard and read, I have seen reason to suspect, that they, and others, have had
a vastly different Notion of Preaching from us. The Noncon. generally (and very
many Conformists too) looking upon it as a great Institution of Christ, for the
publication of the Grace of Christ and persuading Men to the acceptance of that
Grace, to Repentance, Faith, and Holiness, without which none can be saved.
Accordingly they have preached Scripturally, and proved from thence what they
say, and the bent of their Sermons is to persuade Men to a life worthy of the
Gospel, to Acts of Morality, out of a Principle of Faith in Christ, Love to
God, etc. Others looking upon it, as a mere Exercise of Wit, or an
entertainment for peoples ears, or an opportunity to discharge their lusts and
passions, have called a flanting piece of Oratory, a Lecture out of Aristotle's
Ethics, or Plato or such a discourse as lately was made before my Lord Mayor
(to the admiration of all men) Preaching; which is just such Preaching as
before the Reformation, the people had from the Popish Priests, whose Preaching
was but a Lecturing out of Scotus and Aquinas, or a story out of the Legend,
and (as the story of that age tells us) they had not only the brutish
impudence to do this, but also to Petition Magistrates for a liberty to do it,
when the common people discerned the folly and madness of it, and would no
longer endure to be so abused and deluded.

10. In his 214 p. he grows very angry, that I should say, How many
discourses of late years have we had in Pulpits, pretending to prove Men have a
natural power, to things Spiritually good. That we are not justified, by the
imputed Righteousness of Christ, but by our own works? How many perfect
Sat^res, Raillerys, and Evomitions of the Lusts and Choler in the Preachers
hearts. To this he subjoyneth,

These are the kind words, and meek Expressions of one who judges and censures
the sharpness of other Men. Then he comes to defend those who have spoken for
Men's Natural power, to Spiritual Acts, and against the imputed Righteousness of
Christ. These things must not pass unexamined.

11. Will our Answerer say there have been no such discourses of late years? I
appeal to thousands, and ten thousands of Witnesses. Will he say, Ah, but they
should not have been spoken of, because they reflect on the Ministry of our
Church. That is false, they refl^ct not on the Ministry, tho upon many
Ministers of our Church, or who call themselves so. The Ministry of our Church
are those who Preach according to the Doctrine of our 39 Articles (which these
Doctrines are not) others are but Intruders, whom our Church owneth not; they
are but our Churches Natural Sons. Our Church has declared against them, in
her Articles and Homilies.

12. Besides, did not our Answerer enforce me to what I spoke, he had before
often told us, of the Impertinencies, Errors, Nonsense, Blasphemy, to which
conceived Prayer gave a scope, and That a Prayer may be put up, and the People
could not join in one Petition. I told him, Reasonable Account p. 106.
That was a rare and an hard case. 2. That their not joining might be from the
Lusts and Error of their own Hearts; 3. That it was the same case as to
Preaching, and therefore the Argument was as strong for Forms of Sermons to be
Universally imposed and used. He told me there had been many such Prayers: I
told him there had been also many such Sermons. But must our Vindicator, who
knows this, plead for it too, as he does now to the end of this Chapter. p.
215, 216. Let us hear what he says.

13. He tells us that all our Ministers own Christ to be the Savior of the
World (so did Pelagius) and that the New Covenant of Grace is confirmed through
him (so did he for ought I ever heard or read) and that in this day of Grace
God gives his Aids and Assistances, besides the Instructions of his Word, the
mighty motives of his Gos^el, and the benefits of the Ministry of
Reconceliation, and his Holy Sacraments. Hold here a lirtle, for here lies the
pinch. What does our Vindicator mean by Aids, Helps, and Assistances, besides
the Instructions of the Word, and Motives of the Gospel, etc. does he mean any
more then the Remonstrants have in their confession 1622 thus expressed, Chap.
17. n. 8.

That the Holy Spirit gives to all, and every Man to whom the word of Faith is
ordinarily preached, so much Grace, or is ready to give so much, as is
sufficient for the begetting of Faith. -- If he means no more by those terms,
then this, he means no more then a common Grace, granted unto all men that
are in the Church; and tho this indeed be more then a Natural Privilege, yet I
do not understand how it is more then a Natural Power under the advantage of
those Privileges. For Natural here is opposed to Adventitious, and such
adventitious assistance, as is more then the improvement of mere natural
Abilities, by ordinary and common Means. Which improvements, we commonly call
The common Gifts or Grace of the Holy Spirit. All these are comprehended under
the term of a Natural Power, and are opposed to Spiritual, which here signifies
the mighty workings of the Spirit of God, in a way of special and
distinguishing Grace, inabling the Soul to do some truly Spiritual Acts, which
it cannot do (without the Assistances) either from the powers of mere Nature,
or improved Nature, but must be done from a Soul changed, born again of the
Spirit, renewed, transformed, etc.

14. I am sorry to read our Answerer declaring, That he cannot understand the
End of Preaching, unless a man under no special Circumstances differencing him
from none who lives within the Church, has a power to believe and work out his
own Salvation, and to live Godlily, Righteously, and Soberly. I am sure no man
can truly believe what he has no sufficient Evidence of the truth of; and our
Savior told Peter Flesh and Blood had not given him a sufficient Evidence.
That Christ was the Son of the Living God. Matthew. 16.17. But what our Author
says, is the Arminians Argument, and has been sufficiently answered in
multitudes of Books; and what our Vindicator says, is confuted by the
experience of many good Christians, who will own the quite contrary; and I am
sure the Church of England says in her 10th Art, We have no power to do good
works pleasing and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ
preventing us that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will. And Art 13. Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the
Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasing to God, because they spring not of
Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make men meet to deserve Grace.

15. As to the point of Justification, our Author says thus:

We disclaim every where merit in our own works (so do the Socinians) and
acknowledge, Vindication p. 217.
that our Savior has as our Mediator interposed by his Obedience,
Righteousness, and Sacrifice, to expiate our sins, give the Sanction to the New
Covenant of Grace, and Righteousness, and to assure the Mercy of God, and
Pardon, and Forgiveness, upon the Terms of it. But if we speak of the Gospel
condition of Justification, that must be performed by our selves; and we do
account, that as Repentance which includes (that I dare say he meant not
Excludes as it is Printed though he has not been so charitable to me, as to
think I meant the Opinion and Practice, not the Person of Gregory the great,
was protected by Charles the great) is a necessary condition to the obtaining
of Pardon of Sin, so consequently it is necessary to our being justified. --
Nor shall I examine (tho I cannot find it out) the sense of the next words, but
take him up again, where I do understand what he means. -- And that a renewed
Holy Life is necessary to Justification, is manifested from that wrath, and
threatening denounced against workers of In^quity, yet he tells us, p. 218. That
the Gospel Justification is through the Redemption of our Savior and Faith in
him, and from the benefit of his Sacrifice. --

But it cannot be that the Righteousness of Christ should be so imputed to us,
as that we should be looked upon as having done or suffered what he did, or
suffered, -- for then we should be looked upon as Mediators, -- and might be
invocated. -- And he can see no other blame in this Doctrine, then that it is
consistent with it self, and with what was delivered by the Apostle.

16. I will begin my Answer, with the 11th Article of our Church, We are
accounted Righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own works or deservings; wherefore that
we are justified by faith only is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
comfort. -- and that they may not say that by Faith is understood Works, or a
Practical Assent. Faith in the two next Articles is made the Spring and
Fountain of all good Works.

The Articles of the Church of Ireland are yet more plain, Artic. 34, 35, 36,
37. I shall only mention one clause Art. 34.

This Righteousness which we receive of Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits,
embraced by Faith (which Faith Artic. 37 they declare to be a particular
Application of the Promises of the Gospel, to the comfort of our Souls, whereby
we lay hold an Christ, etc.) is taken, accepted and allowed of by God, for our
perfect and full Justification. 17. Our Answerer knew well enough that by
imputed Righteousness we did never understand, that the Acts or Sufferings of
Christ as Mediator were imputed, so as to make them as if we had done them.
This (Reader) is just such another Argument, as if a Prince should employ his
Ambassador to pay a Redemption Price for an 100 Slaves at Algiers, and he
should do according to his Commission; and when he had done, some learned
Musselman, should come to prove that the Ambassadors Action in Payment of the
Ransom, could not be reckoned his, or as if he had done it, because he was a
Mediator for an 100, neither did he actually pay the money. Certainly the Slave
would tell him, that his Action, so far as concerned him, might notwithstanding
be imputed to him, that is reckoned as if it had been his Action.

18. But it may be this is but a word-bait a contest De Lana Caprina, it may be
what they grant is enough to express the end of Christ's coming into the World,
the Mercy of God in Christ, and to secure the Salvation of Souls. Does he think
so? I would gladly then have him answer these Questions, Whether the Righteous
Lord can clear the Guilty without a satisfaction given to his Justice, contrary
to Exodus 34.7. If a satisfaction must be given, for every Man's sin, to make him
in a capacity to be declared Righteous (that is justified) before God, who
could ever satisfy but Christ? 3. Whether this satisfaction (which we call
Christ's Righteousness) could ever be ours, without a gracious Act of God so
reckoning it, as if we our selves had made it? Whether, therefore it be
possible that the Righteousness, whereby any Soul can be in any capacity to be
declared Righteous b^ God should be any other then the Righteousness of Christ,
and any Righteousness of our own, can possibly be antecedaneous to our
Justification?

19. In the mean time, we grant that God pardons no Souls Sins, but theirs in
whom he has wrought so much Repentance, as lies in a Resolution through his
Grace to leave sin and to do good; but this may be separated from all Actual
good works, and is no more then an habit of Sanctification which God gives at
the same time, that he justifies the Soul, but he does not for that justify
the Soul. That is very far from the Righteousness for which God in this life,
declares any Soul Righteous, and pardons its Sin. It is true, no Soul in the
day of Judgment shall be justified, but that Soul, that has wrought
Righteousness; and every Soul which has in sincerity done that, tho not in a
legal perfection, shall be acquitted from guilt by virtue of the Covenant of
Grace, founded upon the satisfaction of Christ, who in this sense is called,
The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World.

20. Nor is the contrary Opinion (so finely blended by our Vindicator) so
harmless, as he would make it, much less so consonant with the Apostles
Doctrine. 1. It makes Justification a mere Act of Grace, which the Scripture
makes also an act of Justice and Righteousness in God; Romans 3.25, 26. To
declare his Righteousness, for the Remission of sins, to declare I say his
Righteousness, that he might be just, and the Justifier of him who believes in
Jesus. 2. It gives Christ no place in Man's Redemption, but that of establishing
a Covenant upon which God might exercise his Grace. It indeed talks of his
Redemption and Merit, but takes away the work of a Redeemer, and makes his
Merits needless. 3. It makes Faith, as it is an Application of the Soul to his
Righteousness and Merit, needless, tho the Scripture makes an inseparable
connection betwixt it and Salvation. Hence it is very rarely that we hear the
necessity of such Faith urged. 4. It gives man the principal parts in his
Justification, for they are his works for which God justifies, tho indeed it
be upon the account of a Covenant established by the Blood of Christ. Much more
might be said: In short, it allows Christ to be a great Prophet, a great
Benefactor to Mankind, but denies him to be a True Priest, such a one as
atones by Blood; he only does it by Mediation, Intercession, and a Covenant.
According to this Doctrine, his Blood only sealed a Covenant; in what sense
they call his Death a Sacrifice, they know best.

21. In the mean time, no sober persons deny good works their due place;
without them no Soul shall be justified in the great day. They are necessary to
Salvation, and that final Justification. Ambsdorsius is the only Protestant I
have met with; who indeed in one place denies them to be necessary to
Salvation; no valuable person has since (that I know of) approved his wild
saying. But they have no place in the justification of a Soul in this Life,
unless in the Justification of its Faith, to be true, and not counterfeit. And
a Soul may be declared Righteous before God, and have its sins pardoned, before
it has actually done any good works, tho not before it be prepared by God for
them by a disposition wrought by Gods holy Spirit in the heart, and a
resolution to do them; which is indeed Repentance in the Seed, but such a Seed
as must necessarily afterward produce its Fruit. For it is as impossible any
Soul should truly trust and hope in Christ for that Eternal Life which he has
only promised to an Holy Life, and not live such a life; as it is that a man or
woman should truly trust and hope in a rich man for an Estate, without doing
the things to the performance of which he has made the promise; which is even
naturally impossible for any to do, tho they may pretend to it.

CHAP. VIII.
A Reply to what the Vindicator has said, Chap. 7. p. 219, etc. The Vindicator
will not understand, that the Question was at first stated only as to Vocal
Prayer, nor speak to the thing in difference. Two Errors running through all
the Vindicators Book. He has brought no sufficient Reasons, for a different
Interpretation of the Divine Precepts for Prayer and Preaching. He trifleth in
applying what I said as to Reading to a recitation of another words, tho it be
without Reading. The impertinent ways of modern Answerers; the Vindicator too
much follows them.

1 IN the 7th Chap. p. 219. Our Vindicator comes to Answer my Sixth Argument,
which I had thus laid down: To pretend to perform an Act of Worship, Reasonable
Acc. p. 115.
and yet not to do it at the same time, is sinful.

But for Ministers furnished by God with the Gift of Prayer, to perform their
Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others, is to pretend to
the performance of an Act of Divine Worship, and at the same time not to do it.
Ergo,



The Major I conceived needed no proof, for to do such a thing were but to mock
God, and to deceive our own Souls. The Minor I proved, 1. Because we so
interpret the precept for Preaching, not Go read other Men's Sermons. 2. If he
read such Prayers. I said it was a further question, because in all languages
the words used to express Reading are different from those used to express
Praying. I said we laid a greater stress upon other Arguments then upon this
yet we could nor think thi^ vain an^ impertinent. I said at first, That the
question is not about Prayer in the general, but about Vocal Prayer, p. 115.
again p. 117. We are speaking of Vocal Prayer, and what is the Will of God
relating to that species of Prayer.

2. In our Vindicators Chapter relating to this Argument, two things are
considerable; 1. The Answer. 2. The Reflections that have nothing of an Answer
in them. I shall only inform my Reader^, that it may appear by the Title of my
Book, and by the conclusion of it, and by many passages in it, that I did not
pretend in this case to define, but only to argue; not to determine what is
lawful and unlawful for all Men, in it self, absolutely, but to give our
Reasons, why we judge this thing unlawful: leaving others to the conduct of
their own Consciences. Nor had I done this, if the World had not been so often,
and so impudently told, That we grant these things lawful, That we have no
reasons, nothing to say (Wisdom, Reason, and Learning, were all born with
them, and with them alone they must dwell and dye.) Now these things being
first called to mind, let us hear what our Answerer says to the Argument.

3. First he says, This is an heavy Charge, a false Accusation, a Slander, a
Calumny; but whom does it accuse? Not a person in the World. Do I, giving my
Argument why I so judge a thing unlawful, condemn others, who think the same
thing lawful, especially when I profess against it? p. 164. n. 2. Next he
says, I contradict my self, having granted before, Forms in themselves lawful,
and may lawfully be used by Ministers in some cases. Very pretty, and I
contradict my self (forsooth) because I now say, that I think it unlawful for
Ministers furnished with the Gift of Prayer, and in a capacity to use it,
nothing naturally hindering. I would gladly know in what degree of opposition
these Propositions are. Shall we continually be troubled with Arguments, Ex
ignoratione Elenchi, not concluding against the Question, or to whom do such
Arguments signify any thing? Let the Reader see the Question stated p. 5.

4. But at length our Vindicator thinks he shall speak to the point, telling
us, That there is not the same reason to interpret the precept of Preaching, as
the precepts for Prayer. Very good, why did not he say so at first; I do think
there is, how does he prove there is not? He says (instead of every precept is
to be interpreted) every duty is to be performed, suitably to the Nature of the
Duty it self, or in such a manner as may best tend to the pleasing of God, and
the exercise of true Piety. Very true, it being always understood, that those
things best please God, and are the truest exercises of Piety, which are
according to his will. For to talk in matters of External Worship, of any thing
pleasing to God, being an Exercise of Piety, or any virtue in them antecedent
to, or separate from the Divine Will, is very odd discourse. God has not
willed acts in External Worship, because they are good and pious, but because
he has willed them, therefore they are so.

But he tells us, That in Public Prayer, Religious Devotion and Gracious
Dispositions and Desires toward God, are the great things to be practiced, and
to that end the use of a Form is well accommodated. I suppose he means for all
Ministers, for otherwise he says nothing.

8. We are speaking (as I said at first) not of Prayer in the general, but of
Vocal Prayer of which (as I have proved) words are an Essential Part; and being
so, our Author has told us, None but God can institute what words we shall
use. If he has appointed any Forms of this Nature, they are therefore lawful
and best, because he has appointed them. If he has left us some, but not
commanded us to use them; but leaving us at liberty to use them, or others to
that sense; Man can no more determine, then in the case of the Turtle Doves or
young Pigeons. If he has only Instituted words as a part of Vocal Prayer, but
left it to the liberty of his Ministers what words to use, only requiring them
to ask nothing contrary to his Revealed Will; it is not in the Creatures power
to determine to another what words he should use.

6. Two Errors and no small ones, I have observed running through all our
Vindicators Book. He seems not to allow of Vocal Prayer to be a distinct
species of Prayer, from what is merely Mental, which it must be, or it would be
sufficient for a Minister in the public Congregation to Pray Mentally, and 2.
Prayer would be no Homage of our Lips, and outward man. And if it be, there is
something else required to it, besides Gracious Dispositions and Desires
toward God, viz. Audible words, and they must be an Essential part of it, as
being that which alone distinguishes it from the other Species.

7. Secondly, Our Author all along this discourse, seems to talk of a Piety
and Devotion in External Worship, antecedaneous to the Will of God revealed
concerning that Worship. Hence he thinks to conclude Forms according to the
Will of God, because (in his opinion) they tend to promove Piety and Devotion,
yea and pleads these things in bar to our proof, that It is the Will of God
that his Ministers who have the Gift of Prayer, or an Ability fitly to express
their minds to God in Prayer, should use that Gift in Praying. We think that
that Duty in External Worship which is performed most strictly according to the
Will of God, is performed with most Devotion and Piety; otherwise the Papists
have more to say for their Images then I think they have.

8. But he further adds, That Ministers are to teach People what they before
understood not. This is in part true, but this is not half their work in
Preaching. We are not to acquaint God in Prayer with what he before knew not.
Therefore the precept for Preaching may not be interpreted go and read another
Man's Sermon; but the Precept for Prayer may be interpreted, go read another
Man's Prayer. We cannot indeed in Prayer tell God what he is not acquainted
with: But how does it therefore follow that therefore we must not interpret the
precept of God as to Ministerial Prayer, Go, and study the Mind and Will of
God, and according to the Abilities I have given you, express your and others
thoughts to me, as to the things which are according to my Will; seeing it may
be done by words conceived in our own hearts, and I have proved them most
Natural, most proper and very probably the Will of God; and considering words
are an Essential part of this Worship which no Man can institute or determine,
if Gods Word has left the particular words to our liberty, and that the matter
of Prayer is more variable then of Sermons?

9. I had said p. 118, That the words in both Languages in Scripture used to
express Reading, are quite other, from those used to express our duty in
Prayer. -- In the same page I had repeated the same: We will not be too
confident of it, but we are not aware of any Text in the Old Testament where
(...) signifies that kind of Speech, which is but the recitation or repetition
By Reading of the words of others. Either the Printer, or perhaps my self
carelessly (having plainly expressed my mind before, in the first lines of that
Paragraph) left out those words, by Reading, which manifestly was my sense, as
appears from what I laid down at first and was proving. I had also said, That
the Hebrews had a great penury of words, and it was hard to establish an
Argument from proper and significant words in that language. But I did not
remember any text in which (...) is translated Read. Here he mightily triumphs
over my unhappiness in Critical Observations; nor do I much pretend to them, or
affect them, but yet shall tell him that (...) in the three Texts he has
brought Genesis 32.4. Deuteronomy. 26.5. Deuteronomy. 27.14. cannot be proved to signify
Reading, which is that I undertook to prove p. 118. n. 3. For the Greek words
it is plain. Here he cries out what means he? That which our Vindicator had
no mind to understand, and which I plainly enough expressed. That the Greek words
signifying to read are never used to express the Action of Prayer, but instead
of them words that signify a recitation of a thing, without the help of our
eyes Instanced in (...), as Exegetical (in part) to (...) Now where shall we
find that word signifying to read in Scripture (...) and (...) we may find, but
all this referred to the Reading of Forms, and touched not the pronouncing of
them by heart. I do not think an Argument from words and the usages of them
alone conclusive; but it is not so slight as our Author would have it, Quae non
profunt singula, juncta juvant.

10. I have done with what in this Chap. pretends to an Answer. I come now to
consider the Reflexive part of it, and indeed this is the way of answering in
these Cases, 1. To look if any words can be catched at, to suggest the
Adversaries Irreverence or Disobedience to Superiors. 2. Next if any can be
found to bring the Adversaries under Odium, or Envy or Prejudice of any
multitude. 3. If any lapses of Pen, or otherwise can he found to make the
Author appear Ignorant, Silly, Self contradicting, Unlearned. 4. To put the
Ergo before the premises, beginning with telling the Reader, there s no weight,
no strength in the Authors Arguments; they are slight, trivial, trifling,
inconclusive things, Quod erat demonstrandum; which ought to have been the
conclusion, after a good answer had been given to the premises. Our Answerer is
too much guilty of it, as has appeared all along in his Discourse in this
Chapter.

11. He first entituleth his Chapter, Praying by Forms is very rashly and
injuriously charged with mocking of God. There is no such thing in my Argument
as the term mocking of God, nor is it named but in proof of my Major. 2. Nor
does it refer to any but Ministers who have Abilities to express themselves
fitly to God without them. 3. Nor is it asserted, but as the private opinion of
some Ministers not satisfied in the use of them, and a reason (and that of
which they were least confident of the strength of) why they cannot judge it
lawful. And the same Men tell you, p. 264. n. 2. They take not themselves to be
Infallible, they only speak as they believe, condemning none that judge or
practice otherwise. But this was a fit title to expose the Author by.

12. Next he tells the World this was an heavy Charge and Accusation, tho no
single person was charged, only a private opinion declared. Then the Reader is
told this is a trifling Argument, and the Reader must be asked pardon for
giving him the trouble to peruse a thing so very inconsiderable (he should have
said in my opinion, for he is not infallible) as this. Lastly he must be told
of great swelling words, extravagancy enough, words supported, or not supported
by weak, feeble, and impotent Arguments. That is, such as our Vindicator thinks
(and it is his interest to think) such.

CHAP. IX.
A Reply to what the Vindicator has said, Chap. 8. p. 225, etc. Ministers main
work, described in their Commission. The Priests and Levites work, more then
the Vindicator owns. They were a whole Tribe in Israel. Their maintenance
proportionable. No arguing from Gods appointments under the Law. The
Vindicators dirt thrown on the Author, wiped off, himself rebuked, for calling
an Ability to express our selves fitly to God in Prayer, a Varying of Phrases.
A fear suggested, lest by it he should have vilified Gods Holy Spirit. 4 New
Arguments against the Universal Use, or Imposition of Forms of Prayer.

1. MY Seventh Argument was thus stated, That Principle, which levelleth the
performance of the great and sacred Office of the Ministry, to the capacity of
the meanest of the People, cannot be a true Principle.

But this Principle, That it is lawful for a Minister of the Gospel ordinarily
to perform his Ministerial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others,
does this. -- Ergo.



This I proved p. 121, 122. I first presumed it would be granted that God had
appointed an orde^ of Men in his Name to declare his Will unto his people, and
to intercede with God on their behalf. 2. That he would not have done it, if
they had nothing to do, but what any of the people might do. 3. That any who
could read well might read printed Forms. 4. That it is not probable, that God
would have reserved Honor or Maintenance, and by a Law established it, for
such a kind of Ministry. What says our Vindicator?

2. He answers by five Observations. His first is, That I have given a very
defective description of the business of the Ministry. Indeed I should have put
in administering the Sacraments, but let it be added, and then I think I have a
good Authority for it, from the Commission given them, Matthew. 28.19. Go, teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded you, and lo I
am with you always to the end of the World. Here Teaching and Administering the
Sacraments, are made their great work, for that both the Sacraments are there
included is plain, from the precept Do this in remembrance of me, given them
Chap. 26. We will also grant Prayer from the Apostles Authority, 1 Timothy 2.3.

3. He tells us p. 226. It must be their Exerci^^ of a special power of Office,
that is the doing the same things, but in another notion (as Officers) but were
we speaking of the Material or formal part of their Works? we were speaking of
what Ministers are to do; not under what N^tion, Character, or Capacity. So I
say, take their Material Actions (supposing such Forms lawful) they have no
more to do, then the meanest of the people have a Natural power to do; which is
all I asserted.

4. Who denies that these Acts done by persons called of God, to do them in his
Church, are quite of another virtue and efficacy then as done by persons not so
called of God; but my Argument was, That it is not probable, or to us it
appears not probable (for the pretended demonstrations, doubtlesses, and
certainties of others in such cases, are no more then confidences) That God
would have instituted an Office for the doing of such Acts as the meanest
people might do.

5. He tells us p. 227, That his work is also to Preach (but in the Argument
Forms of Sermons were supposed as lawful as Forms of Prayer, and I have largely
answered what our Vindicator has said, to prove more need of the one, then of
the other.) For the other things he mentions, dispensing Absolution and
Remission, guiding Men's Consciences, directing and obliging men to observe due
Rules and Exercises of Repentance, convincing Adversaries, watching over their
Flocks; By his leave, if we either be guided by the practice of Christ or his
Apostles, considering them as things distinct from Preaching, they are the
least works of a Minister (I am sure some of them are least attended:) Private
satisfactions of Men's Consciences, is the work of a Minister, but no piece of
his public servie, (about which we were speaking) nor what a private Christian
may not do to his Ability. Nor do I think that in those works a Minister does
any thing Authoritatively, nor that his Counsels or advice will be found a jot
more effectual, then he can make it appear that what he says is the Will of
God.

6. In his third Observation he tells us, That when Litues rgi we^e laid aside
in England, many of the meanest of the people, both of mean Abilities, and of
bad and erroneous principles, were thought fit to be taken into the Ministry,
yet could Pray, and Preach popular Sermons in my method and to great
satisfaction. What is this to the purpose? comparisons are odious, and it is
too true that in the late times too many such persons Prayed and Preached in
Public, but that there were more admitted into the Ministry then since, will
be very hard to prove. I could tell him stories enough of my own personal
knowledge to make him excuse those admissions into the Ministry which were in
those times. But then I should be exclaimed against by our Vindicator as a
great Slanderer of the Church of England, though I know (if our Vindicator does
not) that the Bishops cannot help it. We desired to mourn for, and to throw out
in those times any sottish Persons, that by their Hypocrisy in those times
crept into the Ministry, when they once appeared so, we never called them the
Brethren or our Brethren, but looked upon them as the Scabs and Deformity of
the Church. For their Abilities, there was no defect of Trial of them in any
Presbyterian Ordinations, that has been amended since. There were none then
ordained but were examined of their skill in Greek and Latin and Hebrew (if
they had any, otherwise they solemnly engaged to study it) in Church History, a
great part of the Body of Divinity: none, but were put to make a position in
Divinity, and then to defend it against the Arguments of several learned Men.
Let us therefore hear no more of that.

7. Our Vindicator p. 231, 232, 233, 234 spends many words to prove that God
did under the Law annex a great and honorable Revenue to those that were his
Officers, tho their work was none other, then what other persons had a natural
capacity to do. But 1. How does he prove that the Priests ordinary work was
nothing else, but to offer Incense and Sacrifices. They were to Teach, Micah
3.11. Their Lips were to keep knowledge, Mal. 3.6. They were to resolve
Questions concerning the Law, Hag. 2.11. But further let it be considered,

1. That Gods Provision for the Priests, was a Provision for a whole Tribe in
Israel. The Males of the Levites only at the first settlement, as appears from
Number. 3. were near 22000 Men, besides Women, and Children under a Month old,
they cannot reasonably be thought much less then 50000 Souls, besides the
Priests.

2. It was not reasonable that their Maintenance should be less then was
assigned to the other Tribes: but more, because they were taken off from other
means of livelihood.

3. Their employment took up their full time.

I will not examine how great it was, but does our Answerer think that it is a
good Argument to conclude (if he could do it) that because God under the legal
dispensation allotted a great Maintenance to persons merely for doing what any
ordinary people could have done (which yet is not so) and because they were one
of the Tribes of Israel, no otherwise provided for; that therefore under the
Gospel, where that Worship is wholly altered, and a new Worship instituted, for
one part of which the great Apostle cries out, Who is sufficient, that God
should erect a particular Order of Men, and lay such severe charges upon them,
to give attendance to Reading, Exhortation, and Doctrine, not to neglect their
Gift, to Meditate on Divine things, and give themselves up wholly to them, to
take heed unto their Doctrine, to Preach the Word, to be instant in Season and
out of Season, to Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, to make Intercessions,
Supplications, Prayers, and to give Thanks for all Men, etc. That he should
give so strict Rules for their Qualifications, that they should be able, as
well as faithful, before the Office was committed to them. Apt to teach, etc.
and that these men should have no work to do, or the main work they had to do
at least, should be no more, then the most of their people might do? Will that
Maxim, The Labourer is worthy of his Hire, the Workman of his Wages, prove
that those who do no work in the Ministry, should have Wages? But of this
enough, and more than enough.

8. I had instanced in one thing more, viz. The Unblessed Effects we had seen, of
an Universal practice of this Nature. The first was, The filling the Church
with an ignorant sottish, and lazy Ministry. The second was The loss of
Ministerial Gifts and Abilities. The third was (a consequent at least) -- A
flood of Iniquity. As to the two first I acknowledged, that we have very many
learned, diligent, holy Men, that yet use Liturgies. I added, Far be it from us
to say or think otherwise. But I said, The establishing of Forms of Prayer for
Universal use, opens a door for such persons to enter in. -- And while such a
door is open, it is not to be expected but they will enter in, and it is
evident many such have entered in, and experience tells us, that Conscience is
not enough to oblige all men to their duty, the best of men had need of all
Obligations, etc. p. 124, 125. I proved the second and the third, from
Experience not to be denied.

9. The man raves at this in no less then 6 pages: He calls it an Open
notorious shameless Calumny, and makes me for saying so even the Vilest of Men.
But what is the matter? Have we not very many ignorant, sottish, and lazy Men
in the Ministry? If he has a mind to impose such a belief on the world, let
him first try if he can persuade the world, that the Sun enlightneth not the
World at Noon day? Did I say any more? Yes I said our Church was filled with
such, and that signified the main Body of the Church was such, when within ten
lines I had expounded my self by many, but besides (all due reverence first
paid to the Doctors of Proprieties) I hope it is proper enough to say, A Garden
is full of Snails, though I know there is five times the number of wholesome
leaves, or more innocent Worms in it, or that a Beggar is full of Lice, tho
they do not cover the fortieth part of his Body. I would fain know the
difference betwixt is filled, and is full. But it is a reproach upon our
Church. What do we mean by that? I hope we do not call such men our Church. I
have owned that we have very many others, and why may not those very many
others be the main body of the Clergy as well as the very many of these, who
can pretend no Relation to our or any other Church, but Titular and Secundum
Dici. Upon the people it can be no Reflection, who generally loath such. Thus
we speak Parables: But it may be he thinks it is a Reflection upon the Bishops,
for admitting, or suffering such: If he does, he is ignorant of our Law, and so
are any that say it. Let him or them consult any Law Books or ask any Lawyers,
and see if they will tell him That it is in the power of any English Bishop to
deny Institution to any, that can but bring any Testimony under the hands of
three Ministers for their life, and for their learning, can evidence it by
doing as much as a Schoolboy may do at 12 years old (that is turning into
Latin 10 or 12 lines of the Articles of our Religion) and whether he can
depri^e any (who has once read the Articles) for any Crimes, but being a Jew
or a Schismatic? I must confess it is some Reflection on our present Political
Constitutions relating to our Church, which in this point are nothing altered
from what they were in the times of Popery (notwithstanding the excellency of
them we were so often told of.) Nor is it a Reflection upon any Protestant
Legislators; for those who know any thing, know that from Queen Elizabeth's
time, our Parliaments have been about Bills against Pluralists, and
Non-residents; and for the Regulation of the Laws of Ministers, there have been
Debates upon Debates, and Bills drawn and read against Scandalous Ministers,
but either the Parliament has been turned off to some other momentous
business, or not sat long enough to bring the Bills to perfection, something or
other has as yet hindered. My Lord Cook observes, No good motion ever d^ed in
Parliament, which if it be true, and hold so; it may be a ground of hope to us,
that we shall have something done at last in cases which concern the Eternal
Salvation of so many Souls, and people shall not always perish through want of
Vision, and not any be suffered in a place where their business is by Life and
Doctrine to show men the way to Life and Salvation, by Life or Doctrine, or
both, to show them the way to Eternal Death and Destruction. Nor will this be
ever hindered, but by taking out of the Church Pluralities and Nonresidency
(those two great Pests of the Church, so acknowledged and complain d of in all
ages.) By the first I mean Ministers enjoying two or more livings at such
distances as they cannot possibly watch over the Flock in them, or perform any
thing of their duty to them (for contiguous Pluralities, where livings are
small and people few, and dwelling so near together, that they may meet
together in the same place to Worship God, I know nothing to be said against
them.) But while our Constitution is such, that Ministers may have 2, 3, or
more livings at greater distances, they must have Curates to supply them, and
it cannot be expected that while they will not allow men half a livelihood for
their pains, they should have generally very Learned, Diligent, and Sober Men.
The good Lord put this thing into the Hearts of our Civil Magistrates.

10. Hence it appears that what I said, was no such Calumny, as to be a
Reflection on any one good man, nor upon the Governors of our Church, nor yet
upon the Political Magistrate. What makes our Adversary here in such a rage, as
for this twice to call me Devil, once by craft, p. 70. another time by
Periphrasis p. 235. (for we can understand the term (...) and that of The grand
Accuser of the Brethren, tho while he thinks not fit, that Ministers in public
Services should use their Gift in Prayer, he can yet think it fit, to express
his Charity, by his two gifts, of Tongues and Oratory.) Yet in thus abusing me,
he as much abuses no mean persons of his own Brethren, for he who wrote The
Causes of the contempt of the Clergy, and those who in their Sermons have
complained of the Debauchery of the Clergy (and they h^ve not been few) have
said as much possibly very much more then I have said. I neither said, that the
main body of our Clergy were such, nor yet that they were Learned, Diligent,
and Sober Men, I had no reason to say either, because I do not know the tenth
part of them, but I know very many both of the one, and of the other, and
amongst those that I know on either side, those whom I know of the worser sort,
are most generally the greatest Zealots for Liturgies and greatest Railers,
against those that are of another mind. I say most generally, and the main body
of them are so (Tho there be some learned and sober men, are warm enough too in
this case) and for the truth of this I appeal to the knowledge of all our
English World.

11. Certainly it had been more worthy of one who has had the repute which our
Vindicator has had, to have owned the thing, which every eye sees, and
declared his sad sense of it, and acknowledge the defective Constitution of our
Church, having not had leisure and opportunity since our Reformation from
Popery to provide against it; and to have told us, That although the preparation
of Ministers work for them had been, or may be a Temptation to Men whose hearts
are viciously inclined to indulge their Lusts; yet a Liturgy is no necessary
cause, of this, nor this a necessary consequent of a Liturgy. This had been
true, modest, and ingenious; by what he has here said, he has not exposed me
but himself; but if he had so spoke, he had found me agreeing with him, and
saying the same thing, p. 124.

12. As to the second Effect which I mentioned, viz. The loss of Ministerial
Gifts. He dare not say, That the total disuse, or general disuse of the
Ministerial Gift of Prayer, is not the next way to lose it. But he tells us,
Blessed be God, in our Church, there is no loss of any Abilities requisite for
the due discharge of the Ministry. No loss? If he had said No want, I should
not have contradicted him. But is there No loss? Are there none, or have there
been none, who before this tying themselves to Forms, could have fitly
expressed themselves to God in Prayer, but now cannot without their Book Pray
with a Sick Person, or upon any Emergent occasion? I appeal to the Experience
of the World. And as much as he in his next words, and indeed all along in his
Book, contemns, and slighteth an Ability fitly to express our minds to God in
Prayer, I believe there are thousands, and ten thousands of Ministers and
Consencious Christians, that would not want it for all this Worlds good, and
perfer it to the knowledge of all Fathers and all Languages, and take it to be
one of the Best Gifts which every one who fears God is obliged to Covet. The
Lord lay not to his charge, his scorn and contempt of it. I am afraid, that
when he and I shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, he will find it
a graver thing then a Childish varying Phrases. He has read of words which the
Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. Is he sure, that none of the words which a
Godly Minister or Christian powers out from the Conceptions of his own heart,
first inflamed with the sense of his daily renewed Sins, and Wants, and
Mercies, are not words which the Holy Ghost teaches? It teaches expressions
in Sermons, 1 Cor. 2.13. in Confessions before men, and therefore our Savior
bids his Disciples take no thought before hand what to say, for it shall be
given you in that hour what you shall say, Mar. 13.11. Luke. 12.11, 12. and
Matthew. 10.20. it is expressly said, For it is not you that speak, but the Spirit
of your Father that speaks in you. May it not be the Spirit of our Father,
that speaks in a good Christian, praying from the conception of his own
Heart? Or in a Pious Minister praying for the people of God? Especially
considering that that Spirit is the Spirit of Supplications, and Romans 8.15. the
Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba Father, and v. 26. The Spirit that
helps our Infirmities, for we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered. He can have no Plerophory, that that Text restrains the Operation of
the Spirit there to Impressions upon the Affections. The Spirit may as well
speak in us in Prayer, as (which our Savior asserteth Matthew. 10.20.) it spoke
in his Disciples in their Confessions, which could be no otherwise, then by
prompting them what to say, and so it is expounded, Mark. 13.11. Whatsoever
shall be given you in that hour that speak ye. They spoke, but yet the Spirit
did so eminently influence their speech, that Matthew. 10.20. Christ says, It is
not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which s^eaketh in you. The
case standing thus, I durst not for all this World have said: This was nothing
but a Schoolboys Varying Phrases (which our Answerer has often told us in his
Book) for fear all understanding Christians should have judged me Profane, and
little understanding Communion with God in that duty. What apprehensions, or
confidences others may have, authorizing such expressions, I know not; but
shall in secret mourn for.

13. I had instanced in a thi^d Fruit or consequent of Liturgies universally
imposed, which I called a Flood of Iniquity. I did mention some drops of that
flood. Bitter words in Pulpits and Sermons, and Printed Books, ungodly
representations to Superiors of men, of whom the World was not worthy,
suspensi^ns, silencings of many godly Ministers, Ruins of many eminent
Ministers of Christ with their Families, separations of Christians one from
another, Imprisonments of man to their undoing, Revilings. I might have aded
Blasphemings of the Holy Spirit of God in his Operations; much of which, if not
most, had been prevented if Liturgies of Pra^er, had not been imposed or not
universally imposed. Here now our Vindicator runs a division of 4 pages; and
when he has said all he can, he must needs say, I have said what is truth. But
this is to charge a great deal of Evil on our Laws and Governors. And may not
a great deal of evil be the fruit of some humane Laws, which when Governors
see, it is their duty to repeal such Laws; tho they made them in the simplicity
of their Hearts, not foreseeing such effects, and consequents of them? 2. He
says they must be guilty, unless they root out all Liturgies: Is there a word
by me spoken to that purpose? See the contrary said by me, p. 164. n. 4.
Confusions, Heresies, Blasphemies came in, when Liturgies were shut out But the
question is, Whether if Forms of Prayer had been admitted, and not Forms of all
Sermons, it had been any proportionable means, to have prevented them?

14. For what he further inlargeth upon p. 239, 240. I shall only tell him,
That not one of ten of those who are now against universally used, or imposed
Liturgies of Prayers, had any concern in the things he mentioned, as things
done when Liturgies were shut out. For my own part, I appeared not as a man to
the World, till the year 1645, so could have no concern in imposing, or
persuading the imposing of the Covenant, the Ejection, Sequestring, or
Imprisoning any for refusal of it. If I remember right, I saw not London from
1645 twice, till 1659. I never saw Olivers face, never came near an Army. I did
very well know all the persons who are said to have wrote the Book called
Smectymnuus, and did know that they were all persons, not short of our
Vindicator for Learning, Pity, Ministerial Abilities, and all which was good,
and much his Superiors in age, and that there is no such words or sense of
theirs expressed in the 83 and 84 p. of their Answer to the Remonstrance, nor
any where else that I know. I am not bound to read over all that Answer,
because I am not bound to justify every Phrase of theirs.

15. For what our Vindicator seems to threaten, p. 238. telling me of
Exposing my self to outward Inconveniences (by which I suppose he means
sufferings.) I must confess such a political consideration might have had, and
it may be had too much influence on me 15 or 16 years ago. But having nothing
capable to be impaired, but my Name and Repute, my Estate, my Liberty, and my
Life; and having experienced, that notwithstanding all my Candor, owning the
Lawfulness of Forms in General, the Lawfulness of People joining in Prayer with
those that use them in Devotion, my self doing so very often, not condemning
any Ministers who judge it lawful and more expedient to use them, only
forbearing my self to do it, because I judge it sinful for me, and giving my
reasons for judging it so; yet because I think it my duty to Preach the Gospel,
and have sometimes done it; I have not escaped the rude Tongues of some who are
Zealots for it; nor been able to enjoy my Estate and Liberty, without a very
considerable impairing, by Imprisonment, most malicious and vexatious
Prosecution, without any color and pretense of Law; I am much hardened against
and prepared to answer such little Topics; and tho I yet think it my duty to
use all lawful means to preserve my self, yet I see reason to suspect, I may
have been mistaken, as to the lawfulness of some of my prudentials, and to be
more confirmed in what our Savior has taught us, Matthew. 16.25, whosoever will
save his life, shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake
shall save it. Yet I trust I shall be always careful, not to suffer as a
Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters, Pet. 4.15. but as a Christian, and not be ashamed, but to glorify God
on this behalf.

16. I shall conclude this Chapter with minding my Reader of a fable which
Luther makes use of, in his opposition to the Papists, in the beginning of the
Reformation. There was a City (says he) in which was a Law That none should
come into their great Meetings that had any bodily imperfections. If he did, he
was to pay a Fine. It happened on a day one came in, in whom those who were set
to take care to the Execution of that Law discerned one imperfection; they
demand his Fine, he denies and struggles with them, till they had discerned
four Imperfections he had, and then stood upon four Fines. Our Vindicators
struggling with me to this degree and in this manner, in this case, putting me
upon a more narrow inquiry, into this matter, has helped me to two or three
new Arguments which I before hardly thought of: I will but propound them, let
who will improve, or answer them. I think I shall hardly take up a pen again in
this cause, having said much more then I judge answered, or capable of a solid
answer.

1. To institute any part of Worship, is not lawful for any Superiors.

But to institute words in Vocal Prayer, is to institute a part of Divine
Worship. Ergo.

2. To determine in Acts of Worship, what God has left at liberty to his
Ministers, is unlawful.

But to determine Ministers, what words Ministers shall use in public
Ministerial Prayer, is to determine to them, and that in an Act of Worship,
what God has left at liberty. -- Ergo. 3. To submit to the use of any thing in
the Worship of God, which God has not by his precept made necessary; and many
in the present age make a mere Idol, thinking and declaring by their words and
actions, that no other way of Prayer is acceptable to God: is sinful -- But,
etc.

4. To submit to such a method of Prayer, as must necessarily shut out the
immeditate Influence of Gods Spirit, as to words in Prayer (which may be, and
often is) is sinful and unlawful.

But there may be and often is an influence of Gods Spirit upon Ministers even
as to Words of Prayer, and such a thing is (probably) promised; and to tie our
selves to Forms of Words prescribed by others, manifestly shuts out such an
influence, or the use of it. -- Ergo.

But thus much shall be sufficient to reply to our Vindicator, answering my
Arguments. Let me now inquire how happily he has Vindicated his own, or other
men's, from my Answers, Chap 9. of the Reasonable Account.

CHAP. X.
A Reply to the Vindicators 9 Chap. p. 241, etc. The Vindicators Fortification
of the 10 Arguments for Forms of Prayer before battered, beaten down, and
himself proved to have alleged no reason in his five Reasons, cogent for the
general use and imposition of Forms.

1. I took notice of Ten Arguments brought for such Forms of Prayer, and such
an use of them, as I had been speaking about.

The first was, because Forms are not by God forbidden. p. 135, I told them,
They were forbidden, by the Second Commandment, and three sorts of Texts more.
He tells us, He has answered before all I said to justify this. So I have
answered now all that he has said.

2. He Vindicates the Second Argument mentioned by me from my Answer to it, in
the same manner. I in like manner say, What he has said in his Vindication to
those purposes, I have answered before, in this my Reply to his Vindication.

3. To their third Argument from the common Topics of Order and Decency, I
answered Order only respects first and last: he thinks (...) signifies more.
It is hard to prove: but be it so; In Divine Worship, nothing is Order but what
God has prescribed in the Law of Nature or his Word. As to Decency, I had told
him nothing was Decent, but that whose contrary is Indecent: for betwixt
Decency and Indecency there is no Medium participationis. He denies this, and
thinks to prove it, because white and black are contraries; yet a white Garment
may be Decent, and a black Garment not Indecent. But does he think that it is
good arguing from Accidents to Substances, or amongst Accidents from Quantities
to Actions? Surely he should have instanced in some Actions in Gods Worship,
which are both Decent and Indecent at the same time. He does not like I should
say, That Forms are no circumstances relating to the Action of Prayer, as it is
a mere humane Act, because it might be performed without them; why? Because
standing or any other gesture, is a Circumstance, and some gesture is always
necessary. So words are necessary to all Vocal Prayer, but yet Forms of Words
prescribed by others are not so. Though standing or any other gesture be a
Circumstance, yet I hope a particular gesture is no necessary Circumstance of
Prayer, considered merely as an humane Act. He tells us again, There can be no
public P^^^er without any words, nor unless the words be determined by some.
Both these things are true, but nothing to the purpose; for our question is
about forms of words, prepared by others: and if (as he says truly) there can
be no Prayer in Public without words, then words are a part of that Worship
(they are the Homage of the Lips and outward Man) the External Part of that
Worship, must be words, and no part of Worship may be prescribed by man. He
says true, the words must be determined by some body. God has left them to
the liberty of his Ministers determination, and what God has so left at
liberty, is the Ministers liberty and privilege. I showed before that Man must
not determine in the Acts or Parts of Worship, what he has left at liberty; so
that they may (acceptably to him) do this or that: whether this be trifling,
let the Reader judge.

4. He has said nothing to take off my Argument to the fourth Argument, but
what I have before taken off, he is again at it, That no pious man can think
that the Will and Pleasure of God, is, that men's abilities should be exercised
merely to show their parts. All the strength lies in merely, the falsehood and
vanity of which suggestion, I have sufficiently before showed.

5. I shall say nothing to what he says to take off my answer to the Argument,
from the 1 Timothy 1.2. because our Vindicator himself will not say it is
conclusive in the case. I do not think it probable, nor the more probable,
because of the general use of them in the earliest ages of Christianity, which
I do not believe either proved, or capable of proof.

6. In his p. 247, 248. he comes to take off what I had said to the 7th
Objection, That Superiors may determine us to whatsoever we may determine our
selves. He will acknowledge this not to be Universally true. Two cases he
excepts. 1. When the Superiors commands take away the just civil rights and
freedoms of the Subjects. Says he so? May not the Superior determine me, in a
case where I may determine my self, if his determination takes away my Civil
Rights? And may he determine me in a case, where my Spiritual Rights and
Liberties are concerned, and therein may determine my self? Oh how cheap are
Men's Spiritual Rights and Liberties in the eyes of some, and that in matters,
where their Souls are so highly concerned in their standing fast in their
liberties? Are Civil Rights more to be contended for then Spiritual Rights? And
may they be contended for against a Civil Superior (tho they be in matters
which are his proper Sphere) and may not Spiritual Liberties be contended for,
which we derive immediately from God, and of which no Magistrate as to my
practice is under God the proximate judge? 2. His other case is, Where the
thing commanded is against the Rules of Conscience, But surely every man in
such things is determined, and has no power to determine himself; but it is
true, these things are no matte^ of a L^w. The Question still is, Who as to my
practice shall be the judge, what is against the Rule of Conscience. If he
says my self, he ha^h determined the case to my sense. Here he speaks
something, if ^he Inferior does not believe ^he thing sinful but if he does he
has said nothing at all to the purpose; and that every one may easily discern.

7. It is worth our Readers observation, how ingenuously this V^ndicator
de^leth he says that p. 147. I have told them. That the Author of that
Argument, would persuade us to be Papists, in that he would have men to think,
That the judgment of Superio^s is better then our own. My words are these: It
is worth our Readers observation how the aforementioned Author, and h^t in the
pursuit of this Argument, would persuade us to be Papists acting contrary to
the singular judgment of our own Consciences, out of an abounding voluntary
Humility and judging (and that as to matters of our particular practice) upon
which our Eternit depends as the miscarriage in them may lay the Soul under the
Guilt of Sin. That the judgment of our Superiors is best, whence he would
infer, not only a lawfulness, but a necessity incumbent upon a reasonable Soul,
which is by its principles obliged to follow that which is best to obey men
that are our Superiors, contrary to our own Opinion and Judgment.

What Faithfulness, or Ingenuity is to be expected from such a Writer? If he
ha^h but so quoted the Ancients for Forms of Prayer being generally and
universally used, he may have (after his manner) proved what he would, for
ought I know. I say it again, That he who persuades me or any other Christian
that it his duty in the things of God, contrar^ to the opinon and judgment of
his own Conscience, to obey Superi^rs, because it is best, does a thousand
times more to promove Popery, then if he should persuade men, to believe
T^ansubstantiation or Purgatory, or any particular Doctrines of Popery; the
great Arguments for which are in this Root. And if I could believe, that I
ought to do, or believe what the Church or my Superiors believe, because they
so believe or do, or command me to do so, tho I veril^ believe it sinful; I
should think it most eligible to be of that Church, which pretends to an
Infallible head.

7. And I humbly offer it to the Consideration of those who are, or who are
like to be our Legislators, whether it be possible that that Religion can long
be kept out, if men may thus teach Blind Obedience (the very mother of it) and
(as others have done) confidently assert not only a Real but a Corporeal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, (so ascribing such a body to Christ as is
no true body, invisible, illocal, multi present, etc.) yea and Purgatory too,
leaving order for Prayers to be made for their Souls departed (as others have
done) to instance in no more particulars of very many; and when they have
defended themselves, with the most nice, unintelligible distinctions they can,
the best of this is but to teach people, Quam prope, ad peccatum sine peccato
licet accede re, which it is a thousand to one if people (the generality at
least) can understand.

8. To take off my Answer to the 10th Argument (for the 8th and 9th he will not
own) he refers to what he said before, concerning the necessity of Uniformity,
which I denied. I shall also refer my Reader to what I have before said. I do
presume my instance from the Decree of Darius, was good enough to prove, that
all Superiors Precepts for Uniformity in Worship are not lawful.

9. What he says p. 253, upon my quotation of Heb. 5.1. to prove the due
notion of a public Minister in the Worship of God, He is a person taken from
amongst men, and ordained in things pertaining to God, to offer up such
services as God had instituted; which as to the Jews were Gifts and Sacrifices,
as to us are Prayer, Praise, Preaching, Administering the Sacraments. He had no
mind to understand I designed from thence to conclude, that we having twice ten
thousand Christians, that wanted not the Gift of Prayer (blessed be God) our
Church could not want sufficient Ministers for that work, seeing she had such
Men, and it was her own fault if she did not call them to it.

10. Our Vindicator comes in the last place to reinforce his own 5 Reasons
against the Batteries I had given them. His first was, p. 253.
That a true, right, and well ordered way of Worship in address to God, might
be best secured to the Church in the public Service of God.

To this I replied, 1. That is only a right way of Worship, which God has
instituted. He says God has not instituted the very words we are to use, but
he has instituted, That we should use words in Vocal Prayer, and left the
particular words to his Ministers liberty. Words are an essential part of his
Worship, man cannot institute them, nor determine, what of that Nature God has
left to liberty. I mean no other men besides he that Ministers in Prayer,
which appears to be a part of his Institution, because he has directed no
other way. 2. I had told him that the security he talked of was not possible,
nor attainable by Forms. He tells me it must be secured as much as may be (that
is his sense) but I hope not by depriving Ministers of the just liberty and
rights which Christ has left them, not by making Ministers, the Ministers of
Men, to read what they have prescribed, instead of the Ministers of Christ,
doing his work by the means he has in Nature and by Scripture directed. 3. I
told him that in Hundreds of Congregations, for twenty years together, the
Worship of God was in England well, and orderly performed without Forms. I here
add, and has been, and is in Scotland, New England, Holland, so as admit what
he says were true in the late times of all the Congregations in England,
(which it is very far from) yet there is proof enough, to overthrow his Reason.

11. His second reason was, That needful and comprehensive Petitions, for all
Spiritual and outward wants, with fit Thanksgivings, may not in the public
Supplications of the Church be Omited; when as the tying of all men to the
Forms, is the ready way to have them Omitted, as we have had now the experience
of two years last past, for a sufficient proof; nor are the ordinary and common
wants of Christians, proportionable to the particular renewing wants of States
and Churches, Congregations, and Persons.

12. His Third Reason was, That the hearts of Pious Men, might be more devout,
and better united in the Service of God, by considering beforehand what
Prayers and Thanksgivings, they are to offer up, and come the more ready to
join and prepared to join in them. And when they come, not hear one word about
the particular Sins, they have been thinking to confess, but only sins in
general; nor of their present and renewing wants, nor of their lately received
mercies, how great soever they be, nor how Universal soever, for which God
certainly expects a particular Recognition and Thanksgiving; but only words of
General Thanksgiving, for all Mercies, and general Confessions of all Sins, and
general Petitions for all good things.

13. He seems displeased that I should tell him, Forms may be read falsely. This
he says is very unlike, but I my self with a hundred more, have heard it more
then once; I could name him the particular persons, times and things, but then
I should be exclaimed against again for reflecting, yet it is not yet 14 days
since I heard it from one, who (as one would have thought) read the Forms with
great Zeal. But then he says the people may help themselves, having often
heard and joined in the Form; that is, provided they have the most by heart,
which not one has of Ten thousand; and 2. then not without great distraction,
for they have great reason to believe, their Leader can Read more perfectly
then they can remember.

12. His fourth Reason was, That such difficult parts of Church Offices as
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, the matter of which requires great
consideration, may in composing a Form be so framed, that men of greatest
understandings may with readiest assent, entertain them, and that they might be
sufficiently Vindicated (from the Calumny I suppose he means) of the boldest
Opposers. My Answer was to that sense, That these were the easiest parts of a
Ministers Office, as to External work, for besides the use of his Natural
Motions of his his hands, he had nothing to do but to repeat the words of our
Savior, which are very short Forms, of Divine Institution, and to apply the
general acts of his Office, Prayer and Exhortation to that Work. This now our
Vindicator denies not, but he would have security, that men should not Vary.
Let him have a Law with all our hearts: But he rhinks that according to men's
different Notions, they may vary in their Prayers and Exhortations. So they may
in their Sermons, before the Sacrament, and what help for that.

12. His last Reason was thus delivered, That this may be an Evidence to other
Churches in future times, after what way we Worship God, and that such a Church
is in its measure a pure and incorrupt Church. I answered where has God
required such an Evidence? He tells me, We need not any special command for
every good thing. Nor need every good thing be brought into Public Worship,
and made a part of it. I always took the recital of the Creed to be a good
thing, but no Part of Worship, and thus himself answers what I next said. That
to this end Forms of Sermons are also needful, on this Account. I told him a
public Confession of Faith is a sufficient Testimony. He tells us it is so as
to our Doctrine, but not as to our Worship: Well let the^ be then a Law made
with all our hea^^s, That none in the public Worship of God, should do any
other Act, nor use any other mean, but what God in his Word has established.
We should think this Act as good an Act as ever was made: And this would give a
better Evidence to the World then Forms can, how we Worship God.

And now I am come to an end of my long journey, where I have not been tired
with the length of my way, but for want of one Style or Difficulty, to give my
hand or pen the least stop. I am resolved (without great reason) to tread this
path no more, I see there is no end of Writing, where Men will take a liberty
to repeat what is said, as they please, and run Vagaries, nothing concerning
the matter in hand, only studying to divert the Reader from understanding the
truth, and how to expose those that will venture to contradict their
Sentiments. Let those who have a mind to talk at this rate talk on, for all me,
and please themselves with the noises themselves make, and with having the last
word.

FINIS.
(...), A REVIEW Of the Third Section of the Third CHAPTER OF THE VINDICATION
OF LITURGIES, Beginning Vindicat. p. 136.
1. THose who are but meanly versed in this Controversy, will easily
understand that our Adversaries three great Topics are Unity, Authority, and
Antiquity. Themselves know as well as we, and will sometimes confess, that to
argue from the Institution of God, and Chri^, to the Institutions of Men is
very weak; and the Pleas from Christ's using the same words (as we translate
it;) from the Precepts, for speaking the same thing, and glorifying God with
one Mouth; from the command to Timothy, That Intercessions, and Prayers, and
Supplications, should be made for all Men; from Paul's order for bringing the
Parchments from Troas; are such, as none of them would offer to bring in the
Schools, being fit only for a Country Auditory. They also know, that not one
of their pretended Arguments from Reason, will conclude either necessity or
lawfulness, but Unity, Obedience to Superiors, and Antiquity, are the three
great Bulwarks from which they think to Batter us who are of another mind.
Indeed none of all these, will conclude the general use of such Forms of Prayer
as the Question speaks of, either necessary or unlawful, nor can have any force
upon an Intelligent Soul till the point of Lawfulness be determined within it
self; for Peace is no further required of us, then as it can be kept, together
with our Peace with God; and who so persuades another by Sin to separate
himself from God, that he may keep an Union with Men, has not learned his
Doctrine from the Old or New Testament, which commands us to follow Peace and
Holiness (which certainly lies in a first respect to Gods Commands) and no
further then as much as in us lies, and as far as it is possible to have Peace
with all Men, which must certainly be interpreted not concerning our Natural,
but Moral Power; nor are we to obey man, but in Subordination to God: and in my
preceding Discourse, I have (I think) made it appear, That no man has power to
appoint an Essential part of Worship (which in Vocal Prayer, words must be) nor
when God has prescribed One Mean in Worship, to direct another; nor yet when
God has commanded us to serve him with the utmost Attention and Fervency; and
consequently to use all means he has given us in order to that end, can any
command of men, limit us to a Mean, which we upon experience find, hinders our
Attention and Fervency; nor yet when he has in any duty promised the influence
of his Holy Spirit, can Man command any such mode of performance of that duty,
as must necessarily shut it out; which must be in the present case, if any
influence of the Holy Spirit upon our Words in Prayer, be any part of his
promise. And for the Practice, and Examples, or Opinions of good and Holy Men;
it is impossible they should further lay hold upon our Consciences in this
matter, then to double our thoughts upon the matter in question, to make us
seriously to weigh on what grounds they Act; our selves being as likely to be
mistaken as they. This made me pass over our Vindicators third Section of his
Third Chapter, wherein he labors to load us, with the prejudice of the
Constant Practice of the Church against our Opinion and Practice; something
slightly looking upon it but as loss of time and paper, to reply to an
Inconcludent Argument; and seeing, that the question being about Sin or Duty,
no Practice could conclude on either side.

2. But yet as the most of Men, so I my self have a great Reverence for things
that can be made out to be Universal Traditions. Of which nature I hardly know
any thing not plainly revealed in Scripture, except the observation of the
Christian Sabbath, and Infant Baptism, neither of which stand upon that single
foot; much less do I think, that there is any such thing to be pleaded, for
Ministers Universal porformance of their Ministerial Acts in Solemn Prayer, by
the prescribed Forms of other Men. Though therefore enough is said, partly in
the Reasonable Account, partly in the Supplement, to answer whatsoever has
been said of this nature, yet having my pen yet in my hand, I shall add a few
lines, to justify what is before said, against the Attaques upon it, and to
show the weakness of what is brought anew in the Vindication.

3. Only because we are so apt to vary from the Question, I desire the Reader
would first consider what we do not deny, and therefore needs no proof. 1. We
deny not but from the beginning Public Prayers Were made by the Minister and
Congregation. 2. We also believe, That very early the use of the Lords Prayer
was general in the public Congregations; tho we find none enjoined it under
Penalties. 3. We do believe, That even from the first there were Orders Set for
Churches meeting together for Prayers, in certain places, and certain times. 4.
Nor do we at all doubt but from the beginning, many good Men in imitation of
John the Baptist and of Christ, did compose Forms of Words, which might
instruct the weaker in the due Method and Matter of Prayer; which forms also
some particular men (not having attained to an Ability fitly to express their
minds to God in Public) might use, or let alone, as they saw reason. But none
of these touch the Question, which is, Whether Ministers who have an Ability
fitly to express their mind to God in Prayer, may ordinarily without sin, use
the prescribed Forms of other Men? This our Vindicator must prove. In order to
the proof of it, he suggesteth, That they have been used in all Ages in the
Church, and it is unreasonable therefore to think them not lawful, or that they
any way hinder Devotion. Now to make this good, every one sees that (I will
not say an Universal, but) a general use of them must be proved. For if some
particular men did use such of their own accord, it proves nothing; we agree
they may do so still.

4. I cannot see how this is capable of proof, for it is very unreasonable to
imagine a general use without a general Imposition. Can any one think, that
all, or most Ministers, for more than 300 years after Christ, should fall into
a Practice, to which neither the light of Nature, nor any Precept in Scripture,
or Practice of the Apostles, guided them without some command from the
Governors of the Church? This command must either be from all who were Bishops
over many Churches, or from all the Synods of particular Churches, or from the
Fathers in some general Council, or from the Magistrate. It is certain it was
not from the Magistrate, for there was no Christian Magistrate till more then
300 years after Christ. It could be from no general Council, for there was none
till 325 years after Christ, when the Council of Nice Assembled. The next was
that Assembled at Constantinople 380. The next was at Ephesus 431. The fourth
at Chalcedon, 451. There is no pretense for any such establishment by any
general Council, till we come to that of Chalcedon, nor there, but by
Implication; and the probability of that I shall examine by and by.

5. Besides the Councils mentioned in Scripture, there are 17 Provincial Synods
we read of before the Council of Nice, 36 more betwixt that and the next
general Council at Constantinople, Anno 380. 17 more, before the General
Council at Ephesus, Anno 431. (12 of which were before that of Milevis) 8 more
before that of the Council of Chalcedon Anno 451. In all 78 lesser Synods, and
3 general Councils were before that of Chalcedon. Of all these 78, there are
but three pretended to have made any Canon in the cause. That of Laodicea Anno
364, the third Council of Carthage, and that of Milevis Anno 402; All
Provincial Councils, whose impositions could reach no further then their own
Provinces; and I have showed and shall show further, That the first decreed no
such thing, only that Prayers should be in their Churches Mornings and
Evenings. As to that of Carthage we have showed that it is doubtful, whether
there were ever such a Council or no; if there were, it is certain, it made but
21 Canons, this is the 23d. Nor do the words of the pretended Canon prove any
such thing, but rather the contrary. That of Milevis indeed is plain, but it
was made upon a particular occasion, and reached no further then Numidia; and
by their assuming a power to make a Liturgy for that Province, they have told
us that there was none made by Peter, James, Mark, Andrew, Clement, etc. nor
any then of any general use in the Church, for if there had, they could
easilier have directed the keeping to that alone: and it is plain from the
words of that Canon, that till that time there was a liberty of composition
left to the Ministers of Churches.

6. I therefore humbly offer it to my ordinary Readers observation, how
impossible a proof they undertake, who undertake to prove a General use or
imposition of Forms of Prayers for more then 400 years after Christ; being
neither able to prove it, from Universal Practice of particular Men, nor from
more then one of 78 Provincial Synods (and that in a particular case of great
Exigence) nor from any Canon of any General Council, and I am sure much less
from the commands of all particular Bishops in their Diocesses, or the 40th
part of them: indeed I know not of one. And I most humbly offer it to our
Superiors, whether in a time when they are struggling for the very life of our
Religion against Popery, they can shut out Eminently Learned and Pious Men,
because they durst not submit to this Injunction, which most certainly can
pretend to nothing of Antiquity, elder then the Council of Chalcedon 451 years
after Christ, when abundance of Superstition and Popish trash was crept into
the Rituals of the Church. Nay I hope to make it good that no such thing had
establishment by that Council.

7. I have not the Councils at large, only 2 or 3 abridgments of them. Caranza
gives it us in these words:

Can. 1. A Sanctis Patribus in unaquaque Synodo, usque nunc prolatas Regulas
tenere statuimus; i. e. We determine to keep the Rules established in every
Synod until this time. Justellus in his Code of the Universal Church (whom I
think we may trust, and the rather, because our Vindicator has given us such a
warrant) has it in the s me words almost, (...). By this the Canons of all
Provincial Councils before that time, were not brought into the anons of the
Universal Church and established by it, but only those mentioned in Justellus
his Code.

8. The Code of the Universal Churches Canon, begins with the Council of Nice,
and confirms 79 Canons made by them. It goes on with 25 Canons of the Synod at
Antioch, in the year 341; then it confirms 59 Canons of the Synod of Laodicea
made 364, and 7 Canons made by the Council at Constantinople, made in the year
383, and 8 made in the General Council at Ephesus, in the year 431. Then comes
the Council of Chalcedon in the year 451, which made 29 Canons, the first of
which was confirmative of those before mentioned, and no more. Then comes the
Novella Constitutio of Justinian made about 531, or 532, that is added to
Justellus his Code, in these words, We ordain that the Holy Ecclesiastical
Canons, which were propounded and confirmed, by the four Holy Councils, V.
Justelli Codicem Ecclesiae Universal, p. 128.
viz. that of Nice consisting of 308 Holy Fathers; that of the Council of
Constantinople consisting of 150 Holy Fathers. Those of the first Council of
Ephesus where Nestorius was condemned, and that of Chalcedon, where both
Eutiches and Nestorius were condemned, shall have the Authority of a Law; for
we receive the Decrees of the aforesaid Holy Councils, as Holy Scripture, and
observe their Canons as Laws. This Constitution was made about 541.

9. But we are yet inquiring what Ecclesiastical Sanction Forms of Prayer to be
Universally used by Ministers, had by the Council of Chalcedon. I observe
first, that the Canons of the Council of Milevis are not in the Code, so not
confirm d at all by it. The Canon of the Council of Laodicea indeed is. Let us
then hear that Canon as Justellus has it, (...). That is, We ordain, That the
same Liturgy of Prayers, should be made every where both at Nine of the Clock
and at Evenings.

Thus much we agree was confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon in the year 451.

10. But what is this to the purpose? It should have been (...), the same Forms
of Prayers, that indeed would have been something. Here s nothing but an idle
playing with a modern usage of the Term Liturgy, which indeed we here in
England of late years have appropriated, to Forms of words to be publicly used
in Prayer, and it may be the Church of Rome before us; but alas the word
signifies no such thing. In regard the stress of several Arguments from
Antiquity lies upon this poor word, I will once for all disabuse my Reader as
to the true sense of it; I will do it from a great Authority, that of
Melancthon and all the Saxon Divines, who agreed in writing their Apology for
their Confession tendered to the Emperor Charles the 5th at Ausburgh 1530,
which was answered by the Popish Divines Eccius, etc. Eccius and his Associates
had caught hold of this word, and contended that the Mass was a Sacrifice,
because it is by the Ancients called (...), a Liturgy. Melancthon in that
Apology printed 1535, in the beginning of the Chapter De Vocabulis Missae, thus
answers, The word Liturgy, signifies only a Public Ministry, and does fitly
suit, what we hold, That one Minister should in the Sacrament consecrate the
Elements, The meaning of the word Liturgy.
and give the Body and Blood of Christ to the people; as one Minister
preaches, and offers the Gospel to all the People, according to that of
Paul, Let a man so judge of us as Stewards of the Mysteries of God; and again
We are Ambassadors of Christ; so the term Liturgy excellently agrees to the
Ministry. For the word is an old word used to express public civil Ministries.
The Grecians used it to express any public Taxes, Burdens, or Tributes, the
Charges of setting out Navies, etc. as may appear from the Oration of
Demosthenes (...); which Oration is wholly spent about public Offices and
Immunities from them, where he says, That some unworthy men finding themselves
privileged, In civil Authors.
studied, (...), to decline public Liturgies, that is Services. So they spoke
amongst the Romans, as appears by the Rescript of the Emperor Pertinax F. de
Jure immunitatis. Tho (says he) the number of Children does not free. Men
(...), from all Liturgies, that is public Services. And the Commentator on
Demosthenes says, Liturgy signifies a kind of Tribute to defray the charges of
public Plays, Navies, Schools, and such things as the public stock was
concerned in -- And (says he) it is plain from the diphthong (...) in it that
it is not derived from (...), which signifies Prayers (from whence the word
Litany is derived) but from (...) which signifies public Goods. Thence (...)
signifies to take care of public things, and (...) signifies such an Officer.
Thus far they.

From this account of the civil usage of the word, it may easily be in
Scripture gathered, In Scripture.
what it signifies in sacred things, and proved from Holy Writ. It is used,
Luke 1.23. to signify all Zacharies public Service in the Temple. We there
translate it truly Ministration. It is used to express Paul's public Service to
the Church in suffering, 2 Phil. 17. Surely that Text is not to be translated,
If I be offered upon the Forms of Prayer of your Faith, but (as we do) upon the
service of your Faith. So the Apostle speaking of Distributions to the poor, he
calls it the Administration of this Liturgy, we translate it Service; so Phil.
2.30. to supply your lack of service to me. Gr. Liturgy; he speaks of Timoth's
coming to him. Heb. 8.6. Christ says the Apostle obtained a more excellent
Liturgy, we rightly translate it Ministry, Heb. 9.21. all the Vessels of the
Liturgy, that is of the Jewish Ministry; it cannot be of the Jewish Forms of
Prayer. The Canon of the Council of Laodicea (confirmed as being part of the
Code by the 1 Canon of the Council of Chalcedon) decrees, That the same
Liturgy, that is public Ministry of Prayers, should be performed at Nine in
the Morning, and in the Evenings; which I hope might be without Forms of words,
of which it speaks nothing.

11. But he tells us the next Canon in Justellus proves they understood Forms
of words in Prayer. I answer, that is not so: the next Canon indeed, directs an
Order of the public Ministry, viz. That after the Ministers Sermons they
should pray a part with the Catechumeni, then with the Penitents, after this
thrice; with the Believers once silently, twice speaking out, etc. but in that
Canon (...) is not used, nor any words like it, but (...) and (...), Prayers
and Oblations. But Zonaras and Balsamon so interpret the Canon. I doubt it not;
but the one lived 600, the other 700 years after that Canon was made, and
either of them in ages when Popery had prevailed 4 or 500 years, and they knew
no other public Prayers but by Forms. I doubt not but in that age 100 more
would have so interpreted it, to make it justify their Practice; but what is
this to the purpose? So, many now where they meet with the Terms Liturgy,
Prayers, Offices, Litanies, presently dream of a proof for Forms of Prayer,
which none of those words are restrained to. Thus we see there was no
establishment of Forms of Prayer by the Council of Chalcedon, 451.

12. We must therefore come to Justinians Novellae Constitutiones. I presume
every one knows that great Emperors, neither use to write out Folio's, nor to
draw Prefaces to them. The Imperial Law in that Emperors time (say the
Centuriaters and Moxia) was scattered in near 2000 Books (it was time to
abridge it) the Emperor Justinian employed in it three Lawyers, the principal
was one Tribonianus, Sleidan says of him, He was a covetous profane man, and
reported for sums of money given him, fixisse and refixisse leges, to have
made and unmade Laws at his pleasure. He drew the Imperial Law into three
Books, called after Justinians Code, to which were added, the Digesta, and last
of all the Novellae constitut. the former contained the Laws of all former
Emperors; the last such as he himself, and some few Emperors next before him
made. Justinian confirmed these Books, so they became the Imperial Law, from
the year 542. By the way, tho this Justinian did many good things, yet he was
an Heretic, and had many great Vices (It was he who put out the eyes of
Belisarius that great Commander (by whom he indeed did whatsoever he did
worthily in his Wars) etc. so as he was enforced to beg his bread before he
died.

13. Out of the Preface to these Novellae, our Vindicator has taken something
he thinks for his purpose. If he had given us the words of the Prefacer, for I
cannot find them in Gothofred, I could have spoken distinctly to it, but I
suppose he has given all that were for his turn. (Speaking of his Monks and
Clergy) he says they would have done otherwise if they had acquainted
themselves (...); that is to learn the way of the Holy Ministrations; as to
what he says, cap. 2, and cap. 6, having not the Book, I can say nothing
unless he had given us the Greek words. I suspect them to be but (...) or
(...), which prove nothing. But it is not worth the while, for admit these
proofs prove the thing, it proves no Sanction of Forms of Prayer before 542:
So I lose but 59 years. Nor do I understand what need Pope Adrian had 259 years
after this, to get a Civil Sanction from Charles the Great; if one were 259
year old made by Justinian, and made a part of the Imperial Law.

14. But I cannot but observe by the way how our Author fetching his
Ecclesiastical Sanction but from the Council of Chalcedon 451, and Justinians
Novellae 541, has quite destroyed his instance out of Eusebius de Vita
Constantini, c. 17, 19, 20, (...) for if the English of that be Prayers by
Authority appointed, we must find an higher Authority constituting their use,
then that of Justinian, who did what he did 542; and Constantine had been dead
200 years before. Nor was the Council of Chalcedon of 130 years after
Constantines death, so that it should seem only the Prayers were constituted of
which he speaks cap. 17, not the Forms also; but I shall meet with that anon:
besides this Civil Sanction of Justinian being in his Novellae (which contained
only his own Laws and some Emperors that went immediately before him) it is a
certain proof there was no Ancienter Civil Sanction by Constantine and
Theodosius, etc. we should then have found it in Justinians Code, not in his
Novellae; for any Ecclesiastical Sanction there is no pretense to any until the
Council of Chalcedon, and I have showed there is no proof to be fetched from
thence: besides the Canon of the Council of Milevis being not brought into the
Code of the Universal Church, is a sufficient Argument, there was no such thing
confirmed by the Council of Chalcedon; for that Canon is the only plain Canon
in the case.

15. But ( Dato non concesso as we say) admit, That from the year 541, they had
been so imposed by Justinian, and made a part of the Imperial Law, what then? I
had been mistaken 59 years (which I am far from believing or seeing the least
ground for.) Will any one say that the practice of a Roman Emperor in that
age, or indeed the Church under his Government, was a Copy for any Protestant
Church in all things to write after? I refer my Reader to the sad account given
by the Centuriators (who were all Learned Protestants) of the most corrupt
state of the Church in this Age; see Magdeburg. Centur: Centur. 6. ap. 137,
impr. Basil. I think any one who is a Protestant, will be of another mind. The
Pope indeed at that time was not well set in his Saddle, it was 6 or 7 years
after that age, before he got the Title of Universal Bishop, but his foot at
this time was in the Stirrup, and the Bridle in his hand.

16. But our Vindicator will go higher with us; he will prove them from the
year 400 to the year 500. I hope he means generally used in public Devotion or
imposed for such use, or he proves just nothing. To prove this, he again
brings in the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon: I have already said enough to
that. Next he brings in Proclus Bishop of Constantinople, and he finds his
Writings in Bibliotheca Patrum; he tells us he declares Forms of Divine
Service, (what is the Greek word?) To have been delivered from St. James, and
St. Clement, and to have been ordered by St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom. That
there was one Proclus Bishop of Constantinople soon after Chrysostom, Eusebius
tells us: But that he left us any Writings must be proved from better Auhority
then that of Bibliotheca Patrum. However, he says as much for St. James and
Clements Forms of Prayer, as he does for Basils or Chrysostomes, and as to them
our Author declares his not giving credit to him, nor is it reasonable he
should; for it is not probable, that had there been any Apostolical Liturgies,
Chrysostom and Basil would have made any. Nor was Proclus a likely man to
impose any; for Eusebius l. 7. c. 4. gives us this Character of him:

He vexed no Sect, but preserved and restored to the Church the great Jewel of
Meekness, which is best for the Church; wherein he imitated the Emperor
Theodosius: for as he would not exert his Imperial Power, against any accused
for Religion, so neither did Proclus concern himself, as to those who held a
diverse Doctrine.

17 Our Vindicator rises higher, and will prove something from the year 300 to
the year 400; but I observe he never tells us what: will he prove the Lords
Prayer was used? Or that some Forms were made by others? Or that some men used
some Forms? None denies all this. But that which he is to prove, is, That such
Forms were generally used by, or imposed upon all Ministers in any considerable
part of the Church. All his proof is from the Liturgies of Chrysostom and
Basil. Julians speaking of (...), an Order amongst Christians in Worship, which
Sozomen calls (...), and Nazianzene Orat. 3. p. 101, 102, calls them (...);
considering what himself had quoted out of Eusebius, and from the Council of
Laodicea, n. 5, 6, 7, 8.

18. What he has said out of the Council of Laodicea, has had its full
answer; what he has said from Eusebius has had an Answer in part, and anon
shall have a fuller reply to it: at present I will only concern my self in the
other. For the Liturgies of Basil and Chrysostom, admit they did make any, I
would fain know what line of proof we have, that made they were not left at
liberty; we have before proved there could at this time be no imposition of
them, does any think there were not many in their Diocesses that needed Forms
of Prayer both for their Instruction, and to help them in their Devotion? How
does it appear that Chrysostom or Basil did themselves use any? 2. This cuts
the Throat of all the fictitious Apostolical Liturgies. Had there been any such
things found out in their times, there is no doubt but they would have rather
recommended them then any of their own unto their people. 3. Both these great
Men flourishing in the time of the Milevitane Council, it is not likely had
there been known Liturgies by so famous Men as Basil and Chrysostom, that they
would not without any more ado, have ordered the reading of them, they
especially living at that time or a little before. But 4thly, As I have before
said, what imaginable proof can there be more then we have, that those
Liturgies were none of theirs. The Copies do not agree, there are Doctrines in
them quite contrary to their Doctrines, hymns not used in their times, words
not then in use, Prayers for Persons living 500, 700 years after their time But
there is enough said by my Lord of Morney in the case, by Learned Rivet in his
Critici Sacri Specimen, in the Reasonable Account, p. 67. Supplement p. 43, 44.

19 As to our Vindicators Quotation out of Sozomen, concerning Julians design
^o bring the Pagan Religion in credit, the Reader must be wary, for 1st.
Sozomen tells us the sum of what Julian did in his own words, then for the
proof of it he refers to Julians own letter to the Pontesee of Galatia,
which he gives us at large. The words our Vindicator quotes (as they are in
Sozomen) for he does not love to give us his quotations full) are these. ( Soz.
l. 5. c. 15.)

He (says he, that is Julian) determined to adorn the Gentiles Temples, both
with utensils and furniture ( Apparatu says the Latin Translator) and the
order ((...)) of the Christian Religion; and besides with Seats and Pews for
the Teachers and Lecturers of the Pagan Doctrine, and Exhortations, and with
Prayers prescribed for certain days, and hours, and Monasteries. -- Then he
refers for the proof to Julians own Letter, where is not a word of Prayers.
-- What is there in this, to prove the Christians had at that time Forms of
Prayer in the Church. Because they had (...) an Order in Worship, and because
the had some set days for Prayer, they ordered Prayers on certain days, and
hours, must they needs be Forms? Nor do I believe was the Common Prayer Book of
Julian made for the Heathen, ever yet seen by any learned man, at least, I
never heard of it. But what our Vindicator means by his next words [which
Nazianzene calls (...), which (with all submission to his skill in Critical
Learning) I think is better tranlated partly a Form of Prayers, then as he does
Forms of Prayers in parts I cannot Divine. Does he mean that Naz. expounded
Sozomens (...) That could not be, without a Resurrection, for Nazianzen died
389, which was above 50 years before Sozomen wrote, (was not this as great a
miracle as Gregorius Magnus, his living 200 years?) What then? Did Nazianzen
expound Lucians words? There is no Evidence he ever spoke any such, only
Sozomen so phraseth what he did, but Lucian in his Epistle says no such
things, or at least has no such words. Indeed (...) is more properly
expressive of the thing in Question, Forms of Prayer, then (...) or (...). But
Nazianz. is not by our Author quoted to have said any such thing was
established, only to expound the words of another Author who wrote 50 years
after he was dead, or Julians who never appears to have used such words. So
he^^ is a fine flourish of words to no purpose, but to delude the Reader.

20. Our Vindicator is now come to his proof from the year 200 to the year 300,
where he refers to his proof in Libertas Eccles. from what he had of Origin and
Cyprian, and I refer to my answer, in my Supplement, p. 21. 22, only minding
our Vindicator that there is a great deal of difference betwixt (...) and
(...): Prayers appointed, and Forms of Prayers appointed. The latter is not in
Origin, but the former, which proves no appointment of Forms; but that there
should be Prayers at such times.

21. For what he adds out of Tertullian, of their having a Form of
Renuntiation in Baptism, and H mns, and the Council of Antioch censuring Paulus
Samosetanus, for disusing the Hymns: It had been proper to have told us the
Nicene Council also established a Form of Confession of Faith. Are we arguing
about Hymns, Forms of Confession of Faith, and Abrenuntiation of Idolatry, or
about Forms of Prayer to be used in Devotion? Were the other Acts of Worship,
as Prayer is (I mean the two first, for singing indeed was) from the instance
of the Ennuch and Philip, Acts 8. it seems to be an appendant to the Ordinance
of Baptism, that grown persons offering themselves to Baptism, should profess
their Faith in Christ, which could not be without a Renunciation of Idolatry.
But surely those were no Acts of Adoration or Devotion: So as these instances
are mere Transitions, from things of one kind to things of another; from whence
no proper conclusions can be.

22. The Argument from Singing by Forms is as improper, for a Form is necessary
there, how else can a whole Congregation sing the same thing? But it is not
necessary in public Prayer, by any necessity of Nature or Divine Precept. Now
it is wide Arguing, to conclude from the use of Forms in an Act of Worship
which cannot be performed without Forms; to the lawfulness of them in another
Act of Worship, which may be performed without them.

23. I must confess, I never was for Singing any Hymns or Psalms or Spiritual
Songs in Public Worship, but what were Scriptural. My reasons are, 1. Because
I take singing to have a cognation with Reading, only with a Tuneable Voice,
now I know nothing but the Holy Scriptures, which can be read as an Act of
Homage to God. 2. Because it is needless, we have Scriptural Hymns, Psalms, and
Spiritual songs enough. 3. Because I know none specially commissionated to
compose them, and Psalmistry is no ordinary gift. 4. Because it has proved and
may prove of very dangerous consequence, and I am much mistaken if I have not
read some Ancient Canon prohibiting it, tho I know it has been since admitted
in some Churches by Canons.

24. For the first 200 years after Christ, he speaks faintly, saying only
that Justine Martyr and Ignatius have two expressions which seem to favor it.
He only further mentions Hymns, and proves the use of Hymns of Ecclesiastical
composition from Pliny and Lucian, no very competent Witnesses of the Christian
Churches affairs. The early use of the Lords Prayer is easily yielded him, but
it is a strange proof of a Form of Prayers composed by other Men, and generally
used, or imposed, to prove (as p. 158) That they began in some Churches with
the Lords Prayer, and ended with the Hymns of many names, which Mr. Gregory
thought was the clause at the end of the Lords Prayer, and he does but guess it
some other. The Lords Prayer comes not within our question, be it a Form or
not a Form.

25. Whatsoever he says a p. 160. ad p. 164. is rather ad pompam then ad
pugnam, it all refers to the use of Forms of Prayers in the Jewish Church.
To it all, I shall only add 2 things.

1. It is very improbable, and will appear so to every considerate Christian,
that we should have in Scripture a full account of the Jewish Church from its
Cradle to its Tomb, and so particular an Account of the way of Worship which
God established amongst them, from which they might not vary; and they should
have Forms of Prayers established for ordinary use, and the Scripture not
mention any thing of them: we read in Scripture of other Books they had, some
of which are perished, some preserved for our Instruction, and Guidance. We
read of the Book of the Law many times, but never of their Common Prayer Book,
nor of any person that used the 18 Prayers. We read Nehemiah 8. That in a
solemn day of Worship, the whole Congregation met, and called to Ezra for the
Book of the Law, he brings it, they read in it from the Morning to Midday, v.
1, 2. After this we read of many Priests and Levites who read in the Book of
the Law, distinctly, and gave the People the sense of it, and made them to
understand the reading thereof; but we read not a word of their Book of
Prayers, either there, or in any other part of Scripture: We read in Luke that
when our Savior came into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, they brought him
the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, he read in it and preached out of it, but
neither there do we read of the Book of 18 Prayers brought forth. I must
confess that in ordinary cases it is not a good Argument, That this, or that
thing was not in being or in use, because there is no Sacred Record of the
being or use of it: But certainly concerning Gods Worship amongst the Jews, it
is a good Argument, to prove there was no such thing established in their
Worship, because in the Holy Scriptures, where we have the full story of that
Church, a full account of their Worship, either by Moses, or David, so many
charges to them not to add thereto, nor to diminish therefrom, there is not
any mention of a Book of public Prayers, which God directed for that Church:
we read only of a blessing which looks like a Form (tho some have been of
another mind) of Gods own directing, tho we often read of the Book of the Law,
called for, brought, read in, and often read of the Servants of God Praying
publicly, yet not the least mention is made of a Book, or Forms by which they
prayed. Admit they had had Forms, if God had prescribed them, it had been out
of our question, who will freely allow God to prescribe his own Homage and
Worship; but to think that any of the Jews, or the whole Sanhedrim, had
Authori^y to make any for universal use, when God gave such punctual directions
both to Moses for the Service of the Taberncale, and all things therein, and to
David for the Service of the Temple, that it is expressly said Exodus 39.42. 3.
That the very structure of the Tabernacle was according to all that the Lord
commanded Moses, and Deuteronomy. 4.2. there is so express a command: You shall not
add to the word, which I command you, nor shall you diminish from it; which is
repeated, Deuteronomy. 12.32. and David says, 1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 13, 19. All this
the Lord made me to understand in Writing by his hand upon me, v. 12. the
pattern of all that he had by the Spirit. When we read of Nadab and Abihu,
being struck dead, Levit. 10. for but using ordinary fire in a Sacrifice, and
of Vzzah being struck dead for but touching the Ark when it shook in the New
Cart, it being Gods prescript that that Family of the Levites, should carry the
Ark on their shoulders, Number. 4.15, 7, 9. I say after all this, for any to go
about to prove that the Jews in their Worship had Forms of Prayer not
prescribed of God, which their Ministers were bound to use, and of which is no
mention in Scripture, is an undertaking fit for none but those who think they
can prove Quidlibet e quolibet; nor to be believed by any, but such as are very
credulous. Our Vindicator says their very Sacrifices were Rites of
Supplications, and as to them they were limited, and used no such Variety.
Rites of Supplication, and Supplications are two things, and these Rites were
limited by God, not by the Sanhedrim, I hope, nor were they without some
variety in them. For his instance 2 Chronicles. 29.30. It is said, They praised God
with the Words of David, and Asaph the Seer. Asaph was a Prophet, David told
us, he ordered nothing but by the Spirit of God, what he understood by the hand
of the Lord in writing upon him. For Joel 2.17. which he quoteth, surely Joel
was divinely inspired, nor is that Prayer surely of length enough for a whole
Office, nor was it more then a general direction for matter to be enlarged in
words, as the Jewish Minister thought fit. For what Dr. Lightfoot, Dr. Outram,
Scaliger, Buxtorf, Ainsworth, tell us, they have had their Intilligence from
the Rabbis, the eldest of which (of whom we have any Record) was (says
Alstedius) after the world was 3380 years old. The Jerusalem Talmud was
finished by R. Jochanan 250 years after Christ, the Babilonian Talmud not till
500. The most of the Writings of their Rabbis, says Alsted, appeared not to
the World till 1000 years after Christ. Now how competent Witnesses these are
(whose Books also are as full of Fables as leaves) of the practice of the
Jewish Church before Christ, or in its incorrupt state; let any judge who are
men of sense.

2. But admit it were a thing capable of proof, that the Jews in their
incorrupt times, and that by Gods command, ordinarily used Forms of Prayer in
their Worship, and that such as were neither prescribed by God nor any Prophet,
or Penman of Holy Writ, or that in and about, and since Christ's time, they have
used such Forms of Prayer ought this to guide the Practice of the Christian
Church? Or will it prove that the same thing is lawful in the Christian Church?
I judge not: For the Jews had by Gods prescription a Worldly Sanctuary, and as
some Typical so many Carnal Ordinances (as the Apostle speaks) which are to
continue but till the time of Reformation. Music, which was one of the things
directed by David, by the Spirit of God upon him, to be used by the Jewish
Church, was no Typical Ordinance, but it was a Carnal Ordinance, upon which the
primitive Church disused it, retaining singing only as Justin Martyr tells us
Quaest and Resp. 107. where he calls it a Service (...) for Children (with
allusion to the Apostle, who compares the state of that Church, to the state
of Children under age) therefore the Gospel Church threw it out; but he tells
us that (...) plain singing was not so; and it was therefore retained: besides
it was justified by our Savior, commanded by the Apostle, etc. In that very
Chap. Joel 2. where at the 17. v. Our Vindicator thinks he has found a Collect
to be used in the Jewish Worship, he might have also found a Promise at v. 28.
relating to the days of Pentecost, (as appears by Acts. 2.17. I will power out
my Spirit on all flesh, and this Spirit Zech. 12.10. is a Spirit of
Supplication, a Spirit of Adoption, teaching us to cry Abba Father; and because
we know not what to pray for, helping our Infirmities with strong cries and
groans which cannot be uttered, Romans 8. It is therefore very ill arguing, to
argue Divine Institutions under the Gospel, and the modes or means of them,
from the Institutions under the Law. But far worse, to argue not from the
Institutions of God, but the Traditions and Practices of Men in the Jewish
Church. Are we then ignorant how severely Christ taxed the Traditions of that
Church in his time? Telling them they had by them made the Law of God of no
effect. For which tho our Savior did not wholly desert their Church, but was
often with them, heartily joining with them in his Fathers Institutions, yet he
doubtless never approved nor joined with them, in such Traditions as he had so
declared against.

26. Our Vindicator in the close of this Section has a passage out of
Melancthon, from whence he would make us believe, that Melancthon judged that
Forms of Prayer were always used and commanded in the Church: I shall the more
diligently examine this, to learn my Reader not over much to trust the
Vindicator, without looking himself into the Authors he cites, and because it
has had so contrary an influence on me: That whereas before I was something
doubtful, whether the Saxon Churches (since the Reformation) had not an
universally imposed Liturgy, knowing that Luther did at the beginning reform a
Missal for them, upon reading the common place of Melancthon from whence our
Vindicator takes his quotation; I begin to be of another mind, and to think
that even those Churches (tho of all other most imperfectly Reformed) had no
other then a Book of Prayers composed, and left at liberty. The place he
quoteth is in Melancthons common place, De Precatione. The words of our
Vindicator are these: And upon a view of what I have now produced in this
Section, the Reader may see reason to believe the truth of what was asserted by
Melancthon concerning Forms of Prayer. In loc. Theol. de Precat.
Ecclesia semper eas proposuit, and public and private in eas exerceri jubet.
The Church of God has always proposed them, and thought them fit to be used
both publicly and privately.

27. Melancthon was a great Light, and one of the first threes in the
Reformation of Germany from Popery, of the persuasion of Luther and the Saxon
Divines, who differed much, both from the Suitzerland Churches, and the five
Imperial Cities, and many others, both as to the indifferency of Rites and
Ceremonies, which had been used in Popery, and in the great point of the True
Corporeal presence of Christ in the Lords Supper. This is manifest in the whole
History of those times, wrote by Scultetus, Hospinian, and Sleidan. He
published two Editions of short Com. Places, the one 1535, which he dedicated
to Hen. VIII. King of England, the other largely printed 1543. In both which is
a common place about Prayer, but in the first no such passage as our Vindicator
quoteth. In the latter I find something like it, p. 558. In these words.

Sed quia difficilis est Attentio, in recitatione ideo ignavi fugiunt
recitationes: At Ecclesia semper eas proposuit, et public et privatim eas
exercere jubet: Ideo Psalmitraditi sunt, summo concilio compositi and Christus
ipse formam precandi proponit, ac nominatim inquit; Luc. 11. Cum Oratis Dicite:
verba, et Recitationem certam prescribit ut antea praescripserat Johannes.
Teneamus Ergo et recitemus formam Divino consilio traditam. In English: But
because in recitation attention is difficult, therefore lazy persons decline
Recitations, but the Church always proposed them and commanded them to be used
both in public and private. The Psalms were therefore composed with the
greatest wisdom, and Christ himself proposes a Form of Prayer, and
particularly says, Lu. 11. When you pray say. He both prescribes words, and a
certain Recital, as before John had done. Let us hold, and recite that Form
which our Lord has given us. -- Then he largely expounds the Lords Prayer.

28. It is manifest that Melancthon here speaks not one word of such Forms of
Prayer as are within our question, which are Forms composed, and prescribed by
other Men not divinely inspired, or commissionated by God, to order things in
his Worship. He neither here, nor (that I can find) in any part of this common
place, mentions any but the Lords Prayer, the Psalms of David, or some other
parts of Holy Writ, the use of which we most freely allow even to the best of
Ministers, tho it may be we have no such opinion of the necessity of the use of
the same words and syllables, as some others have had, or have.

29. Neither does he by Recitations (which he says the Church always
commanded) mean Forms of Prayer (as our Author suggesteth) it is a most
unaccountable thing why lazy persons should (as he says) decline Forms. But
the thing he is speaking of is Vocal Prayer, in opposition to the Popish
Practices of Priests in Public Worship, Muttering Prayers in secreto, making
the people believe that whether they heard what was said or no, joined in one
Petition or no, yet they were the Prayers of the Church, and upon that account
heard for them. This is it he opposes, and says the contrary was always
ordered and commanded by the Church. That Christ ordered it otherwise, he bids
them in Praying say, not mutter to themselves only; and that the Psalms were
made to be sang out, not mumbled over in secreto; and this is all can be made
of that Paragraph.

30. From the whole method and structure, and matter of that common place it
appears plainly that Melancthon did think All Ministers might not perform
ordinarily their Ministerial and Family Acts of Prayer, by the prescribed Forms
of other Men, for his whole business is to instruct Students for the Ministry
in the true nature of Prayer, the parts and methods of it, the understanding of
the Lords Prayers, etc. He first determines, Supplications and Thanksgivings
the two great parts or species of Prayer; then p. 532, 533, he goes on, showing
the difference betwixt the Prayers of Christians, and those of Pagans, Jews,
and Mahumetans, directing the first to distinguish themselves, by praying in
the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ. After this he casts his discourse under
5 heads, of all which he discourses severally. 1. In order to a due
Compellation of God he advises a Premeditation, what God is, who Christ was,
what he has done, etc. 2. He advises a Meditation concerning the Precepts
enjoining Prayer, several of which he mentions. 3. He advises the
consideration of the Promises, for this life, and that which is to come, and
instanceth in many, p. 536, 537. 4. He shows the necessity of the exercise of
Faith in Prayer, and directs the different exercise of it in Petitions for
Temporal and Spiritual, and Eternal good things, 538, 539, 540, 541. Then he
comes and directs men what to pray for others, and how. 5. He directs that the
matter of Prayer, Cogitetur ac Ricitetur, should not only be Endited in and by
the Heart, but Recited by the Lips. He again repeateth the Matter, and Order,
and Method, and justifies the lawfulness of begging Temporal good things, and
gives reasons for it, answering the Arguments of some against Praying for
Temporal good things, to p. 555, and 556. He tells us there may be Prayer
Gemitu by a sigh; but it is profitable both for the Younger and Elder to keep a
well ordered Form in Compellation of the true God, that they may distinguish
true Christian Prayers from those of Jews, Turks, and Pagans, minding us of the
Divine Promises, and comprehending the certain matter of Prayer. Such he says
were Jacobs Prayers, and many others Recorded in the Prophets: p. 557, he says
let us therefore accustom our selves to Recital, and we may use well composed
Forms without Superstition or Magic (that is provided those Forms have no
Superstition in them, nor are thought to have a Magical Virtue or Operation
from the mere sound of such and such words rather than other, for which no
reason can be given.) Let us not (says he) recite the Hymns of Homer, Orpheus,
or Callimachus, but let our Souls move toward God, with a confidence in Christ
revealed. He adds in the same page many Lazy, Drunken, Careless persons contemn
Recital in Prayer, but (says he) let good Men be persuaded to accustom
themselves to others, for which he gives Reasons; after which come in the
words at first cited. I can understand nothing by this, but that many Lazy,
Drunken, Careless Papists, both Priests and others, despised Vocal Praying,
some of them pretending they prayed in heart, others persuading the people that
if the Priests muttered over the Church Prayers, tho the People heard not a
Petition, nor understood none of them, yet it was well enough, the Church
Prayers were said, and they were of avail enough for them.

Melancthon does indeed say (but it is three sides before in my book) That a
well ordered Form may be useful both for young and old, provided men did not
use it Supe^stitiously (which they must do who judge it Universally necessary)
nor have any Magical Conceit of it, as if the very words in it were acceptable
to God, tho no reason could be given why those words more then others,
expressing the same mat^er should be so. But his immediate oposing that to that
Prayer, which he says may be by a mere sigh, and opposing Cogitetur and
Recitetur, makes it apparent that he means no more then a Vocal Prayer
opposed to what is merely Mental, and as may be seen by what there follows,
he chiefly refers in that place to a Form of Compellation of God, whether
Scriptural, or according to the sense of Scripture. This was to bring off such
as were newly converted from Popery, from Prayers to the Virgin Mary and other
Saints. Yet Melancthon afterward does indeed direct the use of the Lords
Prayer, (which he largely opens) but says nothing of any Forms but those
upon a Scriptural Record, and commendation; not a word of St. Peter's, St.
James's, St. Marks, St. Andrews, St. Cl^ments, St. Ambrose, St. Basils, or St.
Chrysostomes or Gregory's Liturgies. Yet indeed in that State of the Church the
Proposal of some Forms of Prayer composed by men was necessary in Public
Service, tho not for all Ministers; they were newly come, and still coming off
from Popery, where in their Public Worship they had no other Prayers, nor any
liberty for others, and the generality of their Priests were very unfit for any
thing but Reading a Prayer. In this case what is necessary is lawful, tho not
the full duty of Ministers in Prayer, nor to be rested in, and transmitted as
the only way of Worship from age to age.

32. Which Melancthon was manifestly far from, for it is his whole business in
that common place to fit Ministers and Christians for Prayer, by instructing
them in the Nature, Parts, Matter, Method of it, giving them Copies of Forms to
imitate, largely giving them the sense of every Petition in the Lords Prayer.
This (as I said at first) confirms to me, that tho Luther made a Missal at
first for the Reformed Churches in Saxony, yet it was left at liberty (nor did
other Reformed Divines so well like it when it was first made, as all to write
after his Copy.) Yet I will not be too confident of it. But Melancthon speaks
of no Forms which the Church proposed and willed to be used both publicly and
privately, but the Lords Prayer.

33. Now I should have done with the Vindicator, but that I remember p. 152,
153, he heavily complained, that I took but a slighty notice of his weighty
Evidence for proof of Forms of Prayer in the times of Constantine, for which he
quoteth Eusebius de Vita Constantini, Cap. 17, 19, 20. He shall complain no
more, I will be at the pains to transcribe all the 3 Chapters and to leave it
to the Reader to judge what he can make out of them, for the Vindicators
purpose.

But you may see much more noble things then these, If you consider how he
ordered his Court, like unto a Church. Eusebius de Vita Constantini Cap. 17.
Himself when the rest were assembled beginning, He took the Books into his
hands, and either applied his mind to Meditate on the Scriptures, or prayed
(...), with the whole Church.

He diligently also taught his whole Army to reverence the day which we call
the Suns day, Ibid cap. 19.
or the Day of Light. For those in his Army who were Christians, he gave them a
free liberty to go to Church and to pray without let. For the others, who were
no Christians, he ordered they should be drawn out into the fields, in the
Suburbs, and there one calling them together by a sign, they should all use the
same Prayer; for he said, they ought not to use their Spears, and to place all
their hope in their Arms, and in their own Strength, but spreading out their
hands, and lifting up their hearts to the King of Heaven, they ought to render
him Prayers ordained, and thereby recognize him who is the God of the World, as
the Author of all good things, and even of Victories themselves, and by Prayer
to implore him, who bestows Victories on us, who is our Preserver, Keeper,
and Helper; and himself commanded a short Form of Prayer to be by them used in
the Latin Tongue.

We acknowledge thee O God alone, and own thee as our King and we invoke thee
as our Helper: Ibid cap. 20.
By thee we have gained Victories; By thee we have overcome our Enemies; we
confess that by thee we have obtained our present good Estate, and hope to
obtain future happiness. We all beseech and beg of thee to preserve our
Emperor Constantine with his Pious Children in Health, and as a Conqueror. --
He generally (says Eusebius) made such Edicts, and commanded his Soldiers to
pray in such like words.

34. Mr. Falkner in his Libertas Eccles. had brought this as a Weighty Proof,
to prove the general use and imposition of Forms of Prayer, as he does here p.
152. I have replied shortly to it in my Reasonable Account p. 67, and more
largely in my Supplement to it, p. 22. The sum of what I said was, That this
was a good Argument to prove that at that time there were no Stated Forms in
the Church, for then Constantine needed not to have made any. In my Supplement
I repeated this, and further added, That had there been Stated Forms, the
Chaplains of his Regiments surely would have used them, and thought it piacular
to use others; (as ours do now.) 2. That these Prayers were not by Constantine
made for his Christian Ministers but for his Pagan Soldiers, who could not be
presumed to have an Ability fitly to express their Wants to God in Prayer. So
that this was nothing to our purpose, which only is about the lawfulness of the
use of Forms made by other Men for those Ministers who have an Ability fitly to
express their Minds to God in Prayer. To instance thus, is perfectly (...).

35. I must confess I did not look into Eusebius to examine this Quotation,
partly because I had him not in Greek, partly because both Helvicus and
Alstedius and others assure us Eusebius was an Arrian Bishop, and so no very
fit man to give us a good account of the practice of the sound part of the
Christian Church. Alsted says St. Hierome says he was the very Principal and
Standard bearer of the Arrians 3. Because he is noted by Dr. Rivet and others,
as a most Hyperbolical Flatterer of Constantine, who tho he was an Excellent
Emperor, yet had his great Errors. 4. Because I know his story is by sober men
concluded to be full of Fables, and not wrote till 300 years after Christ and
upward. 5. And Principally, because his design in that Chapter is not to show
us what Prayers the Church used, but how Constantine was as to his Domestic
Devotion. Now men use to be very careless of words they use, that do not
strictly relate to the thing they have in hand: Eusebius his design was to tell
us how Constantine behaved himself in his Chapel, joining with the Church in
Prayers; not to tell us whether the Ministers Prayed by Forms or no. But
considering that Eusebius lived in the time of Constantine, some may cry him up
for a pretty competent Witness in matter of Fact, and so we will allow him, as
to what he designed to speak to, Viz. That the Emperor was very devout in his
Chapel, spending all his time (when there) either in private Meditations, and
Reading the Scriptures, or injoyning with the Church when Praying.

36. Eusebius says, That when Constantine was abroad with his Army, part of
which were Christians, part Heathens; He was wont on the Lords-days to give
order the Christians should go to the Public Congregations of Christians: For
the Heathens (who could not be admitted there) he himself made a Prayer (of
which cap. 20. is a Copy) and ordered those Soldiers by beat of Drum or sound
of Trumpet or some such (probably Military) sign, to be called together, and
one to read the Prayer to them, which Constantine had made for them who were
not able to pray for themselves. What is this to the purpose?

This (as Eusebius says) was admirably done, and no more then we do for our
Children, or Neighbors (who have not Ability to pray without a Form) and allow
to be done for any such who in the present State of any Church are to be
allowed as Ministers, tho they are deficient in Ministerial Gifts. Only one
Question comes into my mind. Suppose there were Public Forms then used in the
Churches thereabouts: Was there a Collect for Constantines success in his Wars
at that time, or in general, and a proportionable thanksgiving yea or no? If
not, then surely Forms are not so comprehensive as Prayers in a Public Service
of God should be. If there were any such Collect, why does Constantine make
another and not take that? It is a great Presumption that in that age there
were none, and Ministers being left to their Abilities to pray in the Christian
Congregations; there was gteat reason Constantine should otherwise provide for
those that might not come in the Christian Assemblies. Let the Vindicator take
which tine of the Fork he pleases, it kills, instead of helping him in the
case of Set Forms.

37. For what Eusebius says cap. 17. That Constantine ordered his Court like
unto a Church, neither will that help. For if Constantine made the Prayers
which were there used, it is what we plead for; That Ministers may mak^ their
own Prayers. If the meaning be no more, than that he kept (...), a Ministry or
Order of Prayer, this proves nothing for Forms, for a Ministry of Prayer might
have been as well without Forms as with them. The upshot of this Weighty
Evidence is, here is not in it one Tittle of pretended Proof for the matter in
Question, unless it be in the word (...) Now if that can be evinced to signify
nothing but Ordained by Public Authority, it will prove what none denies, That
the Church in obedience to Gods command had ordered Public Prayers to be
offered up to him, but not that it had ordained (...), Forms of Prayer: for
Prayers and Forms of Prayer are not convertible terms sure. Besides, I have
before proved, that there is no evidence that at this time, (which was betwixt
306 and 335) there were any Forms of Prayer constituted, either by any Imperial
Law, or by any General Council, or by any Provincial Council The first
Provincial Council that did any such thing, was that of Milevis, more then 60
years after this: that supposed one of Carthage was above 30 years after: That
of Laodicea (pretended) 30 years after: the General Council of Chalcedon more
then 200 years after. Justinians Imperial Law 200 years after. So that if any
in Constantines time ordered any, it was himself for his Family, which is
nothing to our purpose, admitting it were true; for we will allow any master of
a Family or any Minister apprehending that he or others are not able, fitly to
express their own, or o^^ers wants and desires to God in Prayer, to compose a
Form or Forms for themselves or others to be used, by him or them until they
shall have attained to such an Ability. God forbid persons should not pray as
well as they can, because they at present cannot pray so perfectly as they
ought to do and to strive after.

Nor can I possibly understand by what Authority, our Vindicator interprets
(...): Prayers which had received Authoritative Sanction, as he does p. 152,
and unless it be necessarily to be so translated, the Weight of this Weighty
Evidence he speaks of n. 18, is not above the Weight of a feather: Every body
knows that (...) is but a compound of (...) and (...), and can signify no more
then lawful or within a Law, and so all the Lexicographers (which indeed are
but 3 or 4) which I have, translate it. They make (...) and (...), all to be
Synonymous. Only they seem a little to differ in the Etymology of (...) some
making (...) to be equipollent to (...), laws given: others, to (...) Divine
Laws. Any Child that looks into Scapula will find that he expounds the word of
any Laws whether they were vvrote in Men's Hearts, or in Tables, or confirmed by
Custom, that Plutarch in Romulus has (...), Sacred Laws, and Xenophon (...);
Divine Laws, and Hesychius again and again expounds (...) by (...); Divine Laws
(and all know Hesychius is no invaluable Author for giving the true sense of
Greek words.) Constantine ordered his Court like a Church; he had in it,
constant Reading of the Scripture and Prayers: Himself was present at the
Worship of his Family; and being there he spent his time either in Reading the
Scripture or Praying as God had appointed. What is all this to prove that Forms
of Prayer were used or appointed? This is the utmost of this Weighty Evidence,
which surely would not have been called so, had not the Vindicator suspected
all his Evidence to be very light.

39. The Case is now tried, I will but sum up the Evidence, and leave the
judgment to the whole Intelligent World as the Jury. The Question is, Whether
the Nonconformists have not probablet Arguments on their side to induce them to
judge, that the Church of God for six hundred years after Christ, never by
their general Practice of its Ministers, nor any general Impositions upon its
Ministers, judged it lawful for all Ministers, ordinarily to perform their
Ministerial Acts in Public Solemn Prayer, by the Prescribed Forms of other
Men, not directed in Holy Writ. They think they have; the Vindicator thinks the
contrary. The Evidence on the Nonconformists side is this.

Within the first 200 years after Christ. 1. They find no Forms left them by
Christ or the Apostles (the Lords Prayer only excepted, if that were so
intended to be used after Christ's Resurrection:) But on the contrary they find
that Justin Martyr says that in the Christian Assemblies the Minister prayed
(...), which they translate, [as he was able:] The Vindicator, [wi h all his
might.] They are sure it is truly translated so. The Vindicator is not
Infallible, assertin^ it must be translated with all his might. The Non-conf.
also have Tertullian telling them that in those days, they prayed without a
Monitor; because from their hearts. The Vindicator says, without a Monitor
cannot be without a Form, because a Monitor is a person: They conceive those
that make Forms are Persons, and that mute things are very ordinarily called
Monitors, doing the things which persons that are Monitors do. The Vindicator
thinks he has some advantage from Ignatius and Justine Martyr, telling us the
Christians made (...) and (...), the Non conformists say, The Supplications and
Petitions are common in a Congregation when the People make use of the words of
one that ministers, whether, he speaks from a Form or no.

In the next 200 Years, The Vindicator tells us. That he finds in Cyprian, Lift
up your Hearts, We lift them up to the Lord. That Origin speaks of Prayers
Ordained, and quotes an usual expression in their Prayers -- Almighty God give
us a part with thy Prophets, and that they sang by Set Hymns; the Non-con.
answer, That this will no more prove the Ministers Prayed by Forms, then it
will prove that we do so; who ordinarily begin our Prayers, with, Let us Pray,
Let us lift up our Hearts to the Lord; and usually in our Prayer, say, Lord
forgive us our Sins, and use several such general Petitions constantly. They
say it is impossible without Forms of Psalms or Hymns for any Congregation to
Sing, but they ought to keep only to Scriptural Forms left us on Sacred Record
for that purpose.

From the Year 300 to 400. the Vindicators proof is from Liturgies pretended to
be made by Basil and Chrysostom, from the Councils of Laodicea and Carthage.
The Non-con. say, That Basil and Chrysostomes making Forms, prove nothing
unless it can be proved they were by them imposed, or used by all Ministers. 2.
That very learned Men have denied the Liturgies going under their names to be
theirs; and the Vindicator himself will grant, That the Liturgies we have,
could not be theirs. only he thinks they made some, tho much has been foisted
into them since, which is impossible to be proved, the corruptions come to us
on the same credit, the whole comes. The Non-conformists prove that the Council
of Laodicea only ordered Prayers not Forms of Prayer to be Morning and
Evening: Either there was no such Council of Carthage in this age, or they made
no such Canon, says Justellus, nor is it brought into the Code of the
V^iversal Church, so could concern one Province only; nor does the Canon
establish Forms of Prayer. The Vindicator says, Constantine in this age made a
Prayer for his Pagan Soldiers, who were not able to Pray for themselves, nor
might join with Christian Congregations. And that he Prayed in his Family. The
Non-conformists say, They allow those may use Forms to guide their Mental
Prayers, who cannot Pray Vocally, therefore Constantine did well to make a Form
for such; and tho Eusebius says Constantine in his Family Prayed, yet it
cannot be proved it was by Forms not of Divine Institution. Prayers were
appointed, but not Forms of Prayer. He quotes a speech of Sozomen relating to
this Century, and a Phrase of Nazianzen which he makes expository of Sozomen
or Julian but the Non-conformists say, Nazianzen was dead many years before
that Sozomen wrote, and so could not expound his words.

From the year 400 to the year 500. He quotes the general Council of Chalcedon
451, confirming the Canon of Laodicea 364; but the Nonconf. say that the Canon
of the Council of Laodicea (as appears by the words) ordered not Forms of
Prayer, only a Public Ministry of Prayers Morning and Night. He quotes Proclus
also, asserting Liturgies delivered by James and Clement, Basil and
Chrysostom. The Nonconformists say the Vindicator himself rejects the
Authority of Proclus, for St. James and Clement, and they may as well do it as
to the other; and that the pretended Writings of Proclus are of no Authority.
On the contrary the Nonconformists say, That in this Century Sozomen says
there were no two Churches to be found which spoke the same words in Prayer.

From the year 500 to 600, he quotes Justinians Novellae confirming the Canons,
of Chalcedon: But the Nonconformists say, They have proved that Council
established no Forms. He quoted indeed before this the Council of Milevis, but
the Nonconformists say, It was a particular case of a particular Province
infected notoriously with Pelagianism, nor was that Canon by the Council of
Chalcedon 451, taken into the Code.

After the year 600, the Noncon. will agree that Gregory by his Canon Law
established Forms of Prayer, as far as his Authority went, but with so bad
success that if Adrian the Pope 200 years after had not obtained of Charles the
Great to protect his Canon by a Civil Sanction, and by an horrible Persecution
to enforce it, it had never obtained amongst Christians. But they say at this
time the true Christians were fled into France, the Valleys of Piedmont,
Alsatia, and Bohemia, where we read not that their Ministers generally prayed
by Forms.

Now upon this Evidence, let all the Conscientious and Intelligent World judge
and bring in their Verdict as they please, whether this Question can be
determined against us by any valuable Practice of the Church in the purer
primitive times, and whether Our Reasons be not much more valuable to prove the
Unlawfulness, Viz.

1. Because we that are Ministers cannot do it, without omitting a mean God
has given us for the Action, and using one under no special divine
Prescription.

2. Because in doing it we cannot pray with the like Attention and Intention of
heart and Fervent affections.

3. Because we judge words an Essential part of Vocal prayer, and these or
these words an Essential part of this or that Vocal Prayer.

4. Because in an Act or Part of Worship, where God has left a liberty to
Ministers or Christians, other Men cannot determine them.

5. Because in doing it we must grant a principle improveable to the total
Suppression of Ministerial Gifts.

6. Because the Holy Spirit has or may have, an influence on our words as well
in Prayer, as in Preaching, or Confession; and it ought not to be shut out
unnecessarily.

7. Because we cannot understand why the precepts for Prayer, should be
interpreted differently from the Precept for Preaching, which was never by the
Church expounded. -- Go read another Man's Forms.

8. Because it transforms Ministers, from Ministers of Christ, to mere
Ministers of Men.

9. Because it makes the highest performances of Ministers, to be such as
ordinary people may do, so as there were no need of such an order of persons.

10. Because by Experience we see, That many idolize Forms of Prayer, and think
there is no other right Praying to God; which is an horrid Error not fit for us
to give the least countenance to.

This is the Sum of all. Let the Reader, read and judge, and we trust, he will
be so candid as to think we have something to say for our Dissent in this Cause.

The Conclusion.
IT is now Reader high time to have done drawing this Saw which will go no
further. I remember in the Ancient Practice of the Canon Law, after the Pars
Rea or (as we call him) the Defendant, had put in his Answer to the Promoters
Libel, so as there was Lis contestata (as we call it Issue joined) the Promoter
or his Proctor took an Oath which they called Juramentum Calumniae, and
expressed in these terms: Illud juretur, quod lis tibi justa videtur.
Et si quaeretur verum, non inficietur.
Nil promittetur, nec falsa probatio detur
Vt lis tradetur, dilatio nulla petetur.


That is the Promoter was to swear, That he believed he had just cause of
action. That being asked he would not deny the truth, That he would promise no
Bribe, nor bring in any false Testimony, nor without just cause delay any
proceedings. I have observed likewise some Writers of late interposing some
Solemn Professions and Protestations; amongst others our Vindicator says thus,
p. 21.

I do freely profess, that besides what concerns the Laws of the Church and of
the Realm, that I account my self to have as plain Evidence from the Laws of
God and the Constitution of the Christian Church, that Schism and Unnecessary
Separation, is a sin in the breach of Christian Unity, as that Adultery is a
sin, in the breach of Wedlock. And I account my self to be as certain that if
ever there were, an unwarrantable Separation from any known Church since the
Apostles time, the separation from the Church of England is such, since our
Church is truly as free from any just exception in its Constitution, Doctrine,
and Worship, as any other since that time, either was or is. -- A very large
Assertion.

I shall only in like manner enter my Protestation.

1. That I do believe all unnecessary Separation from any Church of which we
are, or have been Members, is Sinful.

2. I am equally certain, That Separation is necessary, where Ministers or
People cannot keep communion without sin, or so far forth, as they cannot do
this.

3. I have the same certainty, That the practical judgment of Ministers or
Peoples Consciences, must (as to their practice) determine what is lawful and
unlawful; tho it be a fallible judgment; and they are therefore bound to use
the best means they can for information, before they form it.

4. I do in like sincerity profess, That I have wilfully omitted no means of a
true Information, as to the Will of God in this Cause, and I do truly believe
it is not lawful for me as a Minister of Christ ordinarily to perform my
Ministerial Acts in Public Solemn Prayer by the prescribed Forms of other Men,
not Divinely Inspired; nor yet, being Solemnly set apart to the Ministry,
wholly to forbear Preaching

5. There are many other things which I cannot but judge sinful, without the
doing of which I can have no station in the National Ministry. Reordination,
Assent, and Consent, Ceremonies, Promiscuous Administration of the Lords
Supper, etc.

6. I do believe the Vindicator has not given a just Answer to one Argument I
brought in this cause, and I profess my Arguments remain still such as I cannot
Answer.

7. I do finally profess, That I have not wilfully brought any thing in any of
my dicourses on this Argument (laying any stress upon it) which I have not
believed to be true: Nor have I been bribed, with any hopes of Reward, or
Preferment. Nor have I quoted any Author (to my knowledge) falsely or partially,
hardly three which I have not seen with my own Eyes, unless I have told the
Reader otherwise: Nor have I done any thing to keep my Reader from a true
understanding of the thing in Question, nor gone about to blind him with
Digressions, Prejudices, or Impertinent Observations, nor (further then the
Nature of the matter does it) have I loaded my Adversary with Odium, Envy, or
Prejudice.

Whence all may observe, what need we have for to exercise a further Charity
then is yet to be found amongst us, and a greater liberty in Religious Worship
then we are yet so happy to enjoy; and that without it we are never like to
come to our desired Peace and Unity. If there were only this single point in
difference, East and West seem to me as likely to unite as Dissenters, and
those of our Vindicators persuasion. The good Lord show us a more likely way
for Union, then all Ministers using the same Words and Syllables in the Acts of
their Public Worship; which is a kind of Union, no where required, no where
promised, no where found, nor ever to be expected, and of which there is no
necessity at all.

FINIS.
Postscript.
BEcause our Vindicator is so mightily confident, that if ever there was a
Sinful Separation in the World, the Dissenters, although they agree in the
Doctrine of the Church of England ( and possibly more heartily, then some
others who profess only to subscribe the 39 Articles in their own sense, and as
Instruments of Peace) and in the same Acts of Worship, and do not condemn the
Church or Churches of England as no Churches, are guilty, notwithstanding of
such a Sinful Separation. I shall crave leave to mind him of an Argument to the
contrary brought this last Commencement at Cambridge ( I suppose the Vindicator
might hear it) which the Auditors did not judge they heard sufficiently
answered by the Dr. Respondent. It was this.

To Separate (or withdraw rather) from a Church which does not acknowledge the
true Ministers of Christ as such: is no Sinful Separation. But to separate from
the Church of England is to separate from a Church that disowns the true
Ministers of Christ to be such. Ergo.

The Minor was proved because it will not own Ministers ordained by mere
Presbyters to be true Ministers, and so consequently disowneth the Ministry of
all Foreign Churches, which by several Acts of Parliament (3 at least, one 13
Eliz. another made in the Parl. 1660, and the late Act for Uniformity) are
acknowledged true Ministers. The trite answer, That it is in a case of
necessity (those Churches having no Bishops to ordain Ministers) is pitiful,
for no case of necessity can make one to be that which by the Law of Christ he
is not; nor was there any necessity that our Parliaments should so own them in
three Acts. We had Bishops in England which could have re-ordained Ministers in
13 Eliz. and in the year 1660, and 1662.

The Basis of this Argument is also much larger. It is this: It is lawful to
withdraw from any Church, where any Ordinance of Christ, proper and necessary
for any Church, is disowned, or not to be enjoyed according to the Practice of
that Church.

Now whether the choice of their own Ministers and the exclusion of the
ignorant and scandalous from the Lords Supper, And a power in a Church to purge
it self from Ministers who by their lives, or Doctrine, make it appear, that
God never called them to the Ministry, and from Members that by the Laws of
Christ are to be shut out of the Communion of a Church, be not Institutions of
Christ, necessary to the very being of a Church, most certainly to its well
being, let any judge, and that those charged with Separation can enjoy them in
the Parochial Churches of England, lies upon our Vindicator to prove, and
should have been well thought on, before he had been so very positive in his
charge, there being especially so many men of unquestionable Learning and Piety
that are of another mind in the Case and as well assured of the contrary.

FINIS.
An A^ement to the Reader.
WHat thou have here in answer to Dr. Faulkner, has been more than nine Months
in the Booksellers or Printers hand, and is at last come out with more
Errata's, then are consistent with the Authors reputation; some of the
principal of them I shall give thee an account of, and for mistakes of a letter
or a stop, leave my self to thy Charity. Only that I may not again be so
smartly reflected on, for my want of skill, in the Chronology of Gregory the
great, I must give thee notice, that whereas in the Title to the Introduction,
the Vindicator is said to have asserted that Gregory died 15 years before
(according to Platina) he entered his Popedom, and in the Book, p. 14, there is
only mention of ten: it is none of the Authors mistake. For in the Edition of
Platina in Fol. thou will find he entered his Popedom Anno 1610, which was but
6 years after the Vindicator says he died: but in the late Edition of Platina
in 24, he is said to have entered it 1619, which was 15 years after. The Author
has left thee a latitude to believe which thou will, only with thy Pen correct
these following Errata's, some whereof might be mine, in writing, but the most
the Printers.

P. 2. l. 13. and so in many other places, for Liturgy, r. Leiturgy; l. 19. r.
(...); p. 3. l. 17. r. deliver; p. 7. l. 7. r. Arguments; l. 8. r. with him; l.
23. r. self have; p. 10. l. 5. r. dicendum ne; l. 13. r. and frustra; l. 19. r.
we judge; l. 28, 29. r. saepe etiam olitor est opportuna locutus; p. 12. l. 22.
r. 604; p. 13. l. 29. r. 1000; p. 15. l. 21. r. self say; p. 18. l. 5. r.
Darapti Ferison; p. 24. l. 7. r. (...); p. 28. l. 8. r. gust; l. 20. r. an
Author; p: 35. l. 25. so p. 159. l. 17. r. word-bate; p. 40. l. 30. r. no
other; p. 41. l. 32. r. may be; p. 67. l. 16. r. For Ministry, he; p. 76. l. 3.
r. (...); p. 116. l. 13. r. whether it or yt; p. 118. l. 15. r. by which; p.
21. l. 22. r. who join; p. 140. l. 15. r. sometimes very little; then blot out
these words [and where they concern it, very little or nothing at all.] p. 143.
l. 15. r. when he pleases; l. 30. r. gifts; p. 145. l. 17. r. he be able; p.
146. l. 22. r. in inadvised; p. 185. l. 4. r. prefer; p. 195. l. 17. r. I may;
p. 219. l. 16. r. (...); p. 224. l. 28. r. (...); p. 226. l. 24. before proper
r. as; p. 238. l. 5. r. prayer; p. 239. l. 29. for others r. them.


