A PERSUASIVE TO Consideration, Tendered to the ROYALISTS, Particularly, those
of the CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCIII.

A PERSUASIVE TO Consideration, Tendered to the Royalists, etc.
Eccles. 7. v. 14. -- In the day of Adversity Consider.
TO be indifferent to all Events and unconcerned at the Successes or
Misfortunes of Human Affairs, would be no Virtue, were it practicable. Such an
uniform Stiffness could be resolved into nothing better then Stupidity, or
Stoical Pride. If the Good or Evil relates only to our selves, to strive to be
unaffected with it, looks as if we thought our Beings not well made, and had a
mind to check the Motions, and alter the Springs of Nature; and not to feel
pain or satisfaction when God intended we should. If what happens concerns our
Neighbor, and has any considerable weight upon his Fortune, to let such an
occurrence pass us without Notice, and Impression, looks as tho we were willing
to renounce our Relation to Humen kind; and imagined our selves disincorporat
ad from Society. And as we are not to be unaffected with the circumstances of
Life, so are we to accommodate our Passions and Behavior to the Nature of
them. A Man should in some Measure suit his Air and Temper to the Occasions of
Joy or Sorrow; and be reserved or entertaining as the complexion of Affairs
requires. For to give unseasonable Signs of Pleasure, or Dissatisfaction; and
to Cross upon the Reason of Things, is neither Christian nor Human; but
transgresses both the Laws of Decency and Religion. Such a singularity argues a
sullen Opposition to Providence; a disregard of the Concerns and a contempt of
the common Sentiments and Customs of Mankind. When God is pleased to give us
our Expectations, and to bless our Endeavors with Success, then we are allowed
within a Rule to unbend our cares, to relish the Pleasure; and show our selves
sensible of the Advantage. But when he recalls his Favors, and his Judgments
are in the Earth; then we ought to pay a proper Regard to his Discipline; to be
serious and recollected, and to put our Minds into a posture of Thought and
Humiliation. In the Day of Prosperity Rejoice; but in the Day of Adversity
Consider.

The Kinds and Degrees of Adversity are various, and take in all those cases in
which Human Nature is Defenseless and capable of Suffering.

As to the Persons it affects, the Notion may be either straightened or enlarged
into the Divisions of Private and Public; I shall insist chiefly upon the
latter, in which the former is often comprehended.

The Question is, how a Man ought to manage his Conduct, when his Country lies
under a Calamity; and Himself particularly suffers for Adhering to the Public
Rights and Interests. In order to the satisfying this Enquiry: I shall examine
what sort of Thoughts and Behavior, the word Consider may import in the
present Relation.

Now to Consider in such circumstances may imply these three Things.

1. A Reflection upon a Man's past Actions, whether he has not been in some
Measure instrumental in bringing the Misfortune upon himself, and his Country.
2. To Consider may imply an Examination of the present State of our Minds,
whether we suffer upon right Principles or not. 3. Whether our Behavior is
suitable to the Occasion.
1. To Consider, may imply a Reflection upon a Man's past Actions, whether he
has not been in some Measure instrumental in bringing the Misfortune upon
Himself and Country. A Man ought to make a careful Retrospection upon Himself,
whether He resisted the beginnings of Evil, and stood upon his Guard against
the first Approaches of Faction; and endeavored to Strangle the Fatal Monster
in its Birth. Whether Interest or Fear, Popularity or Disaffection, Ambition or
Revenge, did not Prepossess his Judgment, and Govern his Inclinations, and
carry him into unjustifiable Practices or Omissions. Whether he kept his proper
Distance from the Infection, opposed the Torrent, and made a noble stand in
Defense of Justice and Truth.

Have we supported our Figure, and answered the expectations of our Post? Have
we maintained the Breach, displayed the Colors, and held up the Cause aloft?
Have we engaged our Authority, and acted to the stretch of our Interest,
directed others with our Counsel, and fortified them with our Courage? On the
other side, have we not sunk into a passive Caution, and retreated to Schemes
of security? Have we not chosen rather to be little in our Actions than in our
Fortune, and preferred our Ease to our Honor? The Case is of the last
Importance, and therefore a Man should press the Inquiry, and see whether he
has not over-rated the Conveniences of Life; dreaded Poverty too much, and
trusted Providence too little. Whether he has not liked a Principle that would
Live, better then one which would Reason; and been apt to believe Things true
or false, according as they concluded hard or kindly upon Him. I am well
assured, such Questions as these ought to be put with the greatest
Impartiality; and if our Conscience can answer them fairly, we have nothing to
do but to thank God, and proceed. But if the Account proves otherwise, we ought
to repent for what is past, and guard against the Future.

2. To Consider, may import an Examination of the present State of our Minds,
whether we suffer upon right Principles or not.

Now the only warrantable and governing Principle must be founded upon
Conscience: The leading Reason must be Religious; because Justice and the Laws
require it, because we believe the Divine Favor suspended upon this Condition,
and that our everlasting All depends upon it. Indeed if God had not so plainly
declared the Persons of Princes sacred and inviolable, and made the resisting
their Authority Penal in the highest degree; we might in great Measure have
inferred his Commands from the Reason of Things: And that He expected we should
continue firm to our Engagements, tho under the greatest discouragements. For
without Steadiness in this Point, Societies must break up; and the Foundations
of the Earth be put out of Course. Let but the contrary Principle once loose,
and we shall presently see all Order confounded, and Peace Banished, and Right
resolved into Force; and the World almost uncreated by the Ambition, Folly and
Violence of Men. To suffer therefore in Defense of Authority and Government, is
both a necessary and a noble instance of Fortitude; so that it is no wonder
Religion should expect it from us. Indeed unless it was strengthened with the
Rewards and Punishments of the other World, it would never have Force and
Firmness enough to Resist and Persevere. But these Regards when well believed,
must make the Principle impregnable. Nothing can engage our Constancy like such
considerations: For Heaven and Hell can have no Counterpoise or Equivalent.

Having mentioned the true Reason for choosing the suffering Side; I shall now
proceed to some of those Motives which are defective and dangerous. And,

1. To submit to a present Inconvenience upon a Prospect of Advantage, is a
false Ground. To be governed by Private Regards, and turn upon secular
Interest, is a Sign of a narrow and ungenerous Mind. Such Persons who engage
only to serve a Turn, must have cold Notions of Justice; and very slender
affections for the Public Good. It Is true, such a provident Projector may
oblige a Cause, and do Service to his Country, and make a creditable Figure;
but then it must be said, the Good which he does, has neither Principle nor
Merit. For how glorious soever his pretenses may be, his Business is to serve
Himself. And tho he may deceive others, yet if he has any Inclination to look
within, he will soon discover how much the World, and possibly Himself in some
Measure, has been mistaken in his Character. A short perusal of his Thoughts
will inform him, that Interest has the Ascendent over all his Designs: That he
pretends to Religion no longer then it affords a Prospect of Gain; and is Loyal
only to his own Sovereign self. I confess he who exposes himself to hazards,
and makes a profession of Constancy, ought not to be hardly interpreted, and
censured, as if he acted out of ignoble Ends; because this is oftentimes
condemning without Evidence. But though a Man ought not to be charged with such
Imputations by others; yet without question it concerns him to examine himself,
whether his Actions proceed from a defensible Cause; whether Duty and Religion
have a just preference allowed them.

In the mean time, it is not denied, but that we may lawfully have a Regard to
private Advantage; provided it be subordinate, and duly proportioned. But then
we should take care not to over-rate our selves; we should not be so
unreasonably partial, as to think our own Interest ought to overballance that
of States and Kingdoms: We should not presume our selves independent of Law;
and above the Regulations of Religion: As if the Names of Virtue, and
Conscience were invented only to disguise our Ambition; and to be regarded no
farther then they served our purpose.

Besides this Motive of Interest is not only irreligious, but wavering and
inconstant. He that serves a good Cause, out of a mercenary View; will engage
in an ill one, when he believes it in the same thriving Condition. He who is
thus affected, will be sure to observe which way the weight of Affairs
enclines, to criticize upon the Health, and Complexion, of his Party; and give
it over when he finds it languishing, and consumptive. If we are governed by
such mean Considerations, we shall be apt to Tack upon every Accident of
Moment; and desert the Relations of Duty and Freindship, when they stand in
most need of being supported.

2. To abet a suffering Cause, upon the score of Affection, and personal
Regard, is another short and insufficient Motive. I confess to be strongly
affected with the Misfortunes of our Friends or Superiors, because we have been
obliged by their Temper, or enriched by their Bounty, is not only lawful but
commendable. To stand by those who can neither reward, nor protect, who are
hated by the Many, and oppressed by the Mighty, is a sign of a generous and
disinterested Spirit. To attend an abandoned Interest upon Principles of esteem
when it is neither allowed to assist, or scarcely to wish well to it; when
Sympathy is marked, and mere good Nature made Criminal.

To embark with the unfortunate, and continue our Regards under such
Disadvantages: These are handsome proofs of Humanity, and Gratitude, and proceed
from a Nobleness of Temper. This shows, that a Man scorns to make his
affection mercenary, to turn upon the inconstancy of Fortune, and to court none
but the happy and succesful. But then those who lay the main stress upon
Freindship, and Inclination, carry the Matter too far the other way. To follow
a man's Fortune, and second his Pretension merely because we like Him, is no
better then plain Partiality. It Is in effect, to declare that we Idolize our
own Humor, and are governed more by Obstinacy then Reason. We must have very
good Luck, if such a blind Officiousness does not sometimes entangle us in
dangerous Engagements; make us firm to Conspiracys, and true to Falsehood, and
give us a share in the Practice of Violence, and Punishment of Treason. It Is
granted, when the Justice of the Cause is secured, and we are convinced our
Friends are in the right, then our affections may seasonably exert themselves.
Then we may be allowed to reason, ourselves into Sympathy and Concern. To
Regard and Love, and Condole as much as we please. Then 'twill be both decent
and proper, to raise our Esteem and quicken our Gratitude, from all the Motives
of Station, Merit, and Misfortune. These are good Expedients to fortify our
Reason, and awaken our Generosity, and make our Freindship Masculine and
Significant.

3. To make the vulgar Notion of Honor the chief Ground of Suffering is a
wrong Principle. Some People distinguish so far between Conscience and Honor,
as if they had no Resemblance or Relation to each other. Never considering that
to do the wisest Things, and to please the best Judges* and to be in Favor
with the greatest Beings, are the truest Signs and noblest Instances of Honor:
Now nothing of all this can be done without Religion. If this Remark was
thought on, and Honor rightly stated; if 'twas fixed upon a Basis of Morality;
and believed to be a Christian Virtue; if Men's Apprehensions were true in this
point, they would not tell us, that it is not so much Religion, which hinders
them from making their Affairs easy. No! They could satisfy their Conscience
without difficulty, and accommodate the Matter with God Almighty well enough.
Their only Fear is, that if they should shift their Sails, and come up to any
remarkable Variation, their Reputation would suffer by it. For how can we quit
a Principle so solemnly avowed without a Mark of Inconstancy? And does not
Inconstancy suppose either our Head, or our Heart defective? That we either
wanted Discretion to make a proper Choice, or Resolution to maintain it? If we
desert a Friendship in time of Trial, and renounce an established Belief, when
it grows uneasy; may it not be justly said, That we have surrendered our
Understandings to our Interests; That we may be frighted out, or into, any
thing, and dare neither pretend to Reason or Honesty, any longer than the
Majority will give us leave? And can there be a more infamous State of
Servitude than to lie thus at the Mercy of the Crowd; to say that which we
don't believe, and do that which we don't like* and that not in trivial Cases,
but in Matters of the highest Importance?

In short, To quit an Opinion or an Engagement, when the Stream goes against
it, is so unbecoming a Man of Honor, so cowardly and ungenerous a Practice,
that we cannot reconcile our selves to it.

To this I answer, That I have no Intention to argue against the Principle of
Honor: Let Men think as magnanimously as they please; provided they will but
settle their Notion right. It Is true, where the Irregularity lies chiefly in
the Meanness of the Action; it may not be improper to engage our Honor to bar
a Suspicion of ungenerous Dealing: But in other Cases, for Men to set aside the
Obligation of Duty, and to lay the main Stress upon pretended Honor (for when
it is parted from Conscience, it is no better,) is both dangerous and
unreasonable. To allege their Honor as the principal Reason, why they cannot
break their Word, or falsify their Trust, or do any other ill Thing, has a
very suspicious Meaning. It Is in effect to confess, that we either believe no
Religion, or are ashamed to own it. As if it were a Disparagement to be
governed by the Interests of another Life; and to profess our selves dependent
upon God Almighty. According to these Men, Conscience should be an ill bred,
Ungentlemanly Pretense, and therefore we must have a Care, how we use it. It
seems we may practice Vice as well as Virtue, Provided we could do it with as
good a Grace. Yes, Opinion, and Mode, and Custom, must be the Standart of our
Behavior; and the great Rule of our Conduct. For to be tied up to the
Strictnesses of Religion is enough to disoblige a Man's Quality, and to make
him cheap and contemptible. That some People have such extravagant Notions of
Honor is past Dispute, otherwise they would not make it Paramount to Reason
and Justice; and set it above the Laws of God and Man; as in many Cases it is
plain they do. There are a sort of Men, who would gladly have the Pleasure (as
they count it) of a Libertine Practice without the Infamy. This makes them
sollicitous to confound the Notions of Good and Evil, to cover the Deformities
of Vice, and take it into their Protection. Thus Whoredom is so far from
suffering the Censures of Religion; that a Man is scarce thought a Jot the
worse for it; or his Reputation at all tranish'd by such a Liberty. Hence it is
counted more Honorable not to pay our Debts than to sink our Figure; to commit
Murder than to put up a disobliging Expression. Thus Luxury and
Licentiousness, and Pride, the Reproaches of Reason, and the Blemishes of Human
Nature, are by too many made the Accomplishments of a Cavalier. In short,
Honor as it is commonly understood is nothing more than the Custom of Men of
Figure; which makes it in some Cases no better than fashionable Pride. It Is
governed by the Maxims and Examples of Courts and Camps; where People are not
always the strictest either in Life or Reasoning. Honor in this Notion aims
more at Appearances than Things; and had rather make a great Show, than do a
great Action. It Is principal End is Reputation, without distinguishing upon the
Means: Which at the highest carrys Men no farther than to an Indifferency to
Good or Evil; either of which they choose accordingly as they find it
fashionable. It Is true, Honor when it wears it is proper Character, and is
under the Government of Virtue, is a Noble Quality. It warms the Mind with a
generous Heat, and is a vigorous Principle of Action. It Is a Guard to Decency,
and a Spur to Glory: It hardens Fortitude and secures Constancy; it ripens
Improvement, and pushes Men on to the Extent of Bravery and Greatness. But when
it is counterfeited or mistaken, when it is resigned up to undistinguishing
Custom; when it is tinctured with Pride, and scorns to be governed by Law or
Religion, then it is a dangerous and unreasonable Guide; and ought to have
neither Credit in our Opinion, nor Influence on our Practice.

3. To Consider, may imply an Enquiry, whether our Behavior is suitable to the
present Occasion.

And here before I descend to particulars, I shall observe, that we ought to be
strictly regular in our whole Conversation. Thus much the general Obligation of
Religion will require of us. We must Psalm. 101. 2, 3. Psalm. 19 6.
walk before God with a perfect Heart; and take no wicked thing in hand; but
have respect to all his Commandments. For whoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet offend in one Point, is guilty of all. He affronts the Majesty of Jame 2.
10.
the Legislator; and sins against the Authority upon which the whole subsists,
and therefore is liable to the Penalty of the Sanction.

Conscience is a Universal Principle, reaches to all Points of Morality, and
obliges to be holy in all manner of Conversation.

And as Christianity binds us to a general Obedience, so one would think the
Decency of such a Conduct should engage our Endeavors. A Virtue equally
spread, and well pursued, is not only a secure, but an ornamental Practice.
It Is Uniformity and Proportion, which makes things look great and graceful. To
see a Life thus all of a piece, argues the Lines were struck out by a Masterly
hand and finished with Art and Application But to divide between Virtue and
Vice, and fly out into Inconsistency and Contradiction, makes a Man appear
parti-colored and monstrous. This is Building with one hand, and pulling down
with the other, and proceeds from Neglect, Impotence and Irresolution, all mean
and disparaging Qualities.

But if Honor cannot affect us I hope Necessity will. We should remember God
will not allow us the Breach of any of his Laws. The doing one part of our
Duty, is no Dispensation to transgress another; for God giv^s no Man a License
to Sin.

Rebellion is not the only damning Sin, no more then the Plague is the only
Mortal Distemper. If we are true to the King, and false to God Almighty; if we
keep the Oath of Allegiance, and break that of Baptism; if we decline solemn
Perjury, and are guilty of Common Swearing; our Case must be miserable
hereafter. Loyal Intemperance, and Loyal Whoredom, are monstrous things in
Religion; where the gaudy Epithet will never excuse the Lewdness of the
Practice. If we indulge our selves these Liberties, how much soever we may
stand off from Rebels in this World; we shall meet them in the next. And that
we may not think the Case aggravated, let us hear St. Paul. Know ye not 1 Cor.
6. 9.
(says he) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor theives, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor reviler^, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. Farther an immoral Behavior, disserves the Interest we intend
to promote. It makes the ignorant suspect the Justice of the Cause, and helps
to fortify the fatal Mistake. To live without Regard to the Restraints of
Religion dishonours a Party; and makes it neither loved nor feared. Such an
abandoned Licentiousness is enough one would think to blast the best Design, to
unbless the most warrantable Undertaking; and to keep off the assistance of
Heaven. We see therefore how much we are obliged to a general Regularity, both
for our own sakes and that of the public; but more especially the occasion will
call upon us not to fail, in the following Particulars.

1. We should remember to contract our Expenses; and retrench from the usual
Entertainments of Life.

To exceed the Proportions of Nature and Decency, is always a great Fault. To
what purpose should a Man exhaust himself in Superfluities, and run out into
Equipage and Show? Does it improve his Understanding, or extend his Senses, or
prolong his Life, or give him any real Advantage in Mind or Body? To labor so
much to be taken notice of, looks as if a Man was conscious of his own
Littleness; for who would be at all this charge to grow considerable; if he
thought himself so without it? It Is true the Vulgar must have some sensible
Advantage to strike their Organ, and therefore those who bear a Public
Character, are allowed to enlarge their Figure, in Proportion to their
Authority. But private Circumstances, though never so much raised in other
respects, can have none of this Pretense. And as for the Luxury of Eating and
Drinking, it is a meaner Vice, and altogether as unreasonable as the other. These
Excesses are degrading Entertainments, and either find Men Little, or make them
So. They are likewise destructive of their own Design; for by over-proportioned
Supplys, they oppress the Sense, and strangle the Pleasure; and in a short time
destroy the Body they pretend to cherish. In a Word, Vanity and Intemperance
would have no Excuse, tho we lived in Paradise; and our Neighbors had no
manner of need of our Assistance. But there are some Circumstances of Peculiar
Aggravation, and which, as the Apostle speaks, make Sin exceeding sinful. Romans
7. 13.


We should do well to consider the Condition of those, who suffer in the common
Cause. With what Difficulties do they retain their Integrity, and how do they
struggle under the Weight of Poverty? Poverty not occasioned by Idleness, or
Luxury; not by their own Fault, but by that of others. Like Mariners in a
Storm; they were forced to throw their Goods overboard, that they might save
themselves: And put to the trying necessity, either of parting with their
Conscience or Fortunes; with this World or a better. And can we overlook those,
who suffer thus nobly for Religion and Law, for Integrity and Honor? Can we
abandon so deserving a Distress, and leave it to languish without Assistance or
Regard? Ought we not rather to deny our Inclinations, and substract even from
Convenience, and labor with our own Hands, that we have to give to him that
needs. Is this a time to indulge our Vanity and riot in Excess? Cannot we baulk
the Extravagance of Fancy upon such pressing Occasions? Does none remember the
Afflictions of Joseph? Is Sobriety such an intolerable Penance, and had we
rather starve our Friends than our Vices? What! Have we drowned all Sympathy,
and Sense of the general Misfortune; and drank away both the Power and the
Inclination to do Good? To disable our selves by any vicious expense, when the
Necessities of our Neighbors call so loudly for our Assistance, discovers an
ungovernable Sensuality, or a wretched Indifference for the Cause; it
aggravates the Guilt, and enflames the Account. In a Word, To consume that upon
our Lusts, Jams 4. 3.
which ought to be managed for the Support of Virtue, devoted to Charity, and
dedicated to Religion, is in effect to rob God Almighty, and swell Profuseness
into Sacrilege.

2. We should omit no Opportunities for Religious Duties. I don't mean, that we
should frequent unlawful Assemblies, and run after every Altar without
Distinction. For in St. Paul's Question, what Communion has Light with
Darkness; what Concord Cor. 6. 4.
has Unity with Schism; and what Agreement has Loyalty with Rebellion? It Is
true, What the same Cor. 5. ^1.
Apostle observes concerning other Sinners, is, in some Measure, the Case
concerning Revolters. We must either keep Company with them, or go out of the
World. But this Liberty, without doubt, reaches no farther than accidental
Meetings, and common Conversation, and secular Business. For certainly we are
not to countenance their Prevarications, and join with them in their Defection:
Is it an Instance of Religion to pray for the Prosperity of Wickedness, to put
up Treasonable and Parricidal Devotions, and to implore God to renounce his
Nature and his Laws? Are we indeed obliged to wait upon Schism to the Altar, to
help to consecrate the Revolt, and to pray against our Conscience and
Inclinations? What Opinion the New Guides may have of these Performances I
don't pretend to determine; because I cannot tell how far Prejudices may
operate; nor to what degree Men's Understandings may be disturbed. But I am well
assured, I have not only represented the Truh of the Case; but the Sense of the
Royallists, whose Grounds must oblige them to think thus of the Revolution
Prayers. And therefore I wonder upon what Basis the Mystery of a double
Communion stands. There is no countenance for it in Scripture that I can learn.
It Is true, the Prophets were sent to the ten Tribes, after their Departure from
the Temple Service, but then we don't read, they approved Jeroboams Priests,
complied with his State Religion or were present at the Worship of the Calves.
This Politic Scheme is sufficiently condemned and a Mark set upon the
Introducer. And as for the Seven Thousand in Israel, who are mentioned with
Approbation; we may observe, they had not bowed 1 Kings 19. 18.
their Knees to Baal; nor gone into the reigning Apostasy. Besides for ought we
know, they might acknowledge the Authority of the High Priest, tho the
Frontiers, being guarded, they could not present themselves at the
Temple-Solemnities: And if this was their Case, They were in all Equity within
the Jerusalem-Communion. This we are sure, that they either absented from
Jeroboam's Assemblys, or they were exceedingly to blame; as appears from many
Places of Scripture. 2 Cron. cha. 13. 1 Kin. 12. 30. Hos. 8. 5. Hos. 11. 12.


If we pass from Scripture to Antiquity, we shall find this Opinion as little
supported as before. The Christians of those earlier and better Ages, denied
their Communion to the Arrian Heretics, the Novatian Schismatics, and to the
Rebellious Bishops under the Usurper Maximus. Socrat. l. 2. c. 38. Theod. Hist.
l. 1. c. 22. Cypr. Ep. ad. Ant^n. Ambr. Ep. 24.


Let us proceed from Authority to Reason. Either we frequent these Revolted
Churches to join with them or not. If not; to what purpose do we go thither. If
we do; we should do well to consider, how we can join with them in Sin, and
avoid the Punishment. If any Man defends himself by saying, he does not assent
to the exceptionable Part of the Prayers; to this I Answer, that the Notion and
Design of a Religious Meeting, implies Union and Consent in the Assembly, as
far as the Worship extends, especially when the Service is Regulated by a Form;
so that every one may know before Hand, what they are to expect. This Consent,
I say, is supposed in the Nature of the Thing; and enjoined by the Rubric of
the Church; which obliges all the Laity to say Amen to every Petition. Once
more, either we may join in a sinful Communion, because of the Mixture of Good
in it; or we may not. If the first; then what hinders us from Uniting with
Socinians, Jews, and Mahometans, upon occasion. For here the true God is
worshipped, and many Points of Morality are taught. If this Liberty is too
large; then we must stand off in the present Case; for here both the Meeting,
and the Matter are unlawful. The Meeting because Schismatical. The Matter for
the Reasons above mentioned. For if Deposing of Kings and Dispensing with
Oaths; and resolving Conscience, into Public Good, that is, Convenience, are
not Tenants of a flaming Malignity; the distinctions of Right and Wrong are
unintelligible. And to cut off all Excuse, the Evil is as thoroughly
incorporated, and as Solemnly avowed, in the latter Case, as in the other, and
therefore it must be equally impossible to make a Separation.

However I am loath to leave my Church: You say well. But can you expect to
find the Church, where its peculiar Doctrins are disowned; where its Authority
is opposed, and betrayed to the Secular Power? Does the Being of a Church
consist in Brick and Stone; what would you do if Jupiter was worshipped there?
I hope the Chiming of the Bells would not draw you to the Service of the Idol.
If it is urged, that we may be so planted as to want the Advantage of an
Orthodox Pastor, what is to be done in such Circumstances? must we Pray alone
without the Assistance of Priest or Congregation? To this Question, after what
has been said, I think the Proverb a sufficient Return; Better be alone then in
ill Company. If it is farther objected, that by this Principle we may lose the
Benefit of the Blessed Sacrament. To this I answer.

1. That this Objection is oftentimes no more then Pretense: For if People
would take that Pains which the Regard to the Institution requires; it seldom
happens but they might receive it from proper Hands.

But 2. I answer, that breaking the Unity of the Church, by Schismatical
Communion; and making our selves partakers of other men's Sins, (1 Timothy 5. 22.)
is a bad Preparation for the Sacrament. To break a Moral Law for a Positive
Ordinance, tho* never so valuable, looks like robbing in order to Sacrifice.

And therefore when the Case is truly put; a pious Desire of Receiving will be
Equivalent to the Thing. This being an allowed Rule in Instances of Necessity.
So that we cannot be said to lose the Benefit of the Blessed Sacrament, though we
are not so happy as to partake in the Administration.

I confess this Branch of Modern Conformity has it is Advantages: It keeps a
Mars Honesty oftentimes from breaking out to his Prejudice. It Is a Passport to
Business, and a Protection to Trade. And therefore it is well, if there is not
something besides Religion at the Bottom. However, let the Intention be never
so Sincere, it is no Warrant for an unlawful Practice, Well! Though we are barred
the usual Place, yet we are not discharged from the Worship. Let us not live
like Independent Beings, as if there was no Duty owing to God Almighty, no
Benefit in public Communion, nor any effect of our Savior's Promise to his
Church. Who the Apostle tells us gave Apostles, and Pastors, and Teachers:
Ephesians. ^ 11, 12
For the Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry; and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. Let us take Care we don't overlook their
Mission, and loose the Advantage of their Office. Always remembering that those
who refuse the Means, must fail of the End. God grant none of our Friends,
Mismanage these Church Distractions. That they don't make their Orthodoxy a
Color for their Profaneness; nor pretend an aversion to the Churches, that
they may go no whither with the better Grace. As if it was a desirable
Condition, to be quit of the Fatigue of Prayers, and delivered from the
Discipline of the Pulpit, and enfranchized from the Servitude of Religion. To
have our Time, and our Conscience, and our Sins to our selves, without the
least interruption or Reproof.

These are sad Privileges both in the quality, and consequence, and serve only
to lay Men asleep in a fatal Security; till they awake in those Flames which
burn for ever.

Let us therefore be governed by the Apostles Advice, and not forsake the
Assembling our selves, as the manner of* ^ebr. ^0. 25.
some is. I am sure, the Occasion calls for the best Appearance of Religion;
for all the Aids of Union and Solemnity: We see in what a Tempest, the Nation
is tossed. What a Torrent overbears all Regards both Human, and Divine. Neither
Nature, nor Obligation, Crown nor Mitre, Law nor Gospel, can stand before it.
No moral Difficulty can stop its Passage. It breaks through all the Oppositions
of Blood, Heights of Station, and Defenses of Right. So that now if ever we may
make the Prophets complaint, Truth is fallen ^sa. 59. ^4.
in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter. And when this Civil Chaos will
Settle, He only knows who brings Light out of Darkness; and Order from
Confusion. And a Consideration no less sad then the rest is the Infatuation
which lies upon Men's Spirits. How they call Evil Good, ^sa.
and Good Evil. How they dote on their Delusion, and are enamored of their
Disease, and like those stung with a Tarantula expire in Pleasure. And is it
not an uncomfortable prospect to see Men seized with such a fatal Eethargy;
that neither Honor nor Interest, Reason nor Sense, this World nor the Other
can work upon them. Since, They have so little Care of themselves, do they not
stand more in need of a Foreign Assistance? Let our Charity equalize their
Rigours, and, if it is possible, exceed them. Let us intercede for them at the
Throne of Grace, and join in the Church's Devotion; That God would bring into
the way of Truth all such as have erred, and are deceived. And what Success
soever our Charity may have, the Office is Christian and Generous.

Besides, we ought to apply for our own Security; and lift up our Prayers for
the Remnant that is left, 2 King 19. 4.

Thirdly, and Lastly, Our Behavior ought to be remarkable for Resolution and
decent Assurance. Honesty without Courage is impracticable. This Virtue of
Fortitude is a Guard to all the rest, without which they lie defenseless and
exposed. He that commands another Fears, commands his Actions; for what will not
a Man do to escape an Evil he believes intolerable. And as we are obliged to
keep our Ground, and retain our Integrity; so we should do it in a posture of
Hope; and with an Air of Satisfaction. To languish and repine, and grow
disconsolate, looks, as if we were weary of well doing; it doubles the
Misfortune, and carrys danger in the Symptom. God has given us the Post of
Honor, are we not to maintain it with a suitable Behavior? To suffer
cheerfully abates the Anguish, and adds Strength and Luster to the Virtue. Let
us keep our Thoughts easy, our Imagination bright; and our Spirits supported
with the Justice of the Cause. To be able to abide the shock has a great deal
of Pleasure as well as Trouble in it. By this means a Man becomes conscious of
his own Strength, and finds his Virtue hardened beyond an ordinary Temper;
which could never have been known without Experiment. And must not such a
Discovery be extremely entertaining to a Generous Mind, and afford a very
relishing Satisfaction? These Strokes of Adversity are like slighter Wounds
received in a Breach, which have more of Honor than Smart in them. It Is true,
the Success is chiefly to be attributed to God Almighty. It was his Assistance
which excited us to the Combat, and fortifyed us to maintain it. But since the
Use of his Grace depends upon our selves; a share of the Action is likewise our
own. Are our Fortunes rifled and our Labors wrested from us? Let us with those
the Apostle mentions, take the spoiling of our Goods joyfully; knowing that we
have in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance, Heb. 10. 34. Must we quit
the Expectations of Birth and the just Pretenses of our Station? Let us
remember, that nothing can make us Little but our selves, that the best Quality
consists more in Action than Title, in Resolution, than in Fortune. To continue
firm to Conscience, to stand by the Oppressed, and to be above the Accidents of
Life, are the most valuable Signs of Nobility: Whereas he who wants Courage to
practice his Sentiment and maintain his Reason, has a vulgar Soul; and how much
soever his Outside may glitter, is no better than a Pageant of Honor.

Are we hated for our Virtue, and exposed for doing our Duty? Let us not
complain. This Usage is commonly the Lot of the best Men in the best Cause.
Christ and his Apostles met with no kinder Entertainment. As we suffer for
their Doctrine; Let us imitate their Example; Let us with them glory in
Persecutions, and despise Contempt, and show our Enemies, that we have
Greatness to pity, as well as Charity to forgive them. At the worst we should
consider the Proof of our Integrity rises in Proportion to the Trial. The
greater our Sufferings are, the greater is our Constancy, the greater our
Resignation, the greater our Reward. The Storm in all Likelihood will not last
always; it may be farther spent already than we are aware of. God, who helps
those to Right, who suffer Wrong, will arise and maintain his own Cause, Psalm.
74. 23. He will, I question not, vindicate his own Establishment, and appear in
his good Time for the restoring of Order, and the Support of Right, for the
Honor of Parents, and the Majesty of Kings.

However, if Life falls short of those happy Days, there are Nobler Scenes in
the other World, than Restaurations. And whoever gets once to Heaven will never
think he dyed too soon. There is no Complaints of Disappointment, nor longing
for Satisfactions left behind. I shall conclude with the Apostles Exhortation
inferred from the same Glorious Prospect. Wherefore be ye steadfast, immovable,
always abounding in the Work of the Lord, inasmuch as ye know your Labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

The END.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 4. read for Humen, r. Human. p. 4. l. 5, for disincorpat ad r.
disincorpated. p. 8. l. 23. for preserve r. persevere. p. 22. l. 17. for swell
r. swells.


