OBSERVATIONS On a PAPER Entitled, The Declaration of the Lord Petre Upon his
Death, touching the PLOT: In a LETTER to His Most Sacred MAJESTY.
BEING A Full Answer thereunto.
WHether the Abovementioned Paper were drawn up, or so much as ever seen,
Considered, or Signed by the late Lord Petre, there is much Reason to doubt; As
1. Because it is dropped into the World Vnattested, and it can scarce be supposed
but if that Lord of his own free motion had a mind to have made any such Solemn
Declaration, he would have desired the Presence of the Honorable the
Lieutenant of the Tower, or the Reverend Dr. Hawkins, or some other good,
Protestants, that they might have been able to Testify it to be his proper
Voluntary Act. 2dly. Whereas it purports to be Adress'd to his Majesty, it is
yet Printed neither by His Majesty's Printers, Nor with any Signification of
his Royal Command or Permission (without which to publish a private Letter
Directed to His Sacred Majesty, is I conceive highly Presumptuous) 3dly. It Is
only said to be Printed by T. B. for R. Mead, whereas there is no such known
Bookseller; which much Implies that those that Midwiv'd this Declaration into
the World, were themselves half either Ashamed or Afraid to Vouch it.

All which being premised, and Submitted to the Consideration and Chastisement
of Authority, if it should prove a Forgery; since the thing is now public, and
may by the Confidence of its Expressions inveagle Weak Readers into too good,
that is, a most false and groundless opinion, of the Innocence of the Church of
Rome in Point of Loyalty, which seems to be the Grand Scope of the Pamphlet, I
hope it will neither be unsafe nor unseasonable to offer a few modest Remarks
upon it. Which that it may more fairly be done, I shall faithfully Recite the
whole Paper (in Paragraphs) Verbatim.

The Letter.
May it please Your Majesty,
I Give my self the Hopes that your Majesty will pardon this Presumption of a
Dying but Dutiful Subject, in giving you the trouble of this short Account and
Declaration of my self, by which, in the first place, I offer to God my Hearty
Prayers for your Majesty's Long Life and happy Reign, with all the Blessings of
this Life, and Eternal Happiness of the next

Observations.
As to these Prayers for His Majesty, I shall only Note, That if this Paper and
these Prayers are real, Then this Dying Lord appears not to have been
altogether of the same Religion with many Learned and Leading Roman Catholic
Priests of Ireland, (even since his Majesty's Reign and happy Restaura^ion) For
I find they had great Scruples of Conscience about Praying for his Majesty, Nay
utterly denied to do it: And for Evidence hereof, I shall produce a Witness of
their own, No worse man then Father Peter Walsh a Franciscan Friar, who in his
Book, Entitled, The History of the Loyal Formulary; Printed 1674. Fol. 706.
and 707. Assures us, That at their Popish National Synod held at Dublin in the
year 1666. (the like of which, he says elsewhere they had not held since Q.
Mary's days) He himself propounded this very matter to the Fathers to be
Debated, and prayed a positive Decree in the Point, Saying -- That he know MANY
CHURCHMEN Omitted to pray in public at their Altars for the King, that is, at
all so much as for his Spiritual Welfare; yea some, for example, Father
Dominick Dempsy a Franiiscan (Esteemed a very Grave and Holy man, and therefore
a Leading Person) and Father Long the Jesuit, Asserted, That because the King
was out of the Roman Catholic Church, it was not Lawful to pray for Him AT
ALL; or at least not publicly on any other day in the year than Good Friday,
nor then in particular for Him, but in General only, that is, forasmuch as he
was Comprehended amongst the great Generality of Infidels, or of Jews,
Mahumetons, Pagans and Heretics, for whom altogether the Church Prayed on
Good-Fryday, as being Anniversary of that Day whereon our Savior Dyed for all
the Children of Adam in general; Nor yet then, or so to pray for Him without
some further Qualification and Restriction of what we should Beg of God, or
wish from Heaven to Him, that is, To Pray only for what concerned the Spiritual
Welfare of his Soul, and therefore only to Pray for his Conversion to the Roman
Catholic Church, but not for His Temporal Prosperity in this Wor^^, until He
be a true Member of the only true C^^rch. -- Thus far the very Words of Father
Walshes Testimony of the punctual Doctrine of those Holy Loyal Fathers in this
Case. But it seems they were none of my Lord Petre's Confessors; And yet
perhaps They might too; For who knows but this Letter was writ on a
Good-Fryday? Since the Publishers have put no Date to it; Which it is like was
not Omitted but for some special Design, since it might otherwise, (if the
Letter were real) be of great use to give his Majesty Satisfaction how near his
Death he made it.

The Letter.
I having been now above five Years in Prison, and, what is more grievous to
me, lain so long under a False and Injurious Calumny of an Horrid Plot and
Design against your Majesty's Person and Government, and am now by the
Disposition of Gods Providence called into another World, before I could by a
public Trial make my Innocence appear; I conceived it Necessary for me as an
Incumbent Duty I owe to Truth, and my own Innocence, to make this Ensuing
Protestation to your Majesty and the whole World; That whereas One Titus Oats
has maliciously and falsely Sworn, That he saw me Receive a Commission Directed
to me from Johannes Paulus de Oliva, Constituting me Lieutenant General of an
Army, which he Pretended was to Come into England, I Declare in the Presence of
the All-seeing God, before whose just Tribunal I am shortly to Appear, That I
never saw any such Commission directed to me, or any other person whatsoever,
and do firmly Believe there never was any such.

Observations.
1. Touching my Lord Petre's Guilt or Innocence, I meddle not; He is gone to
his place: But this I will say, That the Contrivers of this Letter might
however have had more manners than to Call a Legal Impeachment in the Highest
Court of Judicature of this Kingdom, A false and Injurious Calumny.

2. The Strength of this Protestation as to us, (for how it is in it self true
or false, we cannot Determine,) Depends first on the Truth of this Paper's
being the Lord Petre's own handy work, which we have already Detected of
several Symptoms of Forgery, and till that be better cleared, it can be of no
Force at all; but only to add to the Suspicion of his Guilt, if it should prove
Forged; for Innocence never desires its Friends should invent Shams or Lies for
its Reputation, though it self be never so much Oppressed by Calumny. 2dly.
Suppose it Real, It Is only a Dying Romanists word in his own Case, and wherein
the Reputation of his Church is highly Concerned; And it may be he could not
get an Absolution from his Ghostly Father without he signed this Paper; And
therefore how far the same is to be Credited, any that are acquainted with the
Popish Priests Practical Divinity, and the Wicked Tyrannies and Devilish
Impostures they daily Impose on poor Dying Creatures^ will soon be able to
judge.

3. In this Protest, there seems a Fallacy or Equivocation in the very Words,
For he speaks of Oates's having Sworn that He (the Lord Petre) received a
Commission ^onstituting him Lieutenant. General of an Army, which was to come
into England, and protests he never saw any Such Commission; whereas I believe
it will be found Oats deposed not of an Army that was to come into England, but
to be raised in England; And besides, as I Remember, Oats tells us, That they
called these Instruments from the Jesuits General, Pateuts. Now this Protester
denies not the receiving of any Patent, Letter or Instrument from De Oliva, but
only a Commission, which perhaps the^ will now say it could not be, because
Oliva ha^ no Legal Power to grant a Commission of tha^ kind.

The Letter.
But of the Folly as well as the Falsehood of the Information, the sober part of
Mankind as I conceive sufficiently ere this Convinced.

Observations.
This Paragraph smells rank of a Popish Priests Contrivance, being the highest
Affront imaginable, since it not only openly Arraigns the Government, the
Wisdom, the Justice of the Nation, but in effect proclaims, his Sacred Majesty
(horresco referent!) several Parliaments, all our Judges, etc. to be all Fools
or Madmen. But so far is it from Truth, That any sober men are Convinced of the
Folly or falsehood of Mr. Oat's Evidence, That it stands still unshaken by all
the little Arts the Romanists have used to supplant it, and firm as the Pillars
of the Earth (for so is every Truth.) Whereas true it is on the other side all
sober men cannot but observe the Numerous Calumnies and Subornations, etc. --
Which the Papists have set on foot to Blast Oats's Credit, have been abundantly
detected by Providence to their Confusion, and are legible in our Records to
all future Generations, as in the Case of Knox and Lane, etc. -- And what need
was there of such Hellish Artifices, if their Cause durst have looked Heaven
and Truth, and Innocence in the Face?

But we may rationally make Judgment of the whole Paper by that which follows;
For he that will Avouch with the highest Asseverations one Notorious Untruth,
cannot expect to be believed in his other Affirmations, by any that are not
Bankrupt of Reason, and too prodigal of their Faith.

The Letter.
And as for those Aspersions which the Ignoran^ and Malicious have thrown upon
the Roman Catholick-Church (of which I am, and by the Grace of God do dye a
Member) As if Murdering of Kings, and taking up Arms against our Sovereigns,
were an Authorized Principle of that Religion, I do knowingly affirm, There is
nothing with more Horrox detested by the Catholick-Church, as being expressly
contrary to the Command of our Savior, and Christian Doctrine; and as such I
renounce and detest it, As I do all Plots and Conspiracies against your Sacred
Person.

Observations.
What an Innocent Loyal parcel of Folks would this man persuade us, his Church
of Rome consists of! Never, alas, was Prince Assassinated, Never Arms taken up
by them against their Sovereigns upon the Account of Religion! -- Their Church
only Excommunicates a Prince, and gives him to the Devil a little, and deposes
him from his Crown, if he will not believe and do as she would have Him; And
then if any zealous Son of the Church shall think fit to Kill him, this is no
Murdering of a King, for neither is the Prince, according to her Doctrine, any
longer a King, nor the Act Murder, but doing of Justice on an Enemy to God and
the Church. Nor does she allow Subjects to take up Arms against their
Sovereigns, only she Absolves them from their Allegiance when she thinks meet,
and thenceforwards they cease to be Subjects, and their King to be their
Sovereign. -- What Sots, what Dolts, what ignorant not observing Cockscombs
does the Author of this Libel fancy us Englishmen to be? Or how could he have
the Impudence to Address this stuff to that Sagacious Majesty, who both by the
Works and Perils of his Royal Grandfather; the Rebellion of the Irish Papists
against his Incomparable Father; by his own Experience, and a tho^sand
Observations, cannot but know, this bold Averment to be either wholly delusive,
or utterly false. I.

For what does this Author mean by his Roman Catholick-Church? Or by an
Authorized Principle? If by Church, he intends the Pope, whom they call the
Church Vertual, and whom all of their Communion are bound to obey; how many
Kings has he deposed? how many Assassinations Commanded, Encouraged or Abetted?
as against Queen Elizabeth, the two last Henry's of France, and King Charles
the first in Ireland, where the Popes Nuntio was in the Head of the Rebels? If
by Church, he understands Councils, acknowledged by them lawful and general,
whom they call the Church Representative; They have Justified, approved and
Commanded this Deposing Rebellious Doctrine, As the Council of Lions and their
great Lateran Council, held in the year 1215. in which (if they misreckon not)
there were no less than 1215. Fathers; where it was Synodically and
Categorically Concluded, The Pope might depose Kings, absolve their Subjects
from their Oaths of Allegiance, and give away their Kingdoms. If by Authorized
Principle, he means the Dictates of their Canon Law, (the Rule whereby their
Church acknowledges to be governed, and holds in a manner equal to Sacred
Scripture) there we find the same things asserted. If the Judgment of their
most famous Divines, and Casuists in their Books, unreproved, unsentenced,
uncondemned, may together with concurrent practices and attempts in Fact, be
supposed to be the Voice of their Church, they have avowed and justified all
this, as is unanswerably proved by that Judicious Monument of Honor to our
Protestant Church, the Reverend Bishop of Lancolns Elaborate Treatise on this
Subject. Or if you would rather, have the Testimo^^ of a Professed Romanist,
hea^ the before ^^^med Father Walsh in his Preface, where amo^^st other lewd
Principles, he instances these that follow, -- That the Pope has ^^^er to
depo^^ ^^^ces, and absolve Subjects, and Command them to raise Arms against
their Princes, so deposed, and to pursue them with Fire and Sword to death if
they resist; And that whoever Kills any Prince by the Pope Deposed or
Excommunicated, Kills not a Lawful Prince, but (...) Usurping Tyrant, and
cannot be said to Murder the Anointed of God, or to Kill his own Prince; And
that whoever out of pure zeal to the Roman Church, ventures himself, and dies
in the War against such a Prince, dies a True Martyr of Christ, etc. All and
every one of these Tenets (says Father Walsh) are maintained either in Formal
or Vertual Terms not only by many of our most famous and most Classical Authors
of all sorts, out by the Roman Bishops themselves.

Now if all or none of these are enough to declare to us the Sense and
Principles of the Roman Church, (wherein our Author says this Lord dies) we
must I think for ever despair of finding either what that Church is, or what it
maintains.

But here again we meet with another Equivocation -- Aspersions (as he calls
them) thrown on the Roman Catholic Church, of which he knowingly affirms there
is nothing more dete^ted by the Catholic Church -- Very true; but nothing to
his purpose; Such Principles are indeed detested by the Catholic Church, that
is, by all sincere real* Members of Christ; but still it is as true, that
nothing is more plainly vouched or practiced by the Apostatized Politic
Brotherhood that call themselves the Roman Church, who are indeed Members of
Antichrist, and the Synagogue of Satan. And this our Author tacitly
acknowledges, by dropping there the word Roman, whereon the whole Hing of the
Question depended.

Nor is there any thing more absurd than his Suggestion in the following
Clause; That his Church detests it as being expressly contrary to the Command of
our Savior, and Christian Doctrine; For is not his Churches denying the Cup to
the Laiety, forbidding Priests Marriage, Injoyning Prayer in an Unknown Tongue,
and many other Tenets, as expressly contrary to the Command of our Savior and
Christian Doctrine? And yet they are not ashamed not only to practice, but
enforce them, under the highest Penalties.

Besides, Our Author makes the Lord only say, That he detests it as such; that
is, As far as it is contrary to Christian Doctrine: But what if with the Popes,
the Councils, the numerous Doctors of his Church beforementioned, he believed
Killing or Rising in Arms against an Excommunicated Prince, not to be
Murdering of a King, or Raising Rebellion against his Sovereign, according to
Christ's Command, when his (supposed) Vicar requires it, and declares it lawful;
Where then is the Kings Safety, or the Papists Loyalty?

The Letter.
Having thus briefly and with all Sincerity of a Dying Man Discharged my
Conscience; I shall end where I began, and with my last Breath beg of God to
Defend Your Majesty from all Your Enemies, and to Forgive Those who by their
Perjuries have Endeavored to make Me appear to be One: Who am Living and Dying
( as in Duty bound, etc.)

Your most Obedient and Loyal Subject, W. Petre.


Observations.
As to the Sincerity of this Paper, the Reader may I hope by this time be
better able to make a Judgment: And so I take leave of it: Being certain that
all good Subjects will join in hearty Prayers to GOD, to Defend His Majesty
from all His Enemies: And that they will also believe That no Papist that
understands his Religion, and is true to it, can ever be a Friend or a Loyal
Subject (any longer then the Pope pleases) to a PROTESTANT PRINCE.

Entered According to Order.
London, Printed by George Larkin, at the Lower-End of Broadstreet, next to
London-Wall. 1684.


