A MODEST PLEA FOR THE LORDS DAY: OR RATHER The Sum of the PLEA made by
Divines for the Lords Day, as the Christian Sabbath: AGAINST Those who contend
for the Old Sabbath of the Seventh Day, in other (...) in the Creation.

By J. C. D. D.

Mar. 2.28. The Son of Man is Lord also of the Sa^^^th. Acts 6.14. We have
heard him say, That this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall
change the Customs which Moses delivered us. Gal. 4 10. You observe DAYS, and
Months, and Times, and Years. (...) 11. I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed labor in (...) LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1669.

To those Christians (especially my Neighbors) in the County of Norfolk, who
are zealous for the Observation of the Seventh Day Sabbath.
Brethren,
MY heart's desire, and prayer to God for you all, is that you might be saved:
For, I bear you record, that you have a zeal of God; only if I make a doubt
whether it be according to knowledge or no: yea, if I tell you, I verily
believe it is not according to knowledge, I am sure (your ingeunity is such)
that you will pardon it to me, considering that my own persuasion and practice
is differing from you, and Charity (which always begins at home) will not
allow me to judge my self to practice upon ignorance; though I am also one o^
them who but know in part, yet (...) hope I desire to practice according to my
knowledge: Which if you will b^ so charitable as to suppose, I must judg^ your
zeal not to be according to knowledge. And let me tell you, as there is no more
sacred fire than that of zea^ when it has its due fuel, and is exercised in a
just and good cause; s^ there is no more dangerous fire when i^ has a mistaken
object. The zealou^ soul runs, and as the man who runs, if he be in a
right way come quicker than another to his journey end; but if he be out of his
way, ^ is sooner than another at a further distance from home: So it is with
the zealous spirit. I must profess, let (...) person be of what persuasion he
will I must have a reverence for him, if perceive that he differs from me ou^
of Conscience, because he dares not t^ sin against God. It is a noble temper
to be afraid of sin. If a person pretends conscience for a particular opinion
and practice, and in the mean time be a common drunkard, swearer, liar,
blasphemer, unclean person, one that lives as it were without God in the World,
making no conscience of reading the Scripture, praying, bringing up and
governing his Family in the nurture and fear of the Lord, only pretends
conscience as to baptizing of Children, keeping the Seventh day Sabbath; this
man is an hypocrite, and dissembles with God and men for there is an uniformity
in conscience, and it would certainly oblige him to avoid known and confessed
sins, as much as what he does fancy is a sin, and as much oblige him to all, as
to any known duty. But where I see a Christian walking close with God in the
general of his conversation, and differing from me in this or that point,
because he thinks he cannot without sin believe and practice what I do; I
cannot but love and honor him, and be very far from their Religion who think
it the best and most Gospel way to cudgel him into my Persuasion: A Gaol, or a
Fire and Faggots never yet cured an erring Conscience. Such Brethren though
overtaken with a fault are certainly (according to the Apostles counsel) to be
restored in the spirit of meekness, and to be dealt with, (like rational
Creatures) argued, and treated, and persuaded out of their mistakes, not
cudgelled out of them. This (Brethren) has caused me to send this little Book
amongst you; so penned, as I think you will not judge it to have any thing of
bitterness in it, and in so small a volume, as I cannot despair but that you
will bestow the reading of it, nor will it ask you long time: You will find in
it, the most of what has been said by Divines in this case: I have contracted
their larger Discourses that I might not tire your patience, and made what they
have said (in Latin or in more Scholastic terms) plain to you by a free and
familiar style. The singularity of your dissent does certainly call to you for
the use of all possible means to find out what indeed is the Truth of God in
this point; and there cannot be a greater witness against you, of your want of
sincerity, than an unwillingness to read or hear what has been, or is or shall
be said against you. For though indeed there be some Articles of Faith, some
Principles of Religion, about which it is a Christians wisdom not to admit
disputes, yet this is not such; it is no Fundamental in Religion that the
seventh Day from the Creation is the Sabbath: It is none of those points in
which you cannot err without breaking your union with the Head Christ, yet is
it no light point, for it breaks communion with all Churches, and that is no
light matter: And the Scripture says we are members of Christ, and members one
of another. Although an erring Conscience obliges him that is troubled with
it, to do nothing against it, yet certainly he that has it, or has reason but
to suspect he has it, stands highly obliged to use all means to reform it; and
although the differing complexion of a Christians Conscience may oblige him for
a time, to walk divided from his Brethren, yet he ought not to do it without
many thoughts of heart, because of his division; and while he walks alone in
obedience to his Conscience, he ought also to sit alone, and to keep silence.
To sit alone pondering with himself, what is said on both sides, and without
prejudice, weighing arguments in the balance of the Sanctuary, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual. And to keep silence, both as to the publishing
his singular and novel ^^^^^^ns, (keeping to that excellent (...) of the
Apostle, Romans 14.22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self, before God.) (It is
a mad fancy of some, who think that every opinion in Religion is worth breaking
the Churches peace for) and also keeping silence as to inveighing against and
reviling others, otherwise persuaded and practicing: For, which way went the
Spirit of God from the multitudes of their Brethren unto them? And besides, who
knows not that there is the same distance betwixt their brethren and them? and
none can usurp such authority, but those who will arrogate to themselves
infallibility, and take away the judgment of discerning, which is the very
root and basis of the Protestant Religion. You know Brethren, what Fetters I
have upon me as to my public Ministry. If I were free, I question whether I by
it should have any capacity to serve your souls, while you are under this
mistake: If I may do it with these Printed Papers, it will be no small
satisfaction to me; if not, y^ my work is with the Lord, an^ my judgment is
with my God I think scarce any of you think I have any prejudice against you,
many of you may believe, I have a great kindness for you. The good Lord bring
us all in this point, to think and speak the same thing, and to walk in the
same Way.

Your Friend and Servant in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, John Collenges.

CHAP. I. The occasion of the Discourse, and what moved the Author to it.
IF in the following Discourse I had designed to have advantaged my Name in a
printed Book, I had certainly made choice of another Subject, or handled this
in another manner than I have. I know nothing left for an Author on this
subject, it has been so variously and learnedly handled by eminent Authors:
Nothing is to be added to what Mr. Ley has said to justify the application of
the Name Sabbath to the Lords day. Nor to what Dr. Twiss, Mr. Sheppard, Mr.
Caudry, and Mr. Warren, have said for the Morality of it, for the repeal or
expiration of the Jewish Sabbath, for the change of it to the first day of the
Week. Mr. Sheppard and Mr. Caudry have not lef^ Oc^fo^d or Brabourn nor Mr.
Warren left Mr. Tilham a rag to cover the nakedness of their faireyes; nor is
ought to be added to wha^ Dr. Young has said to the primitive observation of
it. For the practical sanctification of it, all the Authors aforesaid have
spoken fully, to which may be added Dr. Bound, Mr. Bernard, and lately Mr.
Wells: To say nothing of the controversial part handled by the aforesaid
Authors, against Heylin, Primrose, Ironside, and all of that party who would
make our Sabbath but an ordinary Church-holiday: so that indeed there is not
room left for a new Author to crowd in, bringing any thing new in this case.

Nor shall this discourse pretend to any thing of that nature. I look upon it
as our great disadvantage in reference to most of our brethren, who contend for
the Jewish Sabbath to be still in force, that what is already said in the case
(which is abundantl^ enough) is either spoken so learnedly as they cannot
understand it: or else hidden in large volumes of considerable price, which
either ordinary people want money to buy, or time to^^ad, or judgment to find
out. All therefore I shall pretend to, is in a plain familiar Discourse to
present our brethren with the sum of what has been far more fully and
learnedly discoursed by others. To which, that which has been the next
occasion is my present leisure, and the Providence of God casting me in a
place, where I observe very many, and those whose hearts I would charitably
think God had touched with a sense of Religion, and who I trust truly fear
God, and love the Lord Jesus, have received impressions, leading them to a
great zeal for the old Sabbath. The consequents of which opinion, I look upon
as very sad, these Christians breaking communion with all Christian Churches in
the World: and depriving themselves of the advantage they might have from
communion with us on the Lords day. For though I have known some of that
opinion, who yet on the Lords day would come to hear the Word preached and join
in Prayer with other Congregations, yet I perceive another spirit in many of my
present Neighbors. And besides if (being possessed of that opinion) they did
come, it would not be with such preparation, nor in such a Conscience of what
they did as were requisite for such as expect a blessing from or in such
duties. God has pleased at present to call me to sit down in silence as to my
public Ministry, that I might in something serve my generation, and be useful
to the Souls of others, I have put my pen to Paper in this cause; nor have I
had any other motive whatsoever: but if it might be to do good to some Soul or
other; or if I cannot cure, yet at least (through the strength of God), to stop
the spreading of this disease, amongst Christians.

CHAP. II. The first Consideration. That God has no more glory, nor the Souls
of Christians any more real advantage, from the observation of the Seventh day
from the Creation, than from the observation of the Lords Day as the Christian
Sabbath; nor can be any pretense of this nature but that of stricter Obedience
to the Commandment.
I Take it to be an excellent notion of that holy and eminent Servant of God,
Mr. Thomas Sheppard, that the thing which makes a Law moral, is a goodness in
the thing, commanded precedent to the command, yet caused by the eternal will
of God. Ceremonial Laws were therefore good because commanded, but the matter
of every Moral Law must have some goodness, that is some equity, some
suitableness in it to the nature, and to the Concernment of men and women,
preceding the command, especially if we rightly consider man as he stands
related to God, and to his Neighbor, as he is made up of Body and Soul, both
ordained to an eternal existence. The light of nature showing us, that there is
a God, and but one God, he, our Creator, Preserver, Governor, an Essence of
glorious Majesty, purity and holiness, etc. If we had never heard of the first,
second, or third Commandments, Nature would have told us, it was fit we should
give the highest homage of our Souls to him alone, worship him according to his
will, not blaspheme his Name, nor use any thing related to him irreverently,
which is the substance of the three first Commandments. The same will be
yielded as to the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. The very light of Nature, would have
showed us a fitness, and sutableness in the things there commanded, to humane
Society, if we never had heard of the Commandment. The same light of Nature
also would have shown us, that some time must be spent in the service of God.
That it was reasonable some due proportion of time should be so sanctified.
Indeed that this should be a seventh part rather than a sixth, Nature would not
have shown us, that is, moral, positive, but being directed, Nature will
presently allow it equal, holy, just and good.

This Original goodness in the observation of a seventh part of our time as
holy to the Lord must lie either in this,

That from such a Religious Observation our Creator will reap some glory. -- Or
this,

That from it, Man, as to Soul or Body will reap some considerable advantage.

Both which are most undoubtedly true, both as to some proportion of time, and
as to a seventh rather than a lesser part of our time. The honor we bring to
God by Acts of Worship, being only in the publishing of his Name, and Works.
The more frequently we do exalt his Name, and publish his Works, the more Glory
we bring him.

Again, Ordinances being the way through which our Lord Jesus uses to pass,
the more we have of Religious Duties and Ordinances, the more advantage arises
to our immortal Souls, if we be not wanting to our selves. But now what real
advantage any soul can have from the sanctification of the last more than of
the first day of the week, will pose the most serious Christian to determine:
Is his Soul to be advantaged by Praying, Hearing, Singing, breaking Bread? All
these certainly are done on the Lords day, and with this advantage in a far
fuller communion of Christians, than those have who keep the sixth day, as to
which the far larger part of Christians, and Protestants, yea and the severest
livers of them, are not satisfied. The only thing which I can think of, as
seeming in the least to abate the edge of this consideration, is, That God is
more glorified, because a stricter Obedience is given to his revealed Will. And
indeed Samuel has taught us, That the Lord has not so great delight in
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices as he has in our obeying his voice; that to
Obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams. Now our
Brethren pretend a more strict obedience to the will of God, in the
sanctification of the seventh than in the sanctification of the first day: I
shall therefore in the next Chapter argu^ that case with them. In the mean
time, i^ is worthy of our Brethrens second thought^ whether under the Gospel it
be usual with God to enjoin his People Precepts of mea^ Obedience, I mean such
from whence their Souls shall reap no advantage, nor he any glory, only in this
as we show our submission to the will of God. Our gracious God has made his
yoke easy by commanding us nothing but such, by performing of which, we
further glorify him, than by a mere Obedience, and from which also we reap
some real advantage to our Bodies or Souls. Such I am sure are all the other
moral Precepts, by a performance of them, we really (besides obedience to the
will of God) do our selves or others some good, and bring God some real glory
further than by the acknowledging of him our Sovereign, and yielding him a
suitable homage. But as to this, there can be no such pretense, neither Souls
nor Bodies of our selves or others are more advantaged, nor God more honored
by our observation of the seventh, than of the first day, nor is God more
honored, if it does not appear he is more obeyed. It is agreed on both hands,
that one entire day ought to be sanctified, by the solemn performance of all
duties of instituted Worship, both publicly and privately, Reading the Word,
praying, preaching, hearing, administering and receiving the holy Sacraments,
singing of Psalms, visiting, and administering to the necessities of the sick,
and of the poor. Now I say it cannot be imagined what good our selves, or
others shall reap more by the performance of these duties on the seventh than
on the first day: Nor what honor God shall have if it does not appear, that a
stricter obedience is yielded to the command of God by the sanctification of
the seventh, than by the sanctification of the first.

CHAP. III. That God has no where required of Christians, the observation of
the Seventh day. The fourth Commandment, though it requires a Seventh day, and
such seventh day as is of Gods appointment, yet it does no more require the
Seventh, than the first day of the Week.
THere can be no pretense for a further Obedience to the command of God in the
observation of the seventh day in orde^ from the Creation, than in the
observatio^ of the first, but from the letter of the fourth Commandment, as to
which it is thus far agreed betwixt us and our Brethren.

1. That it is in the power of God only to make a day holy. No man can lay men's
Consciences under an obligation, that it shall be sin for them not to labor on
this or that day, or not to spend such a day in public and private duties of
Divine Worship, but by Authority from God.

2. That the fourth Commandment is moral and perpetual, not ceremonial and
temporary either in whole, or in part.

3. That the sense of it is plain, and literal, not mystical only.

4. That as it requires some solemn time to be set apart for the Worship of
God, so expressly, 1. A whole Day. 2. One whole Day of Seven. 3. Such a Day as
God has instituted.


So that we are far nearer agreement with our Brethren of this persuasion, than
with Heylin, Primrose, etc. and the rest of that party, who will have the
Commandment ceremonial either in whole or in part (and so lose us one of the
ten Commandments) or those who overstraining two or three Allegorical
expressions in Origin and Epiphanius, would make the sense mystical, Christ to
be the Sabbath, and the Precept only to require the Sanctification of the Name
of Christ, (a modern dream justifiable by no Reason, Scripture, nor Authority.)
We are agreed with our Brethren, That the fourth commandment is a Precept
requiring the sanctification of a seventh part of our time unto the Lord for
ever, and such a seventh part as we shall find his direction for.

But that the fourth commandment does primarily require the sanctification of
the seventh day in order from the Creation, is that in which alone we differ
from our Brethren. Let us therefore without passion, heartily consult the
Precept, and see what there is in it, which can justify our Brethrens zeal in
this case. The Precept runs thus.

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, six days thou shall labor, and do
all thy work, but the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy stranger, that is
within thy gate^ For in six days the Lord made Heaven (...) Earth, the Sea,
and all that in them is, a^rested the seventh day. Wherefore the Lord bl^sed
the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

It (possibly) is some disadvantage in the controversy, that most of our
Brethren a^ not skilled in the Hebrew language, in whi^ this Precept was
Originally wrote. The^ lay much stress upon the word Sabbat^ and the particle
the, beyond what indee^ the letter of the Precept will bear: It man not
therefore be amiss to let our Brethren know these two things by way of promise,

1. That the term Sabbath in the Hebre^ signifies no more than Rest, and a day
o^ sabbath is no more than a day of rest. Tha^ the term Sabbath signifies no
more than rest is evident to him that either attends the derivation of the
word, or the usage of the same word in many Scriptures. Lev. 25.6. where it is
applied to the years of Jubilee, Lev. 26.43. 2 Chronicles. 36.21. Isa. 30.7. It is
used to signify a rest from strife, Prove. 20.3. and that rest from labor
which a wounded man has, Exodus 21.19. it is used to express the resting place
of Thorns laid up to be burned, 2 Samuel 23.7. Now because those days, which it
pleased God to set apart for himself, were days in which he did require a
cessation from labor to that end, that they might better attend Religious
duties, these days were called Sabbaths, and that as well before the giving of
the Law upon Sinai, Exodus 16.25, 26, 29. as after in innumerable Texts. So as
the word is indifferently used, to signify the weekly Sabbath as those other
holy days which God appointed the Jews twice in Holy Writ, we find the word
(with a little alteration) doubled, Exodus 16.23.35.2. we translate it a Sabbath
of Rest. In the Hebrew it is but the doubling of the same word or words, or of
a word from the same root, and of the same significancy, A rest of rest,
signifying it was not to be a bare cessation from labor, but an holy,
religious rest. So as the fourth Commandment is no more than Keep holy a day
of Rest. And because God had instituted but one such day in the revolution of a
Week, therefore by an usual figure the word does sometimes signify a week, as
Lev. 23.15.25.8. and so in the New Testament. But that usage of the word in
this case w^ have nothing as yet to do with.

2. A second thing which our Brethren should know, and observe, is, That thos^
little particles a and the are English particles, not found in the Hebrew, but
put (...) by translation, to make up the sense according to our way of
speaking, the Hebre^ has no more than Remember to keep holy d^ of Rest, or day
of Sabbath; and it is indifferent whether (according to our Englis^ way of
speaking) we put in a or the; no^ can any argument on either side be fetche^
from those supplies to the Text.

These things being premised, we say That there are three things or four which
the Fourth Commandment requires o^ us.

1. That we should keep some solemn time, (...) a time of holy Rest unto the
Lord. 2. That it should be one day of seven, a seventh part of our time. 3.
That it should be an entire day. 4. That it should be such an entire day of
seven as God has appointed.
But that this day should be the sevent^ day in order from the Creation, we say
falls not (at least primarily under the Fourth Commandment) I say primarily
not, secondarily it does, as that was the day which God had appointed to the
Jews: Now we say,

1. That this is not a singularity, but diverse divine Precepts, both of those
which were temporary to the Jews, and of those which are of perpetual
concernment, have just such an interpretation allowed even by our Brethren, and
by all judicious Christians. God commanded, Deuteronomy. 12.5.11. You shall offer all
your sacrifices; only in the place which the Lord your God shall choose. I
would ask our brethren whether this Precept did not oblige them; to offer their
Sacrifices in the Tabernacle while that lasted, and in the Temple afterward
when God had chosen that, and in Ezra's Temple when that was builded. You shall
remember says God to keep holy a Sabbath day, one day in seven for an holy
rest, such a one, as God shall choose for a Sabbath, why must this be the
seventh from the Creation only, and not that only till God should choose
another, which done, the Commandment as much obliges to that. We say in the
second Commandment God requires of us, observance of the Acts of Instituted
Worship, which with the Jews quite differed from ours. Yet the command, obliged
both them to sacrifice, an^ us to preach, hear, receive the Lords Supper^ How
so? The Commandment only require^ of us in the general to worship God,
according to his will. The fifth Commandment, requires us to Honor the King,
when it was given, the Jews were bound to honor Moses their chief Magistrate
at tha^ time, and many years after, they were bound to honor Ahaz, Hezekiah,
and all in force^ of the same Precept. God requires by the Fourth Commandment,
that his People in all Ages should keep holy to him a Sabbath day. He expounds
himself thus: One day in seven, in which we shall not labor (h^ any bodily
labor,) and such a day as (...) should appoint. You will say then, how did the
Jews know, or how shall we know what to keep? We answer, the Jew^ knew by a Law
given them of the same Age (with that for Sacrifices) many hundreds of years
before the Law given at Sinai, and by a temporary Law often repeated, and quite
of another kind from the Fourth Commandment; which day must hold still if we
can neither find it expired nor repealed nor another substituted in the room of
it; bu^ if we can find any such sacred Record. The Fourth Commandment is not
destroyed but established. That required a Sabbath, a day, one of seven, such
day as God had, or should appoint. We plead only for a new appointment of the
particular day to the New Earth, the New World which God made by the sending of
his Son into the world; in the mean while the Fourth Commandment does neither
require this, nor that day otherwise than as that day was at that time by
another Law by God set apart. Let us hear what our Brethren object.

1. Some of them have observed an emphatical note in the Hebrew, as much as
that Sabbath. Remember to keep holy the day of that Sabbath.

Answ. We yield it, that the affix P is indeed sometimes emphatical, but
hundreds of places are to be showed where it is not, so as no argument of force
can be drawn from it.

2. But we may grant it so: it is not that day, but the day of that Sabbath, if
the note of Emphasis had been to the word signifying day, it had been far more
to our Brethrens purpose. But what is it to our Brethrens purpose that it is
the day of that rest, or that Sabbath? We will grant them that it is no
ordinary rest, but a special emphatical rest, a spiritual, holy, religious
rest, which God requires; not a mere cessation from labor, but a rest of
rests as God sometimes calls it, an holy rest, in which we mus^ not think our
own thoughts.

2. But (say our Brethren) you grant the God requires by the Fourth
Commandment (...) seventh day, how can it be a seventh? if it (...) a first
day, can the first be the seventh.

Answ. All this runs upon the forme^ mistake, that the fourth Commandeme^^
requires the seventh in order from the Creation, which we have denied; it
require no more than such seventh Day as God ha^ or should appoint. Suppose
seven pieces o^ Silver on a Table before us, either the one or other of the
outermost pieces may be the seventh accordingly as we begin to count. We must
suppose the seven days of the Week so to lie before the great Lord o^ our
time; surely that is the seventh which God will appoint and make so.

Suppose that any one of us should se^ to our neighbor our crop of Corn, with
a reservation to our selves of a seventh part according to the proportion of
our Acres and we should say to them: Remember I have reserved the seventh part
to my self, six parts I have sold you, but a seventh is mine, you shall not
meddle with it. Must this seventh upon such a demise, needs be this or that
Close, surely no; but such a seventh, as either (according to our bargain) we
shall choose, or our Farmer shall set out. This is the case, all our time was
Gods, he has freely given us six parts and reserved a seventh, such a seventh,
as he shall appoint to himself. Has not God a liberty at his pleasure to set
out a seventh to us.

3. But (say our Brethren) it must needs be the seventh in order from the
Creation, for that was the day which God rested, which is brought in the
Commandment as an argument to urge upon us the sanctification of the Sabbath.

Ans. 1. That our great Creators resting from his work of creation, is brought
as an argument to induce us to the observation of the Sabbath we freely grant,
but we say not as an argument for the particular day, but for the same
proportion of time. God rested one day in seven, therefore you must also so
rest. It is impossible we should rest that day in which God rested, that day
vanished, and returned no more: Our Brethren therefore can plead only for the
seventh in the weekly Revolution, and why not for a seventh in Number only, not
in Order.

2. But we may freely grant our Brethren that that argument held for the
seventh i^ order so far as it could be, without any damage to our cause. The
Precept is on^ thing, the argument is another.

It does not at all follow, that because the force of the Precept is perpetual,
therefore the force of every argument should be s^ also. One argument brought
has a perpetual force, Gods allowing us six days s^ our own employment: what
if the other ha^ a temporary force, a force only for tha^ time, during which
the Sabbath then instituted was to continue? There is nothing more ordinary in
Holy Writ, than to annex arguments of an universal, eternal force to Precepts,
that were to expire; and arguments of a temporary particular virtue to Precepts
that obliged for ever. How often do we find this as an Argument affixed t^ the
Ceremonial, and Judicial Laws, confessed by all to oblige only the Jews, For
(...) am the Lord thy God? To give but one instance, Lev. 22, 29, 30. The
Precept relates ^o a sacrifice of Thanksgiving; it enjoined them to eat it all
the same day, to leave none of ^t till the morning, for says God, I am the
Lord, God is all our Lord, yet we are not ^ll bound to that Sacrifice, or the
rites rela^ting to it.

On the other side: The Argument affixed to the first Commandment is, I am the
Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. The command, in the next words, Thou shall have no other Gods but me,
concerns us as well as the Jews, but the argument from the deliverance from
Egypt and the house of bondage literally only concerned them. So here; The
Precept, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day; with the direction, and first
argument, in those words, Six days shall thou ^abo^^, and do all that thou
have to do, but ^he seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc.
concerns all:

But the other Argument, in those words,

For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them
is, and ^ested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it. We say, only concerned the proportion of time: not enforcing the
same day in order: or if it did, had but a temporary force (that day being then
under divine institution) and there being a need of that argument to quicken
the Jews to observe it, for those many years it was (confessedly) to continue
after the giving of the Law in Sinai.

Nor indeed was it possible for all the World, or for the Jews in successive
times to keep the just seventh part of time from the Creation, in a strict
computation; those who know any thing, know how this computation was
interrupted in Joshuah and Hezekiahs time, and what a difference there is
betwixt days in several climates and quarters of the World; making it a thing
impossible, either for all people (and the Precept concerns all) or for the
Jewish people (afterward dispersed over all the world) to keep the punctual
seventh day in order from the Creation, according to a weekly revolution. I
conclude therefore, that there is no pretense from the fourth Commandment, for
any to urge that we more glorify God by obeying his will in the observation of
the last than of the first day of the week, yea it will anon appear, we less
obey God. The fourth Commandment only requiring one entire day of seven, and
such a one as God had or should appoint. If we prove God has appointed
another, the fourth Commandment stands good, and we are rebellious against God
if we insist on the old Sabbath, and neglect what God has more lately
appointed.

CHAP. IV. That the Lord Jesus Christ, was Lord of the Sabbath: and had a power
as to alter all Laws relating to the acts of Worship, so this Law relating to
the solemn time of Worship.
I Cannot but be so far charitable to our Brethren engaged against us in this
controversy, as to believe they will yield us what we have hitherto contended
for; so far as it extends only to a liberty for the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
after his giving the fourth Commandment, to alter it, for though we cannot
assert such a liberty, no not to the Eternal God, as to such things, in the ten
Commandments, which contain in them a moral goodness, antecedaneous to the
Precept, (being made so by the Eternal will of God,) and the things being of
that nature, that the contrary to them must necessarily impeach the glory of
God, (which he cannot with consistency to his holy nature recede from) yet for
such things, whose goodness merely depends upon the Precept, certainly without
derogation to the Sovereign authority of God, we must acknowledge a power
reserved unto God to make an alteration of them: So that though we cannot
suppose that God should by any Precept, successive to the moral Law, give his
creatures liberty not to glorify him, or to blaspheme him, or to have any
other gods besides him; yet we must acknowledge a liberty to God, if he pleased
to alter the law for the time of his Worship, that being a thing from which no
glory further arises to God, than as his will is obeyed. Now I presume it a
principle agreed betwixt us, and our Brethren, That Jesus Christ is God over
all blessed for ever, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, the express image of
his person (as the Apostle speaks) And that in pursuance of an Eternal
Covenant he was in the fullness of time ^^nt into the world, not only to work
out man's redemption, by his Active and passive obedience to the Law; But also
(as the first Minister of the Gospel) as the head and Lawgiver of the Gospel
Church) to reveal his Fathers will for the Worship of God in it; to this
purpose he tells us, Matthew. 11.27. That all things were delivered him by the
Father. Accordingly, Matthew. 26. he instituteth the Lords Supper, and in Matthew.
28.18. he instituteth the Ministry, preaching the Gospel, and Baptism, and
Matthew. 28.20. he authorizeth his Apostles to teach whatsoever he had commanded
them. And lest we should think that although the alteration of the Acts of
Worship were within Christ's commission: yet the alteration of the solemn time
of Worship was not, he has inspired three of the four Evangelists to tell us,
what he asserted, that he was Lord of the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.8. Mar. 2.28. Luke
6.5. Texts which I wonder Mr. Titham should fancy to have any thing in them for
the old Sabbath. For he who reads any of the Evangelists must yield the sense
to be this at first sight: That he had authority to expound the Law of the
Sabbath, contrary to the rigid sense of the Doctors of those times, so as it
should allow a liberty for acts of necessity, piety, and mercy. The words do
plainly assert our Savior an Authority to alter the Sabbath, for he is Lord of
it. Our Brethren by their daily practice, yield our Savior a liberty to alter
the Acts of Worship; hence they do not offer Sacrifices, as the Jews did
(though by the way observe, our Savior never said to us, You shall no longer
Sacrifice) they allow of Baptism instead of Circumcision; though it be worthy
of our Brethrens observation, that Mr. Titham and Mr. Pooly fell to
Circumcision, and consequently to a denial of Christ, and under the terror of
that Text, If you be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing. Our Brethren
also allow the Ordinances of the Lords Supper, and Preaching: and certainly it
is very unreasonable for our Brethren, to allow their Lord and Savior the
authority to alter the Acts of Worship, and to deny him a power as to the time
of Worship. Certainly, the time is not so considerable as to the glory of God,
as the Acts of Worship are; besides that (as I said before) to deny our Savior
this Authority, is to deny him to be God Equal with his Father, and to deny
what three of the Evangelists expressly assert with an even and also: The Son of
Man is Lord even or also of the Sabbath day.

CHAP. V. That the Lord Jesus Christ in pursuance of his Commission, for
establishing the Gospel Church, did alter the Sabbath, from the seventh to the
first day of the Week. How this appears.
THis being obtained, we have nothing to do, but to prove, That our Lord did
alter the Sabbath day. In order to which proof, Sheppard, These. Sab. th. 24.
what that holy and learned man Mr. Sheppard has said, is to be observed.

We are not to expect such evidence from Scripture, concerning this change, as
fond and humorous wits sometimes plead for in this controversy: Namely, that
Christ should come, with Drum and Trumpet as it were upon Mount Zion, and
proclaim by word, or writing, in express words. The Jewish Sabbath is
abrogated, and the first day of the week instituted in its room, to be observed
of all Christians to the end of the world; For it is not the Lords manner to
speak so in many things concerning his Kingdom, but as it were occasionally, or
in way of history, or Epistle to some particular Church or people, etc. The
Scripture says, that Christ after his resurrection continued upon the Earth
forty days, speaking of things concerning the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. and
St. John, chap. 21. tells us, that all things which he said, were not written,
for the World would not have held the books. Indeed it is not expressly said,
that in that time he instructed them, as to the change of the Sabbath, as it is
not said, he any time spoke to them about the ceasing of Circumcision,
Sacrifices, the Paschall Lamb, etc. nor is it said what in particular he taught
them within those forty days: But certainly a moderate degree of charity will
enforce us to believe, that what we shall find in Holy Writ, the Apostles and
primitive Churches exemplarily practicing in this thing, they learned either by
word of mouth, or by infallible inspiration from their Lord and Master, (which
is all one to us) and we must be very uncharitable to think that those first,
and greatest Ministers of the Gospel (the greatest Light ever set upon the
Lords Hill) should by word of mouth or practice teach the Primitive Christians
so weighty a thing as the change of the Sabbath, without any direction or
authority from the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostles in what they did were
followers of Christ Jesus, and upon this account, 1. Cor. 11.1. the Apostle
calls to the Corinthians to be followers of him, and Phil. 4.9. Those things
which you have learned, and heard, and seen in me, do ye. It is true, the
Examples of the Apostles are not in all things, our rules, nor by us to be
imitated. But in those things which they did not upon some special reason, and
wherein we can imitate them, unquestionably they are to be imitated; and that
in force of many Scriptures speaking to that purpose: And in such things their
example unquestionably amounts to a divine Institution. What have we more than
the example of the Apostolical Churches practice for our use of Water in
Baptism, administering the Lords Supper to Women, etc. So that the business in
question will much lie upon these two things: Whether we can show any
Institution of Christ, or practice of the Apostolical Churches in this case?

Here we will also freely grant our Brethren, That the exercise of holy duties
on a day will not argue such a day was observed as a Sabbath: But if we will
prove, that the first day of the week was by the Apostolical Church, observed
as the Christian Sabbath, we must prove, That Day set apart for Sabbath
Services, more than any other day in the Week, and honored above any other day
for that end.

To this purpose there have been three more eminent Texts in the New Testament
insisted on, almost by all Divines who have handled this controversy, I shall
not pretend to add any thing much considerable, to what has been largely and
learnedly said by Dr. Young, Mr. Caudry, Mr. Sheppard, Mr. Warren, etc. but I
shall gather what they have said into fewer words, and give it my Brethren in
their own tongue, and it may be more in their own dialect, in a plain and
familiar style; for I write not to Scholars, and so am under no temptation to
show reading or Rhetoric; nor am I engaged with any particular Adversary, and
so not concerned to digress to answer all his impertinencies.

The first Text I find insisted on is, Acts 20.7. where we read, that the
Apostle having sailed from Philippi to Troas, abode there seven days. Upon the
first day of the week (says the Text) when the Disciples came together to
break Bread, Paul preached unto them ready to depart on the morrow, and
continued his speech until Midnight. And there was many lights in the upper
Chamber where they were gathered together.

1. It is first very observable, That the Holy Ghost tells us, that Paul abode
at Troas seven days, one of which must needs be the Jewish Sabbath. It is not
unlikely, that the Apostle prayed, and preached amongst them more than once;
but here is no notice taken of any meetings of the Christians, any day; or of
any Religious duties performed by St. Paul any day but upon the seventh day
after he came there, (which the Apostle tells us was the first day of the week)
so that there is an especial notice taken of this day by the Holy Ghost, of the
day before none at all in this place, amongst a company of Christians: Paul was
there seven days, it is not said that he rested, or went into the Jewish
Synagogue on the Sabbath (probably there was none there,) but the sixth day of
Paul's abode there i^ reckoned as an ordinary day at Troas, yet that must be the
Jewish Sabbath, no mention of any preparation to it, any solemn duties in it,
it is counted amongst the other week-dayes.

2. Secondly, If here had been no more notice taken of the Lords day, the first
day of the Week than of the day before, we could have had no argument from
hence; but it is expressly said, Upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples came together to break bread, etc. where many things are to be noted.

1. The Name. The first day of the week, not one day in the week (as some would
have it.) It is the same phrase, Job. 20.1. Matthew. 28.1. Mar. 16.2. Luke 24. 1.
Certainly, the Evangelists design was not to tell us, that our Lord rose one
day of the week, but the day next to the Jewish Sabbath, which was the last day
of the week. If (as some have contended,) the word should be translated, One
day of the week; it would agree with no other use of the phrase in Holy Writ.
2. It would not tell us when they met, which plainly is the Holy Ghosts design.
Were it reasonable to translate, Mar. 16.1, 2. And when the Sabbath was past,
very early in the morning, one day of the week, they came, etc. is it not
plainly the Evangelists design to tell us what time they came, and therefore he
says, 1. When the Sabbath was past, 2. Early in the morning. 3. The first day
of the week. It is a manner of speaking according to the Hebrews, who
ordinarily (for want of such a plenty of words as other Languages have) express
the cardinal number by the Ordinall numerall. So Genesis 1.5. The evening and the
morning were One day, (so it is in the Hebrew) that is the first day.

2. It is not said, Paul called them together, or that the Church called a
meeting that day, but when the Disciples met together, or (they being gathered
together (for in the Greek it is the Genitive case put absolute,) the Text
mentions it as a time when of course, and according to their custom they were
met together.

3. It is not said, when some of the Disciples were met together, but [the
Disciples being gathered together] that is, the Church being met, as publicly
as those times would bear, they came together, v. 7. They were gathered
together, v. 8. there were many lights in the room where they were gathered, v.
8. Here are words enough to conclude a Church-meeting, a numerous meeting, such
a one as required many lights, and put Eutichus to take his seat in a dangerous
window.

4. The Text says, they were met together to break bread. A phrase indeed
which does not always signify, receiving the Lords Supper, but very
ordinarily: It is further said, that Paul preached, and continued his speech
till midnight. The end of their meeting was solemn, religious duties, in a
Church-assembly, and they accordingly were performed till Midnight.

5. It is not said they were gathered together in the evening, but upon the
first day of the week, though the duties were held on till midnight; therefore
it is but a fancy of them who think it was evening before they met.

If Paul did preach amongst them upon other days, and the Lords Supper were
administered any of the other days: Yet the Holy Ghost's taking no notice of
those performances, but only of what was done in this day, is no mean argument,
that this was the day, which he would have us take notice of, as the solemn
time for Christians Gospel Worship, in imitation of the Apostolical president.

I am not ignorant what pains some have taken to avoid the dint of this Text.
Mr. Brabourn and Mr. Titham, both tell us, the Meeting was but occasional and
extraordinary; for which there had been some color, if the Text had said, That
Paul called them together; or that they were called together: but it says,
they being met together, speaking of it plainly, as an ordinary, customary day
when they were wont to meet: But, says Mr. Titham, As soon as they were met,
lights were seen in the upper Chamber, so that (he says) it is not probable they
met till toward evening. But the Scripture says no such thing; it says they
were met on the first day of the week; and Paul continued his speech till
midnight, when he began it, it says not, but the term continued, implies he
began long before: Mr. Brabourn thinks it probable, they did not begin to meet
till toward evening, because that was the time for the Lords Supper, according
to our Saviors example, Mar. 14 17. and the example of the Primitive Church: 1
Cor. 11.21. That our Savior first celebrated the Lords Supper in the Evening
was plainly upon a special reason, that being the instituted time for the
Passover; in the close of which he designed the institution of the Supper; but
that either we are still obliged to that hour, or that the Apostles kept them
to that hour, is very hard to prove. The word (...) used, 1 Cor. 11.21. will
not do it: It is translated Feast, Mat. 23.6. Mar. 12.39. Luke 20.46. and
indifferently signifies Breakfast, Dinner or Supper, as might be showed from
many Authors. Mr. Titham says, the Lords Supper was not administered till the
next day, for Paul continued his speech till midnight, and after this he
restored Eutychus, and v. 11. when he was come up again, and had broken bread,
and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, he departed. But it
is said, v. 7. Upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together
to break bread. So as plainly, their designed meeting to break bread was upon
the first day ot the week. I clearly think, the second breaking of bread, v.
11. was not any religious duty, but a bodily refreshment Paul took before his
journey, the phrase is so used, besides, the manner of the phrase methinks in
this place plainly enough signifies it; When he had broken bread, and eaten,
and talked with them. When all the Religious duties of the day were over, and
Paul had refreshed himself with some Victuals, and discoursed with his friends,
he took his journey. The sense of the Text is plainly this: Paul religiously
with them kept the first day of the Week, preaching, administering the Lords
Supper; and he being to leave them preached something longer than usually;
Eutichus falls asleep, falls from the window where he was, and was taken up
dead. Paul (the duties being done) recovers him to life again, refreshes
himself with Victuals, and discourses with them till break of the day, and
then departs. Lastly, Mr. Titham is mistaken, to say, St. Paul's once
preaching at Troas is so stood upon as canonizing a Sabbath: That which is
insisted upon, is this: That Paul staying at Troas seven days, no mention is
made of the Christians there meeting together any other day, but on the first
day of the week, upon which it is evident that they met, and met on purpose for
the most solemn Gospel-services, and brake not up from them till midnight: yea,
and the Holy Ghost mentions their meeting that day as an usual customary thing
Mr. Brabourn puts us to too hard a task to prove that they abstained from their
servile labor: We hope our Brethren will not think that they were at their
servile labor whiles Paul was preaching, or while they were me^ together to
partake of the Lords Supper. And it is not very charitable for us to think (if
they had not kept this day as the Christian Sabbath) that so near a solemn
service which requires preparation, they should be distracting themselves with
secular labor. Besides that, this will fall as heavy upon our brethren, What
one Text have our Brethren to prove that Paul or any Christians abstained from
all servile labor on the seventh day, which was the Jewish Sabbath, or that
they kept it? It is indeed said, Acts 13.14, 15. That Paul coming to Antioch,
went into the Synagogue, and sat down: and after the reading of the Law, and
the Prophets, upon the desire of the Rulers of the Synagogue, Paul preached a
notable Gospel-sermon to them, to convince them of their errors. V. 42. The
Gentiles desired that those words might be preached to them; (...), we
translate it the next Sabbath; and I must ingenuously confess, that if that
translation were necessary, it would have more color for an argument on our
Brethrens side, than any place I know in Scripture will afford them, that the
Christians when the Jews were gone, should pitch upon the next Sabbath above
other days to hear Paul again. But as there is no necessity to translate it
so, so neither is that translation of the particle I think to be justified by
any like usage of it: We translate it, Between generally. See Matthew. 18.15.
Between thee and him alone, Matthew. 23 35. Luke 11.51. Between the Temple and
the Altar, Luke 16.26. There is a gulf between me and thee. Joh. 4.26. In the
mean while, that is, in the time between, Acts 12.6. Peter was sleeping between
two Soldiers, Acts 15.9. betwixt us and them. Romans 2.15. Their thoughts in the
mean while, or [between themselves as it is in the Margent] So as to this very
Text. The Margent tells you, it may be read; In the week between, or in the
Sabbath between: If our Brethren will allow the latter which is justifiable,
there was a Sabbath between that and the next Jewish Sabbath; which must be the
Christian Sabbath, but if they take it in the former sense, the Gentiles did
not desire Paul to preach the next sevent^ day those words, but in the week
between, so the words are: And the Margent of ou^ Bibles tell us, the
Translators saw thus it might be read, nor could any thing lead them to this
translation, but v. 44. where it is said, that the next Sabbath day came almost
the whole City together to hear the word of the Lord; which they might do, yet
that not the day which the Gentiles before mentioned desired, to hear the same
things again. Acts 16. Paul comes to Derbe, and Lystra, quarters very full of
Jews, for the Text says, for that very reason, Paul circumcised Timothy,
though his Father was a Greek, v. 3. Thence they go to Philippi, there v. 13.
It is said, that on the Sabbath day they went out of the City by the River
side, where Prayer was wont to be made. It is not indeed said it was by the
Jews; but Lydia is called one that worshipped God: who but Jews in Macedonia
should worship God at that time, I cannot tell; for we never read before that
the Gospel was preached in those parts. Whereas Mr. Brabourn objects, so it is
said, Cornelius, Acts 10 2. was one who feared God with all his house: it is
true, but he lived in Caesarea, a place not so far from Jerusalem (where the
Apostles had so abundantly preached the Gospel) as Philippi in Macedonia was,
and therefore far more likely to be a Gentile Proselyte than Lydia was, but at
once to answer this objection of the Apostles going into the Jewish Synagogues,
and preaching on their Sabbath day either there, or elsewhere where they were
met.

1. It is most evident, that the Lord indulged the Christians a time, to be
satisfied, that those things in this Rule of Worship given to the Jews which
were ceremonial, and temporary, had an end, during which time, it was lawful
for them to observe them. Though they all died with Christ, yet the Lord
allowed them (having his own ancient Institution) a time for honorable Burial.
Hence, Acts 16. Paul circumcised Timothy, as well as kept the Sabbath day, and
in the first Council the Apostles enjoined the Gentiles to abstain from blood
and things strangled, and Romans 14.6. gives a liberty to the Christian, to
observe the Jewish days. This liberty did not last long, for the Apostle tells
the Galatians, Acts 15.2. That if they were circumcised, Christ should profit
them nothing. And in this very point of days, Gal. 4.13. he tells them that he
was afraid of them, because they observed days, and months, and years: It is
manifest this Epistle to the Galathians was one of his last, it was written
from Rome, where (as he tells us) he was then in bonds, and as judicious
Interpreters think, not above two year before his death, which was about 65
years after our Savior. That to the Romans was wrote long before, so was his
circumcising Timothy, Acts 16. If therefore the Apostle did for a time allow
the Jews their Sabbath, and go and preach amongst them on that day, it was not
so much, as his circumcising Timothy; which yet he did, knowing the will of God
for indulging his peoples weakness for a time. Nor yet is it needful that we
should say the Jewish Sabbath was a Ceremony, we say the Sabbath, that is one
day in seven was Originally moral, but the keeping of the seventh from the
Creation, but a temporary Ordinance for the Jews, therefore Deuteronomy. 15. God
says, And Remember, that thou were a servant in the land of Egypt, and that
the Lord brought thee ou^ thence, through a mighty hand, and by a stretched out
arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day.

2. We say, Paul's going into the Synagogue, or preaching on that day, does not
prove that he or the Christians with him, had any conscience, or reverence for
that day more than another, they doubtless prayed, and preached other days.
It Is no where said, they kept or observed the Sabbath day; the Jews would come
together no other day, at least in no such numbers: Prudence taught this great
Fisherman, to throw his Net where he saw most Fish; and Paul had a great zeal
and kindness for his Brethren the Jews, as appears from Romans 9.1, 2, 3. they
might indeed have had hearers other days, but probably no Jews, (unless
proselyted) at least no such numbers as on their Sabbath day. Mr. Brabourn
talks idly, to tell us of Paul's calling Jews together at Rome, being their
Countreyman, and a mere stranger as to his Doctrine, but v. 29. they quickly
went away: And for the Jews Acts 19. that came to hear him, they were
apparently such as the Gospel had wrought upon: but it is plain, that the Jews,
who still kept their Judaical Principles, and knew any thing of Paul after his
conversion, were not likely to meet together upon his invitation. So that our
brethrens argument for the seventh day Sabbath, from St. Paul's and others of
the Apostles and Primitive Disciples, going into the Synagogues, or to other
places where they were wont to meet, upon that day; is no better argument than
some bring for our Saviors approbation of the Jewish Feast of Dedication (of
no Divine Institution, or at least so supposed) because he was that day found
walking in Solomon's Porch, waiting for an opportunity in that great concourse
which that day caused, to preach the Gospel; or than it would be for a
Christian Minister at Constantinople (if he had leave) on Friday (their
Sabbath) to go and preach the Gospel. That therefore he observed the Saracens
Festival. In very deed an argument of no force at all to any sober, judicious,
and deliberate Christian.

Lastly, It is worthy of all our observation, that although we read, that for
so long time as the Apostles had any hopes of gaining the Jews, and therefore
kept a communion with their Church, he did take advantage of their Sabbath to
preach the Gospel, it being as indifferent for him to do it on that day as on
any other: yet after that the Apostle had made a perfect separation from the
Jewish Church, of which we read, Acts 19.9. when diverse were hardened, and
believed not, but spoke evil of that way before the multitude: he departed from
them, and separated the Disciples, disputing daily in the School of one
Tyrannus, though this continued for the space of two years, v. 10. yet we never
read of any preaching by the Apostles on that day, or any thing making the
least show of their observation of it. The time of indulgence was now out. The
Christians were now settled in a distinct Church by themselves, and now they
keep only to Gospel Institutions; there was no more hope of Paul's becoming all
things to the Jews, to gain some of them. So that no instance can be given of
any meeting of Christians merely for performance of Religious duties upon the
seventh day (which our Brethren do contend for) so that our Brethren in this
point are without any one Scriptural President for a Christian meeting on their
seventh day: Examples of mixed meetings (whiles the Jews were most numerous in
places, and had their Synagogues) indeed they have. But an example of a pure
Christian meeting they have none; but in the very next Chapter, after the
aforesaid separation, Acts 19. we have, Acts 20.7. of Christians met on the
first day of the week on purpose for religious duties.

It is very true (if we may believe other writings not of divine authority, and
certainly an humane faith may be allowed them) we do find, that after the
Apostles age, the Christians in some Churches did meet on the Jewish sabbath
and perform some religious duties, but putting a vast difference between that,
and the Lords day. As Dr. Young has noted.

1. It was not a custom in all Churches particularly not in that of Rome, or
Alexandria, says Sozomen, Athanasius, and Turtullian (both great lights in
their times) tell us they observed it not. Epiphanius condemns the Nazarites,
and Ebionites, for Heretics, for their observation of it. But in all Churches
the Lords day was observed, those that in any degree kept the other day, were
the Eastern Churches, among whom the Jews were most, the vail before whose
eyes, a little for a time hindered the Christians seeing so well as they might,
and ought.

2. Neither did they observe any seventh day, but made Canons for omission of
some, but they never dispensed with the observation of the Lords day.

3. Nor did they on that day perform all religious duties; they indeed, read
the word, prayed, and preached sometimes, but never administered the Lords
supper on that day. If we may believe Athanasius, Austine, Socrates and
Chrysostom quoted all by the Learned Dr. Young in this case, on his book
called Dies Dominica. Chap. 3.

4. They left people at liberty to meet, or not to meet on that day, as we do
on lecture days. But injoyning the observation of the Lords day, without
indulging any liberty for peoples absence, from the religious services of that
day.

5. They allowed a liberty to labor on the seventh day, yea anathematized
those who did not labor but on the Lords day, they allowed no labor.

This, and much more is said by the incomparably learned. Dr. Young: whose
skill in antiquities is sufficiently known. I have but translated it from him,
for the sake of those who understand not Latin.

Our Brethren therefore (what ever Mr. Brabourn says) cannot prove, that the
Apostles ever kept the sabbath, so much as once, though they can prove they
went into the Synagogues that day, and heard the word read, and preached: nor
so much as that they once on that day received the Lords supper (an ordinance
peculiar to Christians.) 2. nor that they did thus in one unmixed assembly of
Christians. 3. Nor that they chose that day to preach in, only upon desire from
the Jews, did it. 4. Nor that ever kept the sabbath, with Jews and Gentiles
together, much less Gentiles alone: though they sat with them on that day to
hear the word read in their synagogues, and sometimes preached themselves. 5.
Nor have they proved that what they did, was not to indulge the weakness of the
Jews and to gain some of them, while the Lords time of indulgence lasted, and
Christians newly converted, might understand their liberty. 6. Nor yet that
they might have got the Jews together on other days, which are the things Mr.
Brabourn (who has spoken in this case, and to better purpose than any other)
glories in. It is true it was Paul the Minister of the Gentiles, not Peter that
did go into the synagogues, and preached sometimes on the seventh day: but it
was the same Paul that Acts 16. because of the Jews in those quarters,
circumcised Timothy (as great an enemy as Mr. B. would have us believe him to
Ceremonies) For Mr. Bs. rule in Divinity, That actions of holy men in scripture
not contradicted have the force of a precept. I doubt the truth of it, But will
freely yield him; That the Actions of the Apostles, possible to be done by us,
and for which there cannot be a particular reason given why they should not
allege, or for which there cannot be a reason given, why the Apostles at that
time did them, which reason will not now hold, have the force of a precept. But
we allege a particular reason, viz. to avoid the offense of the Jews, and to
gain some of them, we have no cause now of fear for the one: nor hope for the
other. In the mean time Mr. B. and we are agreed in his other rule. That
actions of the holy Apostles in Scripture, not only not contradicted, but also
such as in the fourth commandment are commanded, have the force of a precept.
But I have before showed, that the seventh day sabbath is no more commanded in
the fourth commandment than sacrificing is in the second Commandment. The
general is commanded. 1. A sabbath. 2. A whole day. 3. One whole day in seven.
4. Such a one as God had appointed, or should appoint: but not that seventh day
further than it was then the appointed day, and for so long time, as it should
so continue. But enough is said as to the enforcing of the first main text,
Act. 20.7.

The second text is that, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

As to the Collection of the Saints, as I have ordained in the Churches of
Galatia so do you. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by
him in store as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come.

Many things are observable from this text, as light as some of our brethren
make of it.

1. Here is a collection for the Saints: directed to be against the first day
of the week, (...); the words so translated, are the same with those, Mar.
28.1. Luke 24.1. Joh. 20.1. Act. 20.7. and do out of question signify that day
of the week on which our Lord rose, therefore they do but miserably baffle who
would translate it one day of the week. For it cannot be so read in any of the
Evangelists with out manifest injury to the sense. That collecting for the
Saints, is a pious, and charitable work fit for the sabbath, though such a work
as may be done on the day (as praying and preaching may) is not to be denied.

2. It is not necessary we should translate it upon the first day of the week.
It signifies as well against the first day of the week, so Mar. 15.6. (...)
against the feast he released to them one prisoner, that plainly is the sense
of the text, for the Jews would not come into the Judgment Hall upon the first
day.

3. He does not only limit the time, but he makes an ordinance in the case, and
that not only for his Church, but for the Churches of Galatia also. Let any one
soberly judge whether they can think that the great Apostle who was so zealous
of the Churches liberty, and who had so particularly declared his zeal to the
Galatians, Chap. 5. who also used to deliver unto the Churches what he had
received from the Lord. 1 Cor. 11. and so carefully to distinguish betwixt
things which he advised as a man without special revelation, and what he
ordained as given him in charge by his Master, as appears in that Epistle to
the Corinthians. would have made a Law, binding the Corinthians consciences to
have their charity ready, Against the first day of the week; If the Lord had
not given it him in charge.

4. Why does he limit it to the Lords day? the first day of the week. But that
it was a known day amongst Christians, when the Church was wont to meet, and
they having before against that day laid it by them in store, might have a
convenient opportunity to bring it with them to the Church meeting, and deliver
it to the Deacons as an acceptable gospel sacrifice unto the Lord. And when
also by hearing the word of God preached, and the other spiritual duties which
that day should be performed, they might have their hearts warmed into that due
cheerfulness, and readiness, which became those who gave unto the Lord.

5. Lastly. I desire our brethren would seriously consider, whether this text
does not imply a sanctification of that day by some former precept of Christ
and his Apostles. If there were a Law in England, that there should be a
collection for the Saints made in or against the fifth of November; Would not
this imply, that that day was a known day, either in respect of some law,
setting a mark upon it: or some general observation of it. But if this were a
Church constitution, it would yet argue further, and that the Church on that
day would meet, and take an account of it. The Apostle orders a collection for
the faints, to be made in or against the first day of the week. This certainly
argues, a special remark upon that day, and an usage for the Church to meet,
and and so excellently agrees with that Acts 20.7. For what Mr. Tilham or Mr.
Brabourn says to weaken this proof, it is of little value. Mr. B. says that
this order is but for a single action once to be done. To grant him what he
says (though the term may as well be expounded of every first day; as of one,)
especially that one being no way notified, but only guessed by Mr. B. to be the
next following the receipt of that Epistle. For though St. Paul would have no
gatherings for the strangers when he came, yet there might be collections for
their own. And we know that having collections every Lords day, was in use in
the primitive Church, after their prayers, whence the prayers were themselves
called collects: But (I say) to grant this, still the question remains, why
This collection is ordained to be made Against or in the first day of the week
more than any other: Whereas both he and Mr. T. urge that the text only
commands, that every one should lay by himself: not that he should give it to
the Deacons. Whence Mr. Tilham cavils, that if this day had been their sabbath,
the Apostle would not have directed a survey of their estates how God had
prospered them. I have showed before the Apostle commands this survey, and a
laying by themselves (...). against the first day of the week. We ask why
against that day more than another? but that it was a day when the Church used
to meet; and they might have an excellent opportunity to bring it in, and have
their hearts warmed by the duties of that day, into a due cheerfulness becoming
them who give unto the Lord. But M. T. will not acknowledge a collection, a
Lords day, or a sabbath duty. For then he thinks the Apostle would not have
added, that there be no gatherings when I come. Verily the man's ignorance is to
be pitied. Works of piety, mercy, and necessity are doubtless sabbath duties,
or our Savior would never have healed lame persons on that day. The Apostles
meaning therefore doubtless is, That there be no gatherings for these
Brethren-strangers when I come.

But suppose it be, yet Mr. T. tells us that a survey of their estates, (which
the Apostle does implicitly command, that they may see how God had prospered
them) was no sabbath work: But there is no need as I have said we should so
translate it, nor do I think it the sense, that the laying aside should be on
the first day of the week, but against the first day of the week: Here Is no
survey of estates directed on that day. In short say what we will, our brethren
(so fond of this notion) will make us believe that the strength of our argument
from this text lies, that we think that the Apostle here directed a collection
on the first day of the week: whereas we tell them, that if it were so plain as
if written with a Sun beam, we do not think that would prove it a collection
for the saints, was a pious and charitable work, but might be done or directed
on any day. But this is that we urge from the text. It is plain from holy writ,
that the Apostles gave a peculiar honor to this day, more than to any other
day of the week. Though on the seventh day, the Apostles so long as the Jewish
rites were indulged, or so long as they had any hopes to convince the Jews,
when they came where the Jews had Synagogues, went in, and heard with them,
yea, and preached to them. Yet,

1. They never met in a perfect Congregation of Christians on that day that we
read of: but on the Lords day they did, Act. 20.7.

2. The Apostle ordains their gospel sacrifice, their collection for the poor
Saints at Jerusalem, rather against this day, than any other.

But possibly we may find that as the Apostles, (unquestionably by direction
from their Lord,) gave more honor to this day than to any other, So our Lord
himself also did so.

1. This was the day on which he rose again from the dead. This I am sure they
will not deny, and verily this is not inconsiderable. Let us but here weigh two
or three things.

1. The Resurrection of Christ; was the Lord Christ's great work, by which he
showed himself to be Lord, and Christ: and so confirmed the whole gospel, and
whatsoever he instituted in his worship. It was that work of his which gave
evidence to the virtue both of his life and death. To this end (says the
Apostle) Christ both died, and ROSE again, that he might be Lord both of the
dead, and of the living. By this he was declared to be the Son of God with
power, Romans 1.4. Hence is our justification, Romans 4.25. Hence our peace of
conscience, Romans 8.34. Hence our lively hope, and the answer of a good
conscience, 1 Pet. 1.3.

It was our great Lords first holy day as I may say. Of the day of Christ's
suffering he says THIS IS YOUR DAY, and the power of darkness, a day in which
God has given leave to the Devil and his instruments to play their pranks. But
this was His day. This was the Lord Christ's rest. The day in which he rested
from the work of Redemption: As his Father had done on the seventh day, from
the work of Creation.

2. May we not soberly think that our great Lord should, and did choose to lie
in his grave on the sabbath day, on purpose to let us know, that that sabbath
died with him, and to rise the next day, that he might point out unto us, the
new sabbath, which he had made for the new heaven, and new earth, which he had
now created on purpose to rise upon the first day, that his Father by the
change of the day might have no loss as to the time consecrated by the fourth
commandment. Our Lord could have ordered his death so as he might have died,
and risen again on the 2, 3, 4, or 5, days he chooses so to dye, that he shall
be buried during the whole Jewish sabbath: and early in the next morning he
arises. Le^ us in the next place consider what he did when he was risen. The
Evangelists record, not so full a communion of our Lord, with the world, nor
with his disciples, after the resurrection: for forty day^ he was seen of them.
In that time (counting the day on which he rose) were seve^ Christian sabbaths,
or first days of the week. We read only of our Saviors appearing the two first
of them.

1. On the day of his resurrection, he appears to Mary Magdalene looking in
the grave for him, and to some disciples goi^^ to Emaus, Luke 24.13. and to the
Eleve^ met at Jerusalem, Luke 24.36. Joh. 20.1^ and again,

2. After eight days (says St. Joh. 20.26.) We read but of two apparitions
more, the one at the Sea of Tiberias, Joh. 21. The other in Galilee, which St.
Matthew litt^ more than barely mentions, Mat. 28.16, 17 We do not think Christ's
appearing made sabbath, but Christ's owning his disciple meetings on these
days, by appearing the^ to them, speaks not a little in the case, especially
if it be observed that nothing of any worldly discourse is mentioned, as
passing at these times, but our savior at the Sea of Tiberias, talks with them
in their art freely.

But say our brethren (zealous for the old sabbath.)

1. If the disciples of our Savior, had kept that day as a sabbath, he or they
would not have gone such a journey, as 60 furlongs, almost eight miles.

1. Beza says either Josephus is mistaken, or some error is crept into the
copy, for he it is but 30 furlongs.

2. The length of their furlongs we know not. For our Savior, it was now no
la^our to him to move. Certain it is, the way was so short as Luke 24.33. in
that (...) hour they could return to Jerusalem and find the eleven, and others
gathered together. We in a time of persecution often go as far to hear a sermon,
and yet do not break the sabbath.

2. But (they say) the text says, Christ's second appearing was after eight
days, Joh. 20.26. But so it is said, that after three days the Son of Man
must rise again, Mar. 8.31.

Yet we know he rose on the third day. The Grecians had that liberty in their
language of expressing themselves as to expres^ a thing as done when once
began: Afte^ eight days is no more than after the eight day was begun, as
after three days was n^ more than after the third day was began

Our Savior being now ascended into Heaven, we find the disciples returnin^
from mount Olivet to Jerusalem, Act. 1.^^ and read little of them, but of
their continuing in prayers, and supplication, and choosing an Apostle till the
day of Pentecost. What was done in the day of Pentecost, we find, Act. 2. Then
the Holy Ghost descended, and before that we read of tha^ descending of the
Holy Ghost the Evangelists observed; They were all with one (...) in one place.
A phrase fully expressing (...) Christian Church-meeting. I am not Ignorant,
what a stir Mr. Tilham keeps, (...) prove this was upon the Jewish sabbath We
say with (I think) better evidence, it was upon the Lords day.

1. It was Gods express law, that the Jews should rest on the seventh day, both
(...) earing and in harvest, Exodus 34.21, 22.

2. The law for the feast of Pentecost yo^ shall find, Levit. 23.10, 11, 12,
15, 16. ^hen you be come into the land which I shall ^^e you, and shall reap
the harvest thereof, then (...) shall bring a sheaf of the first fruits of ^^r
harvest unto the Priest, and he shall wave (...) together with the offering of
a lamb with^^ blemish, on the morrow after the sabbath (...) shall wave it. And
you shall count unto (...) from the morrow after the sabbath, from (...) day,
you brought the sheafe seven sabbaths ^ill be complete, even until the morrow
after ^he seventh sabbath you shall number 50 days. Deuteronomy. 16.9. Seven weeks
shall thou number, unto thee, begin to number the seven weeks him such time as
thou beginnest to put sickle ^^to thy corn.

I must first take notice of a base cheat Mr. Tilham puts upon his reader,
Tilham 7 day sabbath. p. 82.
^^lling them that Moses from God appointed Israel to bring, on the ^^orrow
after their passover sabbath, ^sheaf of their first fruits, etc. (Good reader
look into all the texts that mention it, and see if God says a word of their
Passover Sabbath) but v. 11. The morrow after the sabbath; Which was
undoubtedly the weekly sabbath. Besides, their passover sabbath was tied to a
day. It is not to be imagined their corn should always be ri^ just that day,
to wit the 14 day of ^ first month. Now they were not to cou^ till they had
put their sickle into their cor^ Deuteronomy. 16.9.

1. I observe first it was impossible, the Pentecost should ever fall upon the
Jewish sabath, for on the sabbath day, they were ^ Gods law to rest. Exodus
34.21, 22. even earing and harvest. So the soonest they cou^ begin to put their
sickle into their co^ must be the first day of the week.

2. They were then to expect till the next sabbath, and from the morrow afte^
to count; which makes it necessary, th^^ the feast of Pentecost should always
fall (...) the first day of the week.

3. Here was a Church-meeting of Christians met in one place on the first day
of the wee^

4. Christ (who when on the Earth, (...) we heard, did honor those meetings
wi^^ his own company) here he sends the comforter; gives them on this day the
promise of the Father.

It is true Mr. Ainsworth and some other think the passover sabbath was meant:
b^ let any one consider, with reason how it w^^ possible, unless the corn in
Palestina was always ripe before the fifteenth day of the month Abib, so as
they had reaped some of it; for till that, there was no beginning to count for
Pentecost; but Mr. Ainsworth is far from fathering this (as Mr. Tilham does) on
Moses, it was only a notion taken up by that holy man from some Rabbis. But
enough of this; whosoever will read this argument from our Saviors Apparitions,
and the descending of the Holy Ghost improved to the height, may have it
admirably done by Mr. Warren, late Minister of the Gospel in Colchester, in his
excellent Book called The Jewish Sabbath antiquated: and the Lords day
instituted, from p. 169 to 187. where so much is indeed said upon this whole
Subject, as I think very little is to be added to it.

But there is yet behind one Text more, insisted on almost by all Divines in
this case; it is that Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, and
heard behind me a great voice as of a Trumpet, saying, etc. V. 11. and I turned
to see the voice that spoke with me, and being turned I saw seven golden
Candlesticks, and in the midst of the seven Candlesticks one like unto the Son
of man, etc. who is described further, v. 13, 14, 15, 16. where he is said to
have the Stars in hi^ right hand; and out of his mouth went for^ a two-edged
sword. -- Christ himself opens the Vision, v. 20. -- The seven stars are the
Angels of the seven Churches: and the seven Candlesticks which thou saw are
the seven Churches.

St. John at this time was by the Roman Emperor banished into the Isle of
Pathmos for the Gospel sake. Here he sees a Vision. Two things as to the
present Controversy are considerable in it, 1. What he saw. 2. When he saw it.


1. What he saw. He saw the Lord Jesus Christ in the midst of his Gospel
Churches, walking before him in the purity of Gospel Administrations, and
reaching forth godly Ministers to them, and furnishing them with his Word
(which is as a sharp, two-edged sword.) This plainly was the Vision interpreted
by the Lord himself, Revel. 1.20.

2. When saw he this? On the Lords day: he was in the Spirit on the Lords day;
then he heard this voice, then he saw this Vision.

3. I am aware that this Text has so disturbed the leaders in this
Controversy opposite to us, that they have exercised their wits, to find out a
Lords day not the first day of the week. Mr. Brabourn, Mr. Tilham (and one of
more learning and worth than both of them) think it might be the day of
Judgment, which indeed is called the day of the Lord, Phil. 1.16. but never
the Lords day. Again, the Apostle speaks of a known day, and of a day in being
then; but neither of these is true of the day of Judgment, not yet come, nor
to be known when it shall come, Matthew. 24.36. Of that day and hour knows no
man. Others think it might be the day of Christ's Nativity; but it will pose
them to prove that it was then known, or so early taken notice of. For those
that dream of Easter Day above an hundred years after this, this was in dispute
when it should be kept.

Mr. Tilham and Mr. Brabourn both think (and they do but think so) that it was
the seventh day; but why should that be called the Lords day? because he that
day lay in the Grave think we? God indeed in the Old Testament called it his
Sabbath, but was it ever so called in relation to Christ? did Christ ever
institute that? Now why the first day of the week should be called the Lords
day, reason offers it self plentifully.

1. In opposition to his suffering day, of which he says to his Persecutors,
This is your day, and the power of darkness.

2. It was the Day when he triumphed over Sin, Death, and Hell.

3. It was the Day, when he was with power manifested to be the Son of God,
Romans 1.4.

4. In all probability it was the day he instituted for the Christian Sabbath:
and therefore called the Lords day, as the Sacrament is called the Lords
Supper, because he instituted it.

5. Finally, take all the Ancients from Ignatius who lived nearest the Apostle
downward, they all understood by the Lords day, the first day of the week, and
accordingly kept it holy unto the Lord.

Now let all these be laid together, and I beseech our Brethren, laying aside
al^ partiality, prejudice and saction, seriously to consider, whether they will
not amoun^ to as good a proof as we have for many other things, that the Lord
Christ has instituted the Lords day for the Christian Sabbath, though it be
not in the Gospel proclaimed in so many words: And in good earnest I think
those of our Brethren who will not judge it sufficient, if their Consciences
weigh all Gospel Truths in the same balance, will be in no small danger of
being warped in other, and those very weighty Truths of the Gospel, from a
perversion in which, the good Lord keep them and us all, for his mercy sake.

CHAP. VI. That the Seventh Day is repealed.
I Suppose I have said enough to justify the discharge of the Old Sabbath. The
^cense which the fourth Commandment gives us to labor six days in the week,
^vinceth us under no Obligation to keep more than one Sabbath: Now if the first
day of the week, (as we have proved) be the Sabbath to be sanctified, reason
tells us the Jewish Sabbath is discharged. Though the Scripture no where says
to us, you shall not keep the Passover, nor you shall not circumcise, yet we
understand our selves discharged of both, by the substitution of two other
Gospel Sacraments. It is the Lord will (according to the fourth Commandment) we
should not be under an obligation to keep two days in each week; and it is the
Lords will, as we have proved, w^ should keep the first day of the week: wha^
need we any further witness? But yet it be needful, I think it is not hard t^
evince it.

1. The Jewish Sabbath (as I have already proved) was never primarily require^
in the Moral Law; but only by tho^ ceremonial or temporary Laws given to the
Jews, which all acknowledge determine by the death of Christ, and the
extinction of the Jewish Polity, and fell of cou^ when that fell. The Ordinance
for t^^ particular day of the week was but an O^dinance given to hold until
the time Reformation: but to add yet a little more it has been told our
Brethren, and I heartly wish they would deliberate upon it; The the Apostle,
Romans 14.5. blames the ^mans, that amongst them, One man esteem^ one day above
another. Gal. 4.10. he blam^ them that they observed days, and month and
times, and years. That the Apostle, ^al. 2.16. cautioneth the Christians, That
^ man should judge them as to meat or drink, ^ in respect of an Holy Day, or a
New Mood, ^ the Sabbath Day. That these Texts are ^ to be understood of the
Lords day, is ^dent,

1. Because (as we have proved) the Apo^es themselves, and the Christian
Churches ^en observed it.

2. Because the fourth Commandment, ^d perpetually established, 1. A Day: 2. A
^venth Day to be sanctified: Now the ^postles words must be interpreted so as
^t to lose us one of the ten Command^ents.

3. Because to interpret those Texts of all other Jewish Holy Days, with an
ex^tion only to the weekly Sabbath, seem^ both an unreasonable interpretation,
too short for the terms of the Texts. Unreasonable, it is an usual rule, Vbi
lex ^ distinguit, non est distinguendum; we ^e no reason to distinguish where
the rule ^es no distinction, nor can any pretense reason be for limiting the
sense in that ^^oner: but to reconcile the Apostles Pre^t with the fourth
Commandment, which may quickly be without such a restriction according to what
we have proved the sense of it. A Sabbath may remain, though that Sabbath be
abolished. 2. It seems also too short. The Apostle to the Galatians uses four
terms, Days, Months, Times, Years: Suppose by the years be meant the yearly
Feast of Atonement, or the years ^ Jubilee; by Months, the New Moons; b^ Times,
their Feasts of the Passover, Pentecost etc. still we want an interpretation
for the term Days, which certainly must be understood of the Jewish seventh
Days, or Sabbaths returning every week.

4. What Mr. Warren observes is also very considerable, that all these Epistles
were wrote to Churches much leven'd with Judaism; and under great temptations
to it so that undoubtedly it was the Apostles intention by that term to declare
the Christians freedom from the old Sabbath, which also as it is plain from
Deuteronomy. 5.15. ha^ something of a Type annexed unto it. Bu^ enough has been said
to prove the ol^ Sabbath out of doors, if not by repeal, ye^ by expiration, as
being a temporary Ord^nance, and by the appointing of anoth^ Sabbath in the
stead of it.

CHAP. VII. To insist upon the old Sabbath is to Judaize, and non-communion our
selves to all Christian Churches in the World, both in this and former Ages.
FRom what has been said must needs follow, that for us now to insist upon the
old Sabbath, has a double guilt attending upon it.

1. The first is Judaizing.

2. The second is declining communion with all the Churches of Christ that are
or ever were in the world. Judaizing signifies a tenacious adhering to the
Jewish Rites, and Customs, after that Christ has established a New Heaven, and
a new Earth. This was the Jews great sin. It was one piece of our Lords errand
into the world, To change the customs which Moses delivered. A Truth asserted
by the first Christian Martyr, and for it he was accused, Acts 6.14. That this
was one of those customs, is plain, if it were not commanded in the fourth
Commandment, which we have proved it was not. Nor does it hinder that it begun
before Moses, so did Sacrifices, and Circumcision, yet they were the Customs of
Moses, and Circumcision is so called, Acts 21.21. He was the first who wrote
the Laws about them. For any person to adhere to any Jewish custom after
Christ's death, and resurrection, is in effect to deny Christ to be come in the
flesh. Let me in the bowels of Christ, beseech our Brethren to be serious in
this thing: I say again, Whatsoever related to the Worship of God, and fell not
expressly under one of the ten Commandments, and that primarily, nor is
established in the New Testament, could be nothing else but a piece of Moses, a
Mosaical custom, which Christ came on purpose to alter; and to adhere still to
them, is to proclaim against Heaven, I have no part in the Son of David. Hence
the Apostle tells the Galathians, If they were circumcised, Christ profited
them nothing (that is, thinking themselves under an obligation to be
circumcised) and again he tells them, he was afraid of them, lest he had
bestowed all his labor amongst them in vain, preached the Gospel to them in
vain: why? you observe days, and months, and times, and years, Gal. 4.11. that
is, Such Religious days as the Jews observed according to Moses: I know many
of our Brethren will tremble at the apprehension of this, I believe many of
them have said to the Lord Christ, Thou at my portion, and that their Souls in
truth say, None but Christ, None but Christ; and did they know it, would not
deny the Lord that bought them, or by any action interpretatively deny, his
Authority to alter the customs of Moses. I humbly beg of them, that in
tenderness to the Lord that bought them, in love to their own Souls, as I trust
they fear every sin, so they would fear their Souls sinning in this point of
Judaizing, which the Apostle (as to other points) lays so much stress upon,
both in his Epistle to the Romans and Galatians, and Colossians, and all along
in every Epistle. And in a further evidence of this, let me beseech our
Brethren in all seriousness to consider, whither the poring upon this notion
has led others, and let them who yet stand, take heed lest they so fall. There
have not been many Leaders in this, opinion known to the World in this latter
Age.

The first was John Thrask; I never heard that he published any thing in Print,
in the Pulpit he did. A man of so ordinary parts, that it was some time before
he could pass his examination to be made a Minister, after this he preached
this new Doctrine, and was for it censured in the Star Chamber, and recanted
it, and died obscurely at Lambeth. But this is that which I desire may be
noted, he (say our Historians) equally preached up the obligation of the other
Levitical rites.

The next was Theophilus Brabourn, originally a Trader in Stockins, after made
a Minister, and 1628. he published a book for the Jewish Sabbath, a book (to
give it its due) wherein a thousand times more is said for it, and to answer
arguments against his side, than in all Books ever wrote before or since. He
has been abundantly answered by diverse (though on differing Principles) he
lived till within these few years; till he came to assert three Gods, and grew
to keep no Sabbath, for on his seventh day he would ordinarily make Bargains,
take in interest Money, let out more, seal Writings, etc. Mr. Ockford was
another, what he was, where or how he lived, what he held more, etc. I cannot
tell.

The next was Mr. Tilham, who at Colchester in Essex made much stir about this
point, and wrote one or two Books. He was reported before to have been a
Papist, sure I am his Books show not the learning of an ordinary Schoolboy.
With him one Pooly (a wild-headed Norfolk Preacher) joined, he was a man of a
rash, giddy head, and Principles. Both these after went over Seas, where (I
presume our Brethren know upon too good information) they both were
circumcised, and to what else they ran I know not. I speak not this (God knows)
to upbraid, or mock at our Brethren, but by these examples, to show them the
tendency of this opinion, and practice, whither it leads poor Christians.
This Tilhams Book (though I think one of the weakest and absurdest ever wrote
on the subject) is what my Brethren in these parts glory in. I know for a
Teacher, by a lively voice, they had a person of much more worth than Brahourn,
Pooly, or Tilham, Mr. Rich. Breviter (who I persuade my self is at rest with
God) he was a good Scholar, and a person of a sober life, and conscientious to
his Principles, and to whom the Name of Christ I think was truly precious; how
far he had drank in this opinion, and to what degree he was persuaded of it, I
cannot tell. Sure I am, never so much as to print any discourse for it. But I
shall add no more upon this (I am sure) unpleasing subject.

2. If our brethren would avoid this charge, the next I am sure they cannot. To
observe the seventh day sabbath, is to noncommunion our selves from all
Churches that ever were, or are in the world. I mean Gospel-Churches. To say
nothing of the time past, Christian-Churches always condemning them as
Heretics, that kept that Sabbath (upon which account the Ebionites were
condemned,) I do not think unworthy of our brethrens sad thoughts. That this
day there is no considerable number of Christians under Heaven any where, that
keep the Sabbath they keep. Our Brethren know that I am no great man for
Traditions. But certainly the custom and practice of the whole Church, in all
times, and in all places, not contradicted by any valuable number of persons of
any persuasion, is not to be despised by any but such as will arrogate to
themselves, more knowledge of the mind of God than all the world besides. I
must confess, I doubt whether there be any one universal tradition except this;
nor is this purely such: but my meaning is, that there is no one thing as to
which the practice of the whole Church in all ages is so on all sides
confessed, and out of doubt. Now the strength of this lies here. It is not
reasonable to think that God should leave his whole Church, in all times, to
such a mistake as to the solemn time of worship. The general sense of the
faithful is upon this account justly valuable in most controverted points. I
spare instances here, they are abundantly given by Dr. Young, Mr. Caudry, and
Mr. Warren. Where the learned of our brethren may find them. I professedly
write to my neighbors, who I know would be little edified by quotations in
Greek and Latin. To leave therefore the practice of the former times, from the
very Apostles times; which is very significant, at least together with what
evidence we have in the holy writ.

2. I say there is no present Churches of our brethrens mind or practice. So as
they plainly cast off communion with all Churches of Christ on the Earth; and
deprive their souls of the great advantage which they might have by it, and
certainly this is no light thing to those who know their Saviors walks in the
midest of the golden candlesticks, (and surely they should be near him, where
he is.) To evidence this, I perceive many of them wholly absenting themselves
from all religious meetings on the Lords day (the only solemn time observed by
all Christians near them) it may be in prudence and to avoid scandal they do
not openly labor, but neither are they will that day worshipping God. If any of
them will that day go hear a Sermon, I appeal to them, whether they go as to a
Sabbath duty, with that preparation, with that faith in the promises to them
who keep the Lords Sabbath as they should go who expect a blessing from the
Lord of the Sabbath. Ah! my brethren is it nothing to you? Is it nothing to you
to have your places empty at the Lords solemn assemblies? to be out when the
joint-fighs, prayers, and tears of Gods people, are poured out before the Lord?
if indeed you could judge none fearing God but your selves, it were some plea:
but I know you have more charity: why are you then divided from them? why will
you then lose the advantage of their prayers? and deny them the advantage of
your prayers? I must profess were there nothing else to keep me off, this very
one thing would keep me off from that opinion. Eccl. 3.10. Woe to him that is
alone, when he falls: for he has not another to help him up: Of the gifts
and graces of how many precious ministers, and the advantage you might have
from them, do you deprive your selves? Have your souls no need of their
interpretations of Scriptures? their opening Gospel mysteries, their powerful
exhortations, and arguments for holiness, their directions for your Christian
conversation? I beseech you reflect upon your own souls, since the time that
(in zeal to this opinion) you divided your selves from the generality of
Christians. Have your souls prospered as formerly? Have you so increased in the
knowledge of God? Have you had such love, and zeal for God? have you so grown
in any exercise of grace? Indeed it is not reasonable for any to think that you
should, you have not had the means. This is not an age in which the Lord
works in a way of miracles: but produces his great works by means fitted to
them. Our brethren must be very partial to themselves, and their present
teachers, if they think them, for gifts and graces, comparable to those godly,
and able ministers, under who^ ministry they formerly sat. The Historian says
of Mr. Thrask, that besides a voice, he had nothing: we know how little
judgment Brabourn had in any thing, but this one point: And how little Mr.
Tilham had, there needs no further witness then his own book, where is vanity
and wickedness enough. Souls cannot feed upon a mere aerie, empty, roaring
voice, it is the word of God they live upon, the word of God truly,
judiciously, and faithfully opened, and powerfully applied. I appeal to our
brethrens consciences, whether they judge their present teachers, so able and
fit for this work, as the Godly able ministe^ of Christ, who have wholly given
up themselves to the study of the Scriptures: and to the search of the mind of
God in them. I do not speak for every one that has the confidence to wear a
gown. But I am sure our brethren know and will acknowledg^, that all parts of
England are filled with some number, or others of able faithful preachers. Now
certainly it is no small disadvantage to our brethren, to deprive themselves of
all the gifts, and labors of these servants of God, while they walk alone
erecting teachers to themselves.

CHAP. VIII. That for any to deprive themselves of the liberty God has
indulged us to labor six days in each week, is not without guilt.
IT is the Apostles Precept that we should stand fast in the liberty with which
Christ has made us free; and doubtless we are no more to deprive our selves of
that liberty which our great Creator has indulged us, than to throw away the
life, health or estate with which he has blessed us. It is one thing for us as
our free will offering to set apart one of the days which God has given us
for our own occasions, for the service of God; another thing for us to think
our selves obliged to do this, and to do it in a pretended Conscience to a
command, when we have no such command. Since it has pleased God to cast my lot
in the Country, I must profess I have most heartily pitied some of my Brethren
baptized into this persuasion, to see them in the time of Harvest, by their
persuasion hindered of a third part of their time, from making use of those
seasons which the gracious God has indulged them for gathering in the fruits
of the Earth. The seventh day of the week they rest, (being persuaded it is the
Lords Sabbath) and the next day again, either out of conscience to a command,
or to avoid scandal, and danger of the Laws; and I have sometimes thus said
with my self: Alas for my Brethren! they are zealously affected (they would not
else for a private opinion endanger the loss of their Crops, which God has
given them) how good were this zeal if it were in a good cause? but has God
required such things at their hands? has not the Lord said, Six days thou
shall labor, and do all thou have to do? Suppose these men by this devotion to
lose their crop, or a great part of it, or at least to lose much in it, etc.
what satisfaction could they have other than from their own fancy? will it in
the great day of account appear any other than a self-robbery? for a
Will Worship? either it will prove so, or the whole Christian World is
mistaken, and has been so from the very time Christ ascended up into Heaven.
Can my Brethren think, That the Spirit that dwells in all Believers, and
leads them into all truth, should leave all the Churches of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and come and reveal himself in this singular notion unto them? Can our
brethren think it is not possible that in this thing they should be mistaken?
Surely they cannot think, but if whole Churches may err, and if they can think
that all the Churches of God in this thing have for 1600 years been mistaken,
they may be mistaken. Further yet, is it not ^robable, that our Brethren should
be mistaken? Our Brethren must confess, that the far greater number of
Christians are of another mind, yea and not only of those who are Christians at
large, baptized, and owning Christ as the Savior of the World, but ^f those
who are Christians indeed; I mean, who have not only embraced the Doctrine ^f
Faith, but in whom is the work of Faith ^ith power, purifying their hearts, and
who (...) all their conversations exercise themselves to ^^p a good conscience
both toward God and ^owards men. Of these more than a thou^and for one are of
a contrary mind to our ^rethren in this point; so that I cannot ^ut think that
our brethren, must needs upon mature thoughts conceive, that as it is possible
they may be mistaken, because they are but men, so it is probable if not more
than probable, that they are mistaken, because the very far greater number of
Christians, who are as inquisitive after the will of God as our Brethren are,
as much afraid of sinning against God, as our brethren, and as able to find
out the will of God as our brethren are, yet are of another mind, and that not
only upon a tradition, or custom, running along with a multitude at adventures,
but upon a most serious debating, and arguing the business, and candid hearing
all that can be said on the other side. I say, these things being considered,
surely our brethren must judge it probable that they are mistaken: It is not
likely that their natural or acquired parts should be more than those of them
who are against them; nay it is most certain they are short of them: And what
can our brethren have to incline them to think, that God has left all his
faithful Ministers, all his precious people, who study his will, and serve
him, and beg his direction with prayers, and tears, night and day, and in so
great a point as this left them to err, and revealed himself only to these few
of our brethren. Now if it be possible, that our brethren may be mistaken, if
it be probable that they are mistaken, all our brethren can say is, That it is
possible they may not be mistaken, but that all Christians (except themselves)
are in the error, and they are verily persuaded that it is so. Truly
considering the great numbers of the most learned, and strictly godly persons,
who have all along been otherwise persuaded, and for fifteen or sixteen hundred
years have been so, and lived in the contrary practice, it is hardly possible
to imagine they should, or that indeed they should be mistaken, because they
cannot be presumed to have been without the presence of Christ and the guidance
of the infallible Spirit. If indeed what our Brethren sometimes suggest, this
practice were contrary to the fourth Commandment, if that had been so penned,
as the sense must necessarily be what they contend for, it had been something.
But when the Commandment is so penned, that unless they will be wonderfully
partial to themselves, they must con^ess, that the fourth Commandment may
remain an inviolable Law, and yet the same Sabbath may not be required by it to
be observed by us, which at the giving of that Precept was in force amongst the
Jews. Certainly our Brethren must labor under a great mistake in this point,
rather than all other Churches of Christ otherwise persuaded. I must confess,
it is our brethrens unhappiness, that whiles they are thus persuaded it were
sin for them to act against the persuasion, or strong opinion of their
conscience, yet in not acting contrary, they also sin against God. This is the
misery under which an erroneous Conscience brings those who are under the
miserable command of it; all therefore that I would do by this discourse, is
but to reform our brethrens understanding, and to offer such things to them, as
through Gods blessing may first bring them to another persuasion, and then to
another practice. That while they agree with us in the same specifical acts of
Worship, they may also agree with us in the same numericall acts, and in the
same solemn time also. And certainly, I have said enough, if our brethren bring
no more prejudice to the reading of this discourse, than I have had in the
writing of it, to induce those of our brethren who have any candor, to think
that they are in a mistake. Indeed the whole stress lies upon a right
understanding of the Fourth Commandment; and I shall now leave it to our
brethren seriously to advise, whether they can judge that, the necessary sense
of that Precept, which they must make so, or it will serve them in no stead. I
designed at first but a very short and plain Discourse, I shall therefore here
break it off, and make up the rest in Prayers, both for us and our Brethren,
that God would clear up all our doubts, correct all our mistakes, pardon all
our failings, make us all of one heart, and one way, and lead us into all truth.

An Exhortation to the more strict observation of the Sabbath, where are
Directions, and motives to that great piece of our duty.
I Had here laid aside my pen, and have only taken it up again upon a
suggestion, that some of our Brethren should say unto me according to that
Proverb, Luke 4.23. Physician heal thy self. Speak to those of your own
persuasion in this point, that they would keep their Sabbath, more like a
Sabbath than they do, and certainly it is far more excusable, to keep any day
of the seven with a religion befitting a Sabbath, than for any, while they
declare against the Jews, and those who appear to them to Judaize in this
point; to be indeed zealous for no Sabbath at all. And indeed, in this thing
our brethren would have a great advantage against too many of us, if themselves
did not severely observe their seventh day, but I observe too many of them as
remiss ^s others, so as while our zeal is spent about keeping several Sabbaths,
neither party are so universally conscientious as they ought to be in keeping
any. This has made me judge it worth the while to resume my pen, and methinks
I hear (as soon as I have done it) God speaking to me as to Hosea on another
argument. Plead with your Mother (and with your brethren) plead, for she is not
my wife, neither am I her husband, Let her therefore put away her Sabbath
neglects out of my sight, and her Sabbath profanations from her: Lest I strip
her naked as in the day wherein she was born: and make her as a wilderness, and
set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst: Hosea 2.2, 3. And indeed
what Luther (with respect to Apostasy in matter of Doctrine) was wont to say of
the Doctrine, and Article of Justification: the same I think may be said, as to
observation^ of the Sabbath, with reference to holiness in a Church, and its
members.

It is Articulus sta^ti^ and cade^^is Ecclessae, The Article of a standing, or
declining Church: It will upon observation be found true, that the strictness
and holiness of Life found either in societies of people, or in particular
persons, will be in degree much according to their zeal or remisness in the
observation of the Sabbath.

In what things the sanctification of the Sabbath lies, we shall best learn
from the Scripture, and we can be no other way informed. For though the light
of nature showing us a God, the law of nature obliges us to worship him, and
by consequence to set some time apart for it (for all humane actions must be
done in time) yet nature directs us not to a seventh, nor to this seventh,
nor yet to those acts of worship, which God requires of us.

We are (I suppose) agreed that both the old and new Testament ought to be eyed
as our rule in the case, and indeed the old testament is most full in its
directions of this nature. In the new we find the Sabbath altered, the Jewish
superstitions and mis-interpretations corrected, the practical observation of
it justified, by the Examples of our Savior the Apostles and others; but the
rules about it are but few. Our Lord intending to leave his people (as in many
other points of the moral Law,) to the fuller direction of the Laws and the
Prophets. Now in the old Testament, we find something in the Law: (in the five
books of Moses) something in the Prophets.

The Original Law we find Exodus 20. (for concerning the Sabbath in the
Patriarchs time, I shall say nothing, it being not my question to examine when
the observation began, but how it should be observed.)

The fourth commandment, plainly requires that it should be kept as on holy
rest, it requires it to be kept as a day of rest, (...) and requires us to
keep it holy, so Exodus 35.2. an holy day, a Sabbath of rest.

Rest is opposed to Motion, and Action. Holiness is opposed to idleness, and
filthiness.

I say first Rest is opposed to Motion Action
yet it is apparent from scripture that neither all Motion, nor all action fall
under the prohibition of that precept. We shall find both our Savior and his
Apostles going into the Synagogues on the Sabbath day: and the latter going out
of the City. Acts 16.13. hence Act. 1.13. we read of a Sabbath days journey.
i. e. such a journey as a man might lawfully take on the Sabbath day: what
length that might be has (possibly unnecessarily) troubled many, doubtless so
much is to be understood as one might conveniently go to attend upon the
worship of God, it is no improbable conjecture, That the phrase has reference
to the first settlement of the Jewish Church upon their march in the
wilderness. There were to be 200 hundred Cubits between the Arc and the Camp,
Josh. 3.4. And in probability when they rested, they were to keep the same
distance; (this some interpret one mile, others two miles.) On the Sabbath day,
they all were to come up to the Ark to worship, which was 200 hundred Cubits
distant from the nearest of them: and at a far greater distance from those who
encamped farthest off the Ark. Godwin's Jewish Antiquities l. 2. cap. 3.
Besides this, we shall easily understand what Motion is lawful on the Sabbath
day, if we understand what Action is lawful: For such Motion as is necessary to
such Action, must also be lawful. So it is lawful for a Physician to go to his
patient. For a man having a beast fallen into a pit, to go to help it out, etc.

Secondly, as all Motion from our places is not prohibited, so neither in all
action: Our Actions are divided into such as are Natural, flowing from a
principle, and necessity of nature, and serving to the upholding and
conservation of nature, As eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. Under the notion of
moral actions we comprehend, all our actions of worldly labor in our callings
and places. By religious actions we understand acts of worship, by which we
give an homage to God. The fourth commandment requires that we should do no
manner of work: but it is apparent from other Scriptures, that all actions, all
work is forbidden. To open to you the mind of God in this thing a little.

1. Acts of Religious worship, or tending directly to it, are so far from being
forbidden that they are commanded. The Jews might kill, and offer beasts for
sacrifices, 1 Chronicles. 23.31. Number. 28.9, 10. The Priests might order the lamps,
set on the new bread, the Jews might circumcise an infant. The Scribes might
expound the Law. They might blow their trumpets to call the assembly, Number.
10.2, 10. Watch to prevent the profanation of the Sabbath, etc. Neh. 13.22.
Whence the Jews were wont to say that In the temple there was no Sabbath, no
rest there, all were at work. In analogy to this there can be no doubt, but it
is lawful to study, preach, read, hear, pray, sing, baptize on the Lords day,
in order thereto, to ring Bells, to call people together; to be employed in
seeing to others observation of it. These sort of actions is so far from being
unlawful, that they are actions for the Sabbath. Opus diei in die suo.

2. A second sort of action lawful on the Sabbath day, are such as are
necessary to preserve the being or well-being of creatures. Thus it is lawful
for Physicians, or Chirurgions to apply medicines to their patients. Our
Savior abundantly vindicates this, Joh. 3.5, 9. Luke 13.12, 13. Luke 6.10.
Joh. 9.6. Mat. 12.10. And so for nurses to attend those that are sick, or young
children, to go for a Physician; to prepare physic, let blood, etc. To save
the life of another, to indea^our to preserve our own lives, by fighting in
opposition to an enemy, by fleeing from an enemy, to be in arms for the desence
of our Prince, or Country, 1 Kings 20.9. 2 Kings 11.5, 6. For the Magistrate to
commit malefactors, Numb. 15.34. To dress meat, (our Savior justified the
disciples rubbing ears of Corn, Mat. 12, 1, 2, 3.) We find our Savior at a
feast on the Sabbath day, Luke 14.1, 2, 3. and others were bidden, v. 7. To
feed and water cattle justified by our Savior, Luke 13.15. To keep our goods
from being lost, upon which our Savior Job. 5. justified the lame man carrying
of his bed. Undoubtedly actions that tend to preserve the being or usefulness
of a thing, of which we have a moral certainty, that without such labor on the
Sabbath, the creature would perish, or be unuseful, and corrupt, are lawful on
the Lords day. This all stands upon that principle: That God loves mercy rather
than sacrifice. And upon that principle,

3. Actions also of mercy and charity, are by all Determined lawful. Such as
are visiting the sick, etc. Many of those which come under the Schoolemens two
verses, Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo.

Giving bread to the hungry, beer to the thirsty, burying the dead, relieving
the captives, etc.

So as we find the rest commanded in the fourth commandment limited by these
exceptions, and it must remain unlawful in any other causes to labor. From
whence we may gather,

That the prohibitions we read of in Scripture, of not kindling a fire on the
Sabbath day, Exodus 35. and Exodus 16.29. For not going out of their place on the
seventh day, to gather manna: must not be taken in that strictness, in which
some would urge them, or at least only concerned the Jews in that time, not
afterward. The fire forbidden to be kindled, must necessarily be understood, 1.
Either in reference to the making the Tabernacle, of which he there speaks; or
2. more largely of any trade-fire kindled for men to work with, to get a
livelihood, not such as is kindled for dressing of meat, refreshing us in cold
weather; or when we are sick.

1. It is not probable there was no fire in the Jews houses that made the
feast, at which our Savior was, Luke 14. besides we find works parallel to
this, justified in Scripture. Though going out of their doors on the Sabbath,
must be understood, to gather manna, Exodus 16.29. or upon other ends, than in
order to actions of piety, ne^ssity, or preservation and mercy, for that
^^stance, Numh. 15.32, 33. The Scripture so shortly relates that story of the
man's being put to death for gathering sticks on the Sabbath day, as to the
cause of it, that it is hard to give a satisfactory answer. Stoning to death
was a punishment used in the highest cases, as that of blasphemy, etc. with
which our reason would not judge such a violation of the Sabbath, as gathering
sticks was to be put in the balance: but in the Judgment there could be no
error, for it was given by the Judge of the whole Earth, who cannot err in
appointing punishments to sins: That he gathered sticks on the Sabbath, and
this was the matter of his guilt, is plain, but whether it was after some
special command of Moses to the contrary (which the scripture says not) or to
assert a profane liberty, and his not regarding the commandment of God, when he
had no need to it: Or whether it was in order to kindle some fire for labor
contrary to the precept, Exodus 35.3. Or what other circumstance fell in to
aggravate the action to such a degree of guilt we cannot tell. Suppose it was
to kindle a necessary fire, yet we are sure it might have been done before the
Sabbath; so as it was an unnecessary labor, as to any necessity but what a
former neglect had created: something was doubtless in it more than we have in
the story. It is certain Moses brings this example next after the Law against
presumptuous sinners, Number. 15.30, 31, 32. Nor do we read afterward of any such
examples of sev^rity.

But enough is said to show how the Sabbath should be kept as a rest from
labor.

2. But this is not all, it is called an holy rest, the rest of the holy
Sabbath, and the commandment expressly says, Remember to keep it holy.

Now an holy rest certainly stands distinguished from a rest merely natural,
when our bodies cease from action, and worldly labor, 2. A rest that is
profane. By which I understand not only a sinful rest, unlawful on any day; but
a rest from recreations, and pastimes, lawful enough on other days. We read
not in the old Law of any toleration for sports on the Sabbath, we read on the
contrary that it was to be an holy rest, kept holy, etc. To which sports cannot
contribute: It seems unreasonable to think that labor should be forbidden, in
order to our more serious and solemn service of God, and yet sports should be
allowed, which every way as much distract, and unfit the Soul for acts of
solemn worship. But the prophets are best interpreters of the Law. Now the
prophet Isaiah, Isa. 58.13. expounding this Law says, If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor finding thy own pleasure, nor speaking thy own
words: Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. There is a precept
v. 13. and a promise annexed to the due observance of that precept v. 14. The
precept is directive for the sanctification of the Sabbath, which is called the
Sabbath, the Lords holy day. The end of the Sabbath for which God instituted
it, and which every one ought in the observation of it to aim at; and shall
honor him, the honoring and glorifying of God, that is the end. Then you have
the manner directed, how you should honor God in it,

1. By a reverent esteem of it, calling it Honorable. 2. By a free and
cheerful entertaining it, calling it a delight. 3. By an abstaining from our
own pleasure, our own words, our own ways, and turning our foot from it. Our
own pleasure, word, ways certainly signify such pleasure, such words, such
ways as we merely serve and gratify our selves by, and bring no immediate
honor and glory to God. Now whether this be not as exclusive of all
recreations, sports, pastimes, etc. as of all laborious actions (other than
those before excepted by warrant from the word of God,) I leave to every
conscientious and sober Christian to consider with himself and judge.

I shall only further add, that what Divines truly say of all other moral
precepts, must be true of this. That where an action is in any precept
forbidden, all words and thoughts relating to it are also forbidden, and this
is also hinted by the prophet in special, in those words not speaking thy own
words. I am not ignorant that many of our brethren in the other reformed
Churches are not of our minds in this point of the Sabbath. But,

1. It is therefore to be observed that they do not think the Sabbath moral, we
do, and ^rge it as commanded us in the fourth Commandment.

2. And secondly upon inquiry we may possibly find, that both amongst their
Ministers and People, those who are most strict in their lives, lament the
looseness of others of their Brethren in this thing, and order their personal
demeanours, and their Families after another rate. However, we are to live by
rule, and not by example. I have thus as shortly as I could opened your duty,
and showed you how the Sabbath is to be kept as a rest, as an holy rest unto
the Lord. Let me now plead with my brethren, that knowing our Masters will we
may do it. I will urge a few arguments in the case.

1. It is a piece of Religion, by which the people of God have formerly more
honored God in these Nations, than in most, if not than in any other places.
Professors strict observation of the Sabbath in England has even from the
beginning of the Reformation been their Crown and their Glory. Oh let not this
Crown (in our days) fall from our heads. God has always had in this Nation a
strict Sabbath-observing people in the worst of times: There have been of late
greater light, greater means, more preaching, more Profession than in former
times; oh let there not be a less strict Sabbath-keeping than formerly: This
would be but an ill requital of the God of their mercies. Men in other little
things have a zeal to keep up the credit and repute of their Country,
certainly it should not in this grow cold. None certainly can think this is
rather an argument on the other side, as intimating that my plea is for an
unnecessary strictness. If the opinion of duty in such severe observation of
Sabbaths, should be a mistake, yet unquestionably in the practice there can be
no considerable mistake on this hand: If a man upon any other day of the week,
in order to the putting his heart into, and keeping his heart in the better
frame for Religious Worship, to be in that day performed, should resolve to
meddle with no labor, to allow himself no diversions by Sports, nor to engage
in any worldly or more idle discourse; certainly every one would say he did
well, and can any be condemned either by another or by his own Conscience, for
doing this on the Sabbath Day, when by the confession of all, they are obliged
either by the fourth Commandment (as we say) or by the custom or command of the
Church (as others say) to more, and more solemn acts of Worship, than upon the
week-dayes? Surely, if we had not particular Precepts in the cause, yet the
consideration of the great and solemn services we are that day to perform to
God, which reason will tell us, should be performed with the best attention of
mind, and intention of spirit, and improved when done to the best advantage,
would oblige us to this rest from worldly actions, worldly discourses, vain and
useless pleasures, which must necessarily divert our minds from our spiritual
employments, and take up that time which might be better improved, in the
concocting the Word we have heard, and due digesting of it by meditation, and
applying it to our hearts. Now considering (over and above this) that this has
been the honor of the Professors of Religion in England, it certainly ought
to prevail with ingenuous children of so good Parents, especially when it is
impossible that they should find any error in the practice, if any will fancy,
that there is a mistake as to the opinion of a necessity of such strictness. If
any of them can say, (which I much doubt, yea I firmly believe the contrary) he
that reads and prays in his family, and prays with the Congregation, and
hears a Sermon or two in the Sabbath, though he also in the vacation of these
exercises, does some worldly business and discourses of it, or recreates
himself with some sports (not sinful) does well: yet they must say, he who
forbears these sports, labors, discourses on that day, does better, if not
with respect to the command strictly, yet with reference to the duties he is to
perform, that he may the better perform them, and make the better improvement
and advantage of them, and with reference to scandal, and the destroying the
Souls of others, yea and in reference to his own Soul. Reason obliging us in
such cases of doubt to take the safest part.

2. Secondly, Consider, I beseech you the influence that it has upon an holy
life, and conversation. Compare the lives of those that are strict in the
observation of the Sabbath with the lives of those that are more remiss in it,
and where you see an abatement as to strictness in keeping Sabbaths, whether
you do not find also a proportionable abatement of holiness almost in all their
other converse. Observe and see if they be as conscientious (according to
David's resolution, Psalm. 101.2.) to walk in their house in a perfect way. To
instruct their Families according to Abraham's copy, Genesis 18.19. commanding them
to keep the way of the Lord. Teaching the Law of God unto their children
diligently (and whetting it upon them as it is in the Hebrew) and talking of it
when they sit in their houses, and when they walk in the way, when they lie
down, and when they rise up according to Gods command, Deuteronomy. 6.7. whether they
be so diligent and constant in praying with their families, so offering up
their morning and evening sacrifices to the Lord. Indeed it is not reasonable
to presume, that those who will not spend the Sabbath thus, should spend any
considerable time of their working-dayes thus, when they have a free liberty to
work by the Laws of God and men: considering especially that on the Sabbath Day
they are restrained from labor, not only by the Law of God, but by the Laws of
the Nation, and general usage and custom of the place where they are. But I
fear upon observation we shall find, that those who are loose in the
observation of the Sabbath, are not very strict in any other piece of their
conversation. I remember the learned Junius in his Analytick Explication of
Numbers, upon the story before mentioned concerning him that gathered sticks,
starts a question, whether then it was such a crime to gather sticks on the
Sabbath day. He answers it thus, That the Precept of the Sabbath was the
clausula, the conclusion of all the Precepts that concerned the Worship of God,
in which God would have all exercises of piety imbibed, whence it was, that he
who was in the least guilty of the profanation of that, was guilty of a
profanation of the whole Worship of God. Again, that Christian who is possessed
with a dread of the Lord as to the Sabbath, and walks in that dread all that
day, will find it influential upon him the whole week, so that the strict
observation of the Sabbath is both influential upon us as to holiness, and is
also an indication of holiness, which should oblige Christians to the strict
observation of it. Buxtorf tells us of one of the Jewish Rabbis, that wished
His portion might be with those that began the Sabbath with those of Tiberias,
and ended it with those of Tseppore. That is, who sanctified the Sabbath in the
longest proportion of time: for Tsephore being a City placed on the top of a
Mountain, the Sun shined longer upon that than upon others, and Tiberias being
situated in a valley, the Sun appeared to them not so soon as to others. I
think it may be a good wish for a Christian, That his portion might be with
them, that begin the Sabbath soonest, and end it latest, and keep it most
strictly.

Thirdly, Methinks the typical notion of the Sabbath should something oblige
us. The Sabbath is not only a consequent, and commemorative sign to us of
Christ's resurrection; but it is also a predictional, and antecedent sign of
that glorious rest which remains for the people of God; which way soever we
look upon it, it certainly calls to us, for a strict observation of it. 1.
Let us look upon it as a consequent sign, as a memorial of the resurrection of
the Lord Jesus Christ. We are said to be risen with Christ, whence the Apostle
argues our duty, to seek those things which are above. To set our affections on
things above. Certainly, as our interest in the resurrection of Christ, and the
influence it has upon us should engage us to seek the things above, in the
whole course of our lives, and at all times to set our affections upon things
above; so not to do it upon that day which God has sanctified for our special
commemoration of it, will speak souls both little sensible of the great mercy
of redemption, and little influenced from that resurrection, not risen with
Christ as we ought to be. Again, let us consider the Christian Sabbath, as a
sign antecedent, and prefigurative. The Apostle seems thus to argue, Heb.
4.8, 9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God. For he who is
entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own work as God did from
his. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest. And a little before, v.
4, 5, 6, 7. of the same Chapter. For he spoke in a certain place of the seventh
day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from all his works, And in
this place again, if they shall enter into my rest. Seeing therefore it
remains, that some must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached
entered not in because of unbelief. Again he limiteth a certain day in David,
saying, To day, after so long a time as it is said, To day if you will hear his
voice harden not your hearts: for if Jesus had given them rest, he would not
have spoken of another day. There remains therefore, etc. The Apostles great
business there (as is evident) is to exhort the believing Hebrews to a
perseverance in the profession of the Gospel, and to persuade those that yet
believed not, to embrace it. The argument which he uses, is, Lest they should
fail of an entrance into Gods rest; by which rest he undoubtedly means the
souls rest in Heaven. To this end he tells them,

1. That there is such a rest, v. 9.

2. That there is a Promise left of entering into this rest.

3. That some, and those to whom it wa^ first preached, entered not in because
of unbelief.

4. That there is a day limited in which those must hear the Lords voice, that
will enter into this rest. That there is such a Rest, he proves by two types.
The one that of Canaan, the Jews after their laborious travailing in the
Wilderness entering into Canaan, v. 3. The second is that of the Sabbath, for
what sense else can those words have in this place? He spoke in a certain
place, of the seventh day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from
all his work. And v. 10. of Christ he says, he that is entered into his rest,
he also ceased from his own works as God did from his. God the Fathers proper
work was Creation, the Sons proper work, was Redemption. When God had finished
his work, he rested, and in commemoration of it, he appointed his people to
keep a day of Rest: When Christ had finished his work of redemption, he also
rested, and appointed us a day to rest in, in commemoration of it; both the one
and the other are by the Apostle made prefigurative of that Rest which God has
prepared in Heaven for us; which also it self is called, verse. 9. (...), a
keeping of a Sabbath. Now certainly, the type should bear a proportion to what
is signified by it. Our rest on Earth should bear some proportion to our rest
in Heaven. Our rest in Heaven shall not only be a cessation from labor, but
from all sensual vain pleasure, from all worldly discourse, a continual
pleasure in beholding and enjoying God. If we would keep a Sabbath perfectly,
certainly, (abating what is necessary for our selves or others, for the
sustentation of our bodies, and the preservation both of our selves and other
creatures) we should allow our selves no more labor than we shall have in
Heaven, no other pleasure than the Angels and Saints of God have there, all
whose pleasure is in the contemplation and enjoyment of God. Oh that we could
thus sanctify Sabbaths! But this is my third argument to press my Brethren to
a more strict observation of the Lords holy Day.

4. A fourth argument by which I shall pre^ this strict sanctification of the
Sabbath, shall be the influence which it must necessarily have upon us, as to
the duties of worship, which we perform on that day. There is hardly any person
(unless those given up to riot and wickedness) but has upon him some little
awe, and dread of the Sabbath: Some duties they think should be done in it,
more than upon another day, either out of Obedience to God (in the fourth
commandment) or to the Church, or to the state so commanding. Indeed some will
shuffle off with very little. Some think hearing one is enough for their
consciences: In the afternoon they may labor, or sport, etc. Others think it
is no matter whether there be a Sermon or no, but they think they should be
longer at morning and evening prayer that day than upon other days. Those who
have any degree of sobriety in them judge that the greater part of the day
should be spent in the public, or private exercise of Gods worship: but we are
not so strictly tied up, as to abstinence from pleasure, worldly labor, vain
or secular discourse. I will for the present give them, what I cannot grant
them, viz. that the precept is not so strictly to be expounded: yet me thinks
reason is enough in the case to enforce what we plead for. It may be
(Christian) thou art one of the latter sort, a sober person, who do think
that the greatest part of that day should be spent in the solemn stated acts of
worship, but think the intermediate time may be more loosly spent. Do but
consider, what an influence thy strict, or looser spending of the intermediate
time must necessarily have upon thee.

1. In reference to thy acts of worship. 2. In reference to the effect and
fruit of that worship.
First, (I say) in reference to thy acts of worship. If thou have any thing of
the seriousness of a Christian in thee, thou will and must acknowledge, that
God must be served with thy spirit, and with the utmost ferventy of thy spirit
without distractions, without any coldness and deadness of spirit, with life,
love, delight in thy approach to God, etc. Do thou think that all thy time
before thy acts of worship had not need be spent in reading, in holy
meditations, in reading the word, etc. That when thou come to serve the Lord
in solemn acts of worship, thy thoughts may not be scattered, thy heart may not
be dull, and dead: certainly a conscientious Christian finds all his time too
little, before he falls upon his duty, to get his heart into such a frame, and
as he spends his previous, or intermediate time, less or more spiritually, so
he will find his heart less or more what it should be in the performance of his
more direct, and solemn worship.

2. As to the effect or fruit of worship, that is, the impression of it, which
it leaves or the soul (for I shall here speak nothing as to our pleasing God by
the acts of homage which we perform, which is the effect of i^ in reference to
God.) We are commanded to desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow
thereby, and certainly there is no serious Christian, that goes out to hear a
Sermon, but does propound to himself the increase of the knowledge of God, the
increase of faith in God, the increase of the fear o^ God, the increase of love
to God, and other graces. None goes to a Sacrament, but propounds to himself
for his end, the meeting of God in the Ordinance, and receiving some blessing
from him, either as to spiritual life comfort, or strength. Now I appeal to the
reason of Christians, whether in order (...) this end, they had not need spend
all the Sabbath time, after the performance of their solemn acts of worship,
meditating of what they have heard in the word, what they have seen, and heard,
and done in a Sacrament; you know the parable of the sower. The thorns (which
our Savior expounds, the cares of the world) choked the word. The fowls of
the air picked up the seed, which fell by the way side: worldly thoughts,
worldly discourses, worldly business immediately after hearing, immediately
after a Sacrament, are like thorns choking the word, or Birds of the air
picking up the seed. So as if we had no other argument than this, yet it were
in this case not inconsiderable. But,

Fifthly, methinks it should something prevail with us to consider how much
stress God lays upon it. How many times does he inculcate the precept? with
how many additional precepts does he hedge it? how severely does he punish the
violators? how often is it mentioned as the very head of Religion, yea as the
whole of it? I say first how often does God inculcate it, Exodus 16.23. (which
text argues it given before the law promulged in Sinai.) Exodus 20. Exodus
31.14. Lev. 23.3. Deuteronomy. 5.14. Lev. 19.3. and in abundance of other texts. With
how many additional precepts did God hedge it? which (though some of them but
temporary) yet argued Gods eye on the observation of his Sabbath, such as
those, for not stirring out of doors to gather Manna. Not kindling the
artificers fire. How sharply did God himself order the punishment of that poor
wretch that gathered sticks on that day? in pursuance of which the writers of
the Jewish antiquities tell us, Sabbath Breakers were wont to be stoned to
death, as Idolaters, Blasphemers, false Prophets, etc. incestuous Persons,
Sodomites, Buggerers, burners of their children in sacrifice to Molech.
Witches, cursers of Parents, and such as were rebelious against Parents. We
read of none else stoned to death. (For I count inticers to idolatry,
accessaries to these, under their principals.) The righteous God appointed the
same punishment to the Sabbath-breaker as to the vilest and worst of men: which
lets us see, what magnitude this sin of the violation of the Sabbath has in
the Lords eye. And if we look considerately, we shall find, that the
sanctification of the Sabbath, is by God looked upon as a duty of the first and
highest sort. It is made one of his moral and perpetual precepts, it is ushered
in with a word of remark^ Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day: The
observation of it in the Precept is more particularly directed, Thou shall do
no manner of work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy manservant,
nor thy maidservant, nor the Cattle within thy Gates.

It is joined with the most natural, necessary and momentous duties. Lev. 19.3.
Fear every man his Father, and keep my Sabbaths. It is mentioned in Scripture
as the head of all Religion; and therefore chosen out by God, to express all
Religion by: and where the violation of all Religion is taxed, it is ordinarily
taxed under this notion of not keeping, or profaning the Lords Sabbath, Ezekiel.
20.13, 16, 21, 24. chapter 23.38. and supposing the Promises made to the strict
observation of the Sabbath to be Synechdochicall, and to be understood of such
as keep close to, and are strict in all pieces of instituted Worship; yet Gods
choosing of this part of Worship to express the whole by it, is sufficient to
let us know how much God ever laid upon the strict observation of the Sabbath,
as much as if God had told us, that without it we do nothing in Religion. It is
worth the observing how cross men are to God in this thing, tything mine and
annis, and cummin, and making light of this far more weighty thing. We read
indeed under the Jewish Poedagogy, of music and singing, and garments, used in
the worldly Sanctuary (as the Apostle calls it) but we no where read of any
Promises made to these more external rites, and little observances of bowing,
etc. we see many men zealous for these things, but oh how careless in this
great thing! not only violating the Precept, but of so debaucht consciences, as
to teach men so to do, (which says our Savior is to make men least in the
Kingdom of God, Math. 5.) But certainly Christians, we should look as God does,
and lay the stress of our practice where he lays it. The Precept of the fourth
Commandment is one thing, the Argument is another; who so says the Precept, or
any thing in that is ceremonial, leaves us but nine Commandments, contrary to
the faith of all the people of God from the very beginning of the world; and
they who will argue the Precept temporary, because the argument had but a
temporary obligation, make a fair way to blot out the first Commandment,
because the Argument in the letter of it, only concerned the Jews, who were the
only people God brought out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage:
I say in the letter of it. I know we are also by Christ brought out of a
spiritual Egypt, out of a spiritual bondage; and if we can thus blot out the
first Commandment, and the fourth, and the Papists blot out the second (which
they do) and interpret the third only to prohibit false swearing (as some
others have done) we have fairly quitted the first Table, and have nothing to
get quit of but the second, and we leave the whole world, as a generation of
Belial, without any yoke at all.

6. After this it may not be amiss for us to consider, the Promises made to
those that keep the Lords Sabbaths, and the threatenings against the violaters
of them. The first I shall instance in shall be that, Jerem. 17. from the 20.
to the 24. v. their not observing the Sabbath according to the Command, is made
their great crime: from the 24. v. is a Promise made to the better observation
of it, v. 27. a threatening denounced in case of neglect. And it shall come to
pass, if you diligently hearken unto me, says the Lord, to bring in no burden
through the gates of the City on the Sabbath day, but hallow the Sabbath to do
no work therein: Then shall enter into the gates of this City Kings and Princes
sitting on the Throne of David, riding on Chariots and Horses, they and their
Princes, the men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, and that City shall
remain for ever. Here Is a Promise of outward prosperity, and a stability in it.
And they shall come from the Cities of Judah, and from the places about
Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the Plain, and from the
Mountains, and from the South; bringing burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, and
Meat Offerings, and Incense, and bringing Sacrifices of praise unto the Lord
our God: I will continue my Worship amongst you in your own land, in its former
purity, and glory. But what if this people will not sanctify the Lords
Sabbaths? it follows, v. 27. But if you will not hearken unto me, to hallow the
Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of
Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof,
and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched: I
will without remedy destroy your City, and deprive you of all the prosperity
wherewith I have blessed you. Isa. 58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from the
Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a
delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing
thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thy own words,
then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
father. Here is not only a promise of temporal good, riding upon the high
places of the Earth, inheriting the heritage of Jacob, (which in general you
know was the blessing) but also of a spiritual mercy, Thou shall delight thy
self in the Lord: Now lest any one should think these Promises are debts paid,
fulfilled to the Jews, and concern not us, let us consider yet another Text,
Isa. 56.2, 3, 4, 5, and^. Blessed is the man that does this, and the Son of man
that lays hold on it, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps
his hand from doing evil. Neither let the Son of the stranger that has joined
himself to the Lord, speak, saying The Lord has utterly separated me from his
people: Neither let the Eunuch say, Behold I am a dry tree. For thus says the
Lord, unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please
me, and take hold of my Covenant, even unto them will I give in my house, and
within my walls, a place, and a name better than that of Sons and Daughters: I
will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off, v. 5. Also the
sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to
love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold on my Covenant, v. 6. Even them will
I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my House of Prayer: their
burnt-offerings, and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar, for my
House shall be called an House of Prayer for all people, v. 7. That this is a
promise respecting the Gospel Times, is plain enough from diverse things.

1. It is made as a relief for Eunuchs and strangers, who in regard of the
partitionwall set up by the Ceremonial Law, lay under many discouragements,
from joining themselves to the Lord.

2. It speaks of a time to come when this Wall should be pulled down. I will
bring them, etc.

3. It speaks of a time when Gods House was to be called an House of Prayer for
all People; which was not till Gospel Times. The things promised are great and
excellent. God promises, 1. A place in his House. 2. A Name better than that
of Sons and Daughters, even an everlasting Name that shall never be cut off. 3.
To bring them to his holy mountain. 4. To accept their Sacrifices. 5. To make
them joyful in the house of Prayer. Promises, then which God could not promise
more. Now who shall be made partakers of them. (Lord who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle, who shall abide in thy holy Hill?) These things are promised, To
the Eunuchs that keep the Lords Sabbaths. To the strangers that keep the
Sabbath from polluting it. All but those of the Jewish Nation come under the
notion of Strangers all we that are Gentile Churches, are but Churches made up
of Strangers, who have joined our selves to the Lord, and taken hold of his
Covenant. If we would be blessed with these things, if we will have a place in
Gods house, an everlasting name that shall never be cut off, if we would be
brought to Gods holy Mountain, if we would have God accept our services, if we
would be made joyful in the house of Prayer, we must keep the Sabbath from
polluting it.

7. Will example move us? to say nothing of the example of the servants of God
in the Old Testament: The example of Nehemiah as a Magistrate is there a famous
instance, recorded Nehem. 20.32. chapter 13, 15, 16, 17, 19. but let us look into
the New Testament, and there first take our Lords example, who was a zealous
observer of the Sabbath, the seventh day Sabbath, (for the other did not begin
till his resurrection.) Mar. 1.21. He on the Sabbath day went into the
Synagogue, and taught, Mar. 6.2. When the Sabbath day was come, be began to
teach in the Synagogues. Once for all, Luke 4.16. As his custom was, he went
into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. It remains,
that we should be satisfied how he spent that time of the Sabbath, which he did
not spend in acts of more solemn public Worship: Something we find as to what
he did, he healed the sick, Joh. 5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc. Joh. 9.14. Luke
6.7. and 13. 12, 13, 14. Mar. 3.2, 3, etc. we find him also on the Sabbath day
at a feast, Luke 14.1, 2, 3, etc. and passing through the cornfieldsd, Matthew.
12.1. Mar. 2.23. observe but his discourses upon his healing the sick, when he
was at the Feast, Luke 14.1, 2, 3. when he passed through the Cornfields,
Matthew. 12.1. Mar. 2.23. you will find them constantly spiritual, and heavenly,
and suited to the Law of the Sabbath, not speaking our own words. Concerning
others we have no such particular account, but in the general, Luke 23.56. The
women rested on the Sabbath day, according to the commandment, they prepared
spices and ointments the night before, but they rested the Sabbath day,
according to Gods command: Through the whole history of the Acts of the
Apostles, you read of the Apostles, and other Christians exact as to the
keeping of the Sabbath; nor is it at all to our disadvantage that the women,
Luke 23. rested on the Jewish Sabbath according to the Commandment, for at that
time there was no other to rest upon. We plead for no sanctification of any
other day than what God has commanded, and fall under the fourth Commandment,
which we have already proved that the Christian Sabbath does.

8. After all this may it not be worth your while to consider, the difference
of that return which your awakened conscience will make to you, when you have
spent a Sabbath according to this rule; from that which your conscience will
make after a looser observation. Do not your Consciences sometimes check you,
when you have taken up too much of that sacred time in sleep, in dressing and
trimming up your selves or houses, in needless labors, in foolish pleasures,
in worldly discourses, etc. possibly they may smite you in the actions, or
presently upon them; but if you cast up your accounts at night, will they not
chastise you before you go to bed? will they not sometimes tell you, you have
that day done, or spoke what you ought not to have said, or done? The testimony
of Conscience is not wholly to be slighted in the case.

9. Lastly, shall I referr you to those who have taken notice of the Judgments
of God upon Sabbath breakers: How many have perished in their pleasures, in
their labors on that day? Dr. Beard, Mr. Clark, Mr. Bernard, have collected
many of them. I am aware that too too many abuse a Text of Solomon to avoid any
force of this argument, All things come alike to all men. Enough has been
spoken by other holy men, to show that the Judgments of the Lord are not so to
be slighted. It Is but very few years since, that many prodigious appearances in
the Air, Water, etc. and two or three Comets one after another were slighted,
and laughed at, but the dreadful Judgments of the Plague, the War, the Fire
of London, quickly baffled those men of reason, and showed us, that God does
not ordinarily go out of the course of Nature, but to show some extraordinary
work he is about, and to warn men to prepare to meet him. Certainly Lots Wife
being turned into a Pillar of Salt, though our Savior had not fixed a Remember
to it, might have taught people, that it is a dangerous thing, contrary to a
Divine Precept, to look back. We have a Precept to Remember to keep holy the
Sabbath day; there are some that will not believe this obliges us, but will
adventure to work, to sport, and take their usual Recreations as on other
days, God in these actions strikes them lame, dead, etc. Let who will slight
these extraordinary Dispensations of God, My soul ent^ not thou into their
secrets, unto their Assemblies mine honor be not thou united. They shall all
to me sound -- That Israel may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly. It is
time for me to finish this Discourse: Will now any of you say to me, What would
you have us to do in this business, how would you have us sanctify the Sabbath
unto the Lord? I answer.

1. I would have you the day or night before the Sabbath put all that business
relating to your Familes in reference to the Sabbath, in as great a readiness
as you can. The women prepared their spices and ointment over night which they
were to use early in the morning after the Sabbath, Luke 23.56. God allows us
on the Sabbath to do things that are necessary; but we must take heed of
creating necessities needlessly. We may make things necessary: It may be
necessary I should kindle a fire on the Sabbath, and so must have fuel, but not
necessary I should go that day to buy Coals, or cut down Wood, that might have
been done the day before. There Is nothing truly necessary on that day, but what
could not have been done before, nor cannot be put off longer.

2. I would have you get up from your beds as soon that day as you use to do on
other days, if not sooner. It is a day of holy, spiritual rest, not of
sensual, carnal rest. It is a wretched profanation of that day, for people to
make that day their sleeping time above all other days, it speaks a soul not
well awakened with the Conscience of its duty on the Sabbath Day. Certainly, we
had rather need be up sooner from our beds that morning, that we may neither
come late to Worship, nor make more haste than good speed, going out without
any preparation, without any Family duties, etc.

3. For such businesses as are acts of mercy to man or beast, or necessary for
preservation of either, I would have you do them without doubting. Our Savior
has licensed both these: What is necessary for decency is as little to be
doubted of; but take heed of spending too much time in trimmings and dressings,
or being excessive in provisions of meat, etc.

4. Spend your time before you go to the Congregation which you can spare from
necessary actions, (before mentioned) in private, Reading, Meditation, Prayer,
or in instructing the Families, reading the Word to them, praying, singing
Psalms with them, etc.

5. After you have heard the Word preached, spend again your intermediate time
in like manner, privately or with your Family. Discoursing also upon the Word
which you have heard, or upon other spiritual subjects as occasion offers it
self.

6. After your hearing in the latter part of the day, do the same again: Read,
hear, pray, catechize, sing Psalms, read good Books, discourse upon spiritual
subjects; what you have read or heard.

7. You need not doubt on this day, if occasion be offered to visit the sick,
or the Prisoners, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, with such sacrifice
God is well-pleased, yea he loves this mercy better than other sacrifice.

8. You must have your times on that day to eat and drink; by it your live^ are
upheld, and your strength, and you refreshed, and made fit for your duties. But
while you are eating and drinking, remember our Lords discourses under the same
circumstances, Luke 14.1, 2, 3. when he was at the Feast in the Pharisees
house; He discourses of things lawful on the Sabbath, concerning humility,
charity to the poor, concerning the Wedding Supper of the Gospel, etc.

This it is to sanctify a Sabbath unto the Lord, to keep a day as the Lord
has chosen. I beseech you be not so vain as to think, that it is enough to
rest from sin (which is your duty every day, and cannot be all the rest of the
Sabbath.) Nor that it is enough to rest from labor, and you may spend the day
in sleep, or idleness, or sports and pastimes. None of all these (I am sure)
can be named an holy or spiritual rest: Nor that it is enough to spend part of
the day^ in religious duties; God will not halve with you that day, he requires
a whole day (at least a whole artificial day, which the Sun measures to us)
while we pretend to believe ^ Sabbath moral, let us live as if indeed we did
believe it. Whiles we contend for the Christian Sabbath, in evidence of our
(...) of Christ's being come in the flesh, h^ ^yling and resurrection, against
the Jew^ who deny Christ so come, and our B^^thren; who though acknowledging
Chr^^^ come, yet doubt whether as Lord of the S^^bath he made a change of the
day. L^ us not our selves run into a greater erro^ of keeping no Sabbath at all.

FINIS.

