IMPRIMATUR,

April. 26. 1690. C. Alston, R.P.D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

A Scholastical HISTORY OF THE Primitive and General Use OF LITURGIES IN The
Christian Church; Together with An Answer to Mr. Dav. Clarkson's late Discourse
concerning LITURGIES.

PART II. Of the Time after the Year 400; With an Answer to the Arguments
against Liturgies, and the Testimony of Protestant Divines for them.

By THO: COMBER, D. D. Precentor of YORK.

Publica est nobis and communis Oration. Cypr. de Orat. Dom. 5. page 310.
LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the
West End of S. Paul's, 1690.

THE PREFACE TO THE Second Part.
WHEN those who oppose the Use of LITURGIES had appealed to Antiquity, and
boasted it would disown them; I concluded, they were obliged to stand to the
Sentence of a Judge of their own choosing Acts xxv. 12.
; and therefore followed them to that Tribunal, before which they had brought
their Cause: And when the First Four Centuries, whose Authority is most
venerable, and their Testimony the most convincing Antiquitas quo propius
aberat ab ortu and divina progeny; hoc melius ea fortasse, quae erant vera
cernebat. Cicer. Tuscul. quaest.
, had given it on Our Side; It was the Opinion of some of my good Friends, that
I need descend no lower, and might save the labor of a Second Part: But I
considered, That though it was enough to such as were Impartial, to prove that
Liturgies began so Early; Yet others, who were prejudiced against them, would
question the Truth of that; unless I could clear the following Ages also from
all the Objections, that their Friend has raised out of them against this
great Truth: He has fixed the Original of Prescribed Forms a Century or two
Lower, and made a show of proving, That the Use of these Forms was left
arbitrary, even till the beginning of the Ninth Century: And scattered diverse
Arguments in several places of his Book, collected out of some General
Observations, which could not be brought under any one of the Ancienter Fathers
Names; nor Answered in the First Part, because they depended on Miscellaneous
Quotations, chiefly relating to the Time after the Fifth Century began.
Wherefore I was compelled to follow him down through all these Later Ages; and
show, That Liturgies not only continued to be imposed and used then; but were
generally believed to have come down to them by Tradition from the most Eminent
Bishops of the Primitive and Apostolical Ages; and that his Objections rather
confirm, than weaken this Assertion. I was obliged also to Examine every thing
that looked like an Argument, that I might neither give the obstinate Occasion,
to call those Reasonings Invincible, which scarce deserved a serious Answer
Tacere ultra non oportet, ne jam non verecundiae, sed diffidentiae esse
incipiat. Cypr. ad Demetr.
; nor leave any Scruples in the Minds of such as are willing to be undeceived:
And for their sakes, as well as to make this History more complete, I have
added the Testimonies of the most Eminent Reformed Divines, both concerning the
Antiquity and Usefulness of Liturgies in general, and concerning the Excellency
of Our Churches Forms of Prayer. By all which it will appear, That such as
scruple to Hear or Read our Common Prayer, are so very singular in that Notion,
that they are not only contrary to Us, and to all Antiquity; but also to the
Best and most Regular of the Protestant Foreign Churches. It Is true, when Men
have an Interest to serve, they will have no Inclination to yield to the
clearest Demonstration, nor to the plainest Matter of Fact: And therefore
perhaps, Some of this Party may hope to run down all that is brought out of the
Ages after the Year 400, with the old Cry of POPERY and SUPERSTITION. But I
would anticipate so weak an Objection, by observing, That their Friend led me
into these Ages, and they must not blame me for following him. Again, There is
nothing deserves these hard Names in this later Period; but only that which was
then first brought into the Church, and was not known nor used in purer Times:
Now the First Part sufficiently proves, That Liturgies were none of the
Inventions of these Ages; by showing they were used and approved in the former
Centuries, before any of those Corruptions came in. I grant, that those Copies
of Ancient Liturgies which come to our hands, have many passages in them, which
relish of the Superstition of later Ages: But then we are also sure by those
Passages, which the Fathers cite out of them before they were corrupted, that
they were pure at first, and these Exceptionable places have been tacked to
them, long after they were first composed; Which the Compilers and Reformers of
our Liturgy well understood, and therefore, though they imitated them, in all
that was agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of the First Four Centuries,
they cut off and rejected all the rest, and so have reduced the Primitive way
of Praying, to its Original purity, and ancient soundness. They knew the
Praying by Forms was very Ancient, the Corruption of those Forms of later date:
So that when they and other Reformed Churches have purged out all the
Superstitious Innovations, and restored the Primitive Method of Serving God by
prescribed Forms, agreeably to the Scriptures, and the Practice and Opinions of
the best Ages; I would hope, that all who are prepared to submit to Truth, (by
which it is every Man's interest to be conquered Qui veritati cedit utiliter
vincitur. Petr. Damian. lib. 1. ep. 20.
) will renounce their groundless Prejudices, against this useful and Ancient
Method of Praying. And no longer dote upon the new Extempore and Arbitrary way,
which was never used in public, (till of late) since the Ages of Inspiration,
whose practice can be no Rule to us, who have not those extraordinary Gifts:
And which is inconsistent with the Safety, the Honor and the Quiet of all
Established Churches. To conclude, The best Christians and the most regular
Churches in all Ages, have used and approved Forms of Prayer, and found great
comfort in them, and much benefit by them. And if our Dissenters would be
content to serve God so also, they would then be capable of being Members of
our Established Church, and we should no longer be disturbed, weakened and
endangered by this unhappy Separation. But so long as they retain this
Fundamental Error, and profess their aversation to our whole way of Worship,
All projects of Union, and hopes of Accommodation are vain. And for that reason,
I have so fully considered this Question, and set all that relates to it in one
Orderly View; because it is Evident, that the Right Determination thereof, must
be the first step to that Peace, which is the Interest, and would be the Safety
of this divided Nation; the Welfare whereof all good Men unfeignedly desire.

ERRATA.
Page 9. lin. 5. read Scribi fas: p. 11. l. 1. r. Roman Bishop. p. 28. l. 19.
r. generally. p. 31. marg. l. 2. r. Ecclesia. p. 37. l. 25. r. Table Book. p.
41. marg. l. 4. r. Eccles. p. 46. l. 1. r. Babylas. p. 54. l. 27. (dele) all.
p. 68. marg. l. 21. r. Barnes. p. 136. l. 27. r. have been. p. 141. l. 6. r.
faithful deceased. p. 166. l. 7. (dele) Jew r. few Bishops. ibid. l. 10. r.
reckons. ibid. l. 11. r. contained. p. 176. l. 10. r. to the French. p. 193. l.
2. r. ancient.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of LITVRGIES in the Fifth Century.
AFTER so full and clear Evidence for LITURGIES in the former Ages, wherein the
Church was so Pure and the Fathers so very Eminent, the main Point, as to their
Antiquity is gained; and if my Adversary could prove there were no prescribed
Forms in this Century, it would only follow that the Primitive way was changed
for a new sort of Liberty; and then Extempore Praying, or such a freedom as he
pleads for, would be an Innovation, which crept into the Church in an Age of
which he gives the worst Character imaginable (...) of Li^^ page 1^^.
. But it is as certain, that the use of Liturgies continued in this Century, as
it is, that they had their Original in the Foregoing Ages; and therefore though
all his odious Representations of the corrupt state of the Church in this Time
were true, yet that could not blemish their continuing to use those holy Forms
which they received from their Forefathers; if they added any of the
Corruptions of the Age to them, they are blameworthy for that, and we do not
defend them therein; but the Method it self of Praying by prescribed Forms
(about which we dispute) is ancient, and therefore not liable to any Exceptions
from those Additions, all which also are now put out of our Churches Forms, and
so we are not to excuse or answer for them. Now that this Century followed the
former, in the use of Liturgick Forms, is plain from the Centuriators, who (as
was showed) not only own, That Forms of Prayer were prescribed in the Third and
Fourth Ages; but declare concerning this Fifth Century, that The Bishops
ordained holy Prayers for all things necessary Magdeb. Cent. ^ cap 7. page 742.
: And, that there was frequent use of Litanies and Supplications in this time
Ibid. cap. 6. page 651.
. And what these Litanies were, Du Plessis (one often cited by my Adversary)
does inform us, The form and manner (says he) of Litanies was this, They
contrived and drew into certain Articles the public Necessities and Calamities
that did press or threaten them, unto every one whereof as it was uttered by
the Priest or Bishop which went before them, the People answered, (...). Lord
have mercy on us, or, Lord hear us Mornay of the Mass, lib. 1. chap. 7. page
54, and 55.
* So that they had Forms of Prayers and Litanies, not invented by private
Ministers, but ordered by the Bishops, even as we have proved they had also in
former Ages: But because my Adversary labors hard to find out some passages in
the Writers of this Century, which give countenance to his arbitrary and
unprescribed way; I will consider all that he produces in the Order of Time,
and (as I go on) take notice of such other Testimonies as are omitted by him,
and do assure us of the continuance of Liturgies in this Century also.

Innocent. l. Ep. Romans An. Dom. 402.
. I. Pope Innocent the First begins this Age, in whom we cannot expect much
Evidence in our Question, because he has nothing extant but only some few
Epistles, which treat of different Subjects. Yet first he argues against the
Pelagian Doctrine, of our not needing the assistance of Gods Grace, from that
old Roman Form, taken out of the Psalms, which still is the beginning of their
Mass, Deus in adjutorium, etc. The Priest saying, O God make speed to save us,
O Lord make haste to help us. Now says he) Pelagius and Celestius would set
aside this whole Response out of the Psalms, and abdicating this Doctrine, hope
to persuade some, that we neither want, nor ought to seek the help of God;
whereas all the Saints bear witness, that they can do nothing without it --
seposita omni responsi^re Psalmorum aliquid abdicata doctrina, suasuros se
aliquibus esse confidunt nos Adjutorium Dei nec debere quaerere nec egere, etc.
Innoc. ep. 24. B n. Tom. 1. par. l page 622.
. Where we see he argues from this Form, used in the Liturgy by all the Saints
or holy Men, against the false Doctrine of these Heretics; which shows it was a
known and usual Response in that Age. The same Author, though he was shie in
writing Mysteries in a Letter, yet plainly enough describes The Prayer for all
Estates of Men, in which the Names of the Offerers were recited, and God was
desired to accept their Alms and Oblations, as also those Prefaces, of which we
spoke before Prius ergo oblationes sunt commendandae, ac tunc eorum nomina
quorum sunt oblationes, edicenda, ut inter sacra mysteria nominentur, non inter
alia quae ante praemittimus. Id. Ep. 1. cap. 2. ibid. page 609.
. And, which is most considerable in the Preface of the same Epistle to
Decentius Bishop of Eugubium, Innocent declares Si instituta Ecclesiastica, ut
sunt a beatis Apostolis tradita, integra vellent servare Domini sacerdotes,
nulla diversitas, nulla varietas, in ipsis ordinibus and consecrationibus
haberetur. Sed dum unusquisque non quod traditum est, sed quod sibi visum
fuerit, hoc estimat esse tenendum, inde diversa, in diversis locis vel
Ecclesiis teneri aut celebrari videntur. Id. ibid.
, That if those Ecclesiastical Institutions which the Apostles delivered had
been kept entire by the Bishops, we should not have had any diversity or
variety, in the order of Worship or Consecration. But while every one thinks he
must hold, not that which was delivered; but which best pleases him, thence we
see diverse ways of celebration are used in diverse Churches. Now, from hence we
note, First, That this Pope believed there was one way of Worship and
Consecration (that is, one Form of Prayer and administering the Sacrament)
settled by the Apostles at first, and delivered to all the Churches they
planted. Secondly, That the variety which then appeared (not in the same
Church, but) in diverse Churches, was an Innovation proceeding from several
Bishops (called here S^cerdotes) who forsook that one Original Rule, and
followed their own Devices. Thirdly, That this variety was not a liberty taken
by private Ministers in the same Church, but by diverse Bishops in their several
Diocesses. Fourthly, That this diversity (as Innocent there adds) was a scandal
to the People, who not knowing that human Presumption had corrupted the ancient
Traditions, fancied either there was no good agreement among the Churches, or
that the Apostles and Apostolical Men set up this variety. Fifthly, For remedy
hereof he advises all those Churches, which had their Original from Rome, to
follow those Customs which S. Peter had delivered to that Church, and were kept
there ever since. Which place, so clear for the Antiquity and Necessity of
Uniformity, our Adversary cites over and over, and spends many Pages, to show
that this very Epistle proves there were no Forms prescribed at Rome in those
days Disc. of Liturgies. p. 40, 41. and page 78, 79, 80, 81, 82.
: For (says he) when the Bishop of Eugubium enquired of diverse particulars
concerning the Church Service, he does not refer him to any written Orders, but
to what he had seen practiced at Rome; and he will not write down the Words
used in the Office of Chrism, calling the Words of Consecration, Those things
which he might not publish: Adding, That it was matter of enquiry then, whether
the Kiss of Peace should be given before or after the Consecration? and whether
the Names of the Offerers should be recited before or after the Prayer over the
Oblation? Concluding from these passages, That there could be then no settled
Order or Form at Rome; and that which Innocent would have fixed was no more
than a Rubric or Direction, and this for Imitation, not for strict Conformity;
so that in Innocents Time, every one in Italy Consecrated as he thought fit.
This is the sum of his Inference.

In Answer to which I must observe, First, That those particulars which the
Bishop of Eugubium enquired about, and for which Innocent refers him to what he
had seen used at Rome, were Rites and Ceremonies, as appears by the several
Matters treated of in this Epistle, viz. Cap. 1. Of the Kiss of Peace. Cap. 2.
Of reciting the Offerers Names. Cap. 3. Of the Anointing the Baptized. Cap. 4.
Of the Saturday Fast. Cap. 5. Of the Leavened Bread. Cap. 6, 7. Whether a
Priest might lay Hands on the Possessed, and the Penitents. Cap. 8. Whether he
might not Anoint the Sick. Now these things being all external Rites, which he
might see and hear at Rome, and so commit to his Memory the Method used there,
it was not necessary to refer him to the Roman Liturgy; nor does it follow,
there was no such Liturgy for the Prayers themselves, because when the Pope was
asked about the Rites and Customs of Rome, he does not (as my Adversary says)
refer him thither for satisfaction in these Matters. Yet, Secondly, this very
Epistle makes it plain, they had certain Forms at Rome for their several
Offices; for when he speaks of Anointing the Baptized, he says, Verba vero
dicere non possum, ne magis prodere videar quam ad consultationem respondere,
Ibid. Cap. 3. I cannot tell you the words, lest I betray the Church under
pretense of answering your Question. And so about the Forms used in the
Communion-Office, he thus expresses himself. Post omnia quae aperire non
debeo, etc. The Kiss of Peace comes after those things which I must not
publish: And a little after, Quae scribi sui non erat -- Those things which it
is not lawful for me to write down, Ib. Cap. 8. All which places necessarily
suppose, they had certain and fixed Words, which were capable of being written
down; but since in that Age diverse (as he notes out of Chamier, page 41. Marg.)
were not initiated, some being then Pagans, and others as yet but Catechumens;
Innocent would not set down the Forms in a Letter, which might be intercepted
or fall into the hands of such as ought not to know these Sacred Mysteries. But
now, if at Rome every Priest had prayed Extempore, and not only differed from
others, but daily varied from himself; then Innocent could not have discoursed
at this rate, but must have said, As for the Words I cannot write them down,
(not because it is unlawful, but) because it is impossible; for you know every
Priest varies them daily as he pleases. Wherefore this Notion of keeping the
Words secret (which was strictly observed in that Age) proves they were stated
Forms, capable of being writ down, and learned by Unbelievers, if they had been
published to them. And nothing can be weaker (to say no worse) than to argue,
as he does, Innocent would not write the Forms in a Letter which might
miscarry; therefore they were not written down in Books closely kept by the
Bishops and Priests at Rome. Thirdly, For his Objection, That it was matter of
Enquiry then, what place in the Eucharistical Office should be assigned to the
Kiss of Peace, and to the recital of the Offerers Names Disc. of ^it. page 78.
; which he thinks could not be, if there had been settled Forms at Rome; It is
very frivolous, For the Bishop of Eugubium does enquire of these Matters,
because he knew there was a certain Order at Rome; and though he had seen it
(and perhaps knew it very well) yet his Neighboring Bishops having different
ways, as to the order of these, He desires to have it under the Popes hand,
what was the Custom at Rome, hoping by this to bring his Neighboring Bishops
to an Uniformity in these Matters. For Eugubium was a small Bishopric under the
immediate Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishops, as he was a Metropolitan; (being
but 70 Miles distant from Rome it self) and he having no power over his Equals,
gets the Popes Letter, under whose Jurisdiction all these Neighbor Bishops of
his were, thereby to unite them all, by conforming to their Mother Church,
which (as Innocentius affirms) had one certain Form in these Offices received
from S. Peter. Fourthly, Since this Bishop was so desirous to settle Uniformity
even in these Ceremonies of far less concernment, we may reasonably believe
there was no difference in the Forms themselves, that is, in the Prayers used
in all Divine Offices by these Bishops who lived so near to Rome; because, if
they had varied in the substantial parts of the Office, Decentius must have
complained principally of that Variety, and Innocents chief labor would have
been to have agreed and settled that Matter, it being ridiculous for them to be
so earnest for Uniformity in Order and Ceremonies, if these several Diocesses,
had differed in the main, and had infinite variety in the Offices themselves:
so that both Innocent and Decentius being silent as to any such variety, gives
us Reason to believe, they had all the same FORMS. Fifthly, What he says of
Innocents design being only to settle a Rubric, is easily answered. For the
difference was only in Rubrics which my Adversary at last confesses, when he
says, this Epistle is most concerned about Ri^es and Order Disc. of Lit. page
83.
; he might have said (as appears by the several Chapters before,) only
concerned about Rites and Order, the Preface alone excepted; For there is not
one Answer nor Question, that supposes any difference in the Words or Forms of
these Offices; therefore it was enough for Innocent, to settle that wherein the
only difference lay, which was variety of Rites, not of Prayers. Sixthly, He
adds that Innocent settled this Rubric rather for Imitation than strict
conformity Disc. of Lit. page 80.
. I Answer, This is not settling any thing at all, for where every Priest is
Arbitrary, nothing is fixed. But Innocent, when he has declared the custom of
Rome, expressly requires of this Bishop; First to take care that his own Diocese
and Ministering Clergy, were well instructed in it; and then that he should give
a Form to other Bishops, which they ought to imitate or follow -- ut tuam
Ecclesiam, and Clericos nostros, qui sub tuo Pontificio divinis famulantur
officiis, been instituas, and aliis formam tribuas quam debeant imitari. Innoc.
Ep. 1. verse. fin.
. Where we see he requires he should carefully instruct his own Clergy, in
order to their strict conformity no doubt; for otherwise, to what end did he
teach them these Rules? And then he does expect he should give this Form to
others, that is, to his neighbor Bishops, and affirms it is their Duty to
observe it; For since he is speaking of Acts and Ceremonies, there is no way to
imitate them, but by doing them; there is no Medium between strict Conformity,
and total Nonconformity in these cases; so that his distinction between
Imitation and strict Conformity, is nothing but Words without Sense. I conclude
this passage, with my Adversaries censure of Pope Innocent out of Erasmus Disc.
of Lit. p. 81. and 82.
, as if he were fierce in his Nature and no good Orator. And shall note, that
Erasmus does not censure him, for pressing an Uniformity, nor does he give any
ill Character of him for this Epistle, but for others, which he Writ in the
Pelagian Controversy Vid. Aug. ep. 91. and ep. 96. cum notis Erasm. and Coci
censura. p. 111.
. And what Erasmus says of two other Epistles, if it be never so true, cannot
prove that in this Epistle (wherein he Writes of the Customs of his own Church)
he is not a good Evidence for matter of Fact; and if that be granted, then we
have here this Popes Testimony, that the Metropolis of Rome had certain Forms
of Words, for their several Offices, and one way and Method, both in their
Service and Rites; and that all Churches under her immediate Jurisdiction,
ought to be uniform even in their Ceremonies by conforming to their Mother
Church; which is sufficient to show how falsely my Adversary affirms, that in
Italy in Innoconts time, every one Consecrated as he though fit. For the
Question was not about all Italy, but only about Eugubium, and the neighboring
Diocesses; not about private Ministers, but Bishops; not about the Words or
Forms of Consecrating, etc. but about Rites and Ceremonies in the Eucharist and
other Offices; yet even in these he labors to settle an Uniformity; and gives
sufficient indication, not only that they ought to have, but then had, one
prescribed Liturgy for the Offices themselves, differing only in some Rubrics.

2. Prudentius the Famous Christian Poet, Aurelius Prudentius, Ann. Dom. 405.
is but once cited by my Adversary; who speaks of his Cathemerinon, that is,
Hymns or Forms of Praise and Prayer, suited to the several Hours of the Day and
Night, wherein the Christians then Solemnly worshipped God; and he might have
noted of many of them, what he says of one, That they were afterward made use
of as Church Hymns Disc. of Lit. marg. p. 161.
: Now that which I shall observe from hence is this, That these Hymns consist
of Petitions and Prayers, as well as Praises; and are drawn up in the Plural
Number, suitable to their intended use for a public Assembly; to which soon
after they were applied. But if Prudentius had been of my Adversaries mind, and
thought Forms prescribed were unlawful, it had been Ridiculous in him to draw
up, and sinful for the Christians in public, to use these Written Forms of
Praise and Prayer. Again, if the Gift of Extempore making Prayers and Praises,
for the several Hours of Devotion had then remained in the Church, it had been
not only lost labor, but a very bold thing for Prudentius to compose Forms;
and if that Age (as my Adversary pretends) were utter strangers to prescribed
Forms; doubtless Prudentius had not answered his name, rashly to undertake so
novel and daring a thing, without making any Apology. We conclude therefore,
that Forms even in these very Hours of Prayer, were customary and used in his
time. I could also here particularly show, that this Divine Poet frequently
alludes to diverse passages in the greater Offices and Liturgies then in use,
viz. The Amen, Hallelujah, the Trisagion, which he calls the Hymn, Sung by
Cherubins and Seraphins, etc. But since Poetical strains are not so solid
proofs in our Case, I will only mention one place Si quid trecenti bis novenis
additis

Possint (figura noverimus mystica)

Mox ipse Christus qui sacerdos verus est,

Parente natus alto and ineffabili

Cibum beatis offerens Victoribus, Parvam pudici cordis intrabit casam.

Prud. praef. ad Psycomad. page 228.


where (in a Mysterious way) he intimates the repeating of the Nicene Creed,
immediately before the Celebration of the Eucharist, comparing the 318 Fathers,
who composed this Creed, to Abraham's 318 Servants, with whom he met
Melchisedec; and the Sacramental Elements, to the Bread and Wine, which Abraham
then received from that High Priest. And Ant. Nebrissensis has showed that
this passage is not any otherwise intelligible, than by thus expounding it.
Not. in Prudent. page 118. Which implies they used then (as we do now,) to
repeat the Nicene Creed, in the Communion Office.

3. My Antagonist had diligently Read Isidore of Pelusium, Isidor. Peleusiota.
Ann. Dom. 412.
as appears by his citing him for golden Sentences Disc. of Lit. p. 2. and
Title. P.
, and also by his weeding this Author, for all the hard things he says of some
bad Bishops in that time Ibid. p. 182, 185. etc. ad page 195.
, and Maliciously applying it, as the Character of the whole Order in this Age,
which I shall confute hereafter; and now only observe, that since he disparages
Liturgies, by their beginning (as he pretends) in so bad and corrupt a Time, as
he makes this to be, it must follow that he believes Liturgies are as old, as
Isidore's Time, or else his Allegations must be not only spiteful, but
impertinent. And for his baffled Argument from Isidore's concealing the Words
of the Mysteries, and appealing to the Faithful, as being acquainted with them
(...). Isid. lib. 4. ep. 162. and lib. eod. ep. 40. cited under Synesius name
Disc. of L. p. 34.
; This plainly proves, they did not Officiate then Extempore, but in plain
Words, constantly used, and well known to the Faithful, who daily heard them
repeated. Again he cites this Father, to prove that those who were Baptized
were taught the Words of the Lords Prayer Isid. lib 4. ep. 24. Disc. of Lit.
page 2.
; Which shows that Forms, were not held unlawful in that Age. But if my
Adversary had not been obliged to keep back all that makes for Liturgies, it is
not easy to be imagined, why he should never mention that Famous Epistle, which
Isidore Writ on purpose to expound that old piece of Liturgy, Pronounced by the
Bishop in the public Forms; (as we saw in the Constitutions, S. Chrysostom, and
others) that is, Peace be with you, unto which (as Isidore tells us) the people
answered, and with thy Spirit (...). Isid. lib. 1. ep. 122.
. This Form so well explained by this Father, gives us reason to believe, that
the rest of those Liturgies wherein this known Form is found, were used in his
time; and that when he advises a Clergyman not to abuse the Holy Liturgy
(...). Id. lib. 1. ep. 313.
, he means, that he ought not to profane, and desecrate the sacred Forms, by a
most unholy Life and Conversation; especially since he was not only a Scholar
of S. Chrysostoms, who made a Liturgy, but also tells us Id. lib. 1. ep 90.
, that the Women in his time Sung their part of the Church Service; and when
they were deservedly Excommunicate, they were not all wed this great
Privilege; which sufficiently shows there were Forms prescribed in his days,
wherein all the People had their share.

. 4. His Contemporary was the Learned Synesius, Synesius, An. Dom. 412.
who lived also in the same Country; he was bred among the Gentile
Philosophers, and not Converted till he was come to be of a good Age: So that
he had learned, before he became a Christian, what silence and secrecy was due
to Mysteries, and therefore he furnishes my Adversary with diverse Passages
concerning the Heathens care to conceal them Disc. of Lit. page 34.
; but since he has owned the Pagans writ their Mysteries down, He must not
conclude, that the Christians had no written Prayers in this Age, wherein they
called them Mysteries; for though they were concealed from the Infidels and
Uninitiated, they were daily used among the Faithful: And that they were Forms
prescribed has been fully proved. However, though we cannot expect that
Synesius should write down the Sacred Words in his Books or Epistles, which
might fall into common or profane Hands; yet there are intimations in him, that
there were Forms of Prayer in his time, and long before: For when he speaks of
the Worship of God, he says, The Sacred Prayers of our Forefathers, in the
holy Mysteries, do cry unto that God who is above all; not so much setting
forth his Power, as reverencing his Providence (...) -- etc. Synes. de Regno,
page 9.
. Now these Sacred Prayers could not be Extempore, since they were delivered
down to them by their Forefathers, therefore they must be ancient Forms:
Extempore Devotions are properly our own Prayers; but the Prayers of our
Fathers, are Forms received from the Ages before us. Besides, we may note, that
he describes the Service in which these Prayers were used by this Phrase
((...)) and elsewhere he styles it, The hidden Mysteries (...), Synes. Ep. 57.
page 194.
. And Nicephorus his Scholiast explains ((...)) to be, such things as are
mystically delivered both as to the words and actions (...) N^ceph. Scholia id
Synes. p. 401.
; That is, in a Form of Words and an order of Ceremonies, which are the two
essential parts of a Liturgy: Which Name also we have in Synesius, where he is
reciting the Injuries done to him by Andronicus; for he says, The Devil
endeavored by this Man's means, to make him fly from the Liturgy of the Altar
(...) Ep. 67. p. 193.
; that is, (as he explains himself afterward) to make him omit the celebration
of the Sacrament, and give over reciting the public Offices; which were then
performed by a Liturgy in all regular Churches. And though he be very nice of
writing down any of the Forms in his common Writings, yet he gives us either
the Substance or the Words of one of his Prayers, which he used not only in
private, but in the public Offices; viz. That Justice might overcome Injustice,
and that the City might he purged from all Wickedness (...). Id. Ep. 121. p.
258.
: Which Passage probably was a part of the Liturgy then used in his Country,
there being something very like it in other ancient Liturgies, which were used
elsewhere in that Age. However, our Adversary (who cites Synesius so often, and
to no purpose, about Mysteries) could not, or would not see any of these
places, which show there were ancient and prescribed Forms in his days.

Celestinus Ep. Romans A.D. 423.
. 5. Pope Celestine (as is affirmed by many Authors) ordered the Psalms to be
sung in the Communion Office by the whole Congregation in the way of Antiphone
Vita Celest. ap. Bin. Tom. 1. par. 1. page 732. Bena. rerum Liturg. lib. 2. cap.
3. p 502.
: That is, as Isidore expounds it, with reciprocal Voices, each side of the
Choir, alternately answering the other Is^^^r. Orig. lib. 6. cap. 19.
. And Platina adds, That he put some particulars into the Offices then in use
Platin vita Celest. page 61.
. Which shows, That the Roman Church was accustomed to Forms in his days. Yet
my contentious Adversary twice produces this Popes Testimony to show, that in
his Time at Rome there was no more than an Order and Uniformity as to the
persons and things prayed for; but that they did not pray for them in the same
Words Disc. of Lit. page 6. and p 29.
; and he cites the same place again to prove, that Forms cannot be justified
from that Passage Ibid. p. 138.
. But to manifest his Mistake, I will first transcribe and then explain these
Words of Celestine, from whence he makes this false Conclusion: The Words are
these, Let us look upon the Mysteries of the Priests Prayers, which being
delivered by the Apostles, are uniformly celebrated in all the World, and in
every Orthodox Church: That so the Rule for Praying may fix the Rule of
Believing. For when the Bishops of the Faithful perform their enjoined Embassy,
they plead with the Divine Mercy for all Mankind, the whole Church Praying with
them: They entreat and pray, That Faith may be granted to Unbelievers; that
Idolaters may be delivered from their impious Errors; that the light of Truth
may appear to the Jews, by the removing of the Veil from their Hearts; that
Heretics may repent and receive the Catholic Faith; that Schismatics may be
revived by the Spirit of Charity; that the Lapsed may obtain the Remedy of
Repentance; and lastly, that the Catechumens being brought to the Sacrament of
Regeneration, may have the Gate of the Divine Mercy opened unto them
Obsecrationum quoque Sacerdotalium sacramenta respiciamus, quae ab Apostolis
tradita, in toto mundo, atque in omni Ecclesia Catholica uniformiter
celebrantur, etc. Celest. Ep. pro Presp. and Hilar. inter opera Prosper. p. 894.
. This is that famous Passage which our Adversary labors to misinterpret, but
in vain, since nothing can more clearly prove the use of a prescribed Form than
these Words: For Celestine is here arguing against Heretics, and he confutes
them by the Forms then used in the Church, producing the very Words, and
affirming that the Apostles had delivered these Prayers to them at first, and
that there was an Uniformity in these Petitions between all the National
Churches in the World, that is, all their Litanies had these Requests,
differing only in the Order and some few Phrases; but the Roman Form was this,
which he here sets down, bids the Heretics look upon it, and tells them this
was the Rule for Prayer; and therefore they ought to believe suitably to these
Prayers, which might be a Rule for their Faith, as well as for their Devotion.
Now if these Prayers only agreed in the persons and things to be prayed for,
but were daily varied as every Minister pleased; might not the Heretics have
asked him, Where they could see Extempore and invisible Prayers? or how he
could make those Prayers fix a Rule for their Faith, which were as various and
uncertain as their Ministers Fancies? They might except justly against any
Argument taken from Prayers which were varied every day, and differed so
exceedingly in every ^everal Church: But since they could be looked on,
transcribed and urged as an Argument, and were so ancient in this Age, that
even Heretics durst not ^xcept against the Authority of them, we are sure they
must be prescribed ^orms made long before this time. I will not deny, but that
both Innocent and Celestine might stretch their Tradi^ion something too far,
when they ^scribed the Original of these Forms to ^he Apostles themselves; but
even that Assertion (especially here in a dispute with Heretics) shows, they
were so ancient then, that there was no Memorial of the first Composer left,
and ^t is usual among the Fathers to call that Apostolical, which was generally
observed, and had so early a beginning that its first Author was not known. As
for my Adversaries pretense, That this Testimony only affirms an Uniformity, as
to the order, the persons and things to be prayed for; I must observe that S.
Augustine uses this very Argument against the same Heretics, and when he
comes to cite the Words of the Prayer, he repeats these very Words, without
altering any thing either in the Phrase or Order. We have cited the place in
the First part, and if there be any verbal difference in the Translation from
what is here set down out of Celestine, I assure the Reader, there is none in
the Latin, as will appear by comparing both places together Celestin. Ep. apud
Prosp. Et Aug. de Eccles. dogmat. cap. 30. See this History Part. l. Cent. 4..
21. page 231.
. Now when Celestine at Rome, some years after, quotes the same Form of Prayer
verbatim, which S. Augustine in Africa had cited before, this shows that the
Words, as well as the Matter and Order were agreed on; and it follows, that
both the Roman and African Church had a certain prescribed Form of Litany at
this time, and that the same Form was used in both Churches, and was so Ancient
and of so good Authority then, as to be quoted for Evidence in a dispute with
Heretics: And who can imagine there was no more but such an Uniformity as he
speaks of; that is, that every Priest in every several Church in Rome, used
several Phrases every day (which is more properly, a Multiformity) since we see
the same Form of Words quoted for Evidence by two great Bishops, the one in
Italy, the other in Africa, and this also at two different times? Or how can
such a liberty and variety in Praying as he dreams of, be called legem
supplicandi, a Rule of Praying? How can such an uncertain thing, which daily
appears in a new and different shape, fix the legem credendi, the Rule of
Believing? We conclude therefore, that the Words as well as the Method of this
Litany, was fixed at Rome long before the Time of this Pope.

. 6. Which will appear more plainly, Prosper. Aquitan. An. D. 430
if we consult Prosper, in whose behalf the Pope writ this Epistle: For he
being to Expound that place of S. Paul, 1 Timothy II. 1. I exhort therefore, that
Prayers, Supplications, etc. refers to the same Litany; only supposing that the
Form was well known, he does not quote the Words in their order, but describes
them so plainly, that any one may discern it is the same Form which he, S.
Augustine and Pope Celestine do all appeal to: His Words are these, Which Law
(or Rule) of Prayer, the Devotion of all Priests and Faithful People so
unanimously observe, that there is no part of the World, wherein the Christians
do not celebrate such Prayers: For the Church every where prays to God, not
only for the Saints and those already Regenerated in Christ, but for all the
Infidels and Enemies of his Cross: For all Idolaters, and all that persecute
Christ in his Members; for the Jews, to whose blindness the Gospel gives no
light; for Heretics and Schismatics, who are estranged from the Unity of
Faith and Charity: And what does it ask for these, but that leaving their
Errors they may be converted to God and receive the Faith, embrace Charity, and
that being freed from the darkness of Ignorance, they may come to the
acknowledgment of the Truth Prosper. de Vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 12. page 798.
? We see he is discoursing gnerally of this Litany, and breaks the Sentences,
first running over the persons prayed for, and then the things asked for them;
yet even in this lax way of discourse, it is easy to discern that he refers to
Celestine's Form, and with him affirms, That this Prayer was a Rule unanimously
observed by all Priests and People; whereas, if every Priest had daily varied
the Words in every Assembly of the People, there could be neither Certainty in
the Rule, nor Uniformity in the observing it. I may add, that Prosper did so
highly reverence S. Augustine, that we cannot doubt but he imitated him, in the
Approbation and use of public Forms; and he explains one of those public Forms,
viz. the Preface of Sursum Corda, in his Sentences taken out of S. Augustine's
Works Prosp. sent. ex Augustine. sent. 153. page 434.
. And in another place he mentions and commends that ancient Custom prescribed
in the old Liturgies, for the People to say AMEN, when they received the holy
Eucharist Prosp. de promiss. and praed. par. 1. cap. 6. page 7.
: So that my Adversary had no reason to cite him as an Evidence, That there was
no more but a mere Order of things in his time Disc. of Lit. page 6.
, since it is impossible that such an Order could have been uniformly and
unanimously observed by all: For this liberty of varying Expressions would soon
have blundered that Order, and made strange differences in the subject Matter,
as well as the Method of these Prayers.

Johan. Cassianus eod. Anno, viz. 430.
. 7. The Contemporary and Antagonist of Prosper, was John Cassian who had been
Educated under S. Chrysostom (the Author of a Liturgy) and was come to live in
one of the Gallican Monasteries, where he recommended diverse of the Eastern
Opinions and Practices. His Writings indeed are about the private Devotions of
Monks in their Cells and Oratories, and therefore he has no occasion to
describe the Forms then used in Cathedral or other Churches, supplied by the
Secular Clergy; yet he plainly implies, that the public Worship was performed
by prescribed Forms, and expressly affirms that the Monks used such in their
Oratories: Hence he calls Our Father, The Form of the Lords Prayer Jo. Cassian.
collat. 9. cap. 18.
, and that Model and Form which was made by the Judge whom we are to entreat
Ibid. cap. 24.
. He also from those words, Our daily Bread; notes, That we ought to use this
Prayer every day Ibid. cap. 21.
; yea, he assures us, that the Words of it were daily sung in the Church by all
the People, at which time some Persons who were not in Charity, wickedly left
out that part of it, As we forgive them that trespass against us Nonnulli cum
in Ecclest h^c Oration ab universa plebo concinitur, hunc locum tacui
praetermittunt. Ibid. cap. 22.
. He mentions also that Litany for the Catechumens, which was wont to be said
by a Deacon, the Form of which we have set down before, out of his Master S.
Chrysostom Id de Spirit. Cenod. lib. XI. cap. 15.
: He says, That the People sung the Gloria Patri aloud in France after the
Psalms, and in the East after the Antiphon Id. lib. 2. de Canon. noc. modo,
cap. 9.
; and describes one of his Monks in a Journey, going into a Country Church, and
celebrating the Evening-Office with the accustomed Psalms Id. Collat. 8. cap.
16.
. As for the Monks Devotions in their Monasteries, it is very plain from him
that they had prescribed Forms for every hour of the Day and Night in which
they met to pray; which Forms Cassian calls, The Offices of the Canonical
Prayer Id. de Candiurn. Oration. lib. 2. cap. 12.
; and, The Canonical Mass Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 3.
: Which word [Missa] does not signify in him (as it does now at Rome) The
Communion-Office; but any prescribed Service, consisting of a certain number of
Psalms with Prayers intermixed, after the recital of which they were dismissed.
Thus he relates how the Egyptian Monks (by ancient Tradition) repeated at their
Hours of Prayer, Twelve Psalms, distinguished by a Collect placed and used
between each Psalm Id. de Candiurn. Orat. lib. 2. cap. 5.
: And for the Psalms, they sung them by way of Antiphon, putting a melodious
Tune to them Id. ib. cap. 2.
, like our Cathedral-way. In France they only sang three Psalms at the
Morning-hour for Prayer Id. ib. lib. 3. cap. 4.
, and answered Hallelujah at no other Psalms, but those which began with
Hallelujah Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 11.
: But so little did they affect Variety, that they sung the same Psalms at the
same Hours of Prayer, viz. O God, thou art my God early will I seek thee; with
some others Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 3.
. And there were not only certain Psalms appointed for the several Hours in all
Churches Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6.
, But the Forms of Prayer (both for Morning and Night) were the very same Sed
eodem ordine missam quo prius in nocturnis conventibus celebratam. Id. ibid.
, excepting only some which were appropriate to the Season. But neither in
them, nor any other of these Monastic Prayers, did these holy Monks pretend to
exercise any Gift of Prayer, to show how long they could hold out in one
long-winded Address to God: No (he says) They utterly disliked such long
Prayers, and thought the short Prayers (which they frequently intermixed with
their Psalms) were far more profitable Utilius censent breves quidem Orationes,
and creberrimas fieri. Id. ibid. lib. 2. cap. 10.
: Which were not only like the short Collects in our Liturgy, but in Cassian's
Time bore that Name, because in them the Minister collected that which was sit
for the Congregation to desire, into one of these brief Forms, which they all
said together with him, and none were allowed then to be putting up any private
Prayers Id ib. lib. 2. cap. 8.
. Finally, The ancient Fathers (whom he so much admires) were such lovers of
holy Forms, that when they directed a Monk how to pray, always they ordered him
to use this Form, O God, make speed to save us; O Lord, make haste to help us
Id. Collat. 10 cap. 10. p. 848.
; which was then, and is still the Preface to the Western Office for public
Assemblies. It would be too tedious to remark upon all these Instances; which
are so plain Proofs of the use of Forms of Prayer and Praise in the Service of
God, both in and long before Cassian's Time, that my Adversary (in his very
diligent search of Antiquity) foreseeing he could no way evade them, thought it
his safest way to overlook them, and therefore he scarce ever cites this Author.

Council. 3. Oec. Ephesinum, An. Dom. 431.
. 8. In the Acts of the Third General Council at Ephesus, we have also many
Evidences of Liturgick Forms both of Praise and Prayer: For in them we read,
That when the Messenger from the Orthodox Fathers there, arrived at
Constantinople with their Letter to the Emperor, the Monks went with him in a
Body to the Palace, Singing of Antiphones (...) in ^^s^r^ Consta^. Bin. Tom. l.
par. 2. page 289.
; which those who stayed at the Gate continued to Sing, till the rest came out
with the Emperors Answer, and then all went in Procession to the Church of S.
Mochus, and sang the Last Psalm (...) Ibid. page 290.
. By which we see they were so constantly used to praise God by Forms of
Antiphones and Psalms, that even in the Streets they could perform this Office,
and the very People (by long Custom) could also sing their part with them. In
the same place it is Recorded of one eminent Monk named Dalmatius, that when
Constantinople was shaken with an Earthquake, he was frequently desired by the
Emperor to come out of his Cell and say the Litany (being thought to be one
whom God would hear (...) ibid. p. 290.
). Now if the Litany had not been a stated Form, proper only to be used in a
great Assembly, because of the great share the People bare in it (as Du-Plessis
before has described it); this Monk might as effectually have said it in his
Cell, and need not have done it in so formal a Procession. And that it was
usual thus to sing or say the Litany in times of common danger or calamity in
the Eastern Church, long before Mamertus brought that Usage into the West, may
appear from what Nicephorus and Cedrenus both, relate concerning Proclus Bishop
of Constantinople, An. Dom. 434. That Theodosius the Emperor requested him
thus to use the Litany when the City was in danger of an Earthquake: Yea, the
very Manner of the Procession is described by Socrates, when he shows how that
City was delivered from a dreadful Tempest, in the Time of the younger
Theodosius, by a solemn Litany Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 22. page 49.
. Now, that must be a known prescribed Form, wherein so many Thousands can make
their Responses, and bear their part. Again, The dissenting Bishops in this
Council complain to the Emperor, that Cyril (Bishop of Alexandria and Memnon
of Ephesus) by the help of the Rabble, would neither suffer them to keep the
Feast of Pentecost, nor to perform the Morning or the Evening Liturgy (...)
Ep^^. ad Imperat. B^. Tom. I. par. 2. page 228.
and if my Adversary (to serve his Cause) would translate this. The Morning and
Evening Administration, that would not hurt me; because there is such plain
proof, That the Eastern Church then performed this Administration by a Form,
and called that Form a Liturgy also. Again, it is Recorded in these Acts, That
Cyril (in his Letter to John Bishop of Antioch) used these words, We have been
taught also to say in our Prayers, O Lord ^ur God, Give us Peace, f^r thou art
the Giver of all things to us -- (...) Ibid. page 428.
. Nothing can be plainer th^n that this was a Liturgick Form, which S. Cyril
had not made of his own Head, but had been taught it by his Forefathers; and it
was so generally known and used, that he Quotes it to another Bishop, as an
Argument why they should agree, who both used the same Form of praying for
Peace. I should here have concluded this Section; but I will briefly remark,
That Nestorius (who lived in this Time, and his Master Theodorus of Mopsvestia
(who flourished twenty years before it) are accused, for impiously presuming to
alter the Churches usual Liturgy, and without any Reverence either for that of
the Apostles, or for S. Basils, made a new and a blasphemous Office of his own
Leontius Byzan: adver. Nestor. lib. 3.
, which in these early days no doubt was accounted a very bold Undertaking; and
yet still this is only changing one Form for another nor setting up for
Extempore Prayers, of which there is not any mention in this Age.

. 9. This Section shall continue the same Evidence in a few Passages out of
some Lesser Fathers: as first, Petrus C^rysologus, An. Dom. 433.
Petrus Chrysologus (the most elegant Preacher of this Age) tells us, That the
Form of the Apostles Creed was taught to the Catechumens by Heart, a little
before their Baptism Petr. Chrysol. Ser. 56.
: And he bids them commit it, not to Paper, but to their Breasts; not to their
Table, but their Memory Id. Sermon. 60. page 187.
. Where by the way we may note, that the Breast is put for the Memory, even as
De pectore in Tertullian) signifies, saying a Prayer by heart, or by Memory.
Again, the same Author explains the Words of the Lords Prayer, after he had
delivered it as a Form to the Catechumens Chrysol. Sermon. 6^, etc.
: And he notes, That before his Sermon he had saluted them, by praying to God
to give them Peace Id Ser. 138. page 354.
: Which we have seen was prescribed in the old Liturgies, of the use whereof
there are diverse other Intimations in his Works. Secondly, The next place shall
be assigned to a Gallican Monk of great Fame, Linceri^ius, Iarinens. An Dom.
434.
who says concerning The Common Prayer Book, which he calls there Sacerdotalem
Librum, The Priests Book, that None of them dared to alter it, because it was
then Signed and Consecrated by the Confessors, and many of the Martyrs Librum
Sac^r ^talem, quis vestrum resignare audeat, signatum a Comessori^^s, and
multerum ^am Martyrio cons^cratum. I^r. n. adv. haeres. cap. 7. p. 12, and 13.
. But whatever his Opinion were, we have some who would not only alter, but
utterly cast away our Priestly Book, though the Compilers of it were all either
Confessors or Martyrs: However we learn from hence, That in this Age there was
a Book of Offices in France, believed to have been originally Composed by the
ancient Confessors and Martyrs. L^o I. Ep. Romans An. Dom. 440.
Our next Witness shall be Leo, Bishop of Rome, whose Works afford many
Instances of the use of prescribed Forms both of Praise and Prayer: For he
mentions the Singing of Psalms with harmonious and agreeing Voices Sermon. 2. in
assump. Pontif. page 4.
. He Comments twice upon that eminent Preface, Lift up your hearts, noting,
that it is just and right so to do Sermon. 2. in Nat^v. page 37. Ser. 2. in
Ascens. page 207.
; and observing, that if we comply with this Exhortation, earthly things cannot
depress our Minds. He calls the Creed, That Rule of the Catholic and Apostolic
Faith Sermon. 4. de Nativ. page 48. Ser. 11. de Pass. Dom. page 164.
, allowing no variation from it. In him we find the same Epistles and Gospels
always read upon the same Festivals; and generally the same which we read in
our Church at this day Sermon 3. de Epiph. page 76. Ser. 5. de Epiph. page 84.
Ser. 6. page 88. item. Sermon 4 de Quadrag. page 105, 107. and Sermon. 3. de
Pentec. p. 218.
. In him also we find that ancient Use prescribed by the Liturgies of reading
the Names of the Offerers, and others, at the Altar Decretal. Ep. 41. cap. 3.
page 355.
. Finally, he mentions the Prayer for the Jews on Good Friday, used in our
Liturgy at this day Sermon. 19. de Pass. Dom. page 191.
: And he gives us this description of the public Fasting and Prayer then in
use; What can be denied (says he) to so many Thousand People, joining in the
performance of the same service, and unanimously beseeching God with one
Spirit? It is a great thing in Gods sight -- when the whole Christian People
are instant upon the same Offices together, and when all orders and degrees of
both Sexes unite their Affections for the same end Id. Sermon. 3. (...) Sept.
(...) page 240.
. These must be Prayers made ^^ such Forms, as made up one Office wherein all
the People could bear a part, and all join in the Responses, etc. And these
Forms thus unanimously recited he thinks must needs be very prevalent with
Almighty God. At the same Time lived Abbot Nilus, Nilus Abbas, An Dom. 440.
who calls the public Prayers, The fixed Laws of the Church (...) N^^ ^^^aenes.
10^.
: So that in his days doubtless they were not left arbitrary, to the Fancy of
every Man who was to Officiate: He would have his Monks receive the Sacrament
in the Church; but if there was not any celebration of the Eucharist, he allows
them to depart after the singing of the Epistle and Gospel (...) ibid. 105.
Bibl. Patr. edit. Paris. Tom. 2. p. 1172.
: Which shows, they used at that Time to Sing those portions of Scripture in
the Communion-Office; and implies, that the rest of that Service was agreeable
to our Forms, in other things, as well as in the Epistles and Gospels; but
these Passages fell not under my Adversaries observation.

10. Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoritus, Histor. Encles. Cire. Ann. 440.
The Church Historians who writ after Eusebius, within little more than one
hundred year, after the settling of Christianity, viz. Socrates, Sozomen, and
Theodoret, are next to be considered. And in them we find diverse passages to
confirm us, that prescribed forms were used both in, and long before their
Times; and this we shall make out by some instances, both as to Praises and
Prayers, contenting our selves, of many, to select only a few Testimonies. And
First, No sort of Prayer is more ancient, nor more certainly a Form, than the
Litany: Yet of this, we have express Testimony in Socrates, who relates the
Story of that great Storm, which happened at Constantinople, when Theodosius
the younger, and the People were beholding the sports of the Hippodrome,
saying, that the Emperor Commanded the People to give over their sport, and to
join all of them in one Common Litany to God; adding, that they obeyed him, and
all of them with great alacrity, said the Litany, and with agreeing Voices sent
up Hymns to God: So that the whole City was but as one Church; and the Emperor
began the Hymn himself; After which devout recital of these Offices the Storm
ceased (...) -- pp. (...) Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 22. page 749.
. Where we see the Litany and Hymns were such known Forms, that all the People
on a sudden could say and sing their part of them; which can be no Wonder;
because we have showed before, that in the elder Theodosius his time, it was
usual to repeat the Litany in procession at Constantinople, in times of Common
Danger; Yea, I doubt not, but Litanies are mentioned by Eusebius, as used in
Constantine's Time; For he says, the Bishops at Jerusalem offered up ((...))
Supplicatory Prayers; For the Peace of the whole World; For the Church of God;
For the Emperor himself, and for his Children beloved of God (...) Eusebius. vit.
Constant. lib. 4. cap. 45. p. 405.
. Which are almost the very Words of those ancient Litanick Forms, yet extant
in the Constitutions, and alluded to by many of the ancient Fathers, although
Eusebius here rather describes, than cites these ancient Forms. Theodoret
speaking of the same Emperor, says; Constantine prepared a Chapel in his
Camp, where they might Sing Hymns to God, and Pray, and receive the Mysteries;
For there were Priests and Deacons following the Army, -- who according to the
Law of the Church, performed the Order for these things (...). Theod. lib. 1.
cap. 8. p. 205.
. In which passage, we have express mention of an Order for Hymns, for Prayers,
and for the Eucharist, which was settled by the Law of the Church; and this
amounts to no less than a Common Prayer enjoined by Law. For this ((...))
Constitution or Order, no doubt contained those prescribed Prayers which
Socrates calls ((...)) Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 15.
, that is, prescribed Forms of Prayer; which we may learn from Sozomen also,
who speaking of Nectarius (that from a Layman, was suddenly advanced to be
Bishop of Constantinople,) says, He was sent to Ciriacus, an ancient Bishop of
Adana, that he might learn ((...)) the Order of officiating used by the
Bishops, which plainly signifies learning his Book of offices Sozom. lib. 7.
cap. 10. p. 420.
, it being one Requisite in a Bishop to be very exact in that point. As for
those short Prayers which the Monks of Egypt used, (mentioned in my Adversary)
it is Evident they were Forms, though he is not willing to confess so much
Sozomen. p. 397. in the Disc. of Liturg. page 75.
. For that place of Sozomen which he cites, concerning Paulus, who said 300
Prayers in a day, and was forced to use 300 little Stones, for Beads,
(Foreheads, says his frontless Editor) to count them by, is taken from
Palladius, who writ Anno Dom. 401. and tells us that he had 300 prescribed
Prayers (...) Pallad. Hist. Lausiac. cap. 23.
; and because they were short Forms committed to Memory, Paulus was constrained
to use these ((...)) little Stones that so he might know when he had repeated
them all. And since we have mentioned Palladius (who wrote at the very beginning
of this Century,) we may Note here, that he also affirms, Ma^arius another
Monk, said an hundred prescribed Prayers every day (...) Pallad. ib. cap. 24.
. And another, called from his Charity Eleemon, used to go to the Church to say
the accustomed Prayers (...) Id. c. 115.
. By which we may see that the ancient Monks, who lived before this Century
began, (of whom Palladius Writes,) were accustomed to Forms of Prayer both in
their Cells, and in the Churches when they went thither; nor can I find in any
of these Historians, an account of any that pretended to Pray in public, in the
Extempore way by the Spirit, except those Heretics called Euchites, and
Enthusiasts; upon whom Theodoret is so severe, as to say he believes, they were
inspired by the Devil Theodoret. lib. 4. cap: 10. page 116.
. And this may suffice for the Prayers. Secondly, As to the Praises, the last
cited Author assures us, there was a known Form of Gloria Patria at Antioch,
concluding (as it does now) World without end; and this as early as the time of
Leontius, who because he altered the ancient Form, repeated it with a low
Voice, but was soon discovered by the People, who were well acquainted with the
Orthodox way of saying that Hymn Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 24.
. Sozomen also relates how the Arians in S. Chrysostoms time at Constantinople,
being divided into two Companies, Sung Hymns after the manner o^ Antiphones,
adding such Responses to them as favored their Heresy Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 8.
. I confess the Hymns themselves were corrupted, but as they were Forms and
sung alternately, they were agreeable to the Churches method of praising God;
and therefore in that they were imitated by S. Chrysostom. For thus the same
Historian tells us, Those Christians Sang their Hymns by way of Antiphone, who
Translated the Bones of Bubylas the Martyr, in the time of Julian Sozomen, lib.
5. cap. 18.
. And another says, The holy Virgins Sang the Psalms in that manner, even in
defiance of that Apostate Theodoret. lib. 3. cap. 17.
. So also Theodosius the Younger, and his Sisters arose early to recite the
Morning Hymns alternately (...) Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 22.
. Now these Antiphones which were thus Sung alternately, could be no other than
prescribed Forms of Praise; and so was that usual Hymn collected out of those
Psalms, beginning with Hallelujah, from whence it had the name of The
Hallelujah, and was Sung both in the Eastern and Western Churches so
frequently, that a Pagan Philosopher knew it to be a sign, the Christian
Worship would be set up in Serapis Temple, when in the middle of the night, he
heard that Hymn Sung there, no persons visible, being in the Temple Vide Sozom.
lib. 7. cap. 15. page 426.
. We may also here remember, what has been said of the Trisagion, which was so
known a Form, in the time of Anastasius the Emperor, that there was a dangerous
Sedition at Constantinople, upon his attempting to add a few Words to it Evagr.
lib. 3. cap. 44.
, which is sufficient to satisfy us, that Forms of Praise as well as Prayer,
were then generally used in the Christian Churches.

But my Adversary, (who overlooks all this Evidence) has picked up some few
passages out of these Historians, to make out his imaginary liberty of Praying.
First, He notes out of Socrates, That Athanasius Commanded the Deacon to
publish the Prayer, or to bid it; but to Read the Psalm (...). Socr. lib. 2. c.
8. (...). Theodo. lib. 2. cap. 13. Disc. of Lit. page 8.
. From whence he infers, that the Prayers then could not be Forms Read out of a
Book. But this inference is easily bafled, by observing the true meaning of
these Phrases, to publish or bid the Prayer; Which is meant of the Preface to
that ancient Litanick Form, repeated of old by the Deacon: And before he began,
He summoned the People to be ready with their Responses after every Period, by
Crying out aloud, Let us Pray, or Let us Pray earnestly; Which Form is found in
the beginning of the Greek Litanies to this very day. So that this Phrase,
supposes a Form in which all the People bore a part; and was Read or repeated
by heart, by the Deacon (no matter whether.) And it was not only a Form it
self, but the Preface to a known Form; nor is the repeating of the Prayer
called publishing, or bidding it, but the preparation for it, and the notice
which the Deacon gave of it, with a loud Voice. Wherefore this Phrase confutes
his Opinion, and confirms ours. Secondly, He twice quotes Socrates, as saying,
That generally in all places and among all sorts of Worshipers, there cannot be
found two agreeing to use the same Prayers Disc. of Liturg p. 89. and 133.
. And by this he would prove, that all Ministers might Pray as they pleased;
and that there was no agreement, in using the same Prayers in any place. But I
will first set down the Words, both of Socrates and Sozomen, and then explain
them: The former says, And generally you cannot find two agreeing together in
all places, and in all the kinds of Worship, as to their Prayers (...). Scorat.
lib. 5. cap. 21.
. The latter tells us, It cannot be found, that the same Prayers, Psalms, or
Lessons were used by all at the same time (...). Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 19. cited
Disc. of Lit. page 9.
. Now both these Historians are speaking, not of single Congregations, but of
several Nations, and several Diocesses; among which there was not indeed so
exact an agreement, but that you might find some difference in some Offices;
Which signifies no more, but only that in the Order of placing the several
Parts of Worship, and in the very Words of the Prayers, different Countries
differed so far, that they could not be said to agree in all things: but both
the Hist^rians suppose, that in many things they did agree: And Socrates gives
the reason of this variety; saying, The cause of which diversity (as I judge)
has been, the Bishops, who in several Ages, have presided over their several
Churches, from w^om their Successors did rece^ve this variety, and Writ it down
for a Law to those who should come after them (...). ^^crat. ut supr. page 698.
: So that these differences were not Arbitrary Variations of private Pastors,
proceeding from Extempore Gifts, as my Adversary fallaciously pretends; they
were such Varieties, as were Written down, and prescribed by ancient Bishops,
in their several Diocesses, as a Law and Rule, for the Worship of that Diocese:
Which plainly shows, that though there was not the same Liturgy used all the
World over; yet that every Country had one Liturgy, which was a Law and Rule to
Guide them, received from their Primitive Bishops, who had, long before this
Age, introduced some things into the Liturgies for their own Churches, and
those under their Jurisdiction; and by that means it came to pass, that the
Liturgies did not agree so exactly, as to use the same Psalms, Prayers and
Lessons, however not in the same Order in all places. Which clear and genuine
Sense of these Authors, is so far from justifying his Notion of variety of
Arbitrary Prayers in single Congregations, that it proves there were prescribed
Liturgies every where, differing only in some few things, which were
differently Writ down and enjoined by the ancient Bishops, who had formerly
presided over these several Churches. Had Socrates and S^zomen been of my
Adversaries side, they must have told us in short, that there could be no
agreement in Prayers any where because all Ministers were at liberty to Pray as
they pleased. Had that been the custom, these Historians need not have set it
down as a Memorable thing, That no places agreed in all points; for the Wonder
would have been, if they had agreed in any thing Nor could Socrates have
ascribed the variety to the Orders of diverse ancient Bishops; he must
(according to my Adversaries Notion) have ascribed it to the Various Gifts and
Elocution of every several Minister; but it is plain, that Fancy of Ministers
exercising such Gifts in public Prayers, was not so much as thought of in that
Age; it is a Novel invention of Modern Enthusiasts, and utterly unknown to
these ancient Times. Thirdly, He cites Socrates about the Prayers used at the
time of Candles lighting (...) Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21.
, which he says were accomodated to the Season Disc. of Lit. page 161.
: But I must ask who it was, that suited these Prayers to the Season? Was it
private Ministers by their Gifts, who daily varied them? If not, it is nothing
to his purpose: For if they were fixed written Forms, fitted by the Bishops of
several Countries, and prescribed to those under their charge for constant use,
then they justisie prescribed Forms, which will be plain enough when we
consider, what Socrates says of these Evening Prayers, in this very place
cited, viz. That in Greece, Jerusalem and Thessaly, the Prayers at
Candle-lighting were made after the same manner, which was used by the
Novatians at Constantinople. So that this passage, if my Adversary durst have
produced it a large, shows, First, that the three several Provinces, did all
Pray alike at this hour of Prayer, and all of them followed the way of the
N^vatians at Constantinople: Now if the Novatians, there had daily varied these
Prayers Extempore, No Provinces nor places could have exactly used the same
Prayers as they did, and every one of these places must have differed from
another. So that when so many distant Churches agreed in the same way, and made
the same Prayers, no doubt they all Prayed by prescribed Forms. And this is all
that is needful to say as to these Historians.

Council. Vinet. Ann Dom. 453.
11. Though there passed near an hundred years between the Council of Laodicea
and this of Vanues; yet my Adversary was so unfortunate, that he could find
nothing for Liturgies in all this space of Time; for he tells us, the next
Authority he meets with after the Council of Laodicea, is the Synod at Vannes
Disc. of Lit. page 173.
, which he labors both to disparage and pervert; because it has a Canon for
uniformity in the Liturgy: But we will first cite the Words of it at large, and
explain the sense of it: And then Answer all his Allegations; The Words are
these; We also think it fit, that at least within our Province, there should be
one usage for holy Offices, and for the Order of Singing: That as we hold one
Faith, in the confession of the Trinity, so we may hold also one Rule in our
Offices; lest by various usages, our Administrations be thought to differ in
some things Rectum quoqu^ d^ci^^^, (...) v^l in^ (...), Sac^ (...) ^rdo (...).
Ut sicut (...) c^m Trinitatis c^nf^ssion^ (...) tene^at^ (...) and Osp^^ (...)
re^ul^m t^neam^^ variata observ^tione, in al^ no observatio nostra discrepare
creaa^ur. Council. Vi^tet. Can. 15. Bin. Tom 1. par. 2. p. 422.
. This Canon is as plain an Injunction of one Liturgy as can be expressed* one
Custom in Administering the Sacraments, and one Order of Singing Hymns; Which is
afterward called, one Rule for the Offices, which was to be observed by all the
Clergy in this Province. Again, they compare this to one Creed; Now the Creed
was one known Written Form of Words, in which they all confessed their Faith;
and they think it reasonable that their Prayers and Hymns should be so also,
that is, performed by one prescribed Rule, and in the same Forms. Lastly, The
reason they give, why they would have but one Form or Liturgy in all their
Province, is to prevent the Scandal and Offense which might be given, by
variety in these Offices, as if there were no good agreement among these
Bishops, which might easily be believed, if every Diocese varied in the manner
of Worshipping God; but if every private Minister at that time, had daily varied
his Prayers and Praises, it had been very ridiculous in these Bishops, to be
afraid of seeming to differ in any thing: And in vain had they settled an
agreement in the Rubries, if the substance and Words of the Prayers had been
changed every day. However my Adversary tries all his Art to undervalew, and
pervert this plain Decree For first, he falsely thrusts this Council down, to
the latter end of the Fifth Century; whereas it was held but three years after
the midst of it. Ann. Dom. 453
Then he says, this Canon was made only by Six Bishops in one Province, where
there were Fifteen or Seventeen; and this not till the latter end of the Fifth
Age, when all things were grown very bad Disc. of Lit. page 176.
. To which I reply, That this Council supposes there was an Order in every
Diocese of this Province; only, whereas there was (as Socrates observed in the
East,) some difference between them, they now reduce all to one Form, those
under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan of Tours, of which Perpetuus was now
the Bishop, and came to Vannes, with five of his Suffragans to ordain a Bishop
there; and being assembled they made this and other Canons, and Writ to
Victurius Bi^hop of Man's, and Thalassius Bishop of Anjou, (two absent Bishops
of this Province) to see this and the rest of these Canons observed in their
Diocesses. And in all probability, these Eight were all the Bishops of that
Province, in those early Times; for Miraeus reckons now, (in this Age) but
Eleven Bishops, who are under the Metropolitan of Tours Miraei. notitia Episc.
lib. 4. p. 194.
, so that my Adversary is mistaken to say, there were Fifteen or Seventeen: And
he is as grossly out, in his calling this a late Decree: For it must be
considered that France was overrun by Barbarous, and Pagan Nations within less
than an hundred Years before, so that it needed a new Conversion a little
before this Century began; and therefore Lidorius was the first settled Bishop
of Tours, who had a Church Builded there for Christian Worship; and he died,
(as Gregory Turonensis relates) Ann. Dom. 370. that is, only 80 Years before
this Council. S. Martin also the great Apostle of this part of France, and
Bishop of Tours, died only 50 Years, before this C^non was made; and Perpetuus
the President of this Council, was the Fifth Bishop after ^. M^rtin (...). 14.
p. ^^.
, and hold this Synod at least 30 Years before the Conversion of Cl^vis, the
first Christian King of France. So that it is very frivolous, (to say no worse)
for my Adversary to call this a late Decree with respect to the whole Church.
Since as to this Province, and with respect to France, it is a very early
Decree, made soon after their Conversion to the Faith; and considering each
great City, after the Barbarous inundation, was Converted by a several Bishop,
it is no wonder if there were some variety in their Liturgies: But we see, as
soon as they had settled Christianity it self, their very next care was to
settle one Liturgy; and probably other Provinces made the like Decree, though
this only for this Age be now extant in the Councils. And if (as he says) all
things were so had here in this Country, in the very beginning of their
Conversion; I would fain know, when things were better there, than when this
Canon for an Uniform Liturgy was made; and I desire it may be Noted, that
Gregory of Tours, who lived within little more than ^n hundred Years, of this
Council, assures us, That many of these very Bishops had the Gift of Miracles;
Yet did not pretend to that Gift of Extempore Praying, (which our Dissenters
boast of) but bound themselves, and all their Subordinate Clergy, to one and
the same Rule of holy Offices; and a Man would hope this Country was not so
very bad, nor this Age so wicked, where the Bishops were enabled to work
Miracles, and while many of them were Confessors and Martyrs. Thus much for the
Authority of this Council: And as to the meaning of the Canon, my Adversary
leaves out one half of it, and recites no further than una sit consuetudo: So
that his Reader may not see the unam Officiorum Regulam, One Rule for holy
Offices; nor observe their resolution to have one Form for their Offices, as
well as they had for their Creed; nor discern their fear of having any remarks
made, if there were the least variation in their Worship. This was all to be
clapped under Hatches. Then he puts Sacrorum Ordo together; whereas Ordo is
joined with Psallendi. But that is no great matter, if he had not also falsely
expounded this Word, Ordo, and told us, it signifies no more than the disposing
the Responsals, Prayers, Hymns and Psalms, each in its proper place; which he
would prove by the Council of Agatho, (held, he says, not long after) where
Ordo Ecclesiae is used only for a Rubric or Directory; and therefore he thinks
it cannot be inferred from hence, that the same Expressions were used by them
that did Officiate Disc. of Lit. page 174.
This is the sum of his Arguing against the plain and genuine meaning of this
Canon: But I shall easily show it is all mistake: For first, all those Prayers
which had Responsals in them, must necessarily be in known Forms, otherwise the
People could not make certain Answers to them in their proper places; and that
the Hymns and Psalms were Forms also* is most certain. Well then according to
him, Ordo must be the disposal of all the Responsory Prayers and Praises,
together with the Hymns and Psalms, in that very Form of Words in which they
were prescribed, into their proper places: So that according to him, Ordo will
signify not only a bare Rubric, but a direction containing ^he Forms
themselves, as well as the Order of them: He can except nothing but the
Prayers, and gives no shadow of a Reason why they should not be put into Forms,
as well as the Responsals, Hymns and Psalms. And this is certain, that The
Litany, which was the ^ongest Prayer in all the Offices, and was in use at the
Time of this Council (as I will show in the next Section) was a Responsory
Form; so that if this Ordo, did dispose of that into its proper place, no doubt
it also contained the very Form it self; and he must need Hellebore who can
imagine, that when the Litany, and the Hymns and Psalms, were all prescribed
Forms, other Prayers should be left arbitrary. Again, I hope this Canon may be
allowed to expound it self, and then this Order is enjoined to be done in one
manner, and after one Custom; there was to be no more variety in it, than in
their Creed, which was one constant Form of Words; yea, it is called One Rule
of holy Offices, and so made, that none might observe the least variety in any
Church throughout the Province. Therefore if we join Ordo to Sacrorum, it can
mean nothing but a Prescription both of the Order and Forms also, to be used in
^^cred Administrations: And that this is generally the sense of Ordo, when it
is applied to Divine Offices, appears in those very Councils of Agatho and
^amiers, which he cites here (but were not held till after the Sixth Century
was begun): In the former The Order of the Church equally to be observed by
all, is one Liturgy consisting of Antiphones and Collects with proper Hymns and
Prayers for Morning and Ev^^ing Council. Agat^ Can. 30. B^n. Tom. II. par. 1.
page 555.
. In the latter of these Synods it signifies so also, for there all the Clergy
of the Province are commanded to use the same Liturgy (or Order of Prayer)
which was used in their M^tropolitan Church Council. Epanu. Can. 27. ibid. page
53.
, as I shall more at large demonstrate when I come to these Councils, in order
of Time. In the mean season I will here observe, that Causab^^ tells us, the
Latins call the Liturgy, Ordinem agendi Causab. exercit. 1^. ad Annal. Eccles.
page 384.
: and every Man knows, that Ordo Romanus, is the Roman Missal: And it is the
proper Latin Word for ((...)), which we have seen used by Sozomen and others in
this Age for a Liturgy (...) Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 10.
; and this Order is that Liber Sacerdotalis, which Vincentius Lirinensis speaks
of Vincent. Lirin. adv. haeres. cap. 7. page 12.
; it was called sometimes Ordinale, and (as Spolm^n defines it) signified, That
Book wherein was appointed the manner of saying, singing and celebrating the
Divine Office, after the manner of the Roman Church Ordinale: Liber quo
Ordinatur modus dicendi, decantandi, celebrandique divinum Officium, ex more
Romanae Ecclesiae. Spelm. Glossar. page 440.
; yea, after the manner of any other Church: For the Missal of Sarum, Composed
by Osmund, who was Bishop of that See, is called, The Ordinal of Salisbury Hic
quoque comp^suit librum Ordinalem Ecclesiastici officii, quem Consuetudinarium
vocant. Ranulf. Polychron. An. 1077. Item Knighton de event. Angl. lib. 2. cap.
3. col. 2351.
, and did not agree in all things with the Roman Missal: Yet these Orders or
Ordinals had prescribed Forms of Prayers and Hymns, as well as Rubrics, to show
when and where to use them. I confess there are some ancient Breviaries of the
old Liturgies, where the first words only of the Hymns and Prayers are set
down, and the order in which they are to be used is directed; but these are an
undeniable Proof, that the Forms themselves were by long use become known and
familiar in those days: But for any such Order, as is a bare Rubric for Method,
and has no Forms, neither largely set down, nor briefly hinted at in it; no
Man ever saw such a Book, or any thing like it, in all Antiquity; only when the
New-fashion Directory ha^ got possession of a Man's fancy, he may dream, that an
Order, or an Ordinal, mus^ needs signify some such thing.

Voconius Episc. and Musaeus Presb. Marscil. An. Dom. 458.
. 12. It was in the same Country and much about the Time of this Council, that
Voconius a Bishop, and Musaeus a Priest of Marseilles, did Compose very famous
Volumes of Sacraments and Offices, as Gennadius, who lived also at Marseilles,
and flourished not above 30 years after this, does testify Gennad. lib. de
Script. Eccl. in Musaeo.
. Which still confirms my Observation, That upon this Second Conversion of
France (after the Northern Pagans had overspread it) the most Learned and
Eminent of the Clergy began to reduce the several Provinces to one Form of
Divine Service. For it was not long after that the eloquent Bishop of Auvergne,
Sidonius Apollin. Ep. Avern. An. Dom. 472.
Sidonius, Composed a Book of Masses, that is (as the Phrase then signified) a
Book of Forms of Prayer, etc. Vid. vit. Sidonii praefix. oper.
; and Gregory of Tours (who writ his History in the next Century) tells us,
That he had written a Preface to this Liturgy, and published it, as Sidonius
had reformed it Greg. Turon. lib. 2. cap. 22.
. And not long before this, viz. about the Year 458, Mamercus (Bishop of
Vienne) had set up the use of Litanies after the manner of the Eastern Church,
ordering all the People with Fasting and great Devotion, to use them in a
public Procession, when they were pressed with heavy Calamities Greg. Turon.
lib. 2. cap. 34. Sidon. Epist. lib. 7. ep. 1.
. And Sidonius tells us, That there were Litanies used in the Gallican Church
before; but they were not said with that fervency, vigor and frequency, no nor
with such strict Fasting, as Mamercus had appointed Sidon. lib. 5. ep. 14.
. And therefore as the Diocese of Vienne had been delivered by this devout use
of the Litany, so he thought fit to appoint it should be repeated in the same
manner in his City, when the Goths broke into that Province. From which
Relation we learn, That Litanies were used in France before this Age, though
not with so much devotion and success; and therefore we must by no means think
Mamercus was the first Author of these Prescribed Forms of public Supplication.
There is another memorable Passage in the Life of Sidonius, which confirms the
general use of Written Forms in his Time; which is, That being to celebrate a
Festival in his Church, some wicke^ persons had stolen away the Book by which
he was wont to Officiate; but h^ was so ready a Man, that even without Book he
went through the whole Office for the Feast, to the wonder of all the
Congregation, who thought he spoke rather like an Angel, than a Man Vit.
Sidonii Praef. oper. Greg. Turon. lib. 2. cap. 22.
. Now here we have express Testimony of a Common Prayer, which this excellent
Bishop was wont to use; and it seems it was a Wonder in this Age to see any
Clergyman perform the public Office without a Book, which could not have been
strange, if my Adversaries way of Extempore Prayer had been usual: For if every
Bishop and Priest (as he pretends) had daily prayed without Book, it had been
ridiculous to have written this as a singular Excellency in Sidonius, to be
able to repeat the Office by the strength of his Memory without that Book,
which used to guide him therein. And if it be Objected, That this Relation
seems rather to suppose he made a new Office Extempore: I Reply, That still
makes out my Assertion. Since it could not be the common way to pray on the
sudden, because it was thought almost a Miracle in Sidonius to do so; therefore
other Clergymen generally used written Forms, and made use of
Common-Prayer-Books, as we do now. The same Sidonius tells us in one of his
Epistles, That the Monks and the Clergy celebrated the Vigils, together with
the Chanters of Psalms, in Tunes which they sang alternately Sidon. lib. 5. ep.
17.
: And it was in his Time (as that Historian remarks) they used to sing the
Antiphons in the Church of S. Martin at Tours Greg. Turon. histor. page 83.
. Now these were Forms of public Worship, and (as we have often noted) must be
either written, or however certainly known before, to those who make use of
them: and therefore prescribed Forms were the way by which God was worshipped in
this Age; Not only in France, but also in Africa, where Victor relates, That it
was the Custom at Carthage to bring up Boys in the skill of Music for the
public Service of the Church, Twelve of which Boys fell into the hands of
Hunnericus the Vandal King Victor. histor. persec. Vandal. lib. 5. Ad. Dom. 478.
. Now these Singing-Boys were not capable of bearing a part in the public
Service, if it had not been in Prescribed Forms.

Petrus Cnapheus Eplsc. An ioc^. An. Dom. 483.
. 13. And the same way was continued in the East; for Petrus Cnapheus about
this Time, ordered the Creed to be daily repeated in the public Office at
Antioch, as my Adversary does confess Disc. of Lit. page 102.
, and other Authors testify Theod. Lect. lib 2. page 189. Bona, de rebus
Liturg. p 537.
: And no opposition was made to this, it being a known Form as well as the rest
of the Service. But when the same Bishop, being infected with Heresy, did
attempt to make an addition to the ancient Hymn called the Trisagion, and would
have put in these Words [Which was Crucified for us], the People who had been
long accustomed to that Orthodox Form delivered down to them from their Fore
fathers, would not endure it Baron. Annal. An 483. p. 381.
; and when others at Constantinople added this Sentence to the Response, as the
Chanter was singing the Hymn in the accustomed way, there was a very great
Tumult made upon that occasion Theodor. Lect. Synops. page 187. Disc. of Lit.
page 2^. compared with page 25.
. And here I cannot but wonder at my Adversaries rare dexterity, who when he
had undertaken to prove, that there could be no Liturgies in these Ages,
because we never read of any change or alterations made in them, page 25.
within two Pages relates. The great tumult at Constantinople, and the wise
which was made through the World* by attempting to alter this ancient Hymn.
Which was an eminent part of the Communion-Service, to which the People had
been so long used, that they soon perceived and highly resented this Alteration
of their Sacred Forms: Which strongly proves, not only that they used
prescribed Forms now, but had done so long before: And as to this very
Trisagian, he mistakes in saying it was first used in the Time of Theodosius
the Younger Disc. of Lit. page 177.
: For we have proved by diverse Testimonies, that it was used in the Third, and
in the beginning of the Fourth Century, in all the Churches of the World. It Is
true, there was an Orthodox Addition made to it in the Time of that Theodocius,
grounded on a Miracle, as Nicephorus reports Niceph. Histor. lib. 2. cap. 46.
: But the Original of this Hymn is taken from the Prophet Isaiah, and it was
used in that Form long before this Emperor was born; yea, it seems it was
accounted to be a Form very Sacred, since they durst not alter it, but by the
direction of a Miracle: so tenacious was that Age of their ancient Forms of
Worship.

Gela^ us Episc. Romans A.D. 492.
. 14. Pope Gelasius was one of the most Learned of the Roman Bishops, and
though (as we have seen in the Life of Damasus and of Innocent) there was a
Liturgy at Rome before, yet he took great pains to polish and reform it: For
all Authors affirm, That he made Hymns for his Church like to those of S.
Ambrose P^ntifical. vit. ^ las. item Plat^na in vit. Cent. Mag^eb. 5 Cent. p.
1271. etc.
: And, that he Composed some Graduals, Prefaces, and Collects Pontif call. ut
supr. item C^s^andr. Liturg.
. And Durandus affirms, that this Gelasius (the One and filtieth Bishop from S.
Peter) was he that principally put the Canon into that Order wherein we now see
it Durand. ^at. lib. 4. fol. 67. i^em Burns. v a Gelas. page 55.
; and some add, that he enlarged the Preface and put in, It is meet and right
so to do. But let us hear the Learned Du-Plessis; Gelasius came in the Year
490, and he ranged and set in order the Collects and Compl^nds, amongst the
which are some that do yet stand and continue pure and uncorrupted M^rnay of
the Mass, Book l. cap. 60.
So that if we regard the account which we had before in the Life of Pope
Innocent See the beginning of this Century,. 1.
, or the full Evidence of these Authors, ancient and modern, we must grant
there were prescribed Forms at Rome long before Gelasius Time; but being by
continuance of Time, and frequent Transcribing, become somewhat imperfect, he
undertakes to rectify them by some Alterations, and by adding something of his
own, made the Offices more complete. His putting the Canon into Order, adding
to the Prefaces, and his ranging the Collects into a Method, shows there were
Collects, and a Preface, and a Canon before; so that the use of prescribed
Forms did not begin in his Time; and yet because he took so much pains about
the Liturgy, of the Roman Church, That Book which he had Corrected and put in
Order was called Codex Gelasianus, The Gelasian Book: And John the Deacon, who
writ the Life of Pope Gregory, says, that He contracted this Gelasion Book,
and out of it compiled the Gregorian Office Johan. Diac. vit. Gregor. 1. lib.
2. cap. 17.
; yet so, as it seems, the Book still remained in some places; for the
Chronicle of the Abbey of Saint Richerius Chronic. S. Richerii apud Dacherii
Spicileg. Tom. 4.
reckons up Nineteen Missals of Gelasius among the Volumes in their Library.
And it is plain enough, that Pope Gregory took the same liberty with this
Gelasian Office, that he had done with those our of which he first extracted
it: For there were Forms from the beginning, and none but great Bishops
presumed to alter them; which had been a very impertinent labor, if after they
had thus Corrected the Offices, they had not imposed the use of them on their
subordinate Clergy; and doubtless they would never have taken this pains, if
every private Minister might vary the Office every day at his pleasure: Which
fancy, this Book of Gelasius utterly confutes, and proves there was a Canon for
the Consecration of the Eucharist, written down in a Book at least an hundred
years before S. Gregory's Time; yea, we see this very Book of Gelasius was
taken out of elder Forms, which makes it to be somewhat strange* that my
Adversary should cite and own this Gelasian Book, and at the same time, and in
the same Page affirm, There was no settled Form of Consecration at Rome before
Gregory 's time Disc. of Liturgies, p 83.
. But of this I shall have occasion to say more in the next Century: And shall
conclude this Age with observing, That Clovis the first Christian King of
France, soon after his Conversion, placed certain Monks in the City of Rheims,
giving them great Privileges and Possessions; and the Rule which they were
governed by, was that which Macarius had Composed about One hundred years
before for his Monks of Nitria, the Ninth Article whereof enjoins them, To love
the Course of their own Monastery above all things Cursum Monasterii super
omnia diligas. Reg. S. Macar. art. 9. ap Cointe Annal. Eccles. Franc. Tom. 1.
page 178. An. ^96.
: That is, That they should delight in that Form of Service which was
prescribed for their Monastery; for a Course, signifies an Office for
Divine-Service: And therefore Gregory of Tours says, That he himself writ a
Book of Ecclesiastical Courses Gregor. Turon lib. 10. cap. 31.
; that is, of Divine Offices; and the same Author calls Saying the whole
Service, Fulfilling the Course Post imple^^m in Oratione C^r^um. id. de glor.
Confess. cap. 38.
: So the Roman Course, is put for the Roman Missal Sp^lm Council Tom. I. page
177. An. 680.
: And in one of our ancient Saxon Councils it is Ordained, That in all Churches
the Course shall be reverently performed at the Canonical hours Council.
Calcuth. Can 7. An 787. ibid. p. 295.
. From which use of the word we may learn, That the most ancient Monks, long
before the Time of Benedict, had their prescribed Forms of Prayer, which they
used in their own Oratories; though among these Men, who did a little incline
to Raptures and some degrees of Enthusiasm (if any where) we might have
expected to have found Extempore Prayers. I shut up this Century with the Words
of Du-Plessis, Thus we are come to the Five hundredth year after Christ,
finding in all this time One Service, consisting of Confessions and Prayers,
Psalms, Reading, Preaching, Blessing and Distributing the Sacraments, according
to the Institution of our Lord. Mornay of the Mass, Book I. Chap. 6. page 44. So
that he did not think this Age was much corrupted: And yet we have proved, and
he owns that Prescribed Forms were now generally used.

CHAP. II. Of LITVRGIES in the Sixth Century.
WE need go no Lower for Authorities to prove the Use of LITURGIES, because our
Adversary freely and frequently grants, that they began in the end of the
Former and the beginning of This Century: But I must here note in general,
concerning this Concession, First, That if they began no sooner, yet they
prescribe to at least Twelve-hundred Years, and to universal Practice and
Approbation for all that space of Time, which cannot be proved concerning any
thing that is a notorious Corruption. Secondly, That the gross Mistake of
laying the Original of them so late, is all along supported by perverting those
places, which speak of reducing some Countries, which had been overrun by the
Goths and Vandals, Hunnes and Franks, with other different sorts of People, to
one Form of Liturgy; As if these were meant of the first imposing of Forms of
Prayer in the Christian Church. Whereas it is plain, that some of these
Countries needed a New Conversion, and the various and different Inhabitants of
other Provinces had brought in great variety of Rites; which this Age strove to
reduce to an Uniformity, not by inventing a New Way, but by following the
Primitive Way of establishing One Liturgy for every Kingdom or Province.
Thirdly, I must note, That my Adversary frequently repents of this despicable
Concession, and after he has granted the use of Liturgies in this Age, he
omits all those Authorities, which clearly prove the continuance of this
ancient Practice, and with all his might strives to wrest those Passages which
he does produce in this Period, as if they did not prove so much as he has
granted: So that I must first supply the wilful Omissions of his Discourse by
setting down the Evidence which he conceals, and then rescue the Places he does
cite, from his Misinterpretations. And, first, we will see what the industrious
Centuriators say of this Age: They have (as was showed) owned, that Forms of
Prayer were generally used in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries; and in this they
take notice, That the Nicene Creed was repeated in their Divine Service; that
The Lords Prayer was sung by all the People together in the Greek Church: That
the People at Constantinople did frequently use Litanies: That Antiphons were
usually Sung in the Gallican Church: That we may see by the Histories of this
Age, that solemn Masses had now filled all places: That they had public Prayers
in their Temples, and sometimes celebrated Litanies in the Night. And they add,
That they had many Forms of Prayers; One of which they reckon to be, That
Litany used in the Eastern Church, wherein the Peoples part was to Sing, Lord
have mercy upon us Magdeb^. Cent. 6. cap. 6. page 330, etc. ad page 339.
. This was their Opinion of the Way of Praying and Praising God, which had
begun in former Ages, and was continued in this, to be performed by Prescribed
Forms.

Caesarius Arelat. An. D. 503.
. 1. The first eminent Writer of this Age is Caesarius, Bishop of Arles in
France, who was present at most of those Gallican Councils, which enjoin an
Uniformity in the Public Offices, and settle one and the same Liturgy; and
thence we may conclude, he was for the use of Forms of Prayer. Which may appear
also by his Homilies, where he intimates, That the whole Service for the
Communion, the Prayers, Lessons, etc. took up an hour or two; yet he reckons
those are very Criminal, who for their Souls good will not stay till the whole
Office was completed; that is, till they had received the final Blessing after
the Lords Prayer; with which (as we have shown in former Centuries) the
Communion-Service was concluded Caesarii, hom. 8. edit. a. Baluz. page 60.
. Now since the Office ended exactly as it had done in former Ages, we may from
thence infer, it was the same ancient Form: And we will observe further, that
when the Admonition given by a single Bishop, would not reform this vile Custom
of the Peoples going out of the Church before the Prayers were fully ended; The
Councils of this time began to make Canons to forbid the People, to depart from
the Divine Service before the Blessing was pronounced Council. 1. Aurel. Can.
28. An. 507. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. page 562. item Council. 3. Aurel. Can. 28. An.
540. ibid. par. 2. p. 29.
: Which Blessing was an ancient and well known Form, as also was the whole
Office. For this same Caesarius very clearly witnesses in another place, That
the Preface, Lift up your Hearts, etc. was still used in the Communion Office,
a Form, which had been in all Churches down from the days of S. Cyprian, and
probably long before Caesar. hom. 14. vid. Bona, rer. Liturg. page 552.
, and yet continued without any variation.

. 2. But because we have mentioned some Gallican Councils, Council. Agatheus.
A.D. 506.
we must here observe, that after the Kings of France had received the Faith,
That Church was every where restored to that good Order and Regularity, from
which under Pagan Princes and in difficult Times it had fallen; and this was
the occasion of the many Councils held about this Time, and of those Canons
that do labor to reduce all the Gallican Church to one Order of Service. So in
the Council of Agatho, of which Caesarius was President, one of the Canons is
in these Words; Since it is convenient that the Order of the Church be equally
kept by all, We Ordain (as it is every where), That after the Antiphons, the
Collects shall be said in order by the Bishops or Priests: And that the Morning
and Evening Hymns shall be sung every day; and in the conclusion of the
Mattins, Vespers and Masses, the Sentences out of the Psalms shall be read: And
the People (after the Common Prayer) shall be d^smissed in the Evening with the
Bishops Benediction Et quia convenit Ordinem Ecclesiae, ab omnibus aequaliter
custudiri, etc. Council. Agath. Can. 30. Bin. Tom. II. par. I. page 556,
. Before which Blessing the People are forbid to go out of the Church Ibid.
Can. 47.
. Here then we see there is an Order of the Church, that is, (as the word then
signified) A Liturgy, enjoined to be observed by all in that Province, as it
seems it was now by other Councils settled every where: Which Liturgy consisted
of the Antiphons and Collects, every one set in its proper place, as also of
Morning and Evening Hymns and Prayers, together with the Communion-Service
(then called the Mass) and the Responsory reading of the Psalms, with a common
or general Prayer for all Estates of Men, and all was concluded with the
Bishops Benediction. Now it is certain, that these Antiphons, Collects, Hymns,
and this General Prayer, were Forms; and the Canon supposes them all written
down at large in that Order they were to be used by all Bishops and Priests;
and this is plainly a prescribed Liturgy: But my Adversary, who cites this
Canon at large, after he had falsified the Words of it Disc. of Lit. page 174.
where he set down Collationes for Collectiones, and leaves out per ordinem.
, attempts to pervert the Sense, and would persuade us it amounts to no more,
than a Rubric or Directory; which is a gross, and I doubt a wilful Mistake. For
though we should grant, That the Canon it self do only direct the Order in
which these several parts of the Service shall be used, and forbid the altering
that Order; yet withal it refers to these several parts of the Service, and
calls them by their proper Names, supposing a Book well known, in which they
were written down in the same order which is prescribed by this Canon. It is
plain, the Antiphons, Hymns, Collects, etc. were certain fixed Forms, not made
in this Council, but supposed to be commonly known by all long before; and
since some variety in the reciting these Forms had crept in, so as one Diocese
differed somewhat from another, that Variety (though it were but in the order
of using these Forms) is forbid here; and the same Uniformity established in
this Province, which had been settled every where else: And indeed this Canon
convinces me, there was no difference in the Forms themselves, the same
Antiphons, Hymns, Collects, etc. were used every where, that needed not any
regulation, only they were differently placed in the Liturgies of diverse
Churches; and this they Reform, by settling one Liturgy for the whole Gallican
Church, which is called Ordo Ecclesiae; and This Order contained not only the
Rubrics, or disposal of these several parts of Service, but also The Forms
themselves so disposed and set in Order: And doubtless, if any had then been so
bold to vary the Hymns and Forms of Prayer, these Fathers (who would not suffer
any Variety in the method and placing them) would much less have endured the
presumption of altering the Words and Expressions: but that was a piece of
Confidence, that was not heard of in this Age.

The next Year was held the first Council of Orleance, Council. Aurel. I. An.
Dom. 507.
which again forbids Any of the People to go out of the Church, before that
final Blessing after the Lords Prayer, in the end of the Communion Service
Council. Aurel. I. Can. 28. Bin. Tom. II. par. l. page 562.
; and enjoins the Litanies shall be used three days before Ascension day, and
orders the People (who had so large a share in this ancient Form) to leave
Work, and join in presenting this general Supplication to Almighty God Ibid.
Can. 29.
. Agreeable to which is that Passage in Caesarius his Homilies, where he tells
us. That the whole Church throughout the World, then celebrated these Three
Days with Litanies; and then no Christian ought to be absent from that
Religious Assembly In tribus istis diebus, quas regulariter in toto mundo
celebrat Ecclesia, nullus se a sancto Conventu subaucat. Caesar. hom. 1.
. Now, can any man doubt of the use of Prescribed Forms, when these Litanies
were so generally observed both in the Eastern and Western Churches? Is it not
plain, the Communion Service was the same in all these Provinces, since so many
Authors and Councils agree, That that Office every where ended with the Lords
Prayer and the Blessing? An Order, now, must signify more than a Rubric: For
undoubtedly they had a prescribed Rule, containing both the Forms and the
Method also. And the better to secure this Liturgy from being altered, Council.
Epaun. An. Dom. 509.
the Council of Pamiers Ordains, That all Churches in the Province shall
observe the same Order in celebrating Divine Offices, which was used by the
Metropolitan Bishop Ad celebrandum divina Officia, ^^dinem quem Metropolitani
tenent, Provinciales observare debent. Council. Epaun. Can. 27. Bin. Tom. II.
par. I. page 553.
. And a few years after, the same Order was made in Spain, where Variety of
Nations and Opinions had made some difference in their Liturgies: But at Girone
in Catalonia it was decreed, That as to the appointing of Divine Service, as it
was performed in the Metropolitan Church, so in Gods Name let that same Usage
be observed through the whole Province of Catalonia, as well in the
Communion-Office, as in that of Singing and Ministering De institutione
Missarum, ut ^u^modo in Metropolitana Ecclesia fuer^t, ita in Dei nomine, in
omni Tarraconensi Provincia, tam ipsius Misa Orao, quam psallenai and
ministrandi consuetudo servetur. Council. Gerund. An. 517. Can. 1. Bin. ibid.
page 618.
; that is, The Order of Divine Offices, which by a prescribed Rule was settled
in the Metropolitan Church; for the Communion-Service, the Hymns, and other
Administrations, were to be the Guide to all the Diocesses under the
Jurisdiction thereof: Which supposes that the Original Liturgy was written and
kept carefully there, by which all the Books of Divine Offices, transcribed for
the several Diocesses of his Suffragans, were to be corrected; which was a very
fit Means to preserve that Unity both as to the Forms and Order, which they now
labored to restore in all these parts of the World. The last named Council
also mentions Litanies in two Canons, Can. 2, and Can. 3. And informs us, That
the Lords Prayer was there repeated daily, in the end both of Morning and
Evening Prayer, Can. 10. And all this leaves us no room to doubt of their using
those ancient Forms, which (after these great Confusions) began to be restored
in these Countries, upon the Conversion of both Pagans and Heretics to the
Faith, and their beginning to incorporate with the People which they had
Conquered in the last Age. And I have a little transgressed the Order of Time,
that I might lay these Canons together, which were all made upon the same
Occasion, and do mutually explain one another.

Fulgentius Ep. Ru^pens. Ann. Dom. 508.
3. We must now step into Africa, where that Pious Bishop Fulgentius
flourished, who was the most Eminent Champion, for the true Faith against the
Arians, then very numerous in that Country. And this holy Confessor has left
us, sufficient Evidence of the continuance of the ancient African Forms. For he
largely expounds that Primitive Petition, so generally used at the
Consecration, in all the old Liturgies, viz. That God would send down the holy
Spirit upon the Elements, to sanctify them, and make them the Body of his deer
Son Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 2. cap. 6. p. 79.
. Yea, he confirms the Orthodox Faith, from this ancient and well known Form of
Prayer. He also discourses very fully upon that general conclusion of the
Collects, which the Arians cavilled at, Through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord,
who lives and Reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Spirit Per universas
pene Africae regiones Catholica dicere consuevit Ecclesia Per Jesum. etc. Fulg.
ad Ferrand. Diac. Resp. ad Quaest. 4. page 266.
; Assuring us that the Catholic Church, in almost all the Regions of Africa,
concluded their Prayers in this Form; which he proves is agreeable to
Scripture, to the usage of the Primitive Church, and to the Doctrine of the
Orthodox Fathers. And that must be a very ancient piece of Liturgy which is of
Authority in dispute with Heretics: And so much was he in love with Forms,
that he made such for private and extraordinary occasions. For when any came to
him under outward afflictions, and desired his Prayers, he used this Form, Lord
thou know what is best for our Souls, and therefore when we ask for such
things as our necessity compels us to desire, do thou only grant that which
conduces to our Spiritual welfare; therefore if our humble Prayer be expedient,
then let it be heard, so that thy Will may happily be Accomplished Vita
Fulgent. cap. 25. page 30.
. Another Form frequently repeated by this holy Bishop, in his last Sickness,
was this, O Lord give me patience here, and thy Pardon at my End Ibid. cap. 30.
page 93.
. And the Writer of his Life, remarks that these Prayers of his were graciously
heard, and answered by Almighty God, who it seems is well pleased with Forms,
that are said with true Devotion; and if he accept them, we may justly despise
the Censures of ignorant and prejudiced Men. I must not conclude this Period
till I observe, that there is in the Works of this Fulgentius, a Book dedicated
to him by Peter the Deacon; which this holy Bishop highly commends, wherein (as
we showed before) it is affirmed, That the Liturgy of S. Basil was generally
used in the Eastern Church; and of so great Authority was it accounted, that he
cites a passage out of it against the Heretics In libel. Petr: Diac. de
incarn. and great. Jesu. Chr. inter op. Fulg.
. Moreover in that same Book, is quoted also that same Prayer for all Estates
of Men; as an Argument to confirm the Catholic Faith, which we produced at
Large before, out of S. Augustine and Pope Celestine Ibid. cap 8. page 281. See
Cent. 5..
; and since so many Fathers produce it in dispute, it is Evident it was a part
of the Churches Liturgy, and had been so for many Ages; otherwise it had been
to no purpose to bring it for Evidence, against the Enemies of the Catholic
Faith: And this may suffice, to show the continuance of Liturgy in the African
Church, in the time of Fulgentius.

Council. Valentin Ann. Dom. 524.
4. To return into the West, there is a Canon made at the Council of Valentia
in Spain; Which says, Before the Catechumens go out, and the Office of the
Faithful begin; let the Epistle and Gospel be Read, and the Sermon be Preached,
because by hearing of these, many had been converted to the Faith Council.
Valent. Can. 1. Bin. Tom. II. par. 1. page 629.
. By which we see the Offices of the Catechumens and the Faithful, yet
remained in two distinct Forms, as they had been in the Primitive Ages; but
this Canon made way for joining those Offices, and admitting all sorts of
People to the whole Service, excepting only the holy Cummunion; so that after
this we rarely hear of dismissing the Catechumens, or of keeping Mysteries
secret; because these parts of the World, were now generally become professed
Christians. In France a little before this, Sigismund one of their Kings, had
instituted a Society of Monks, to sing the Daily Office Gregor. Turon. lib 3.
cap. 5. page 95. vid. Cointe Annal. An. 522.
: Now that Office which is Sung by each side of a Choir, can be no other than a
prescribed Form: And we shall show presently, that the Monks of France, had a
peculiar Office made up of ancient Forms, of Praise and Prayer. In the mean
time, we shall look upon the Canons of the Council of Vaison; Council. Vasent.
3. Ann. 529.
by which we shall see, that Liturgick Forms were used at this time, also in
all the Churches of the World, and believed to have descended down to them,
from the most ancient Times: For the Bishops in this Council say, That since it
was the custom in the East, at Rome, and in all Italy to repeat the Kyrie
Eleeson [Lord have Mercy upon us]; Therefore in all our Churches, this holy
Custom shall be introduced, to say it in the Morning Prayer, at the Communion,
and at Evening Prayer -- ut in omnibus Ecclesiis nostris ista consuetudo sanct.
ad Matutinum and Missas, and ad Vesperam (Deo propitiante) intromittatur.
Council. Vas. Can. Bin. Tom. II. par. 1. page 641.
. The Form was ancient and used in all the Primitive Litanies, but in these
Churches they had not begun to repeat these Words in the Daily Offices, at the
three great Hours of Prayer: But since it was become a Custom in all other
Countries, so to use this holy Form, they now prescribe it shall be so used in
their Churches, as it is still in our Liturgy, immediately before the Lords
Prayer. Again, the same Council ordains, That the Communion Service, shall
never be said without the Hymn, of Holy, Holy, Holy, that is, the Trisagion;
which though it was prescribed by their Liturgy before, yet some, in the time
of Lent, and in private Communions, had thought fit to omit it Ibid. Can. 4.
; so that the variations which Bishops had made from the old way, were
regulated by the Councils of this Age. The next Canon affirms, That at Rome, in
the East, in Africa and Italy, they had for preventing Heresy, added to the
Gloria Patri, these Words, As it was in the beginning, etc. Wherefore they
ordain that this Hymn shall be repeated with that addition in their Churches
Ibid. Can. 5. p. 642.
. The Form, with this enlargment also, had been long in use in other Churches,
but this Addition was first Established in France, after its second Conversion,
by this Canon. And we gather from hence, that in this Age there is not only an
assurance, that every Nation had a Liturgy; but that the lesser Churches,
labored to imitate the greater and more famous Churches, in order to the
making as great an Uniformity as was possible, in all the Liturgies then in the
World: And we shall finally note, from this Councils Orders about these ancient
Forms; that private Bishops themselves, in this Age, were not allowed to
correct or alter any thing relating to the Liturgy; Nothing less than a Council
might presume to make Orders in those Cases. Wherefore we cannot imagine that
Liturgies, were lately set up in the end of the last Age, or the beginning of
this, (as my Adversary affirms) much less, can we think that private Ministers,
had leave to vary the Offices as they pleased.

Benedictus, Monach. An. Dom. 529.
5. About this time Flourished Benedict, the Father of that numerous Order of
Monks, who within an Age or two, had filled all the Western World; and he writ
his Rule, (not as my Adversary pretends, in the middle Disc. of Lit. p. 178.
, but) toward the beginning of the Sixth Age, viz. Ann. Dom. 530. Vid. Dr.
Cave Cartoph. Eccles. p. 109.
: Which Rule is still extant Vid. Cointe Annal. Eccles. An. 536.
. And as to that part of it, which concerns the Divine Service, that he
prescribed to his Monks; We have an Abstract of it in Card. Bona Bona de divin.
Psalmod. c. 18. page 895.
. And thereby it is manifest, that although this Founder of Monastic
Societies, inclined to Enthusiasm in some things; Yet he durst not presume to
make a new Office, consisting of new Forms, nor did he leave his Monks to make
Extempore Prayers, but takes his Office wholly out of the Liturgies then in
use; Only because these Monks had nothing else to do but to serve God, he
allots more hours of Prayer, and orders many of the Forms to be oftener
repeated, than was Customary in the Cathedral, and Country Churches. For this
Rule enjoins the frequent repeating of the Lords Prayer, The Apostles Creed;
The Responses, O Lord make speed to save us, etc. The Hymns and Antiphons,
particularly the Te Deum, Benedictus and Magnificat, The Collect for the Day,
the Kyrie Eleeson, or Lord have Mercy upon us, (by which sometimes is meant the
Litany) the Allelujah, and the like, ordaining the Psalter to be Read over in
their Office once every Week. But all these are known parts of ancient Liturgy,
and every one of them prescribed Forms; which by this time, had gained so great
Veneration for their Antiquity, and general use, all over Christendom, that
none durst presume to omit nor alter them; And Benedict's prescribing them to
his Monks, shows that he took them, out of the received Liturgies of his Time:
And by long usage the Forms themselves were so well known, that they are
described in the original Rule, only by the first words of the several Forms.
In like manner at the same time that Benedict was Famous in Italy, Tetradius
Nephew to Caesarius Bishop of Arles, Flourished in France; and he also writ a
Rule for his Monks, wherein we have the same Method observed; that is, to
oblige them to repeat the Psalms, and all the ancient Forms, diverse of which
are there briefly called by the two first words, as Gloria in Excelsis, is put
to signify, that well known Hymn, Glory be to God on High: And so for the rest
Bibl. Patr. Tom. V. p. 866. and Bona, de reb. Liturg. l. 1. c. 4.. 4. page 512.
. The same is also to be observed in another Rule, made within less than twenty
Years after this, by Valerianus Bishop of Arles Bona, ibid. and Cointe Annal.
Ann. 550.
. Now though these Orders of Monks did miserably degenerate afterward; Yet at
this time they were the best Men of the Age, Renouncing the World Sincerely,
and Serving God with Extraordinary Devotion; yet every Order had its prescribed
Forms of Praise and Prayer, none of them differing much from others; and all
taken out of the public Liturgies then in use in the Country, where they were
first planted, after the Example of those Egyptian Monks in the Fourth Century,
whom Cassian before described to us.

6. Let us now pass into the East, Justinianus, Aug. Ann. Dom. 530.
and see what Laws the famous Emperor Justinian made concerning the Liturgies,
which we have proved to have been established there, long before his Time. And
First He was much displeased at some who had been admitted into the inferior
Orders of the Clergy, though they were Illiterate; Wherefore he requires that
none shall for the future be ordained Priests and Deacons, unless at least,
they be able to Read, and can both instruct others in the holy Prayers, and
Read the Books of Ecclesiastical Canons Authent Collat. 1. Tit. 6. Nov. 6. cap.
4. page 13.
. Again the Religious Prince complains, that by the neglect of frequent Synods,
which would have obliged all the Clergy, to be well skilled in the holy
Liturgies; some, even of the highest Order, were not perfect in the holy Office
for the Communion, nor in the Prayer for Baptism. And therefore he appoints,
that before any Bishop be Consecrated, He shall publicly Read over the
Communion Office, The Prayers for Baptism, and all the other Supplications
(...) Idem. Authent. Collat. 9. Tit. 20. Nov. 13^. Praef. cap. 1. and 2.
. Now here we may observe, that the Prayers then in use, were called holy
Liturgies; and were such as could be Read, Learned and Taught: And the
Qualification of Persons to be Ordained, was not to be able to make new
Prayers, but to Read the ancient Forms, which it seems, were used also in the
Nunneries; and therefore this Emperor orders the Bishop to take care, that the
Nuns might have one grave old Man, to make the necessary Responses in their
Service; and that they should have a Priest, and a Deacon of unblameble Lives,
to perform the Divine Liturgies, and give them the holy Communion (...) Cod.
l^b. 1. Tit. 3. de Episc. and cler. l. 44. page 19.
. But if any had Built a private Oratory in his House, though he might perform
his Ordinary Devotions, yet he Ordains, that according to the Laws, delivered
in the Ecclesiastical Acts, touching the Worship of God, in public, they do not
presume there, to do any of those things, which are appointed by the holy
Liturgy (...) Authent. Coll. 5. T^t. 13. Nov. 58. p 91.
. Moreover as to the public Offices, the Emperor Decrees, that Stripes and
Banishment, shall be inflicted upon any that come into a Church, and injure the
Bishop or other Clergy; while the Divine Mysteries, or the holy Offices are
performing: But to disturb the Liturgy it self, is to be punished with Death.
And because Litanies were then said in the open Streets in procession, the
Emperor enjoins the Bishops and Clergy, to be always present at them, and makes
it capital to affront or disturb them, in that part of Divine Service (...),
etc. Authent. Col. 9. Tit. 6. Novel. 123. cap. 31. and 32. p. 174.
. All which Laws, suppose a prescribed Form of Service, and have the very name
of Liturgy for that Service, as every one will grant, who considers that the
Liturgies of S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, were constantly used in the Eastern
Church, both in and long before Justinians time. I know my Adversary pretends
((...)) Liturgy, in these Laws, signifies no more, than the exercise of any
Divine Ministrations Disc. of Lit. p. 157. 158.
: But if we grant that, it will not help his cause, nor hurt ours, because in
that Age and those Churches, it is certain all those Divine Ministrations were
performed by prescribed Forms; so that it is all one as to our dispute, whether
we translate ((...)) Liturgy or Ministration, because we are sure they
Ministered by Liturgies, as we now call them. For proof whereof, we have a
Memorable passage in the Council of Constantinople, under the Patriach Menna,
in this Emperors Reign; where it seems the Peoples extraordinary Zeal against
Heretics, could not be satisfied, unless the Bishops would put in the Names of
the four General Councils, into the Dyptics, to be Read at the Altar: And when
these Names were put in as they desired, the whole Multitude came together to
observe, and hear this new and grateful Addition: And dividing themselves into
two parts, they Sang, (for a long time) the Benedictus [Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel,] until the Choir began the Trisagion; to which they all listened, and
after the Reading of the holy Gospel, the Liturgy was performed according to
the Custom, (that, is the Office for Catechumens.) Then the Doors being shut,
and the holy accustomed Lessons read; At the time for Reading the Dyptics, all
the People with silence drew near to the Altar; and upon hearing the Deacon
recite those Names, they all Cried with a Loud Voice, Glory be to thee, O Lord;
and then through Gods help, the rest of the Liturgy was finished with all
Decency (...) Council. Constant. sub Men. Act. 5. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 1. page 733.
. Now here we have not only the Name of Liturgy used, in the sense we now take
it, but the several parts of it are set down, and particular notice of diverse
Forms therein contained, viz. The Benedictus, The Trisagion, and the Gloria
tibi Domine: The Prayers for the Catechumens, the Dyptics, etc. And the Prayers
themselves are called, the accustomed Liturgy, and said to be performed ((...))
with all good Order; that is, according to that excellent Order appointed, by
the ancient Liturgies.

7. Pope Vigilius lived in the time of this Emperor, Vigilius Ep. Romans An. Dom.
540.
and writes an Epistle to him, wherein he blesses God, for that Princes
Religious care of the Church; which requited him by her daily Prayers for him:
And Vigilius notes, that Justinians affection to the Church, was a sign that
their usual Prayer for it was heard, and Answered. And when he comes to
describe that Prayer, he does it in these Words, All Bishops by an ancient
Traditi^n, in the Communion Office desire and Pray that the Lord would please,
to Unite, Govern, and Preserve the Catholic Faith, throughout the whole World
Omnes Pontifices anti^ua in offerendo s^cripcio Traditione aepe^^mus,
excrantes, ut Catholicam fidem aduna^e, regere, Donamus and custodire toto or^e
dignetu^. Vigil. ep. 4. ad. Justin. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 5.
. Which Words are certainly the Roman Form, as it was in the days of Vigilius,
being according to the Book of Gelasius his Correcting, not much altered from
the Liturgy ascribed to S. Clement, or the old Roman Form before Gelasius Pro
Sancta tua Cat^olica and Apostolica Ec^lesia, ut pacificare, custodire, and
gubernare digneris, omnes fines terrae, Liturg. S. Clem. Bib. Patr. Tom. 2.
edit. Paris. p. 119.
. And when Gregory the Great in the next Century, corrected the Gelasian
Office, he evidently made his Form, out of both those elder Liturgies Pro
Eccles a tua Sancta Catholica, quam pacificare, custodire, adunare and reg^r^
^igneris toto terrarum erbe. Off^c. Gregorian. ibid. page 128.
; As the Reader will see by comparing the several ways of expressing this, in
these several Offices, in diverse Ages used in the Roman Church. Which shows not
only, that there was a Form of Prayer for the Church, professing the Catholic
Faith, in the time of Vigilius; but that the Form was then believed to be from
ancient Tradition, and was made almost in the very Words, which had been used
for many hundred Years before. Had Liturgies been newly set up, (as my
Adversary pretends) nothing had been more false, nor more Ridiculous, than to
allege an ancient Tradition for this Form; and had all Ministers before this
had the liberty to Pray, in what Expressions they pleased, nothing had been
more imposible, than this Harmony between these Offices, which only differ in
diverse Ages, by reason of the several Corrections of the Forms, but were always
in every Age done by a prescribed Form. Which will be still more plain by the
same Vigilius his Answer to the Consultations of Etherius, whom he first
informs concerning the certain Time on which Easter was to be kept for that
year: And because this Bishop was placed in a Country newly converted to the
Catholic Faith, and not yet well instructed in the regular way of performing
Divine Offices, he had (it seems) desired to know how they celebrated the
Service at Rome on the greater Festivals: To which Vigilius gives this Answer,
We also acquaint you, that as to the Order of Prayer in celebrating the
Communion, it is not different at any time, nor upon any Festival; but we
always consecrate the Gifts offered to God after the same Manner -- Then he
goes on to tell him, That they had indeed proper Prefaces, for commemorating
the Mercy peculiarly to be remembered in each of the greater Festivals -- And
then adds these Words, -- But the rest of the Service we perform according to
the accustomed Order: And therefore we have herewith sent you the Text it self
of that Canonical Prayer, which by Gods Mercy we have received from Apostolical
Tradition. And that you may know in what place to add proper things for each
Festival, we have also added the Prayers for Easter Day O^dinem qu^que precum
in celebritate M ssarar nullo n^s t^mpore, nu^^a (...) sign ^uaca^^ habere
a^v^^, sed semper ^^aem tenore oblata Deo munera consecrare -- and pp. --
Caetera vero Ordine consueto prosequimur. Qua prepter and ipsius Canonicae
precis textum direximus subter ad^^ect^^ qua^^^ (Deo propitio) ex Apostolica
traditione suscepimus, etc. V^g^l. Ep. 2. ad Ether^um, Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2.
page 4.
. Here we see the Communion-Service, and especially the Prayer of Consecration,
was an ancient Form derived from Apostolical Tradition, and the whole Office
was written down in a Book, and sent into that Country where Etherius was
Bishop, which some suppose to have been some parts of Spain, lately Converted
from Heresy Baron. Annal. An. 538. page 278, 279.
. And if so, probably this was the foundation of that Office which is called
the Mosarabick, and was Composed by S. Leander about Fifty year after, out of
the old Gothic and African Forms, compared with this Roman Office. However it
appears, that though in some places, where the Faith was newly planted, they
needed help to settle and correct their Offices; yet both the New and Ancient
Churches did all agree in the use of Forms: And when a new Liturgy was to be
made for a Newly Converted Nation, the Bishops consulted the most Ancient Forms
they could find in other Churches, choosing out of them what they thought
proper for their own Country, and that Form they enjoined upon all that were
under their Jurisdiction. We must also observe further, That the Roman Office
which was writ down, and the very Words of it sent to this Bishop, is called,
An Order of Prayer: Which therefore does not signify a bare Rubric for Method,
but a Book containing the Prefaces, Hymns and Prayers themselves: And thus it
is used in the Life of S. Laetus a Monk, who about this Time was ordained
Deacon: and He in a short time learned the Psalter, and all that the Ecclesiast
call Order required; so as to be more perfect in them than many were, who had
been longer used to them Cointe Annal. E^^les. ^ra^^. An 533. page 413.
. This Ecclesiastical Order was a Book as well as the Psalter, and this
ingemous Monk got to say the very Words of them both, by Heart. But to return
to Pope Vigilius; He was so tenacious of Forms, that he warns Etherius not to
permit one Syllable to be altered in the Gloria Patri: Which the Catholics by
ancient Custom use to say after the Ps ^ms, thus, Glory be to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; but some Heretics a little before presumed
to leave out the last [and] saying it thus, -- and to the Son, the Holy Ghost;
which he co^demus as an Heretical Variation V^^ Ep. 2. ibid. page 4.
. But it had been impossible to secure the Orthodox Forms, if my Adversaries
pretended liberty of varying the Words of their Prayers and Praises had then
been allowed in the Church: Nay, if that had been permitted in former Ages,
there would have been no certain Primitive Forms left, by which they could have
corrected these Heretical Innovations.

8. In the East we have further Evidence of the continuance of Liturgick Forms;
Council. Mopsevest. An. D. 550
for in the Council of Mopsvestia, the Fathers there assembled pray for the
Emperor in that ancient and generally received Form, O Lord, save the
Emperor; And hear him whenever he calls upon thee Salvum fac Domine
Imperatorem, and exaudi eum quacunque die te invocaverit. Vid. Synod. Quint.
collat. 5. apud Bin. Tom. II. par. 2. page 83. Anastasius Sinaita, Patriar.
Antioch. An. Dom. 560.
. But soon after this we have sufficient Proof, that the whole Liturgy
transcribed in the Apostolical Constitutions, and showed to have been the
Antiochian Office some Ages before, was still in use there: For Anastasius, who
had been a Monk of Mount Sinai, being now Patriarch of Antioch, has some
Homilies (owned to be genuine) still extant, wherein he refers to, and expounds
the Words and Actions prescribed by that ancient Liturgy. As first, He bids
them mind the Deacons Voice when he cries, Stand with reverence; stand with
fear --; bow down your Heads. And again, The Priest (says he) engages you to
attend when he bids you, Lift up your Hearts: And what do you Answer? Do you
not Reply, We lift them up unto the Lord? Adding, That the Peoples joining
their part to the Priests, made the Prayers to be more effectual. He goes on to
tell them -- The Angels minister at the holy Liturgy -- The Cherubins stand
round about, and with sweet Voices sing the Trisagion, Holy, Holy, Holy; and
the Seraphins bow and adore. He mentions also the Lords Prayer, as being daily
repeated by all in the Communion-Office; and Comments upon that ancient Form,
Give holy things to those that are holy Arastas. Sin. Orat de sacr. Synaxt in
Auctario Bib. Pati. Tom. 2. col 9, and 10.
. Now these Passages, and in this Order, may be seen in diverse ancient
Liturgies, particularly in that which is set down in the Constitutions; which
shows, that the same Forms were used at Antioch in this Age, which had been
used there in diverse of the foregoing Centuries: And though in these Homilies
he does transcribe no more of them, but only such parts of the Liturgy as were
proper to move the People to come to the Communion with Devotion and Reverence.
Charity and holy Resolutions; yet by those which he occasionally mentions, and
by the Order of them, we may discern the ancient Forms were still in use there,
with little or no Variation.

. 9. By this Time diverse Parts of Spain had embraced the Catholic Faith,
Council. Bracar. I. An. Dom. 563.
and therefore now the Orthodox Bishops met in a Council at Braga; and after
they had caused the Book of ancient Canons to be publicly read before them,
they gather out of them some that were of present use, and revive them by a
fresh imposing them. The first thing they labor to regulate, is that variety
of Forms and different ways of Divine Service, which the mixture of diverse
Nations and Opinions had produced among them; therefore the first Canon is,
That one and the same Order of Singing shall be kept in Morning and Evening
Prayer, and that no different Customs, either of private Men or of Monasteries,
shall be mixed with the Ecclesiastical Rule Ut unus atque idem Psallendi ordo
in Matutinis vel Vespertinis officiis teneatur, and non diversae ac privatae
neque Monasteriorum consuetudines cum Ecclesiastica regula sint permixtae.
Council. Brac. Can 1. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 211.
. The Morning and Evening Offices consisted chiefly of Psalms and Hymns, with
some proper Collects, and were all (or the most part of them) chanted and sung;
which cannot be in a public Congregation, unless the Form and Words be known
before. Wherefore for these Mattens and Vespers, they had established One
Order. Besides these, there was the Communion-Office before Noon, and for that
they had also a Prescribed Form; which they call here, The Ecclesiastical Rule;
and since some private Persons presumed to alter this, and others followed some
of the Forms prescribed by the Rules of certain Monasteries, they utterly
reject these Variations, and bind them all to the public Liturgy. This is the
plain sense of the Canon, and therefore Ordo Psallendi, and Ecclesiastica
Regula, must be more than a Rubric; for these confined them to Sing the Mattens
and Vespers in the same words, and to celebrate the Communion-Service by such a
certain Rule as admitted of no Variation. And the following Canons make this
still more plain: The Second is, That on the Vigils of Feasts, and at the
Communion, all shall read the same, and not different Lessons in the Church.
The Third orders, That Bishops and Priests shall use the same Form of Saluting
the People, viz. The Lord be with you; To which they shall Answer, And with thy
Spirit; even as the whole East has retained it from the Apostles, and not as
the Priscillianists have altered it. The Fourth Canon is, That the
Communion-Office shall by all be celebrated, by that same Order which
Profuturus, formerly Bishop of this Church, received in Writing from the
Apostolical See. The Fifth enjoins, That none pass by that Order of Baptizing
which the Church of Braga anciently used; and which, to avoid all doubts
concerning the same, Profuturus had received in Writing from the Sea of S.
Peter Council. Bracar. l. Can. 2, 3, 4, and 5. apud Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page
212.
. Here we have one Calendar fixed, appointing the very same Lessons; one Form
of Salutation, derived from the Apostles; one Written Form for the celebration
of the Eucharist; and another, being the Order of Baptism, which in the days of
a Bishop (who was dead some years before this Council) were sent in Writing
from Rome, and had been ever since used in these Provinces; which can be
nothing else but a Liturgy, from which they will not suffer any Minister to
vary in the least. And it signifies nothing to allege, That this is one of the
first Injunctions for such Uniformity in this Country, that had been for an Age
and more overrun with Barbarous People, and overspread with Heresies; because
there are evident Supposals, That the Ancient Churches, which had not been
renversed by these Calamities, but kept to their old accustomed Ways, furnished
the New regulated Churches with ancient Forms, which had been used among them
from the Primitive Ages; and that sufficiently proves the Antiquity of
Liturgies. My Adversary, who conceals all this Evidence, cites the 30th Canon
of this Council, but very falsely; for he reads it thus, Besides the Psalms of
the Old Testament, let nothing Poetically Composed be Sung in the Church; and
he false dates it also Disc. of Lit. page 179. Council. Bracar. Can. 30. An. 565.
. But the Words of the Canon are a Translation of the Canon of Laodicea, made
200 years before, Forbidding the Singing of any Poetical Compositions in the
Church, except the Psalms, and what Hymns were taken out of the Canonical Books
of the Old and New Testament Vid. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 212.
; which was designed, to set aside the late composed Hymns of the Arians, used
among the Heretical Goths, and other corrupt modern Composures: Not to reject
the Magnificat, the Benedictus, Nunc dimittis, and other Canonical Hymns, which
our Dissenters now totally disuse. He adds, That Ordo Psallendi, in the Council
of Tours, signifies not what, but how many Psalms shall be Sung Disc. of Lit.
page 174.
: But let the Canon be consulted, and any Man who knows the Custom of the Age
will see, that the design of that Canon was to establish a Calendar, which did
appoint and prescribe the very Psalms, as well as the Number, which were to be
Sung at the certain Seasons there mentioned Vid. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. in
Council. Turon. 2. An. 570. Can. 19. p. 228.
: And he unfortunately forgot one Canon of this Council of Tours, which
enlarges the former Canon of Braga, and takes in all the ancient Hymns, which
he pretends are rejected by that Canon; for it says, Though we have the Hymns
of Ambrose in the Canon; yet since we have other Forms worthy to be Sung, we
willingly receive them, unless they have no Authors Name in the Title; because,
if they be agreeable to the Faith, they ought not to be left out of use Ib.
Can. 24. page 230.
. So that we see, this Canon owns the Te Deum, the Benedicite, and other Hymns,
provided they be Orthodox, and the Authors were known Friends to the Catholic
Faith; and here are Forms supposed as generally used, and a Council to allow
them, after which the Church may use them, though they be not taken out of
Canonical Scripture. I have no more to add here, but a scattered Passage or
two, to confirm the continuance of the old Forms in the Gallican Church. First,
Whereas there was a necessity of leaving the Priest at liberty, to put the
Names of those who Offered, into the Prayer for all Estates of Men, some
ventured to take more freedom, and in that part of the Office varied from their
Mother Church: Which occasioned a Council at Arles to Decree, That the
Oblations made at the Holy Altar, should not be offered up by any of the
Bishops of that Province, otherwise than according to the Form used in the
Church of Arles Council. Arelat. An. Dom. 554. Can. 1. apud Cointe Annal. page
799.
. Or if (with some) we expound this Canon of the Prayer of Consecration, still
it proves, That the Forms used in the Metropolitan Church, were to be an
invariable Rule to all the Churches in that Province. The Council of Tours also
(before cited) mentions Litanies, Antiphons, and the Hallelujah Council. Turon.
2. An. 570. Can. 18, etc.
: And we have a farther account of the Use of Litanies there, in the first
Council of Lions Council. Ludg. 1. eod. An. Can. 6. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page
232.
: All which are the Forms which we have showed were in use in the preceding
Centuries. And when Chilperic (a King of France) about this Time pretended to
Compose new Hymns and Prayers, our Author tells us, They would by no means
receive them into the Churches Offices Greg. Turon. lib. 6. cap. 46. page 308.
; for those were fixed before, and none but a Council of Bishops could be
permitted to alter or add to them. I had almost forgot Martin, Bishop of Braga,
Martin Episcop. Bracar. An. Dom. 572.
who came into that See very soon after the forementioned Council, and being a
Grecian by Birth, he collected and translated diverse Canons of the Greek Church
into Latin for the use of Spain; in which Collection of his we have very many
plain Indications of a Liturgy. One of these Canons obliges every Clergyman in
a City, or any place where there is a Church, to be present at the daily Office
of Singing Mattens and Vespers Canones Martin. Bracar. Can. 63. Bin. Tom. 2.
par. 2. page 246.
: And another forbids New composed Psalms, made by some of the Vulgar, to be
said in the Church Ib. Can. 67.
. For indeed the Hours of Prayer, and the Offices appointed for them, were then
so fixed, that as none might neglect them, so none were allowed to change them,
or add to them, in any sort whatsoever. And I must note (by the way) that this
very Martin, who collected these Canons, was he that had Converted the Suevians
in Spain to the Catholic Faith, that so we may be satisfied, that part of Spain
a little before this, had a second and New Conversion; and that gave occasion
to diverse of these Canons for an Uniformity in the Divine Service, which was to
be established there.

Pelagius II. Ep. Romans An Dom. 577.
. 10. To proceed with the Western Church; the Bishops of France and Germany
about this Time desired Pope Pelagius the Second, to inform them what were the
Prefaces then used in the Roman Church; that is, what Festivals there were upon
which they made a peculiar Addition to the Primitive Form of Lift up your
Hearts, etc. suitable to the occasion of that particular Festival: And his
Reply is this, Having diligently read over the holy Roman Order, and the sacred
Constitutions of our Predecessors, we find only these Nine Prefaces to be
received into the Sacred Catalogue, which for many Ages past the Roman Churches
Truth has hitherto observed Sacrum Ordinem Romanum, sacraque constituta
nostrorum Antecessorum solerter relegentes invenimus has novem Praesationes in
sacro Catalogo tantuminodo recipiendas, quas longa retro veritas in Romana
Ecclesia hactenus servavit. Pelag. Ep. 11. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 259.
: And then he proceeds to reckon up the particulars, viz, The first at Easter,
The second at Ascension-day, The third at Pentecost, The fourth at Christmas,
The fifth at the Epiphany, The sixth on the Festival of the Apostles, The
seventh on Trinity Sunday, The eighth, on the Feast of the Cross; The ninth in
Lent, and time of Fasting. From which Answer, it appears the holy Roman Order
was a Written Book; a Liturgy, containing not only the Method in which the
several parts of the Offices were disposed, but the very Forms themselves at
large, and particularly the several proper Prefaces for the great Festivals: As
also it is affirmed, That these proper Prefaces, of which he has here occasion
to treat, had been prescribed in this Roman Liturgy long before this Time, and
for diverse Ages had been preserved therein: Which shows there were Written
Forms at Rome in very early Times, and that they were no invention of this or
the last Age. And we may give the more credit to this Assertion, because even
to this very Time the Church of Rome was wholly free from the corrupt and
superstitious Worship, which since they have given to the Blessed Virgin Mary,
there being not to be found at this Time, one Festival dedicated to her Honor,
which had a special Preface appropriate to it in the Offices then used at Rome,
to the shame of the later Popes, who have made the Worship of the Virgin, the
main part of all their Offices.

Leander Episc. H ^pal. An. Dom. 588.
. 11. After the Steps made toward one uniform Liturgy, among the Suevians in
the Province of Gallicia, by the Consultation of Vigilius and the Council of
Braga; Leander, the famous Bishop of Sevil, Converted Reccaredus (King of the
Goths) from Arianism, within a few years after these Goths had Conquered the
Suevians, and were become Lords of all Spain: And the first Care he took was to
purge out the Errors from the Gothic Office, and to take away the various Forms
used in the several Provinces of Spain, which had been Peopled with several
Nations, governed by different Kings, and had held diverse Opinions in Religion;
but he now composes one. Office for the whole Kingdom, which his next Successor
Isidore perfected and fully settled there: For which Reason the Writers of this
History generally ascribe it to them both. Roderic of Toledo calls it, The
Office of the Mass, instituted by the Bishops Leander and Isidore Roderic.
Tolet. de reb. Hispan. lib. 6. cap. 25.
. And Jo. Vasaeus in his Chronicle says, The Christians who lived among the
Arabians were called Mozarabes, that is, Mixed with the Arabians; and therefore
they used that Ecclesiastical Office then, which S. Leander and Isidore
composed, and all Spain used it until the days of Alfonso the Sixth Jo. Vasaei
Chron. Hispan^ page 579.
. But that Leander first put this Office into order, is plain from the
Testimony of Isidore himself; who faith, Leander took no small pains in the
Ecclesiastical Offices; and in the Hymns at the Communion and Psalms, he
Composed many sweet things Isidor. de script. Eccles. in Leandr. vict. Bona de
reb. Liturg. lib. 1. cap. 11. p. 364.
. Another Historian says, Leander writ one Book of Prayers, and another of the
Communion Fran. Taraph, de reg. Hisp. page 704.
. Wherefore we conclude, that this Leander having before him the Liturgy used
by the Arian Goths, the Order made for the Suevians in Gallicia: And probably
the Gallican. Roman, and African Forms, made up one Office out of them all,
which afterward (when the Moers (who spoke Arabic) came into Spain, and were
some of them Converted to the Faith) was called the Mozarabic Liturgy; which is
extant to this day in the Bibliotheca Patrum, and elsewhere Bib. Patr. edit.
Colon. Tom. 15 p. 777. vid. Ben. de reb. Liturg. lib. 1. cap. 11, and 12. and
in Appendice.
. For that this was not the first time that prescribed Forms were used in these
Parts of the World, is evident from what has been showed before concerning the
Goths and Suevians both in France and Spain, and may further appear by these
few Observations, viz. That the old Gothic Office, yet retains a Collect on S.
Martins-day, wherein he is called, A Man whom our Age has produced. Now S.
Martin died An. Dom. 402. and therefore the Missal from whence Leander or
Isidore took this Form, must have been composed in the Fifth century, that is,
as soon as the Goths in France became Christians: And Gregory of Tours mentions
an Ambassador coming from Leonigild (the Father of Reccaredus) who was an
Arian, and so was this Ambassador, for he would not Communicate with them in
France, because they did not say, Glory be to the Father by the Son, as they
did in their Offices in Spain Greg. Turon. lib. 6. cap. 48. page 289.
: And in the Third Council of Toledo, under Reccaredus the First Orthodox
Gothish King, when Leader had begun to correct the Arian Forms, they pronounce
an Anathema against all that say, Glory be to the Father by the Son; and will
not say, To the Father and the Son Council. Tolet. 3. An. 589. ap. Bin. Tom. 2.
par. 2. page 276.
. So that we see the Goths had Forms suited to their Heresy while they were
Arians; but made Orthodox as soon as they embraced the Catholic Faith.
Moreover, this same Council (which was before Isidore's Time) in order to
discover those who yet secretly favored Arianism, Ordain, That the Creed shall
be repeated by all the People with an audible Voice, before the Lords Prayer in
the Communion Council. Tol. t. 3. Can. 2. ibid.
; Which Usage still is kept in the Mozarabic Liturgy, and is peculiar to that
Office. From all which we may infer, That Leander compiled this Office, but did
not first invent the Forms; only he collected them out of more ancient
Liturgies, especially the old Gallican Missal, which the Arian Goths had
corrupted, but he now restored it to its ancient Purity; and therefore there is
a very great Agreement between the old Gallican and Mozarabic Missals; and they
are nearer to each other, than either of them are to the ancient Roman Forms:
Which confirms our Observation, That this Age did not first Worship God by
Liturgies, but continued the ancient Way; only by the New Conversion of diverse
Countries from Paganism or Heresy, one pure Liturgy was collected, and
published for the use of that Country or Province, from which none of their
Ecclesiastics were allowed to vary. The Orthodox and Heretics agreed in the use
of Forms, none so much as thought of Extempore Prayers; no Nation pleaded for,
expected or enjoyed such a Liberty; nor did any of the Clergy or Laity
complain, That the imposing there Forms was an Innovation, or hindrance to
their Gifts, or an invading of their Christian Liberty.

. 12. There is nothing clearer in all History, S. Gregor. Mag. Episc. Roman.
An. Dom. 590.
than that there was a Canon or Form of Consecrating the Communion at Rome,
long before the Time of S. Gregory the Great. The very Words of it have been
produced out of S. Ambrose his Book of Sacraments, An. 374. and we have proved
it cited by the Author of the Questions out of the Old and New Testament, who
writ in the Fourth Century: We have also brought in the plain Testimonies of
Innocent, Celestine, Leo, Gelasius and Vigilius, all of them Bishops of Rome
long before Gregory's Time: And we now add, That Johan. Moschus declares, there
was a certain Form of the Canon at Rome, in the Time of Pope Agapetus, who
lived An. 535 Joan. Mosch. pratum Spirit. cap. 150. Bib. Patr. Tom. page 1121.
: And that the Lord Du Plessis (whom my Adversary cites often) shows very
largely, that there was a Canon of the Mass at Rome, which was very pure and
Orthodox, before Gregory's Time; yea, he sets down diverse parts of it, and
assures us it was common to all, both Priests and People Mornay of the Mass,
Book I. Chapter 7. page 53.
: And John the Deacon, who writ S. Gregory's Life says, That he corrected the
Gelasian Book for the Communion-Office, taking away some things, altering some
few, and adding other things to explain the Gospels, putting it all into one
Volume Johan. Diac. vit. Gregor. lib. 2. cap. 17.
. Which shows there was a Canon before, written down in the Gelasian Book,
which S. Gregory only altered in some few things; and it does not appear he
added any more to it, except these Words, O Lord, order our days in thy Peace,
deliver us from Eternal damnation, and make us to be numbered among the Flock of
thine Elect: For these are the only Words that all Writers say were of his
Making, and which he added to the Canon Johan. Diac. ut supr. Item Pedae
histor. lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 53 Naucler. Gener. 20. page 743. ita Platina vit.
Greg. page 82.
; wherefore he was only the Corrector of the Old Canon, not the Maker of a New
one. And whereas some Authors of later Times ascribe the Composing of the Roman
Offices to him, we have seen it is usual in most Writers to call such as only
corrected and reformed Liturgies, The Authors of them; by which they mean no
more, than those who published them in a more complete Form than before. But my
Adversary, who can prove any thing, undertakes to make out two difficult things
in relation to this Pope Gregory: First, That there was no Form of Consecration
at Rome before his time. Secondly, That when another had made this Form, he did
not impose it on others Disc. of Lit. page 83, 84, 85, 86, 87.
. The former of these Assertions he proves from a Passage in Saint Gregory his
Epistles, which the ignorant editor of the Discourse of Liturgies has put into
a wrong Page: But I shall cite it at large, and then will examine the true
meaning of it: We therefore say the Lords Prayer immediately after the Prayer
(of Consecration), because it was the custom of the Apostles with that Prayer
alone to Consecrate the Host; and it seems to me very inconvenient, that we
should say over the Host that Prayer which a Scholastical Man had composed, and
not say that Form which our Lord himself composed, over his Body and Blood Ut
precem quam Scholasticus composuerat super Oblationem diceremus -- etc. Greg.
Epist. 63. lib. 7. page 230.
. Now from hence he gathers, that Scholasticus is a Man's Name, who was
Contemporary with S. Gregory; and since he affirms, this Scholasticus composed
the Canon, therefore the Canon (as he pretends) could not be made before
Gregory's Time: The weakness and mistakes of which Inference we shall easily
perceive, if we consider the occasion and the sense of these Words: S. Gregory
was accused for imitating the Custom at Constantinople, In ordering the Lords
Prayer to be repeated immediately after the Canon; and these Words are his
defense of his bringing in this Custom. Now doubtless it had been more
rational, to object his setting up a New Canon made by a late obscure Author,
if he had done any such thing, than to allege his only adding the Lords Prayer
to it; and if he had first brought in this Canon of Scholasticus, that had been
an imitation of Constantinople too, so far as it was a Canon; for they had long
used the Canon of S. Basil, and that of S. Chrysostom there; but of this the
Objectors take no notice, which makes it probable, that the Canon was settled
long before; it was a Prayer which he found, and added the Lords Prayer to it.
But my Adversary urges S. Gregory's Saying, That the Apostles only Consecrated
with the Lords Prayer, and therefore Scholasticus his Canon must be composed
about S. Gregory's Time. Why so? was there not above Five hundred years between
the Apostles and S. Gregory? If this Canon were not extant in their Time, might
it not be made in some of the intervening Ages, and yet be long enough before
S. Gregory? And indeed there is a Mistake (as learned Men think) in the Popes
premises; for he is supposed to refer to S. Hierom, who only says, Christ
taught his Apostles, that the Faithful might daily say in the Sacrifice of his
Body; Our Father Hieren. adv. Pelag. Tom. 2. page 469.
. But neither he, nor any Ancient Writer before this Gregory, did ever affirm,
That the Apostles themselves used no other Form of Consecration, but only the
Lords Prayer, it being generally believed they used the Words of Institution
(recorded in the Gospel) and the Lords Prayer when they Consecrated, to which
long before S. Basil's and S. Ambrose his Time (as we have showed) other parts
of the Canon were added: And for the Roman Canon, whatever Du-Moulin and my
Adversary say Disc. of Lit page 84, and 85.
, Du-Plessis, and other both ancient and modern Writers do agree, That several
of the old Popes made the several Parts of it, in diverse Ages, long before the
Time of Gregory Mornay of the Mass, B.I. Chap. 6. p. 44.
: But Gelasius gathered together all these Additions, and put them into that
Form wherein Gregory found it; and he (as Cassander thinks) is called by the
Title of Scholasticus, because he was first a Scholastical Man before he was
chosen Pope Gelasius ex Scholastico Papa factus. Exp. vet. Miss. ap. Cassand.
de Liturg. lib. 1.
. And if this be so (as it is very probable), then Scholasticus is not any Man's
proper Name, but a Title used in that Age for any Learned and Well-read Man,
and so applied to Gelasius, who lived near an Hundred years before S. Gregory:
So the word Scholasticus is taken, I am sure, in many ancient Authors Aug.
Tract. 7. in Johan. Hieron. de vir. illustr. and Salvian. praef. ad libr. de
gub. Dei, ap. Bon. rerum Liturg. p. 557.
. And in that Sense of an elegant and learned Man it is, that we find
Capitolinus use it Capitolin. in vit. Maximin. junior.
, and so does Sulpitius Severus Sulpic. Sev. dial. 1.
, and Macarius Macar. hom. 15.
; so Suidas calls Agathias by the Title of Scholasticus Suid. in Agathia.
; and Prudentius is called Hispaniarum Scholasticus, by Walafridus Strabo
Walafr. Strab. de reb. Eccles. cap. 25.
; yea, Synesius long before gives that Title to a learned Friend of his Synes.
op. 155, 156.
, and Elpidius has the Name of Scholasticus, in Leontius Leont. Mechan. de
Arat. sphaer.
: Which is enough to prove, That for diverse Ages this had been a Title; and in
S. Gregory he plainly opposes a Prayer, composed by a Divine Person, such as
the Lords Prayer is, to one made by an human Author, by a Learned and
Scholastical Man; by which he means either in general, all the old Popes who
first put in the several Parts; or rather Gelasius, who settled the Canon made
up of those Parts, and so may be said to be the Author thereof: And thus all my
Adversaries dreams of a Man called Scholasticus, contemporary to S. Gregory,
fall to the ground. But still he persists in this Notion, and says, Bellarmin
thinks it is not improbable, that Scholasticus was a Man's Name then alive. I
Reply, Bellarmin Bellarm. de Miss. lib. 2. c. 19.
only recites this as Chemnitius's Opinion, but disputes against it; and yet
adds, if he should yield this to gratify his Adversary, it would not follow
that the Canon was made by him, because S. Gregory's Words may be expounded,
not of the Canon, but of some lesser Collects, of later composure, used in the
Communion-Office; and then adds, Vtraque probabilis, both Opinions, viz. of the
Canon being made by an ancient Learned Father, entitled Scholasticus, and of
the Words signifying other Prayers, are probable: But my Adversary wilfully
perverts Bellarmin, as if he affirmed, it was probable that Scholasticus
(Author of the Canon) lived in Gregory's Time; which the Cardinal utterly and
with good Reason denies, because there was a Canon at Rome diverse Ages before;
and that which Gregory here speaks of, was writ down by Gelasius before the End
of the last Century. And here let it be noted, That though S. Gregory prefer
the Lords Prayer, whose Authority was Divine, before this Prayer of
Ecclesiastical and Human Composition, yet he gives great regard to it; for he
calls the Elements only, The Host, or The Oblation, before this Canon be
repeated; but after the pronouncing this Prayer over it, he calls it Christ's
Body and Blood: Which shows, That he thought the Consecration was made by this
very Prayer, though it were only an Human Composure. And this was not his
Opinion alone, but was believed generally in that Age, as may appear by the
Case of Januarius (proposed to Gregory) who was sometimes taken so ill, even at
the Sacrament, that he was a great while before he could go on at the same
place of the Canon, where he left off; which made many doubt, whether or no
they might receive the Communion from him, because they feared, that a Mistake
in this Prayer would make the Consecration null Gregor. Epist. 56. lib. 11. page
. Now it is no way probable, that a Prayer lately made by an obscure and
private Man, should so suddenly gain the reputation of being a necessary part
of the Office: And therefore we may conclude this first Assertion of his to be
false, and no way deducible from S. Gregory's Words, since it opposes so much
Reason and so great Authority. But Secondly, Whoever made this Canon, or
whenever it was made, my Adversary says, That S. Gregory was not for
imposing it; which he hopes to prove by his not imposing this Canon upon
Augustine the Monk, whom he had sent to Convert the Saxons then in this Island;
For he advised him to a Course inconsistent with any restraint. Now all this is
to insinuate, that it is ill done of our Church to impose her Liturgy upon her
own Clergy, because (as he pretends) Bid says, S. Gregory did not impose the
Roman Canon on Austin the Monk. An heavy Charge this, and well proved, as we
shall see by the true Quotation of Bede's Words, half of which my Adversary
has left out: Augustine had enquired, why since there was but One Faith, there
were diverse Liturgies, and in this case, which he should choose to establish
here? And Bid thus relates S. Gregory's Answer: Your Brotherhood knows the
Custom of the Roman Church, in which you were brought up; but I am content,
that whatever you can find in the Roman, the Gallican, or any Church, which may
best please Almighty God, you do carefully choose that -- [here He fraudulently
draws a Line] -- [But Bid goes on thus -- ] And infuse into your New Converted
Church of England, by a special Institution, what you so gather from several
Churches [ -- Here he comes in again -- ] For things are not to be beloved for
the places sake, but places are to be beloved for the good things that are
there; wherefore out of every Church choose such things as are pious, religious
and right -- [Here he concludes, but S. Gregory goes on] -- and gathering these
into one Collection, deposit them for Customs in the Minds of the English.
Never was poor Author so mangled, to serve an ill Cause; two long Sentences
left out, one in the Middle, and another at the End; to find out which base and
disingenuous Fallacy, I desire the Reader will compare Gregory's full Answer as
it is Recorded in Bid, and Sir Henry Spelman Bed. hist. lib. 1. cap 27. and
Spelm. Council. Vol. l. page
, with his circumcised Citation thereof Disc. of Lit. Marg. page 85^
; and then he will discern his Fraud in concealing the directions for Augustine,
to make a special institution of the things he had so Collected into one Body
of a Liturgy; and then by a New Form daily to be used, to fix them in the Minds
of the English, by a Custom; Which utterly overthrows his pretended Liberty?
For S. Gregory supposes every Church had a Written Liturgy, which Augustine
might read over and compare: And he advises Augustine, to read over the several
Liturgies of several Churches, the Roman, the Gallican, etc. and out of all
these, to compose One Form, and then to enjoin it on the English, and by daily
use to accustom them to it. This is all the Restraint that is practiced now:
Our Reformers did read over all Liturgies, and chose out the best things from
each, put them together in one Volume, and then required these Forms should be
daily used, so that both Priests and People might be accustomed to them. And as
S. Gregory did not impose the Roman Liturgy or Canon upon Augustine the Monk,
who lived in a distant Country and in a distinct National Church; so we do not
impose ours upon Denmark or Sweden, upon the Dutch or the Helvetians: But to
argue from hence, We are not for imposing our own Liturgy upon our own Clergy,
is so weak, so obvious a Fallacy, as deserves to be laughed at rather than
seriously confuted. Again, because Gregory (the Patriarch of the West) took the
liberty to correct the Roman Offices, by that which he approved of, in the
Forms of other National Churches Disc. of Liturgies, p. 87.
: And because he would not impose the Trine Immersion used at Rome, upon
Leander's New Converted, distant Church in Spain Gregor. Ep. 41. ad laeanat.
lib. 1.
; Therefore every Parish Priest and private Minister may vary from the Liturgy
of his own Church daily, if he please: And therefore no Bishops ought to impose
any Liturgy upon their own Clergy, living under them in the same Diocese or
Nation. This is such woeful Sophistry, that I am sure he cannot impose this sort
of Arguing upon any rational Men; yet if these Inferences be not drawn from S.
Gregory's Answer, it makes nothing to his purpose, unless it be to prove, there
were no Forms imposed in Gregory's Time. But how can that be squeezed out of
any of these Passages? The Epistle first cited, supposes a Form of Prayers
extant, and imposed at Rome before S. Gregory's Time, wherein the Hallelujah
was never sung but between Easter and Pentecost, which ordered the Subdeacons
to wear Surplices when they sang the Litany in Processions; in which Litany by
the old Form they did not repeat the Kyrie Eleeson often; nor was the Lords
Prayer in the Communion Office of that old Book, prescribed to be used
immediately after the Canon: But this Epistle shows, that Gregory had altered
the ancient Liturgy of Rome in all these Particulars, and made it agreeable to
the Liturgy at Constantinople, from which place he was lately come: And this he
was censured for by some; this he excuses in the whole Epistle Gregor. Ep. 63.
lib. 7. page 230.
. Wherefore here was a Form imposed before his Time, and he imposes it again
(with his Corrections) upon his own Church, or else what need the Clergy under
his Jurisdiction complain? Indeed he did not impose it on Spain, France or
Britain, which were not (in that Age) under his Authority; but he was strict
enough at Rome, and in the Churches then subject to that See: He corrected the
Book of Gelasius, and imposed that there; He compiled Hymns and Antiphons, and
brought in a New way of Singing them, teaching Boys to do it with skill, so
that soon after all the West imitated that Way Johan. Diac. vit. Greg. lib. 2.
cap. 6.
: He compiled that Book for the Communion-Service, which still is called his
Sacramentary, wherein are all the Forms used at Rome for the Eucharist Id. ib.
c. 17.
: He brought in the Sevenfold Litany, and prescribed how and when it should be
used Naucler. Gen 20. p. 743. Platin. page 82. and Johan. Diac. in vit.
. And all these Parts of Liturgy were by him imposed on the Roman Church; and
will my Adversary still pretend, he was against the imposing Forms of Praise
and Prayer? Did he take all this pains for his own private use? Did all the
West voluntarily conform to this, and yet was it not used and observed at Rome,
any further than the Clergy pleased? These are wild Conjectures. But he says,
Cassander publishes the Ordo Romanus, in which there are no Forms of Prayer,
but only the Order wherein they proceeded. I Reply, Those Copies which
Cassander publishes, are only a Breviat of S. Gregory's Liturgy; and therefore
the Hymns and Prayers he composed are not set down at large there; yet when
this was writ out, these Forms were so well known that they are named often,
only by two words of the beginning of each Form: Ex. gr. Gloria Patri --, Kyrie
Eleeson --, Gloria in excelsis --, Dominus vobiscum --, etc. Cassander de
Liturg. lib. ^.
. Which shows the Forms were then well known, and had been so long used, as to
be understood by short hints in this Epitome of the Gregorian Office: But my
Adversary knew well, that the Sacramentary of Gregory is extant in his Works,
wherein all the Prayers and Antiphons, etc. are set down at large which Gregory
made and imposed on the Roman Church, and therefore it is disingenuous in him,
to argue for his pretended liberty from this Epitome. There is but one thing
more in my Adversary relating to this Matter, which is, That Augustine being not
imposed on by S Gregory, would not impose it on the Britains Disc. of Lit. page
87, and 88.
; which he gathers from this, viz. That the Britains and Scots were Enemies to
the Roman Use in Gildas his Time, and had no Uniformity in Worship long after.
Now to his Position, I say, That if Augustine followed Gregory's Advice (as no
doubt he did) then he did impose, not the Roman Forms, but those of his own
collecting, upon the Saxons, which I shall prove more largely afterward: But
as for the Britains, they were a distinct Christian Church then, and did owe no
manner of subjection to Augustine; so that it had been ridiculous i^ him to have
imposed a Newly comp^^^d Liturgy upon them. They were no more obliged to
receive his Forms, than we are to receive those of Geneva, or they to observe
ours. Again, as to his Proof, How does the Britains rejecting the Roman Use in
Gildas's Time, prove, That they had no Forms imposed on them by Augustine?
Gildas died (according to Bishop Usher) An. 570. that is, Thirty years before
Augustine the Monk came in Cave Cartoph. Eccles. in Gild. Badon. page
; so that their dislike of the Roman Usages then, is nothing to Augustin's
Impositions. Besides, The Roman Liturgy and Augustin's were two different
things, and therefore it is very weak to prove, they did not receive Augustin's
Liturgy from their rejecting the Roman Usage, since they were different things:
So that this would be a good Argument, if it were not as destitute of Logic and
Chronology, as it is of Truth; For Augustine did make a Form, and impose it on
the Saxons under his Jurisdiction, and they received it, and used it long
after. As for the Britains, Scots and Irish, in that Age, they belonged not to
him, and so he could impose nothing on them: And for their Uniformity, I shall
clear that Point after a little while. For what has been observed (I hope) may
suffice to prove, That imposed Liturgies were in use in all Churches, long
before the Time of Gregory the Great.

Leontius Bizantin. An. D. 594.
. 13. Toward the End of this Century, Leontius of Bizantium writ his Books
against Nestorius and Eutyches; wherein he complains of Theodorus of
Mopsevestia, the Master of Nestorius, That he not only corrupted the Scripture
but presumed to do another Evil equal to that, viz. That he foolishly invented
a New Liturgy, besides that which the Fathers delivered to the Churches,
neither reverencing that of the Apostles, nor that which the Great S. Basil
writ by the same Spirit; in which Liturgy of his, he filled the Mystery of the
Eucharist with Blasphemies rather than Prayers: And can we now (says Leontius)
reasonably expect any other Antichrist, since this Man so desperately hates
Christ, and changes the things that are Christ's Leont. Bizan. adver. Nestor.
and Eutych. lib. 3.. 18. Bib. Patr. Auctar. Tom. 2. col. 619.
? I briefly pointed at this before Cent. V.. 8.
: But I produce this place here at large, because it shows, That in the Greek
Church, the Liturgy of S. James (which is here called, that of the Apostles)
and the Liturgy of S. Basil, were believed in this Age, to gave been endited by
Inspiration, and to deserve a Reverence almost equal to Holy Scripture: So that
for a private Bishop to despise or disuse them on conceit of his own Fancies,
was adjudged to be Blasphemy; and he who did so, was in this Century thought to
be an Enemy to Christ himself. Now this extraordinary Veneration for these
Liturgies could proceed from nothing, but their having been long used in the
Eastern Church, and their assurance of their great Antiquity and Excellency.
And if private Ministers had then enjoyed such a liberty in varying the public
Prayers, according to their own Fancies and Conceptions; This Author could not
have been so ridiculous, as to represent this as so heinous a Crime in a
Bishop. So that we may conclude this Century also, wherein we find the Use of
Liturgies every where continued, and by all the Fathers and Councils of this
Age they are spoken of with much Reverence, and represented as delivered from
the Apostles and Primitive Bishops, and as the ancient way of Serving God;
being no where first introduced in this Period, but only in Countries newly
Converted: And the great business of many Councils in this Time was, to reduce
those Nations which had variety in their Offices, to a Regular Uniformity.

CHAP. III. Of LITVRGIES in the Seventh, and other Later Centuries.
TO gather up all the Evidence for LITURGIES in this and the following Ages,
would be a needless Trouble to the Reader and my self; both because what I have
so clearly made out to begin much sooner, can receive no great strength from
the Writers of this declining Age; and because my Adversary does confess, they
began to be imposed above one whole Century before the beginning of this: Yet
since he will go on to lower Times, to plead for the continuance of his
imaginary Liberty, I shall follow him, and not only confute his Objections, but
collect also (which he has omitted) some of the most remarkable Proofs for the
continuance of Liturgies in these Ages.

. 1. He that considers the Authorities before produced, to prove, Isidorus Ep.
Hispalens. An. Dom. 603.
That Isidore (who succeeded his Brother Leander in the Archbishopric of Sevil)
did perfect the Mozarabic Liturgy, will not question but there was a settled
Form of Prayer in Spain in his Time: But if it be needful further to prove so
plain a Matter, we find in his Book of the Original of things, one Chapter of
Divine Offices, wherein he explains the meaning of the several Liturgick
Phrases; such as, The Evening Office, The Morning Office, The Mass, A Choir,
Antiphons, Responsals, Canticles, Psalms, Hymns, Allelujah, Amen, Hosanna, the
Offertory, etc. Isidor. orig. lib. 6. cap. 19. page 80.
. Now these (as we have seen) are all parts of ancient Liturgy, and he
(supposing the things to be known to all) here gives the reason of the Names.
Moreover, he has also extant another Tract concerning The Offices; wherein he
shows, what was the Original of every one of the Ecclesiastical Offices;
wherein he shows, who were the Inventers of Canticles, to be sung with Voices;
and Psalms, to be sung to Musical Instruments; as also, who were the Authors of
the Hymns used in the Church, both Divine (among which he reckons the
Benedicite) and Human; the latter Composed by S. Hilary and S. Ambrose, whose
Hymns were used in all the Western Church. He goes on to inform us, That the
Greeks first Composed Antiphons, and that the Responsals were made in Italy in
old Time. As for Prayers, he says, Christ was desired by his Disciples, to
compose them a Prayer, which he did; and thence the Church learned to use
Prayers like to that which Christ made; The Greeks being the first that
composed such Forms of Supplication. And a little after he treats of the
Alleluja, which by ancient Tradition was sung always in Spain, except on
Fasting-days and in Lent. He explains also the Offertory, which use to be made
with Singing in his Time: Then he reckons up, Seven Prayers in the Mass, that
is, (says he) The Order of those Prayers by which the Sacrifice is
Consecrated, which being instituted by S. Peter, is celebrated in one and the
same Manner throughout the whole World. The first is an Exhortation to the
People, to entreat the Lord (that is, a Litany:) The second is a Prayer, That
God would receive the Prayers and Alms of the Faithful: The third respects the
Offerers and Faithful, deceased: The fourth relates to the Kiss of Charity: The
fifth is for Sanctifying the Oblation, and setting out Gods Praise, exciting
Heaven and Earth to join in it, in which Hosannah is sung: The sixth is the
Prayer for the Holy Spirit, to descend on the Sacrament: The last is the Lords
Prayer: After which follows the Nicene Creed, and the Benediction of the People
Isidor. de Offic. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.13, 14, 15, 16, and 17.
page 581, 582, etc.
. All which several Prayers and Forms are yet to be seen in the Mozarabic
Office, to which Isidore here refers, and so exactly follows the Order of it,
even where it differs from other Forms and Liturgies, (as particularly in
giving the Benediction before the Distribution Vid. Offic. Mozarab. in Bib.
Patr. Tom. xv. edit. Colon. cap. 27. page 779. Item vid. Council. Tolet. 4. Can.
17. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 350.
), that no Man can doubt, but that Office was Extant then, with all the Parts
now contained in it, except those which mention the Virgin Mary (added since)
of which there is no mention in him. I must transcribe this whole Book of
Isidore's, if I should produce all the other particulars about the Hours of
Prayer, the Vespers, Completorium, Vigils, Matius, etc. In all which, and all
the rest of those Books, such plain and express mention is made of prescribed
and known Forms, then settled in the Spanish Church, that it is impossible to
deny or evade so manifest a Truth. To which may further be added his Epistle to
Ludifredus Bishop of Corduba, about the several Ecclesiastical Officers and
their Duties; wherein he mentions, The known Forms of Lauds and Responsals; the
Office of Prayers, and reciting of the Names; the giving of Peace, and indeed
all other Parts of Liturgy; so that nothing is more clear, than that he has
respect to the prescribed Forms then in use Isidor. Ep. ad Ludifred. page 615.
. And the like Reference he makes to the particular Offices and Forms used by
the Monks in their private Oratories within their Monasteries, where they also
prayed by Forms Idem in reg. Monach. cap. 6. de Offic. page 701.
: So that it is impossible there should be any thing more evident, than that a
Liturgy, and prescribed Forms of Prayer and Praise were used in this Country of
Spain, in Isidore's Time, who was Bishop of Sevil Thirty three years together,
and the most learned Man that can be found in the Western Church, in this Age.

. 2. Council. Toletan. 4. An. Dom. 633.
This very Isidore was President of the Fourth Council of Toledo, called by
King Sisenandus, wherein there were Sixty two Bishops, and seven more
subscribed by Proxy, being Summoned out of all the Provinces in France and
Spain, then subject to the Gothic Kings; who had much enlarged their Empire,
since the Mozarabic Office was first composed: Wherefore many of the Canons of
this Council were made, to settle the use of that one Liturgy, every where in
Sisenandus his Dominions; for it seems before this National Council, it was not
universally received, or at least not used without some variety; but here the
Second Canon says, We Decree, that as we Bishops are joined, in the Unity of
the Catholic Faith; So will we do nothing differently or dissonantly in the
Sacraments of the Church, lest any difference of ours, among the Ignorant and
Carnal, should give suspicion of Schism; and the variety of several Churches,
prove a Scandal to many. Therefore one Order of Praying and Singing shall be
observed by us, through all Spain and France, one manner of Communion Service,
one manner of Morning and Evening Prayer; nor will we, who are United in one
Faith, and one Kingdom, have any longer, diverse Ecclesiastical Customs; For the
ancient Canons also Decree this, That every Country shall have the same way of
Singing and Ministering -- Unus igitur ordo Orandi atque psallendi nobis per
omnem Hispaniam atque Galliam Conservetur, Unus modus in Missarum
solennitatibus, Unus in vespertinis matutinisque officiis, nec diversa sit
ultra in nobis Ecclesiastica consuetudo, qui in una fide continemur and Regno,
hoc enim and antiqui Canones decreverunt, ut unaquaeque Provincia and psallendi
and ministrandi parem consuetudinem contineat. Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 2. Bin.
Tom. 2. par. 2. p. 345.
; From which Canon we may Observe, First, That the different ways of
celebrating Divine Service was looked on, as a Corruption broken in upon them,
contrary to the ancient Canons, that is, those of Laodicea, Milevis, Vannes,
Pamiers, Gyrone, and others cited before. Secondly, That these differences were
occasioned by the Bishops, having been formerly of different Opinions in
matters of Faith, and lived under different Kings; but being now all of one
Faith, and under one Prince, it was necessary to have one Form of Service.
Thirdly, That these Differences were Scandalous to the Bishops, and an Offense
to the People, while they did continue. Fourthly, Therefore they settle one
Form of Morning and Evening Prayers, and one Form of Communion-Service,
throughout all the Dominions of Sisenandus, who Ruled all Spain; and in some
Parts of France, lately gained by his Ancestors, they now will have but one
Order, that is, One Liturgy (as that Word signifies) without the least
difference. And since Isidore had so lately corrected and completed Leander's
Office, and was President here, we may conclude, that this Canon was to settle
that very Liturgy: And because some Bishops might be so much in love with their
former ways of Service, that without the Authority of so great a Council they
would not change them, there follow diverse Canons to forbid the Particulars
wherein they differed, and to settle those prescribed in the Mozarabic Office;
of which being many, I will only repeat the Heads, which are these: The 5th
Canon forbids the Trine Immersion in Baptism, and orders it to be done but
once: The 6th enjoins all to observe the Office for Good Friday: The 8th
orders, that on Easter-Even there shall be Tapers Consecrated in the Churches
of France, as had been anciently done in the Churches of Spain: The 9th Canon
Commands the Lords Prayer to be said every day, and not only on Sundays: The
10th forbids the singing Allelujah in Lent, since the Universal Church omitted
it in that time of Fasting: The 11th enjoins the singing, Glory be to thee. O
God, after the Gospel, according to the Old Canons, and not after the Epistle,
as some used: The 12th condemns those who rejected all Hymns not found in
Scripture, and orders the use of those made by S. Ambrose, S. Hilary, and other
Ecclesiastical Doctors: The 13th Censures those who would not sing the
Benedicite, or Song of the Three Children in the Communion-Office on Sundays
and Festival-days, being an Hymn used all over the Catholic Church: The 14th
directs the Singing of Glory and Honor be to the Father, etc. (exactly as it
yet prescribed in the Mozarabic Liturgy, and in no other): And the 15th is
about the Gloria after the Responsals, that it be always used alike: The 16th
asserts the Revelations of S. John to be Canonical, and orders them to be read
between Easter and Pentecost: The 17th orders the Benediction of the People as
well as the Lords Prayer, to be used before the distribution of the Sacrament
Council. Tolet 4. Can 5. and Can. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Bin.
Tom. 2. par. 2. page 346, 347, etc.
: An Usage which (as we noted before) is also peculiar to the Mozarabic
Liturgy. Now from these Canons we may gather, First, what were the Particulars
wherein the several Diocesses had differed, viz. not that some of them had no
Liturgy and others had; but that whereas all of them used prescribed Forms,
there was some variety in the use of some of the particular Parts of Liturgy,
at least in the Order or the Time of using them; but as for my Adversary's
pretended Liberty for Private Ministers, to vary daily these Offices, here is
nothing can be meant of that; it was several Diocesses which differed, not by
reason of Extempore or Arbitrary Prayers, but only about some Liturgic Forms,
or the manner of using them; Every Bishop and Diocese had an Order; and Now
they Decree, there shall be but one Order, without the least Variation, and
that one Order was (as we see plainly) the Old Spanish Liturgy, the very Words
of which are yet extant Vid Bi^. Pati. Tom. xv. ut supr. Item Bona de reb.
Liturg. lib. 1. cap. 11. p. 365.
; which was that Office whereby all the little Varieties, occasioned by
diversity of Religion, mixture of People, and division of Kingdoms were happily
taken away for many Ages; and this is the true state of this Matter. But my
Adversary generously undertakes from this very Council, and these Canons to
prove: First, That the Spanish Churches at this time were not subject to
Imposed Orders, for one Form of Worship; no, not in the Sacraments, which were
celebrated there, not only variously, but unduly Disc. of Lit. page 133.
. And this he proves by the Preface to this Council, which in a detached
Sentence says, The Divine Sacraments in the Churches of Spain, are celebrated
in a different and unlawful manner In S^cramentis ^ v^nis qu^^^^ verso (...)
medo in Hispania^um ^^^^sas celebrantur. Ba^. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 345.
. And this he pretends shows some remaining Ruins of the ancient Liberty, even
after the Imposing Spirit was rouzed and active: But alas, the History and
Occasion of this diversity, shows it was a modern Corruption, no ancient
Liberty; and this very place which he cites calls this diversity Unlawful, as
being contrary to the ancient Canons: For one Liturgy in one Country was the
Old Rule and Original Practice; the Variety (which yet was no liberty of
Praying without Forms) was the Innovation; yea, the same Preface there calls
it, An Usurpation, assuming license to it self from Men's negligence, contrary
to the Ecclesiastical Usage Quae dum per negligentiam in usum venerunt, contra
Ecclesiasticos meres ^^^^tiam libi de usur atione (...). Praelat. ibid.
. It Is plain, they had diverse Kings, different Creeds, and all had been
confused for some time past; but now they had broke through those unhappy
Circumstances, they resolve to cast out this seemingly Schismatical, and really
Scandalous Diversity, and reduce all to the ancient Uniformity. Secondly, he
says, One of the first Books for public Service, that he meets with, is the
Libellus Officialis in the 25th Canon of this Council, which seems rather a
short Directory than a complete Liturgy, given to every Presbyter at his
Ordination, to instruct him how to Administer the Sacraments, lest through
ignorance of his Duty herein he should offend Disc. of Lit. page 15.
. And to make this out, he quotes (as usually) only half that 25th Canon. But
the whole Canon is this, When Priests are Ordained for Parishes, let them
receive a Book of Offices from their Bishop, that they may succeed in their
Cures duly instructed, lest by Ignorance in the Divine Mysteries they offend
Christ Quando Presbyteri in Parochiis ordinantur, libellum Officialem a
Sacerdete suo accipiant, ut ad Ecclesias sibi deputatas instructi succedant, ne
per ignorantiam, etiam in ipsis divinis Sacramentis Christum offendant; ita ut
quod Quando ad Litanias, vel ad Concilium ven^rint rationem Episcopo suo
reddant, qualit^r susceptum Officium celebrant, vel baptizant. Bin. ibid. Can.
25. page 351.
-- Here he breaks off, but the Canon goes on -- So that when they come to
Litanies, or to a Council, they may give an account to their Bishop, how they
have performed the Offices they have undertaken, and how they have Baptized.
This is the Canon entire: And to his Objections I Reply, First, That he did
meet with the Codex Gelasianus almost 150 years before this; and with Gregory's
Ordo Romanus, which was made made Thirty year before Disc. of Lit. page 83.
; yea, he had met with Written Prayers in the Third Council of Carthage, An.
398. Ibid page 44.
. And he might have met with a Common Prayer Book in Sidonius Apollinaris; with
Sacerdotalem librum, in Vincentius Lirinensis cited before; with (...), in
Sozomen, with a whole Liturgy in the Apostical Constitutions, with the Books of
enjoined Prayers in Constantine's Time: These, and many more Books for public
Service he might have met with; but that none is so blind as he that will not
see. He affirms, Secondly, That the Book of Offices mentioned in this Council,
was rather a short Directory, than a complete Liturgy. But this is to outface
the Sun, when it is certainly meant of the Mozarabic Office, wherein all the
Hymns and Prayers are writ out at large: And it argues a Mind strangely
possessed with the Notion of a Directory, to tell us, That all those Canons
(which we cited before) viz. Can. 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16th
and 17th. had been needless, if those Churches had been furnished with such a
Liturgy, as provided sufficiently for the Severals there mentioned Disc. of
la^t. page 16.
. For those Canons do all suppose there had been diverse Liturgies, appointing a
various use of those Forms; but since now one Liturgy was established (as the
Second Canon shows) they add the Authority of a National Council to that One
Order agreed on, and forbid all former ways which did in the least vary from
it; and considering how apt Men are to be tenacious of their own Way, which
they have long used, all these Canons were little enough to secure and restore
the ancient Uniformity; yea, the very Reason given in this 25th Canon, why the
Bishop delivered this Book of Offices to every Parish-Minister at his
Ordination, is, that they might Officiate by none of the Old Liturgies, but by
this alone; and when these Country-Ministers came to their Bishop, either upon
occasion of the Grand Procession used when the Litany was publicly said by the
whole Clergy of the Diocese, or at those Synods which were then held at least
once a year; Then he might bring this Book along with him to certify the
Bishop, that he had used no other Forms, but these established, in any Offices
of his Ministration. Now had this been only a Directory, according to my
Adversaries extravagant Fancy, some might offend Christ out of Ignorance, by
not choosing or making proper Forms; and it had been impossible they should all
have agreed so exactly in every Office (as the Second Canon requires) that the
People could not observe the least difference. To conclude, The Fathers of this
Council tell us in the 13th Canon, That diverse Hymns used in the Church were
composed by the Ecclesiastical Doctors; and if any for that Reason would not
use them, they must also reject the Forms of Prayer: For (say they) these Hymns
are composed, as Masses, or Supplications, or Prayers, or Commendations (that
is, Intercessions for all Estates of Men) or Impositions of Hands, are
Composed: Which, if they might not be said in the Church, all Ecclesiastical
Offices must cease: And therefore they conclude, That as none of them did
refuse such Composed Prayers; so none of them for the future ought to reject
Hymns, so Composed for the Praise of God Componantur ergo Hymni sicut
componuntur Missae, sive Preces vel Orationes, sive Commendationes seu Manus
impositiones, ex quibus si nulla dicantur in Ecclesia, vacant Officia
Ecclesiastica, etc. Council. Tulet. 4. Can. 13. Bin. ut supia, page 349.
. I suppose he will grant the Hymns were Forms of Praise in Words at large,
made by ancient Holy Fathers: And they declare, that their Communion-Service,
their Prayers, their Collects, Intercessions, and Forms of Absolving Penitents,
were composed just as the Hymns were composed, viz. in Words writ down at large
by Ancient Doctors; so that if any Men had then been of our Dissenters
Principle, to use no Human Composures in the Church (except their own) all
Divine-Service must have ceased; because they had no other way to perform it
by, but by a fixed Liturgy, in which these Old Forms were set down: But they
were so happy, that none scrupled to use these Prayers then, either because
they were Forms, or because they were made by Ancient Doctors; and thence the
Council Argues very firmly, That it was ridiculous for them to use prescribed
Forms of Prayer of Human Composure, and at the same time to scruple the use of
Hymns, that were Composed after the same manner. This sufficiently proves, it
was a Liturgy at large, which was writ in this Book of Offices; and so we may
dismiss him and his Directory, as having no Foundation in, or Encouragement
from this Council. Thirdly, He cites a Rule of Pope Gregory's, said to be
praised in this Synod of Toledo, viz. That where there is one Faith, there is no
hurt to the Church by diversity of Vsages Disc. of Lit. page 86 and 87.
. His blundering Editor refers this to a place in Eusebius about different ways
of Fasting in diverse Churches, and puts the true Quotation into the next Page.
But to let him pass, We grant that S. Gregory has such a Rule in his Epistle
to Leander Gregor. Epist. 41. ad Leand lib. 1.
; and it is quoted with Approbation, both by this Council Council. Tolet. 4.
Can. 5.
, and by Walafridus Strabo Walafrid. Strab. de reb. Eccles. cap. 26.
. But Gregory himself, and these who cite him, apply this Rule only to a
Ceremony in Baptism, which he thought might be used variously in diverse
Churches, without any prejudice to that One Faith wherein they agreed; and
therefore though Trine Immersion was used at Rome, he would not impose it on
Spain: But what is this, or the Censure upon Victor in Eusebius, for imposing
the Roman way of Fasting upon the Eastern Church, to our Question about the
lawfulness of a National Churches imposing one Liturgy upon her own Members?
Gregory did most certainly impose Trine Immersion at Rome, and Leander and this
Council imposed Single Immersion on Spain; Nor did any blame Victor for
imposing his way of Fasting, and keeping Easter, upon his own Church of Rome,
and its Dependants. This sort of imposing Ceremonies and Liturgies, always was
thought very lawful, and was practiced in all Ages and Countries: And this is
all we desire, viz. to impose the English Liturgy and Ceremonies upon the
English Church, leaving other National Churches to their Liberty in both cases.
Fourthly, My Adversary says, He can no where di^c^ver the Song of the Three
Children before this Council of Toledo; where it is mentioned as used before,
but then first imposed Disc. of Lit. page 178.
. I Reply, The Words of the Canon show this to be a Mistake: For they say, That
the whole Catholic Church throughout the World celebrates this Hymn, and that
only some of the Spanish Clergy neglected to sing it at some solemn Times, viz.
On Sundays and Holy Days; therefore they Decree it shall be sung in all the
Churches of France and Spain in all solemn Masses, and that they who omitted
this ancient Custom, and broke this Decree, should be deprived of the
Communion. Now how could the whole Catholic Church agree in the use of this
Hymn, if it had not been imposed? Had all Churches been at liberty (as he
fancies) some of them would have used it, and others not. Again, how comes this
Council to call it, an ancient Custom, if this were the first time it was
prescribed? Or why do they say, it was Negligence in those few who omitted it,
if it were not a Duty before? It is plain enough, that this Hymn was anciently
prescribed; but some Scrupulous persons, by mistaking the Canons of Laodicea
and Braga, as if they forbad all Hymns, which were not taken out of holy
Scripture, would not obey the Injunction, nor use this Hymn at solemn Times:
This indeed may prove that some of the Clergy then did neglect to read the
whole Office, (and yet it shows that to be a great fault,) but it does not
prove that this Hymn was never enjoined before, it rather supposes the
Contrary. And indeed the Canon of Laodicea, only forbids ((...)) Psalms
composed by private Persons, which cannot reach this Hymn. And that Canon of
Braga, is a Translation of that made at Laodicea, and forbids private Men's
Poetry to be used in the Church: Yet perhaps, some did abuse this into the
rejecting Hymns, composed by the Ancients; and therefore seven years after, The
Second Council at Tours, made a Canon to justify and allow the use of the
Hymns, made by the Ecclesiastical Doctors Council. Turon. 2. Can. 24. An. 570.
. And what was Decreed then in that Council, the last Century, is confirmed in
this Century by this Fourth Council of Toledo; which contains as we see, clear
Evidence for the use of Liturgies, both now, and in ancient Time also.

Before I leave Spain, let me briefly note; That the Fifth, and Sixth Councils
of Toledo, do strictly enjoin Litanies to be used Solemnly, upon the Ides of
December Council. Tol. 5. Can. 1. An. Dom. 636. Council. Tolet. 6. can. 12. An.
638. Bin. ut supr. page 365. and 370.
: And all Men know Litanies were put into prescribed Forms, many Ages before.
The Eighth Council of Toledo Council. Tolet. 8. can. 8. An. 653. Bin. ut supr.
p. 491.
, complains of some Clergy Men, who were not thoroughly acquainted with those
Orders, (or Forms) which were daily used; And they Decree that none hereafter
shall be ordained, but such as have perfectly Learned the whole Psalter, The
usual Hymns, and Canticles, and the way of Baptizing: And if any such be
already admitted, they are compelled to exercise themselves in Reading these
Offices. Which is a Demonstration, they were in written Forms, which might be
read over by them. Another Council about twelve Years after, makes a Canon for
observing the Method prescribed, in the Mozarabic Liturgy, about the place of
that Psalm, O come let us Sing unto the Lord; in the Evening Office Council.
Emeritan. Can. 7. vid. Notas Bin. ut supr. page 540.
. And upon the creeping in of some variety, about ten Years after that into
some lesser Churches, The Eleventh Council of Toledo, renews the old Canon,
That all shall Celebrate the public Offices, that is, Vespers, Mattins and
Mass, as was done in the Mother Church Council. Tol. xi. Can. 3. An. 675. Bin.
ut supr. p. 549.
; So great was their care to preserve that Uniformity in their Worship, which
they had restored and Established.

3. Now that other parts of the World kept to their ancient way of serving God,
as well as Spain, Council. Constant. in Trullo An. Dom. 680.
appears by a Famous Council, held at Constantinople in this Century, where the
Liturgies of S. James, and S. Basil, are cited for very good Authority, against
such as were then accounted Heterodox, if not Heretical; even the Armenians,
who did not mix Water with their Wine, in the Sacrament. For when they haved
cited Scripture and cleared S. Chrysostom from the aspersion of holding that
Opinion, They add, That both James the Brother of our Lord according to the
Flesh, who was first placed in the Sea of Jerusalem, and S. Basil the
Archbishop of Caesarea, whose praise is spread over all the World; Delivering
to us in writing, the way of Mystical Consecration, have appointed us in the
holy Liturgy, to consecrate the sacred Chalice, both with Water and Wine --
(...). Council. Constant. in Trull. Can. 32. Bever. Tom. 1. p. 192.
. Here then we see a great Council, accounted the Sixth of the General
Councils, Twenty years before the year of Christ 700, expressly owning the
Liturgies of S. James and S. Basil, to have been delivered to them in writing,
the one by an Apostle, the other by an Eminent Bishop, who lived above 300 year
before this Council; And quoting them in dispute, with those they accounted
very Erroneous, which assures us, that they not only owned, and used these
Liturgies themselves; but that they had been so long received among them, as to
gain an Authority in matters of Controversy, next to the Holy Scriptures. And
withal it must be supposed, that the Armenians also owned these Liturgies to be
ancient, genuine and Authentic; for if they had thought them to be impostures,
or inventions of later Ages, it had been ridiculous in this Council, to press
them with Evidence taken from Thence. Which makes me admire at my Adversaries
Confidence, who pretends to have searched all Antiquity; and yet asks, What
Greeks they are which own the Liturgy of S. James? and tells us, he can find no
Greek, ownning it till 700 years after Christ Disc. of Lit. page 149.
; And a litte after, These Liturgies were not known, nor used before the
seventh or eigth Century -- if they had, some Fathers or Councils, would have
mentioned them Disc. of Lit. page 150. and 151.
. We see if he had pleased, he might have found a whole Council of Greek
Bishops, and a whole Country of Eastern Christians, owning these Liturgies
before the year 700. But further, we have before showed that diverse Fathers do
mention them before this Age; And we must here add, that a general Council
cannot be supposed, to cite these Liturgies for Evidence in dispute, in the
very same Age, wherein they were first known and used: We must suppose them
extremely impudent, and their Adversaries strangely soft and easy, to fancy
such a thing; Wherefore this Testimony though produced only in this Age,
undeniably proves that these Liturgies, had been used and owned for many Ages
past, and that no body in this time doubted of their Authority or Antiquity.

Ecclesiae Britannie^e and Saxon. ab An. Dom. 450.
4. We will now return into the West, and as we have given an account, of the
original of the famous Spanish Liturgy in one entire History; So we will now
treat of the Liturgies used in Britain, France, and Germany, not tying our
selves strictly to the Order of Time, that we may put together the scattered
Memoirs relating to each of these Countries. We shall begin with the British,
and their imitators the Irish and Scots, of whom my Adversary boldly pronounces
thus, In Ireland (with whom the Britons and Scots symbolized,) we showed before
out of the great Usher, that till the Twelfth Century, no one general Form of
Service was retained, but diverse Rites and manners of Celebration were
observed, till the Roman was brought in by the Popes Legates Disc. of Lit. p.
134. 135.
. In which words he refers to a former Quotation, which he made out of Bishop
Usher in these words; It is sure (says he, i. e. B. Usher) that in the
succeeding Ages, no one general Form of Divine Service was retained, but diverse
Rites and manners of Celebration, in diverse parts of this Kingdom; until the
Roman use was brought in at last, by Gillebertus Malachias, and Christianus,
who were the Popes Legates here about 500 years ago Disc. of Lit. p. 88. Usher
Relig. of anc Irish. Chap. 4. mihi. page 24.
. Now hence he infers, that the Irish, for above 1100 years, (and the Britains,
and Scots, if not so long, yet long after Austin, retained such liberty herein,
as the Church anciently enjoyed, in all corners of the World. In which account
he equally wrongs that learned Primate, and the Truth it self: For Bishop Usher
in the place cited says concerning Ireland, As for the Form of Liturgy, and
public Service of God, which S. Patrick brought into this Country; it is said
that he received it from Germanus and Lupus, and that it originally descended
from S. Mark the Evangelist; For which he quotes an old Manuscript, written
near 900 years ago, extant in Sir. Robert Cottens Library Us^er, Relig. o^ anc.
Ir sh. Chap. 4. p. 24.
: Which Manuscript is since Printed, (but very imperfectly) in Spelmans
Councils, and therein it is said, That their Form of Liturgy was the same, with
that which was received by the^r Neighbors the Gauls Sp^^m. Council. Tom. I. An.
80. p. 177, 178.
; and it is there said to have been delivered from Germanus and Lupus, and
supposed to have come at first from S. Mark: Now of this last Point, ( viz.
that S. Mark was the Author of the Gallican Liturgy,) Bishop Usher seems
doubtful, and then goes on thus, But whatsoever Liturgy was used here at the
first, this is sure, that in succeding Ages, no one general Form of Divine
Service was retained, etc. and so goes on in the words cited by my Adversary:
Who according to his wonted Fraud, conceals all that the Primate says of the
ancient Liturgy; which he affirms was but one, and was brought in by S. Patric,
both among the Irish and Britons; for in the next Page he says of the Britons,
That their Form of Liturgy was the same, with that which was received by their
Neighbors the Gauls, is intimated by the Author of that ancient Fragment
alleged before Usher Rel. of anc. Irish Chap. 4. page 26.
: So that Bishop Usher, believed that at first, both Britons and Irish had one
Form, one Liturgy. And the variety which my Adversary calls an ancient Liberty,
was an Innovation and a Corruption of the truly ancient way of Serving God by
one and the same Liturgy. And the Reader must have seen this to have been
Bishop Usher's Opinion, if he had not cut off half his Discourse, and begun in
the midst of a Sentence. But to make this still more Evident, Bishop Usher in
another Tract, produces a very ancient Manuscript, called A Catalogue of the
Irish Saints: Wherein they are reckoned up in three Orders; and the Chronology
is so very exact, that we may reasonably believe, it was writ by a very good
hand: The words are these, The first Order was, that of Catholic Saints, in the
time of Patricius, and they were famous Bishops full of the Holy Ghost, in
number 350, Founders of Churches, having one Head, even Christ, and one Leader
S. Patric; one Mass, and one manner of Celebration, -- The Second Order were
Catholic Presbyters, among whom were few Bishops and many Priests, 300 in
number, having one Head, even our Lord; they Celebrated diverse Masses, and had
diverse Rules, -- The Third Order of Saints, were Holy Presbyters, and a few Jew
Bishops, 100 in number -- and they had diverse Rules and Masses Usherii Antiqu.
Britan. Eccles. page 473, 474.
. Then a little after he recokons the time that these Orders cotained; The
First, which was most Holy, continued from An. 433. to An. 534. The second,
which was Holy of Holies, continued from 544. to 572. The 3d Order which was
Holy, continued from 598 to 665 Vid. Ibid. page 490.
. Now by this account we see, That the First and best Times from S. Patric, had
only one Form of Divine Service; and thus it contiued for above 100 year, from
toward the midst of the Fifth Century, (that is, from their first Conversion,)
till toward the middle of the 6th Century. And then about the time that Monkery
came into request in the Western Church, as Superstition increased, variety of
Rules were made, and in them were prescribed various Forms of Prayer and Divine
Service, or (as they called it) of Masses: For as Bishop Usher tells us, The
public Liturgy and Service of the Church, was of old named the Mass, even then
also, when Prayers were only said; and so the Evening Mass signifies no more
than that which we call Evening-Prayer B. Usher Rel. of anc. Irish, Chap. 4.
page 26.
. So then, when Variety was brought in, it was not (as he falsely pretends) a
liberty to pray Arbitrarily, it was various Forms prescribed in each Diocese or
Monastery: And every Clerk and Monk was bound to the Form of his own Diocese or
Monastery, and so were Strangers too, when they came among them; which
occasioned Gillibert to complain, That it was Indecent and Schismatical to see
a very Learned Man of one Order, to be like a private Lay man when he came to
the Church of another Order Gillibert. in Usher. Relig. anc. Irish, page 24.
: That is, because he could not make Responses, nor Vocally join in their
strange Form: Wherefore when Superstition had destroyed their Ancient and
Original Uniformity, they had no Liberty, but were as much under Forms as ever,
only different Churches had diverse Forms, which I will make still more evident:
For Bishop Usher expounding the aforesaid Passage of diverse Masses and diverse
Rules, shows it was meant of diverse Forms, and reckons up four several Rules
written down by these Irish Saints, all differing from each other U^^er Antiq.
Bri^. Eccles. page 476.
: And two more; one writ by Daganus, approved of by Pope Gregory the Great:
Another made by Columbanus, who flourished Anno Dom. 614. which is yet extant,
and differs in some things from the Rule of S. Benedict Id. Ibid. page 476, and
477.
; of which Ordericus Vitalis says, That though his Scholars followed the Rule
of S. Benedict, yet they forsook not the Orders of their Master: For from
Columbanus they learned the Manner and Order of Divine-Service, and a Form of
Prayers for all Orders of Men that are in the Church of God Orderie. ^ital.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 8. ad An. 1094.
. So that this Learned Primate took all these Varieties, to be various Forms of
Prayer; and my Adversary shamefully abuses his great Name, to give color to a
false and groundless device of his own, of Praying Arbitrarily and Extempore,
which he would dress up as one of the General Usages of the ancient Church,
whereas there is not one Syllable in Bishop Usher, tending to prove, That the
Irish retained this liberty of Praying for 1100 years, and the Britons and
Scots for a long time after Augustine. This is his own Invention, and is as
false as his Reflections upon the present Church of England in that Page are
malicious, and without ground Disc. of Lit. page 89.
. As for the Britons he says, They were Enemies to the Roman use in the
Eucharist in Gildas 's time; but he produces an Author there, which says, They
followed the Asian Manner in Preaching, Baptizing, and celebrating Easter Ibid.
page 88. Spelm. Council. Tom. I. page 107.
. Now the Asian and Eastern Churches had Forms of celebrating the Eucharist,
and Baptizing in the Fourth Age, as we showed before out of the Apostolical
Constitutions and many other Authors; therefore if they followed the Eastern
Manner, then they had Forms for the Eucharist and Baptism; and though they had
no Uniformity with Rome, yet if they followed the Asian Manner, he has no
Reason to assert, That they were averse to, and unacquainted with any
Uniformity; and that -- they had no prescribed Liturgies for such Uniformity
long after. A pitiful piece of Sophistry! to conclude from their not receiving
the Roman Liturgy, and agreeing to be Uniform with them, to infer, that the
Britons had no Uniformity or Liturgy at all. If we may believe Bishop Usher,
Saint Patric was the Apostle both of the Irish and Welsh, and brought the same
Liturgy into Wales, that he brought into Ireland; and therefore he says of the
Britons, That their Form of Liturgy was the same with that which was received
by their Neighbors the Gauls Usher Rel. of anc. Irish, page 26.
; for which he cites the forementioned Ancient Manuscript: And if they had any
variety among them, it was a variety of Forms, not his Arbitrary liberty: For
Baleus informs us, That Kentigern, who was Bishop of that Church which was
afterward called S. Asaph, Writ a Manual of his Ministrations Balaeus de
script. Brit. mihi, fol. 32.
; That is, the Forms by which he celebrated Divine Service; and Bishop Usher
shows, That he and S. Columba meeting together, their Disciples alternately
sang Forms of Praises to God, and the latter Company with Hallelujah Usher
Antiq. Brit. Eccles. page 370. An. Dom. 560.
. Moreover, Baleus further tells us, That S. Asaph, the Scholar and Successor
of Kentigern writ a Book, Of the Ordinations of his Church Balaeus de script.
Brit. fol. 34. An. Dom. 590.
; which seems to be the Forms used there in Ordaining Presbyters and Deacons,
and perhaps in Admitting of Monks. This may suffice to show us, the Britons had
written and prescribed Forms, before my Adversary will allow them to have been
used any where; and if any require further satisfaction, he may consult the
Learned B. Usher's Antiquity of the British Churches, where there are diverse
Evidences of this Truth.

We proceed therefore to the Saxons, who were Converted by Augustine the Monk
about the end of the Sixth Century: And He (no doubt) according to S. Gregory's
direction, made a Liturgy for them, taken out of the Roman, the Gallican, and
other Forms, which continued in use for some time: But after Gregory's Roman
way of Singing began to be so generally admired in all these Parts of the
World, That was also labored by Augustin's Successors to be brought in here:
Forbid mentions one James a Deacon, who was skilled both in the Roman and the
Canterbury way of Song; saying of him, That Paulinus leaving York, and
returning to Rochester, left this James behind him in the North, who when that
Province had Peace, and the Number of the Faithful increased, being very
skilful in Singing in the Church, became a Master of Ecclesiastical Song to
many, after the way either of Rome or of Canterbury Bedae histor. lib. 2. cap.
20. circ. A. D. 640.
: Which must signify his teaching Clerks how to recite Gregory's or Augustin's
Forms of Service; because in that Age they chanted their Prayers and Praises
both. About Thirty years after this, in Theodorus his Time, They learned to
Sing the Office all England over, and one Eddi ( after the aforesaid James) was
their Master in the Churches, on the North of Humber Beda ibid. lib. 4. cap. 2.
circ. An. 670.
. And a little after, those who Instructed Men in Ecclesiastical Offices, are
called Masters of Singing Idem lib. 5. cap. 20.
; because the Offices were set to some certain Notes; and that alone is enough
to prove, they then Prayed by certain prescribed Forms, it being impossible to
set Arbitrary or Extempore Prayers to Notes; which though some have affirmed
liable to be Canted, yet none ever thought them capable to be Chanted. But we
proceed: I doubt not but the Gregorian Forms, as well as his way of Singing,
came into use here before the Year 700: For in the late elaborare Collection of
Old Saxon Books and Manuscripts, put out by my Worthy Friend Dr. Hicks, there
is a Sacramentary of S. Gregory, which is at least a Thousand years old
Grammatica Maeso-Gothic. D. Hick. p. 148.
; and then it must be Written about the Year 690. But this is more plain in the
Famous Council of Clovesho, which sat 24 year after, wherein there is not only
clear Testimony for the use of Forms, but a full Evidence of the prevailing
Interest of the Roman Offices: For there it is appointed, That All Priests
shall learn to repeat the whole Office by Law, appointed for their Order; and
shall be able to interpret the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the holy Words
pronounced in the Mass, into the Vulgar Tongue; Can 10th. As also, That all
Priests shall perform all their Offices after the same way and manner, Can.
11th. And further it is Decreed, That the Festivals in memory of our Lord, be
celebrated in one and the same manner, in all Offices belonging to them; as to
Baptism, Administering the Communion, and the manner of Singing, according to
the Written Form, which we have received from the Roman Church; and that the
Festivals of the Martyrs shall be observed on the same day, according to the
Roman Martyrology, with the Psalms and Hymns proper to each of them, Can. 13th.
And finally, That the Seven Canonical Hours of Prayer be observed, with the
proper Psalms and Hymns, and that the Monasteries shall all Sing alike, and
shall neither Sing or Read any thing, but what is generally used, and is
derived from Scripture, or permitted by the Custom of the Roman Church, that so
all may with one Mind and one Mouth glorify God, Can. 15th Council. Clovesho.
Can. 10, 11, 13, and 15. apud Spelm. Council. Tom. l. p. 249. circ. An. D. 714.
. From which Canons it is very plain, that the Saxons, within one Century after
their Conversion, had Written Forms of Prayer for all Offices, and that the
Roman Liturgy was now beginning to be generally received in this Land. I shall
make but one Remark more in so clear a case, which is, That Venerable Bede
dying on, Ascension-day, is (by ancient Historians) said to have repeated the
Collect for the Day, in these Words, O King of Glory, and Lord of Hosts, who as
on this day did ascend triumphantly into the Heaven of Heavens, leave us not
comfortless, but send us the Promise of the Father, even the Spirit of Truth
Gul. Malms. de gest. reg. lib. 1. cap. 3. page 12. and Sim. Dunelm. lib. 1.
cap. 15.
; and soon after he gave up the Ghost. Now this is the Collect in the Old Roman
Forms, and is yet continued in our Liturgy almost Verbatim, which gives that
Collect the honor of having been received in this Nation for near a Thousand
years: But since my Adversary dares not attempt the Saxons; and Spelman's
Councils afford so many undeniable Proofs of prescribed and imposed Forms used
here from the Time of their Conversion, I shall not heap up needless Instances,
but proceed to the Kingdoms and Churches in France and Germany, where the same
Order and Method of Praying was observed.

. 5. I have so fully proved, Ecclesia Gallicana, ab An. Dom. 450.
that there was a Form of Service peculiar to the Gallican Church, that I need
not have added any thing on that Subject, but that my Adversary has the
confidence to say, In France they had Books for public Service in the 8th
Century, yet they were used at the discretion of those that officiated, who
added and left out as they thought fit, till Charlemain, in the beginning of
the Ninth Age, would have them Reformed after the Roman guise. And this he
proves by a Passage cited out of the Chronicle of Engolism, related in Mornay
of the Mass Disc. of Lit. p. 134.
; but the whole Story is nothing else but Falsehood and Fallacy. For,

First, He speaks of Books for public Service in France in the 8th Century, as
if they had none before: Whereas we have made it appear, That S. Hilary made a
Book of Hymns for the Gallican Church in the Fourth Age, An. 354. That Museaus
of Marseils composed a Book of Prayers for Consecrating the Sacrament in the
Fifth Century, An. 458. We have showed, That the Gallican Office, which is
still extant, was made at least as early as the Age in which S. Martin lived
Bona, rerum Liturg. lib. 1. cap. 12. and in Append.
: And that in the Time of Sidonius Apollinaris the Clergy there generally used
a Common Prayer Book, in that same Fifth Century, An. 475. We have proved, That
in the end of the Sixth Age, Gregory the Great directed Augustine the Monk, to
read over the Gallican Liturgy, as well as the Roman; which shows it was then
Written in a Book: Yea, my Adversaries own Author, Mornay, in the place cited
by him (which he must needs see) affirms, That before the Time of Gregory,
there was another manner of Service in France than there was at Rome, and that
Innocent and Gelasius (who were Popes in the Fifth Century) as well as Gregory,
had used their utmost endeavors to bring them to conform to the Roman Order
Mornay of the Mass, Book I. chap. 8. page 63.
. Which supposes plainly, they had a Service of their own differing from the
Roman, in Innocents and in Gelasius his Time, that is, in the Fifth Century;
and that Epistle of Hildewinus to Jews the Gentile, An. 825. (mentioned in
Mornay) implies the same thing: For Hildewinus says, We have still diverse very
ancient Mass-Books almost consumed with extreme Age, containing the Order of
the Gallican Service, which was used from the time that the Faith was first
received in this part of the West, until we admitted the Roman Order Hildevinus
Abb. praefat. ad opera Dionys. Areop.
. Where we see, He not only affirms they had a Form of Service from their first
Conversion; but that in the beginning of the Ninth Age some of the Copies of
that Service were worn out with extreme Antiquity, so that probably these
Copies were writ in the Sixth Age: And from hence we may discern the falsehood
of my Adversaries Pretense, That there were no Service-Books in France before
the 8th Century.

Secondly, He affirms, That these Books were used at the discretion of him that
Officiated. But this is as false as the former; for we have proved by diverse
French Canons, in the Fifth and Sixth Ages, That all the Clergy in one Province
were bound to use the same Form of Service, which was used by their
Metropolitan. And in the Eighth Century, Theodulphus (Bishop of Orleance)
enjoins his Clergy, When they came to his Synod, to bring their Common
Prayer-Books with them, and two or three Clerks who assisted them in the
celebrating Divine Service, that so it might appear hour exactly and diligently
they had performed their Duties Theodulph. Aurel. Ep. ad Cler. cap. 4. ap. Bon.
rer. Liturg. p. 349.
; which is a stricter course, than is now taken in our Church. But my Adversary
pretends he has Evidence for this Liberty out of an ancient Chronicle in
Mornay Mornay of the Mass, Book I. chap 8. page 64.
, which says, That every one at his pleasure had depraved the Book of Offices,
by adding and diminishing. To which I Reply, That these Words are not in
Mornay, and if they be in the Chronicle of Engolism, as the Margen recites
them, The meaning is plainly this, That those who writ out these Forms, had
depraved them by leaving out some things; and putting in others. Not that those
who used these Books altered or added at their pleasure; for he who officiates
cannot properly be said to have depraved a Book, by not reading it aright; it
was the Scribes, who writ the Copies falsely and variously, that had depraved
the Old Office so much, that it gave a good Pretense to French Kings, to bring
in the Roman Service: Herein therefore he has no ground for his false
Assertion, That these Books were used at the discretion of him that did
Officiate.

Thirdly, He mistakes again in saying, That Charlemaign, in the beginning of
the Ninth Age, reformed them after the Roman guise. For first, his own Author
Mornay affirms, That King Pepin, for reverence of Pope Steven, received the
whole Order of Rome, and cites two Capitulars for this, wherein Charles the
Great declares, That his Father Pepin first put down the Gallican, and set up
the Roman Service in France Capit. lib. 1. cap. 80 and lib. 5. cap. 219. in
Mornay ut supr. page 64.
. Now Pope Steven died An. 755. which is near Fifty years before the Ninth Age
began. Moreover, the Centuriators out of Sigebert, and diverse ancient
Historians, tell us, That it is apparent, there was a different way of Singing
in the Roman and the Gallican Churches, till Pepin, upon his being made King of
France by the Pope, brought in the Roman Rites and way of Singing into the
Gallican Church Magdebur. Cent. 8. cap. 6. page 342, 343.
Now this was in the year 751. that is, in the midst of the Eighth Age. It Is
true, Charles the Great did go on with the same work, but then it was before
the beginning of the Ninth Age, which is the Period that my Adversary assigns
to this Matter: For finding still that some Churches kept up the Old way of
Singing, he sent two Clerks to Rome, to learn there the Authentic way of
Singing, and they first taught the Church of Metz, and then all France Magdeb.
ibid and Sigeb. Chron. An. 774.
. But this was in the year 774, Six and twenty years before the Ninth Age
began. Again, He owns this Uniformity was brought in by his Father Pepin, and
enjoins it once more Capitul. Franc. Tom. I. in Cap. An. 788. page 203.
, about the Year 788. The next Year, in another Capitular. Charles the Great
obliges the Monks also to follow that Roman Order of Singing, which his Father
appointed, when he put down the Old Gallican way Capitul. ibid. An. 789. cap.
78. p. 239.
. In the same year also was this Law made, That the Clergy should have Orthodox
Books very well Corrected, lest those who desire to pray to God aright, by Ill
written Books should ask amiss; and therefore none was to write out the Gospel,
the Psalter, or Missal, but a Man of mature Age Capitul. ibid. Tom. I. cap. 70.
p. 237.
. And finally, The last Persons sent from Rome about completing this
Uniformity were Adrian's two Chanters, who came into France An. 790 Magdeb.
Cent. 8. cap. 6. page 343. and Sigebert. An. 790.
. Wherefore he is out in his Chronology as to this Matter, because the Roman
Order was brought into the Gallican Church by Pepin first, and then universally
settled there by Charles the Great, before the Ninth Age began. But to let that
pass, it is certain there was no more liberty allowed to any Ministers in the
Gallican Church, before the Roman Offices came in there, than there was
afterward; because it is plain they had a Liturgy before, imposed strictly by
diverse Canons of several Councils; and while that Gallican Office was in Force,
the Clergy were as much bound to use those Forms, as they were to use the Roman
Forms afterward; and therefore his pretended liberty of Praying Extempore in
public, or changing the public Forms at pleasure, has no Foundation among the
French of those Ages, and is grounded only upon false and wrested Quotations;
for in fact and reality there was no such liberty in the Gallican Church, since
the second famous Conversion of that People, no nor before, as far as we can
find by those few Memoirs we have of those obscure Times.

Ecclesia Germonica ab An. Dom. 600.
. 6. My Adversary is as much mistaken in the Proofs which he brings for his
Imaginary liberty in Germany: For he says, Long after Boniface had been
stickling to reduce it to the Roman Uniformity, the whole Country was so far
from submitting to any one prescribed Order of Service, that in one Diocese
there were various Modes of Administering: Which he proves by a Decretal, and by
a Passage in the Life of Bruno, Archbishop of Colen, in the Midst of the Tenth
Age, who was then to correct the diversity of Divine-Service in his Province
Disc. of Lit. ^ag. 13^.
. To show the weakness and mistakes of which Argument and Instances, let us
Note, That Germany (as well as other of its Neighboring Countries) was early
Converted to the Christian Faith; for Irenaeus mentions the Churches founded in
Germany, which believed as other Orthodox Churches did Iren. adv. haer. lib. 1.
cap. 3. page 53.
: And in a Council held at Colen, An. 347. Six of the German Bishops were
present Bin. Tom. I. par. 1. page 460.
; And from their nearness to, and Correspondence with the French, we may
conclude they used the same Method in Divine-Service which was used there: But
when the Northern Nations broke into these parts of Europe, many of the Germans
relapsed to Paganism; yet not so generally, but that some of them were still
Christians, and retained one Form of Divine-Service, using it in their
Mother Tongue. Now Boniface was sent thither in the Year 722; and though his
Pretense was to convert Pagans, yet his main business was to bring those who
were already Christians, to submit to the Roman Service in the Latin Tongue; in
this he was stoutly opposed by diverse Bishops of Germany, who would not part
with their old way of Serving God; but by the help of the Popes and the French
Kings, he was so successful in his Attempts, That (as his great Author says)
he induced the People of Franconia, Hessia, Bavaria, Saxony, Frisia, etc. to
receive the Roman Order, oppressing such as did oppose him, by Force: But after
this, an holy Man named Methodius, turned the Scripture into the Sclavonian
Tongue, and reestablished the Ancient Service in all the Churches of this
Language, attempting also to do the same in Bavaria, Austria, Suevia, etc.
Abolishing the Latin Mass, and the Ceremonies of Rome Mornay of the Mass, Book
I. chap. 8. page 65.
. Or as the Centuriators relate it Magdeb. Cent. 9. cap. 10. page 491.
, He began to persuade some, That casting away the Latin Tongue, they should
celebrate Divine Service in the Vulgar Tongue, for the edification of the
Church, and return to their former Usage, which they had before the Time of
Charles the Great. From which Relation, and from the good Agreement between the
Old Gallican and German Churches, we may see there were Forms of Prayer before
Boniface came into Germany, and Methodius restored the use of those Forms, and
rejected the Roman Liturgy: So that here were Forms used by all, and no Side
desired or expected any liberty from them; None pleaded for Extempore Prayer,
the change being no more than exchanging one Liturgy for another. And in this
Boniface did prevail, and Methodius did not prevail much in Germany, being soon
after banished from thence into Moravia, where he died. But my Adversary cites
the Canon Law, to prove, there were afterward various Modes of Administering in
one Diocese. Now this Decretal is generally ascribed to Pope Celestine the
Third, who died An. 1198. above 450 Years after Boniface; and B. Bilson thinks
it was made by Innocent the Third, in his Lateran Council, An. 1215. near 500
Years after: The Words are these, Because in many Parts, there are in the same
City and Diocesses, mixed People of diverse Languages, having but one Faith, and
yet diverse Rites and Manners; We strictly Charge the Bishops of such Places, to
provide fit Men, who (according to the diversity of Rites and Tongues) may
celebrate Divine Offices, and minister the Sacraments of the Church unto them
Decret. lib. 1. Tit. 3 1. de Offic. Jud. cap. 14. mihi page 452.
. Now this Decretal only provides for such Cities wherein there were Merchants
from all Nations of Christendom, some of which (suppose) might be Greeks,
others Armenians, others Sclavonians, others Spaniards; all which had different
Forms of Liturgy, and some of them in different Languages: Now in this case
they were to be allowed so many several Priests of their own, to Officiate by
their own Liturgy: But this no more proves, that Priests who Officiate to their
own Nation, then had a liberty to vary, or that there were various Offices for
People of the same Country, than the allowing of French, Dutch, or Greek
Churches, to serve God after their several ways in London, proves, That the
Clergy of London are not enjoined to Read one Liturgy, or that the Church of
England has diverse Forms of Common Prayer. This Fallacy is so gross, that to
be imposed on by it would show as little Judgment, as the pressing it expresses
of Modesty in him who would put such Shams upon this Age. His second Instance
is about Bruno, Bishop of Colen, who, as he cites the Relation (not out of
Rotgerus, but) out of the Centuriators; Correcting the diversity of celebrating
Divine Offices in his Province, appointed there, that the same Order should be
every where observed Diversitatem sacra peragendi in tota sua Provincia
corrigens, ac ut eadem ubique esset ratio constituens. Mag. Cent. x. page 608.
But, first he fraudulently leaves out the Word [Tota], which signifies this
Diversity was not in any one Diocese, but in the Archbishop of Colens whole
Province, to whom all Germania Secunda of old was subject Heylin Cosm. lib. 2.
page 47.
. And even at this day Miraeus does reckon up five Diocesses beside that of
Colen, all under this great Metropolitan Mirai notitiae Episcopat. page 300.
: So that whereas in these several Diocesses there were some differences in the
Divine-Service; This famous Bishop reduced them all (according to the Old
Canons) to that one Order which was used at Colen. Now this makes nothing for
that liberty of private Clergymen, to vary the Offices as they please, which
my Adversary pleads for; especially if what Du-Plessis say of this Matter be
true, That Bruno then reformed the Order of the Mass in his Diocese (he should
say Province) according to that of Rome Mornay of the Mass, Book I. chap. 9.
page 74.
: For then it follows, That the ancient German Offices were still used in some
Parts that were subject to the Archbishop of Colen: So that still this is
exchanging one Form for another, and no proof at all of liberty in Praying; a
thing unknown in this Age.

Agobardus Episc. Lugdun. An. 831.
7. We have little more in this Discourse against Liturgies out of Antiquity
excepting only some few pretended proofs from late Ages, to show, that they
used various words in the distribution of the Eucharist. As First, he tells us,
that Agobardus the Famous Archbishop of Lions, could not well like that Common
Roman Form, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. since he was only for
Scripture Expressions in the public Offices. And then he intimates, that
Agobardus was censured for this by Baronius and his Epitomator Disc. of Lit.
page 90. and 91.
; To which I reply, First, That Baronius never censures this great Bishop at
all; for this passage is not in Baronius, but only in Spondanus the Epitomator,
and from him alone my Adversary cites it Vid. Baron. Tom. 9. An. 831. p. 797.
and 798.
. Secondly, Spondanus speaks not one word of Agobardus his correcting the
Communion-Office; but only that he took great pains in restoring the ancient
Antiphonary, or Book of Hymns Spondan. Epitom. An. 831. Number. 2.
. And Baluzius has now put out the very Tract, which Spondanus refers to, and
there is not one Syllable in all that Book, expressing, any dislike at the
Words used in the distribution Agobardi lib. de divin. Psalmod. and lib. de
correct. Antiph. oper. Tom. 2. edit. Paris 1666.
: Yea there is a peculiar discourse of this Bishop, against Amalarius his
Comment on the Mass; wherein he speaks of the Roman Canon, Te igitur, etc. yet
never makes the least exception against the Roman Order, or any thing contained
in it Ibid. lib. contr. Amal. page 101.
. So that this pretended dislike of the Roman Form of distribution is a mere
Fiction of his own Brain. And if it were true, that Agobardus did not like any
thing in Sacred Offices, but what was Scripture; Yet there is no cause, he
should for that cause dislike this, which he calls the Roman, but was the
Primitive, and is now our Protestant Form; since the words are taken out of,
and grounded on express places of Holy Scripture: The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is a Scripture Expresion Math. xxvi. 26. Luke xxii. 19. 1 Cor. xi. 24.
, and the next words, Preserve thy Body and Soul to Eternal Life, are grounded
on Scripture Promises John. vi. ver. 50.51.53.54. and 58.
; so that if Agobardus were never so scrupulous, he might very well like and
use this Form. But because my Adversary deals only in Epitomes, I will now give
a full Account of this matter. We must observe therefore that Leidradus, the
Predecessor of Agobardus, in the year 799. according to the desire of Charles
the Great, had brought in the Roman Order of Singing, into the Church of Lions;
and had put out an Antiphonary, with an Epistle before it, the Hymns whereof
were generally taken out of the Holy Scripture Leidradi. Ep. ad Carol. Mag.
inter oper. Agob. Tom. 2. p. 127.
. But about 30 years after, Amalarius a busy Monk, pretends to bring a new
Antiphonary from Rome, Corrected after the Roman Office, in the time of Gregory
the Fourth; which he presented to Lewis the Godly, and hoped by his Authority,
to impose it on all the Gallican Church. But Agobardus the Primate of France,
rejects this new Antiphonary, and writ a Book to prove there were Heresies,
Blasphemies and Nonsense, in these Hymns of Amalarius, and keeps to the old
Roman Antiphonary, established by his Predecessor, the Hymns of which were for
the most part taken out of the Psalms, and other parts of Holy Scripture,
commending this to his Clergy, and giving them his Reasons, why he would not
admit of the other: And this Book of Agobardus concludes with these words, As
the Church has a Book of Mysteries, for Celebrating the Solemnity of the Mass,
digested Orthodoxly, and with convenient Brevity, and has a Book of Lessons,
collected Judiciously out of the Divine Books; so they ought to have this Third
Book, the Antiphonary, purged from all Human Figments and Lies, sufficiently
ordered out of the pure words of Scripture, through the whole Circle of the
year: That so in performing sacred Offices, according to the most approved Rule
of Faith, and the Authority of ancient discipline, there may be kept among us,
one and the same Form of Prayer, of Lessons and of Ecclesiastical Songs
Agobard. de correct. Antiphon.. 19. Tom. ii. p. 100.
. This is the whole Story, and the passage which Spondanus ignorantly, or at
least rashly Censures, and my Adversary Ridiculously brings in, to show
Agobardus his dislike of the words of distribution: Whereas these words refer
only to the Hymns, which yet probably were not all, the very words of
Scripture: but were either Transcribed thence, or agreeable thereto, much more
than the new Hymns of Amalarius. And since Agobardus received and used the
Roman Canon, and the whole Roman Missal, wherein were many things, which are
not the words of Scripture; we must not expound these words, (cited but now) so
strictly as Spondanus does, as if he would not use any words in Divine Offices,
but those of Scripture: For Agobardus means no more, than that the Hymns ought
to be, either taken out of Scripture, or agreeable to the Doctrine thereof; for
he proves that the Hymns of Amalarius were Heretical and Blasphemous, contrary
in many things to the Holy Scripture, and therefore he rejected them. But as to
any Liberty in varying the Prayers, Lessons or Hymns that were established, or
altering the Roman Forms; This great Bishop was so far from it, that he enjoins
the old Gregorian Office, and imposes that prescribed Form, together with the
Lessons and the Hymns, and opposes those Innovations and Alterations, which
some attempted to make, because the Forms and Order then established, were
agreeable both to the Rule of Faith, and to the acient Ecclesiastical Laws;
upon which occasion, he produces that African Canon before cited Part. i.
Cent. 4.. 24. page 257.
, in these Words, viz. That no Supplications and Prayers be said, unless they
have been approved in a Council; nor shall any of these, at all be Sung in the
Church, till they have been considered by the Prudent, and approved of in a
Synod, lest any thing against the Faith be composed, either my mistake or by
design Canon. Afric. ap. Agob. de correct. Antiph.. ii p. 92.
. And now the Reader shall judge, whether this Author be for my Adversaries
purpose or no, since he imposes Books of prescribed Prayers, Lessons and Hymns,
and thinks the keeping strictly to them, is necessary to make the Clergy
Uniform, and the use of them agreeable both to Scripture and Antiquity.

8. Adrian. ii. Episc Romans An. Dom. 8^8.
Another instance of Liberty taken in varying the prescribed Form of the words
of distribution, is a Relation, of Pope Adrians adding diverse Solemn words to
the usual Form, when he gave the Sacrament to Lotharius the French King and his
Attendants; Which Lotharius had been Excommunicated by Pope Nicolas, for living
in Adultery with one Waldrada, and Lotharius came to Rome for Absolution, and
promised for ever to Renounce her; for the security of which promise, this Pope
obliges him to take the Sacrament upon it, together with his Nobles: And upon
that Extraordinary Occasion, post Missarum Solennia, after the usual
Consecration, the Pope added some words for that once only; which was to let
them know their Danger, if they did Dissemble in so Solemn an Ordinance; but
so, that probably either before or after, he used the old Form of distribution,
which the Historians also intimate; though since this is only an Historical
Narration, they have not perhaps so clearly expressed it: However, what can my
Adversary infer from hence to his purpose, supposing Adrian mixed the Form of
distribution, for this once, with his occasional Commination Disc. of Lit. p.
91, 92.
? First does he think the Pope did well or ill in this? If he did ill, why does
he urge it for a Precedent? It seems to be a varying not only from the Churches
Form, but from the design of Christ; who did not institute this Sacrament to be
a Rite, to purge Men from Accusations, or Seal Curses on Men, who brake their
Leagues; and therefore this is not a good Example for our Church to follow; nor
ought the Dissenters to desire the same Liberty, till they have proved the Fact
was not Evil. Yet if it were well done, what consequence can they draw from it?
may private Ministers do all that the great Bishop of the West may do? Or
because he did take this Liberty, once upon a very Extraordinary occasion,
ought they to have it always, when there is nothing Extraordinary in the Case?
I dare say, my Adversary could not imagine, that this Pope gave his Clergy
Liberty to vary this Form as they pleased, nor to draw this Act of his into an
Example; and therefore I cannot see any reason, why he should urge it.

The like may be said of his next instance, of one Leuthericus Leuthericus
Episc. Senon. An. Dom. 1004.
Arch Bishop of Sens, who used these Words in the delivery of the Sacrament,
Receive if thou art Worthy. And my Adversary says, Robert K. of France Checked
him for it, not because he Transgressed the Established Order, but because the
King (by mistake) supposed none were Worthy to Receive Disc. of Lit. page 92.
. I shall easily Answer this, when I have First set Right the Matter of Fact.
For Spondanus tells us out of an old Author, That this Leuthericus held not a
right Opinion of Christ; and seeking to prove some whom he hated, by the Body
of the Lord; the King sharply reproved him, for that whereas the Priest who
gave the Communion, use to say, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy
Body and Soul, he with a Rash and polluted Mouth said, If thou be Worthy
Receive it: Whereas indeed none can be truly said to be Worthy Spondan. Epit.
ad An. 1004.. 2. p. 798. e Helgald. in vit. Roberti Regis.
. Here we see the old Author, (for these are his Words,) brings in an Irregular
Fact of an Heretical Bishop, which ought to be no Precedent, and is no
Evidence, what was the Custom of the Orthodox Clergy in that Age. Again, this
instance shows, that the old Form was generally used then, and that his not
using it, was the True Reason, why the King reproved him, viz. for daring to
alter the Established Form; For the last Words, that none are truly Worthy, are
not the Words of the King, but of the Writer of his Life. Wherefore the usage
of that Time was, for all to Administer by the ancient and Established Form;
and that when an Eminent Arch Bishop presumed to vary from it, he was sharply
reproved for it, by a Religious King, and is censured by an ancient Historian,
as one that did not amend, but deprave the Office by this pretended Correction.
As for Spondanus, his supposing Leuthericus refused the old Form, out of a
dislike of Transubstantiation, it is wholly groundless; For this Form was used
in the Roman Church, long before Transubstatiation came in, and is retained in
those Protestant Churches, which have rejected that false Doctrine.

He tells us also of Pope Gregory Gregorius Sept. Episc. Romans An. Dom. 1077.
the 7th, who having been accused of great Crimes, and being about to receive
the Sacrament, made a Solemn Protestation of his Innocence, holding the
Eucharist in his Hands Disc. of Lit. page 93.
. But the Historian cited by him, does not say he omitted or altered the usual
Form; he rather supposes the Pope First said these Words, for clearing of his
Innocence, and then after those terrible Words, he did receive it, probably
with the Common Form. But however it was, we say, that this Extraordinary, and
perhaps unlawful Fact of a Pope on that occasion, is no Evidence of the Custom
of that Age; nor is it to be alleged to justify any private Ministers taking
Liberty to vary the Forms as he please: Besides, we see that in this Corrupt
Age, the Holy Sacrament came to be used for a Canonical Purgation, as in this
Case; And in confirming secular Leagues, as in the next; and it is no great
wonder, if when they used the Eucharist to new purposes, they were forced to
invent new Forms, as in his next Instance, Pope Pascal the Second did, when he
delivered the Sacrament to the Emperor, Hen. 5th, as a Confirmation of the
Peace and League then made between them Disc. of Lit. page 93. e Sig^b^rto.
. Now if this matter of Fact be true, it is nothing to our Question, which is
about the Forms commonly used in Divine Service: As for odd and Extraordinary
Cases, and especially when the Ordinances of Christ were prostituted to secular
Ends and Purposes, they ought not to be alleged in an enquiry about the Custom
of those Ages, which all grant, was to Pray, and Administer the Sacraments by
prescribed and imposed Forms; and no Liberty was allowed to any, in the least,
to vary from them: And those who did vary, were either so great as to believe
themselves above Rules, or so irregular as to be censured for it; wherefore
these few Cases do not at all prove, that the Clergy had, or ought to have a
Liberty to vary from the prescribed and established Forms, in the Ordinary
Service of God.

I find nothing more in my Adversary out of Antiquity; and had he not started
these trifling Objections, I should not have descended so low; but since his
Fancy for a bad Cause, puts him upon these poor shifts, I was not willing to
leave any thing, that might amuse a common Reader: But now as to these later
Ages, the Point is clear, certain and undeniable, that Liturgies were every
where imposed, and no Church permitted its own Clergy, to vary from their own
way: It is true, many Corruptions and Superstitions in these Ages, crept into
the Liturgies of all Churches; but they grafted still upon the old Stock, kept
the Primitive way of Praying; Yea, retained so many of the ancient and pure
Forms, as do frequently confute diverse of these Corruptions and Innovations. So
that it is no difficult thing to disprove many of the Romish Modern Opinions,
by some parts of their ancient Missals; but that is not my busisiness: It is
sufficient to my purpose, that I have made it Evident, there were prescribed
Forms, used in the public Service, even from the beginning of Christianity, and
that the way of Serving God by Liturgies, was the Practice of all Regular
Churches, and had the Approbation of all Eminent Fathers, and of very many
Councils all along in every Century, since the time of the Apostles, and from
the beginning of settling Christianity.

CHAP. IV. Of the Arguments against the Antiquity of LITVRGIES.
THERE are some things relating to the Antiquity of Prescribed Forms and
Liturgies, which are dispersed up and down my Adversary's Book, and would not
easily be brought under the order of Time in the History; and yet must be
considered, that no Scruple may remain concerning this great Truth: And though
some of these have been briefly examined before, yet we will here put them
together, and give a fuller Answer to all that looks like an Objection.

. 1. First, He thinks to disprove the ancient use of Prescribed Forms, by
affirming, That of old they had no more, but a certain Order, wherein diverse
Churches agreed, to administer the several Parts of Worship, particularly the
Severals in the Sacrament, so as each had its known and fixed place: This he
finds in many Fathers, and he says, the 19th Canon of Laodicea, An. 365. was a
Rule for this Order Disc. of Lit. page 4, and 5.
, which elsewhere he makes to be no more than a Rubric or a Directory Ib. page
174.
. But this should have been proved, not only by the word Ordo, (which we have
showed signifies a Liturgy, containing not only the Method, but the very Forms
themselves); He should have produced some such ancient Rubric or Directory,
which had nothing but the Method of the several Parts of Divine-Service without
any Forms. For we have produced Liturgies, at least as ancient as that Canon of
Laodicea, viz. That of Jerusalem, and that in the Apostolical Constitutions,
having all the Forms at large; and if he cannot show one of these Directories,
he only dreams of such a thing. Now though it be hard to make out a Negative,
yet we may go far to prove there was no such thing, distinct from a Liturgy:
For these Severals in the Sacrament, were Prayers, Intercessions, Giving of
Thanks, Prefaces, Hymns, and the like: Now these must be called by some
distinguishing Names in this pretended Rubric; and that they could not well be,
unless they were Forms: Now if the Severals were all Forms, as the Prefaces and
Hymns certainly were, then they might have proper Names for each of them, and
might easily describe them by some of the first words; as, Our Father, Lord
have mercy, Lift up your Hearts, etc. and then if the Forms were known by those
short Names, that makes this Rubric become a shorter Liturgy. Besides, He tells
us, This Order was certain, and agreed on by several Churches, and made some
kind of Uniformity among them in praying for the same things. But it is hard to
conceive, how Extempore Prayers could be agreed on by distant Churches, to be
used in one certain Order; or how this agreement could produce Uniformity, if
the Words of the Prayers every where differed, and the Phrases in the same
place daily varied: No Canons of Councils, not written Rule, nor (...), can
suffice to make an Uniformity out of such diversity. He finds but one Canon
till the beginning of the Sixth Age, to direct this Order, viz. the 19th Canon
of Laodicea, and that is a very short one, which only mentions Six Prayers, as
known by their proper Names; therefore to be sure, that Canon was not all the
Rule the Church had for this Agreement and Uniformity: And for the (...), it
was that which the Deacon lifted up at the end of every Collect, when the
Bishop or Priest came to say, Through Jesus Christ our Lord; to give Notice to
the People, to say Amen, or to make some Response: And sometimes to call them
off from their Knees, to join in Hymns, or the like; which supposes known
Forms, when so slight a Signal served a great Congregation, to make them ready
for all Parts of the Service, in which they had any share: Therefore there must
be more, to make this Uniformity in distant Churches, and in very large
Congregations, and that was Prescribed Liturgies, which we have made out, to be
much elder than his imaginary Rubric or Directory. But for once let us suppose,
That they had in those Early Ages no more than some Canons or Written Rubric,
prescribing and enjoining the certain Order of the several Parts of Worship,
and this so exact, as to make diverse Churches agree to pray for the same
things, and in the same Method; Would not this be as much an abridgment of the
Liberty which is claimed, and a stinting of the Spirit, as if the Words were
prescribed? If Ministers then had the Gift of Prayer, could not that one Spirit
which inspired them, teach them the Order and Method, as well as the Words and
Phrases? Would not this Gift have made them as Uniform, as Written Canons or
Rubrics, and rendered a Directory as needless as a Liturgy? It must be so,
unless my Adversary will say, the only use of the Spirit is to furnish Men with
Phrases and Expressions in Prayer; but that he cannot say (without
contradicting himself, and blaspheming the Spirit) because he says, God minds
not so much the Expressions, as the inward Affections Disc. of Lit. page 132.
; and proves this by a Set of Golden-Sayings out of the Fathers Ibid. page 50.
: Wherefore at this rate, the Gift of Prayer would only enable Men for that
part of our Prayer, which God does not much mind: So that this imaginary Order
of his, devised to protect the Gift of Praying Extempore, overthrows it as much
as a Common Prayer Book; And if he could make it out, Wise Men could not but
see, That so soon as there was need, to agree upon his sort of Order, and to
write down the Method and the Things to be prayed for, so soon the Gif of
Prayer was ceased, and so soon there was need also to agree upon the Words in
which these Things should be asked, if they would have any solid Agreement or
Uniformity between distant Churches.

. 2. He Argues, There were no Liturgies in the first Four or Five Ages at
least, because no Writers of that Time have any such Phrase, as Reading of
Prayers, though they do speak of Reading the Lessons and the Passions of the
Martyrs Disc. of Lit. page 7.
. I Reply, First, the force of this Argument turns upon himself: For I may
Argue, There were no Extempore Prayers in all that time (at least after the
miraculous Gift of Prayer ceased) because in all that Space, he (who has so
diligently searched Antiquity) cannot produce any Writer, who speaks plainly of
Extempore Prayers. He finds several Testimonies of the Fathers Preaching
Extempore, wherein that very Phrase is used Disc. of Lit. page 56, 57, and 58.
: And since it would have been more to his purpose, we may be sure, had he met
with Preces Extemporales, or Extemporaneae, or found (...), or (...), or (...),
(which Phrases he meets with for their Sermons) He would have produced them
very triumphantly; but his Silence assures us, there are no such Phrases
concerning Prayers; and therefore (in his way of Arguing) we conclude, there
were no such Prayers in those Ages. But Secondly, It is certain there were
Written Forms of Prayer very Early in the Church of God: This we have proved
out of many Writers of the first Four or Five Ages. Now if there were Written
Forms then, doubtless they might be Read; nay, they must either be Read when
used in public, or be gotten by Heart; and so in Tertullian's Phrase be
repeated de Pectore, by Memory; even as Socrates (says the younger Theodosius)
could recite the Scripture out of his Breast (...) Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 22.
page 748.
. And it appears in S. Basil, That the ancient Monks used to get both their
Prayers and the Psalms by Heart: Wherefore, if they took this Method, he cannot
conclude from their not Reading Prayers, that they had no prescribed Written
Forms. He himself has cited the Hymns written by the Holy Brethren from the
beginning Disc. of Lit. page 23.
; He found Written Forms of Prayer in the Council of Carthage Ib. page 84.
, and cites the Prefaces before the Communion out of S. Cyril Ib. page 147.
, and might have cited them out of S. Cyprian, had he so pleased. These he
found in the Primitive Ages; and we have found Litanies, Prayers for all
Estates of Men, and Forms of Consecration within this Period: So that being so
sure of Written Forms, whether they were Read or no, is nothing to our purpose.
But, Thirdly, The Phrase for Offering up Our Desires to God, both in these and
the following Ages, when Forms were most used and most common, were, To Pray,
To Make, or To Say Prayers Disc. of Lit. ex Origin. page 139.
; Which Phrases are more applicable to those who Pray by Forms, than to such as
Pray without them: yet we do not urge them against the Extempore Way, and he
must not allege them against Forms; because we know the Jews certainly prayed
by Prescribed Forms; and yet I do not remember the Phrase of Reading Prayers is
to be found in the Old Testament, any more than in these ancient Writers: And
these Fathers imitated the Scripture Phrase, where Reading was appropriated to
the Reading the Law and the Prophets; as among these it was, to the Reading of
Lessons, which were only Read, and no more; but using Holy Forms of
Supplication, though they were also Read, is called Praying, from the Principal
design of them, which was to petition Almighty God, or ask him for what they
wanted. But whereas he would prove, That the Primitive Christians could not
Read their Prayers, because while they Prayed, they had their Eyes lifted up to
Heaven Disc. of Lit. p. 9.
: This has been answered before; and I have proved, That neither the Priest
nor the People did always look upwards when they Prayed; sometimes they Prayed
with their Eyes looking down See my 1st Part, Cent. 2.. 4. p. 46, and 47.
. And all Men know, that after we are accustomed to a Form, we may look upwards
when we Repeat it, for the greatest part of the time; and many, yea, most of
our Ministers do so, in the use of the Common Prayer; and therefore the
Primitive Bishops and Priests might Read their Prayers, and yet look upwards
frequently. Though I must also note, that there is not one of his Quotations
brought, to prove this to be the Posture of Prayer, which relate to the Priest
who did Officiate, they all relate to the whole Congregation, to the Christian
People; and I hope their looking upwards frequently will not be allowed for a
good Proof, that they (much less that the Priest) never looked on a Book of
Prayers, or read any prescribed Forms of Prayers or Responses: And for the
Presbyters and Deacons, which (he says) could not Read (if there were any such)
no doubt they got their Office by Heart; for such Men (he grants) were not fit
to make Extempore Prayers.

. 3. In the next place he goes about to disparage Reading of Forms of Prayer,
as a way which wants Life and Action, and that is apt to dull the Auditory; and
this he proves, by Pliny's refusing to read over one of his Orations to his
Friends in private, since he could not read it over with that life and vigor,
with which it was spoken at first in the Court Disc. of Lit. page 11.
. But to this I Answer, That he twice mentions that Commendation which Pliny
gave his Servant Zosimus (and puts it in, both in the Text and Margen of his
Book Ibid. page 8. and p. 11. Marg.
) whom his Master there praises, Because he could read a thing with as much
life and vigor, as either the Inventer of it, or he who had got it by Heart
could show Plin. epist. l. 5. ep. 19.
: Adding, That he did this so rarely well, as if he had learned to do nothing
else. Now this Instance confutes his Argument, and shows, it is possible for a
Man to read a thing with great life and vigor, and so as to affect his
Auditory very much thereby: And why should he uncharitably suppose, that a
Pagan Slave should take more care to read a Play, or an Oration, vigorusly
before his Master, than a Christian Priest to read a Prayer before his God?
Experience confutes this unworthy Reflection, because many Clergymen do read
the Common Prayer with as much spirit and life, and as true Devotion, as any of
his Friends say their Extempore Prayers; and I am sure, their Tautologies,
Incoherences, and tedious length, tire a Judicious Hearer, much more than a
well-read and acurate Form can do. As for Pliny, his Oration was a Form,
composed with great Art, and committed to Memory before it was first spoken,
and was designed to work upon the Affections of a Crowd of Men in a Secular
Court, and in a Temporal Cause; and in that Case even Theatrical Gestures, and
the Artificial Acting of it, were apt to move the Auditory, more than the bare
Reading it in a private Room to a few Friends Pl^n epist. lib. 2. Ep. 19.
. But what is this to the Case of Prayers? Pliny durst not have come before
that Auditory with an Extempore Harangue, such as our Dissenters dare come into
the presence of God and a great Congregation with: He designed no more by his
Action, but only to work upon the Frailties of Men; but our Adversaries (I
hope) will not own, That their only design in Prayer, is, to move the
Affections of their Hearers, by Tone, Gestures, Noise, and Fluency. We who use
Forms, as Pliny did, and generally have them by Heart, as he had, can repeat
them as vigorously as he did the first time, and thereby do keep all pious Men
in our Congregations very attentive. But still we remember, we speak to the
Most High God, before whom our Words ought to be well weighed, and our Desires
properly expressed; because he is not wrought upon by Noise and Action, as
silly Men and Women are. If our Petitions be sincere and hearty, prudently
Worded in proper Phrases, and repeated with new Devotion every day; the God we
pray to, likes them no worse for being daily in the same Words: And Pliny could
not have wondered at us, for Reading daily the same Forms of Prayer; for He, and
all the Priests of his Religion, prayed so to their Gods, and did not believe
the Deities affected Change and Variety, or were moved with Gesticulations and
Tones; Nor would that Judicious Heathen have been so weak, as to compare his
popular Orations, to the Prayers he offered up to his Gods. And since he
appeals to Pliny, to judge between Forms and Extempore, we will hear what he
and others say of these two Ways, even with respect to Civil Pleadings; Pliny
brings in Pollio, saying, Pleading agreeably, I pleaded often; but by Pleading
often, I came to plead not so well; for by too often using this, I got an
easiness rather than a faculty; and not so much an assurance, as a sort of
rashness -- ass^duitate nimia, facilitas magis quam facultas, nec fiducia, sed
temiritas paratur Plin lib. 6. ep. 29.
. And if our Dissenting Brethren had the modesty to confess it, I fear they
find the same effects of using this Gift, when they plead at another Bar. The
Grave Tacitus also derides Q. Huterius, an Orator, who was very ready at
Extempore Speeches, saying, His Orations did not survive him: For whereas other
Men's Labor and Meditation lasted to Posterity, his Noisy fluent way died with
him Huterii Canorum illud and pr ^^^ns, cum ipso s mul extinctum est. Tic^t.
Annal. lib. 4.. 61. page ^13.
. So despicable was this kind of Eloquence in those days. Again, Lampridius
says, The Wise Emperor Alexander Severus, Suffered not any of his Counselors
to answer him concerning great Affairs, till they had well thought upon them Ne
ince^itati dicere cogerentur de re^us ingentibus. Lampr^d in vit. Al. Sev. p.
524.
. Plutarch also Arguing against Extempore Orations, tells us a Story of a young
Painter, who showed Apelles a piece of his Work, and bragged how little time he
had done it in: To whom that great Master Replied, I saw by the Work, it was
done in haste (...). Plut. de liber. educ. page 6.
. But none is more severe than Seneca, upon a Philosopher of quick Invention,
who used this way; This Rapid and Copious way of Speaking (says he) is much
fitter for a Jugler or Mountebank, than one that is about a great and serious
Matter Istam vim docendi rapidam atque abundantem, aptiorem esse circulatori,
quam agenti rem magnam and seriam. Senec. Ep. 40. page 101.
. And I suppose it will be granted, That Praying is as great and serious a
Matter, as a Philosophical Lecture. I shall conclude with S. Hierom's Opinion
of Gregory Nazianzen's Extempore Preaching which he had heard, and could well
judge of it: Nothing is so easy, as to deceive the Vulgar People, and an
Illiterate Assembly, with the Volubility of the Tongue; because they do most
admire that which they least understand Nihil tam facile est, quam vilem
plebeculam and indoctam concionem linguae volubilitate dec^pere, quae quicquid
non intelligit plus admiratur. Hicron. ad Nepot. Ep. 2 page 16.
. This he spoke of his Master; and thus he censured the Extempore Preaching of
an Eminent Father in that Age: And if any had then pretended to Pray at that
rate, it is more than probable he would severely have exposed the Boldness and
Folly of hoping to please God by that contemptible Faculty, which was admired
only by that ignorant Crowd, who were deceived by it. To conclude this Point, I
dare refer it to any Man, who duly considers the Majesty of God, Whether the
grave and affectionate Reading of a well-studied and judicious Form of Prayer,
expressed in proper and pious Words, be not more fit to be presented to him,
and more likely to be accepted by him; than a rash unpremeditated Rhapsody,
without Method, strength of Reason, or Propriety of Phrase: The latter, by
Noise and Action, may operate more upon the Passions of Weak Men; but the
former is more suitable to the infinite Majesty of him, whom we only desire to
please when we Pray.

4. After this he Argues, that the ancien^ Church had no Liturgies, or Books of
public Prayers, and therefore could have no prescribed or imposed Forms. And he
would prove they had no Books, by the Case of Athanasius his not being accused,
for abusing the Liturgy, nor the Arians, for Burning any thing but Bibles; by
Constantin 's employing Eusebius, only to Transcribe the Scripture; by the
Council of Carthage 's Decree, for only holding a Book of the Gospels over the
Bishops Head; And by the Persecutors finding no Liturgy, in their Searches
after the Christians Books Disc. of Lit. p. 12, 13, 14, 15. etc. -- to the 20th.
. To which I answer, First in general, that I have made it so Evident, that
there were prescribed Forms, and Books of Hymns and Prayers in these Ages; that
a negative Argument, taken from some few Authors, in some places, not
mentioning them, is of no Force against plain and positive proof. But Secondly,
We will examine his particulars, and show that they do not make out his Point.
First, His own Quotation concerning Athanasius, expressly says that Macarius (
who was employed by Athanasius) did Burn ((...)) the Holy Books (...) Socrat.
l. 1. cap. 20. p. 539.
, he Translates it fraudulently in the Singular Number, the Holy Bible; to make
his Reader suppose, it was meant alone of that Book. But the Original speaks of
more Books; and therefore since a Liturgy was then in use at Alexandria; no
doubt that was one of the Holy Books, which they here falsely, accused Macarius
for Burning. And since the Author calls them, [Holy] not [Divine Books], it is
more probable he meant it, of the Books of Offices, which were counted only
Sacred; than of the Scripture, which they generally call Divine, or Divinely
inspired Books: Which distinction is very evident in Eusebius, where he
relates, how in the Persecution under Dioclesian, They Burnt the Divine and
Sacred Books in the M^rket places (...) Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 217.
. In which place, the Divine Books are the Holy Scriptures, and the Sacred
Books, those which contained the Service of the Church. The same Author in the
Life of Constantine, makes a plain distinction between these Books, as being
several Volums; For he says the Emperor took the Books, for the explaining the
Divinly inspired Scriptures, and after for repeating the prescribed Prayers,
with those who dwelt in his Roy. al Palace (...). Eusebius. vit. Constable. lib. 4.
cap. 17.
. First he took the Bible into his Hands, and then after that, (it seems) he
took the other Book, wherein the usual Established Prayers were written. For
((...)) the Books, implies more Books than one. Secondly, As to the Books,
which Constantine sent to Eusebius into Palaestine, to procure for his Churches
at Constantinople, he calls them, Those Divine Books, which he knew most
necessary, according to the Ecclesiastical Catalogue, to be prepared and used
(...) Ibid. l. 4. cap. 35.
. And this might be expounded of Books of Offices, as well as Bibles; but
suppose we grant, this Catalogue here mentioned to be the Canon of Scripture,
agreed on by the Church; and so the Books he sent for, were only the Canonical
Books of Scripture: His inference, that the Churches in Constantine's Time, had
no other Book, will by no means follow: Eusebius lived in Palaestine, where the
Scriptures were first written and best understood, and there the best Copies
were to be had; and Eusebius who lived there, was the fittest Judge of them;
therefore Constantine sent thither, and to him, perhaps for no more but Bibles;
Not because Churches were furnished then with no other Books, but because we
know, Constantine had Prayer-Books at home, and could get acurate Copies of the
Service, writ out at Constantinople, and need not send so far as Palaestine for
those Books; but it was most proper, to send thither for Copies of Canonical
Scripture. Thirdly, The Council of Carthage also does mention a Book of the
Gospels, held over the Bishops Head, a Book of Exorcisms to be given to the
Exorcist, and a Book of Lessons to be delivered to the Reader, at their
Ordination: But does not mention the Service Book, delivered to any that entered
into Orders Council. 4. Carthag. can. 1. 7, 8.
. But it is too much from thence to conclude, there was no Service Book there
in the year [498]; because we have proved by many Testimonies, which are
Positive, that they had prescribed Prayers there long before. And he may as
well argue, that we have no Common Prayer Book in England, since it is not
delivered either to any Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, at their Ordination, that
is, there is no more done here, than was there; and yet, both we have, and they
had a Book of Offices for all that; Optatus, S. Augustine and others before
cited, do fully attest it: Moreover, these Books of Exorcisms, were Forms of
Prayer, and of Catechizing, Collected out of Holy Scripture -- (...) Cyril.
praef. ad Catech.
, for those who were newly Converted to Christianity. And such Books had been
long time used in the Church before this Council, though this formal delivery
of them, is not mentioned till this Council Orders it. Fourthly, As to the
Persecutors not enquiring for, or finding, or the Christians delivering no
other Books to them but only Bibles; I reply, the matter of Fact is not True,
and therefore his Consequence, viz. that they had no Prayer-Books then, is
false. Indeed the Bible was the most Eminent of all the Christian Books, and
the Foundation of their Faith, their Worship and their Manners: And in those
Ages, the Bible was in all Christians Hands, the People Read it at Home;
whereas the Liturgy was only in the Priests Hands; and upon the Notion they had
of the necessity of concealing Mysteries from Pagans, was kept very close. By
which means, no doubt, Bibles were oftener found by the Persecutors, and better
known to them than the Book of Offices, the Dyptics, the Book of Exorcisms, the
Book of Anthems written and composed to the Honor of Christ. Yet we are sure
they had these Books then, though they are rarely or never mentioned singl^,
only they come under the general Titles of Christian Writings, Divine, Sacred
or Holy Books, etc. and no doubt sometimes the Persecutors found and Burned
these, as well as Bibles: For we may observe, that all Authors generally speak
in the Plural Number, The Divine and Holy Writings, and the Writings. The Books
of the Church (in Eusebius) are said to be Burnt, and Destroyed by the
Persecutors (...) Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 2. (...) ibid. cap. 3. (...) Id. lib. 10.
cap. 4.
; Why do our Writings deserve to be committed to the Flames? says Arnobius
N^^str^ quidem Scripta cur ignibus merueru^t dari? Arnob. l 4.
. They Demanded the Divine Books for the Fire, Says Augustine Peterent divinos
c^dices exurendos A^^. brevic. C^l. l. 3.
: So they ask the Holy Martyrs, if they had any Writings in their keeping
Dicas, aliquas Scripturas habeas? ^ron. An. 30^.. 53.
? And the Canon of Arles is general, against all that had delivered up the Holy
Writings De his qui Scripturas Sanctas tradidisse dicuntur. Council. Arcl. can.
13. An. 316.
. Now, why should they so Constantly and Unanimously speak of more Books, if
there had been no Book but a Bible? But further, some of the Acts of the
Martyrs mention Volumes of Parchment, and other folded Books, besides the Bible
Baron. An. 303.. 10.
. In the Acts under Zenophilus, the Persecutors demanded, If they had any
Writings of their Law, or any thing else in their Library Ibid.. 13. and 14.
? Now they had removed the Books before they came, conveying them to the
Readers House, where at last they found 24 great and small Volums, and in
another House 8 Books, and 4 folded Tomes. Now certainly these were not all
Bibles; no doubt, some of them were Books of Prayers, Hymns and Passions, or
Names at least of Martyrs Writ out, as S. Cyprian had directed. Another of them
was asked, If he had any Writing in his House Habes ergo Scripturam aliquam in
domo tua? Baron. An. 303.. 50.
? Another was charged, to give up those Books, and whatsoever Parchments he had
Baron. An. 302.. 120.
: Finally, in the Examination of Irene, they charge her, with preserving a
great many Parchments, Books, Tablets, Codicils, and Pages of Scripture, which
had belonged to the Christians from the beginning. And she owns, that since the
Edict to Burn all these, the Christians, to their great Grief, could not use
them, Night and Day, as they had formerly done, but were forced to hide them
Baron. An. 303.. 44. and 46.
. Now when we consider the Christians Praying Thrice a Day at least, Morning,
Noon and Night; and see so many sorts of Books reckoned up, which had belonged
to them from the beginning, and were used Night and Day, before this cruel
Edict; We cannot but imagine they were, the Catalogues of Martyrs, the
Prayer-Books and Antiphonaries, Litanies and other Offices, used in their
Divine Service, because they are reckoned up here distinct from the Pages of
Holy Scripture. We conclude therefore, that it is a mere Dream of our
Adversaries, to Fancy, the Christians then had no Books, but the Bible, since
he Argues against matter of Fact; his Premises are utterly false, and
therefore his Conclusion falls to the ground. As for his long Ramble, about the
Heathens, tolerating very odd Opinions, concerning their Gods, but prohibiting
new ways of Worship Disc. of Lit. p. 17. etc.
; It is well known, that every Country then, had a several way of Worshipping
their proper Gods; and many of these ways were allowed, and used in Heathen
Rome: And so was the Christian Worship, under some Emperors; but I grant, and
have proved, that when Persecution came, the Pagans searched for Liturgies, as
well as Bibles; So that all his random Guesses, have only given me the occasion
of clearing this Point, That the Christians had prescribed Forms, writ in Books
and Parchments, folded or rolled up, even under the Heathen Persecuting
Emperors.

5. We are now come to Finally, (which one would think was his last Argument,)
If there had been any such Liturgies, they would have been made use of against
the Errors, and for deciding the Controversies, with which the Church was
exercised in those Ages, wherein we are concerned especially those two, that
which opposed the Godhead of Christ, and that which asserted the Faithful, to
be wi hout Sin Disc. of Lit. p. 22. etc.
: Which Argument I thus turn upon himself; If they were made use of against
Heretics, and in these two Points, and by my Adversaries own Confession; then
he must grant, there were Liturgies in those Ages. Now, my Adversary himself,
in the same Page confesses, that S. Augustine mentions the public Prayers
against Pelagius; and though he pretends, he does not speak of them as a Form;
I have under the title of Augustine, before, showed the falsehood of that
pretense, and proved that he cited, and referred to the African Forms Part. I.
Chap. IV.. 21.
. Again, my Adversary in the next Page, produces a passage out of Eusebius, to
show, that Artemon an Heretic, who held Christ was a mere Man, was confuted by
those Hymns, which were composed by the Brethren, in the beginning of
Christianity, wherein Christ was praised as very God Disc. of Lit. page 23.
. Now Hymns were a great part of the Christian Liturgy, and therefore my
Adversary has utterly spoiled his own Argument, and proved that some parts of
Liturgy were used to confute both the Heresies, he instances in. And since he
Argues negatively, one or two positive Examples are enough to confute him, if
there were no more; But I have showed, (and must not tire my Reader, with that
kind of Repetition, which I blame in him) That diverse other Fathers, did use
the words of the public Liturgies, against these and other Heresies; so does
Optatus Milevitanus cite them, to confute the Donatists See this Hist. Part. I.
Chap. 4.. 10.
; S. Augustine to convince the Pelagians Ibid.. 21. page 228.
; S Hierom brings in the Gloria in excelsis, to expose the same Heretics
Hieron. cont. Pelag. lib. 2. page 447.
; Celestin cites the Prayers for all Men See Part. II. Chap. I.. 5.
, and Petrus Diaconus in Fulgentius, the Prayer of Consecration, to decide the
Controversies of their Times Ibid. Chap. II.. 3.
. So that his Antecedent is a notorious Falsehood, confuted by his own
Confession, and by matter of Fact; and therefore his Consequence must be false.
Yea, from these and other instances, we firmly prove, that there must be
Liturgies in those Ages, in written Forms and certain words; which were
generally owned to be of great Antiquity and Authority, at the time when they
were produced in Controversies of Faith; because Extempore Prayers cannot be
cited at all; and Novel Inventions must have been quoted to little purpose
against obstinate Heretics, who openly opposed the Faith of the Church. But
some perhaps may wonder, there are not more passages cited in the three first
Ages, against the Heretics of those Times, our of Liturgies. To which I
answer. There are but very few Writers of these Ages; and of those who did
write, few of their works are come to our hands, and their Arguments are
generally so obscure, that probably they may more frequently refer to their
Liturgies, than we can easily observe; Besides, the Church was then unsettled,
and it is probable those Heretics, who opposed its Doctrins, would not allow
its Liturgy for a competent Judge, as we see in Paulus Samosatenus, who
despised the Solemn Forms of Praise used at Antoch; as being made not long
before his Time: and therefore the Fathers of those Ages, cited not the
Liturgies so often, as they of the Fourth and Fifth Century did; when the long
and Universal use of them had given them a greater Reputation, and a firmer
Authority. However in the Second Century, we have showed that Irenaeus, brings
in some Heretics, arguing from the Churches Forms See Part. I. Chap. II.. 3.
, which proves prescribed Forms were then used as clearly, as if they had been
cited against Heretics: We have also proved, that Gregory Thaumaturgus made a
Liturgy in the midst of the Third Age Ibid. Chap. III.. 5.
; and by diverse other Evidences, we have showed there were Liturgies, in these
first three Centuries; which Point being fixed, we need not enquire nicely, how
often they were cited against Heretics, who (for any thing I know) in those
early Times, valued a passage of the Liturgies then in use, no more than our
Dissenters do a Proof from our Common Prayer Book. But we see in the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries in both which he affirms, they had no Liturgies, there are
Quotations good store out of the public Forms, which is enough to spoil his
Cause.

6. After his Finally, Page 22th, I thought he had done Arguing; but as if he
knew not how to make an end, and could not stop in his full Career, we heave
Further, after that Finally. And now he goes on, If there were such Liturgies,
how comes it to pass, we meet with no Intelligence of any changing them, or
alterations made in them (...) Lit. page 25.
? But as if he had forgot his own Argument, he immediately tells us, he had met
with Intelligence; That Paulus Samosatenus cast out from the Church of Antioch,
those Hymns or Psalms, which were used to be sung there, in honor of Christ,
(he might have added) and made new Forms of his own. Now this made a very great
change in the Liturgy there; because wc may remember, the whole Christian
Worship in Pliny, is described by Singing Hymns to Christ as God; so that some
think, the greatest part of these Primitive Liturgies, consisted in these
Hymns; and therefore, his casting out all these, was chaning more than half the
Liturgy: And since these Hymns were written Forms, it is very probable, the
Prayers were suitable to them, and were Forms also. Again, my Adversary meets
with more Intelligence, viz. that the Arians altered the Gloria Patri, the Form
of Baptism, and the Universally received Confession of Faith Disc. of Lit. page
26.
. Are not all these ancient Forms, and parts of Liturgy? And did not the
Orthodox Fathers blame the Arians, for these bold attempts? Moreover, in the
next Page, he finds that the Eutychians attempted to add two or three words to
the Trisagion, an ancient and known Form, and a part of the Prmitive Liturgy,
which the People were so unwilling to have altered, that the very attempting
it, made a Tumult at Constantinople, and a Noise throughout the World. Why
then, does he pretend, he meets with no Intelligence? His Fallacy is this, he
supposes a Liturgy, containing nothing but Forms of Prayer, (which is a mere
Chimaera, a thing that never was in those Ages,) and because there is no
mention of altering this Liturgy, but most of the Instances happen to be in
Hymns and Forms of Praise, he supposes, that they never changed the Liturgy;
that is, as he expounds it, the Prayers. But in this he is mistaken too; For
the Reader may remember, how stiffly the Clergy and People of Naeocaesarea,
opposed the making any change in their old Liturgy, drawn up by Gregory
Thaumuturgus. He has owned that Epiphanius, his changing the Form, by which
they usually prayed for the Bishop before Sermon, made a very great Noise. And
I have told him, that it is remembered how S. Basil changed and altered diverse
things in S. James his Liturgy, even in the Prayers; I have showed that
Theodorus of Mopsevestia, rejected both those Liturgies, and made a new Office
for the Communion, filled with Blasphemies instead of Prayers; and this in the
beginning of the Fifth Century. So there were changes and alterations both in
Prayers and Praises, and that sufficiently proves they had prescribed Forms:
For Extempore and Arbitrary Prayers are daily varied, yea they are nothing
else, but change and variety, so that it is impossible for any to observe any
alterations in them; If the change be a thing taken notice of, and opposed or
censured, it must be the change, or alteration of a known Form; and since such
changes are noted, and were observed in those Ages, it evidently follows, they
did use Forms, and no Extempore Prayers or Praises. And we may note by the way,
that the Arians and other Heretics, did allow Christ to be our Mediator, and
made Prayers to God the Father in his Name, which was the way of all ancient
Liturgies: so that they had not so much Quarrel to that part of Liturgy, which
was Petitionary or Deprecatory, as they had to the Laudatory parts, where they
set out our Savior, in the glory of his Divinity, and paid direct Worship to
him; and for this reason, we meet with more attempts upon the Praises, than the
Prayers. As for Maldonate's Saying, That such as changed Religion, did also
change the Prayers, and every Heresy invented its own Prayers; which my
Adversary cites page 25. He speaks only by guess, for if ever any old Heresy
had any peculiar Forms of Prayer, the Fathers long since burnt and destroyed
them in a pious Zeal against their Errors: So that there are no Footsteps of
them remaining, no nor any mention of the thing (that I can now remember)
excepting the aforementioned Instance of that Heretic, Theodorus of
Mopsevestia, who made a New Liturgy: And the Arian Goths, who (as we have
showed) had so corrupted the Primitive Orthodox Liturgy, that Leander and
Isidore had very great Trouble to Correct those Errors, and bring the People to
change their Heretical for Orthodox Forms: But both the Nestorian and Arian
Liturgies are long since abolished, and no Memory remains of them, but only
that once there were such things. To conclude, There is intelligence of many
Alterations made, or attempted to be made, either in whole Liturgies, or in
eminent parts of them, even in the first Four or Five Centuries, and those
Changes were noted, opposed and censured: Which shows, their Service could not
be then in the Extempore, or Arbitrary way, because none could blame any Man
for changing Prayers and Praises, if the Church gave Liberty to every Minister
to vary every day, if he pleased, as my Adversary vainly supposes. This
observation of, and opposition to Changes, is an undeniable Proof of known and
prescribed Forms, that had been long and constantly used.

. 7. Though all these Arguments have been against Liturgies in general, and not
one of them particular; yet he begins afresh with In general, and so falls to
his topping Reason against Liturgies; viz. That they took themselves obliged to
conceal the Symbols, Rites and Prayers, used in these Administrations from the
sight of the Vninitiated, and therefore to be sure did not commit them to
Writing Disc. of Lit. p. 28. etc.
. Now this Argument I have often considered, and sufficiently confuted in the
First Part, under the Heads of those several Fathers (especially S. Basil) whom
he brings to make out this gilded Sophistry; and therefore I will be the
briefer in exposing it. We grant the Premises, and he need not have stuffed so
many Pages to prove it; but he himself sufficiently confutes the Conclusion:
For after he has spent much time to prove, That the Heathens concealed their
Mysteries and Religious Administrations, as well as the Christians Disc. of
Lit. page 30, and 31.
; And said expressly, concerning the Greeks and Romans, That they would not
commit them to Writing Ibid. p. 32.
: At another place (needing a good Memory) he says, That Among the Greeks
Prayers were read out of a Book Disc. of Lit. p. 122.
; and, That the Persian Magi read their Prayers out of a Book Ibid. p. 123.
; That the Romans (besides the Sybils Books, their extraordinary Ritual) had
also a Liturgy sent to them in Writing, by Apollo: He also mentions a Public
Table wherein their usual Prayer was writ, and says, That Scipio reformed
their Common Prayer Book Ibid. p. 124.
. We leave him or his Friends to reconcile these Contradictions: But being sure
the Heathens did conceal their Mysteries, and yet write them in Books, and read
them out of them: He must infallibly grant, That the Christians might both
conceal their Mysteries, and yet write them in Books also, and read them out of
them; and if the Christians (as he says) learned of the Heathens to conceal
their Administrations, they might also learn of them to write them in Books,
and deliver those Books to the custody of the Clergy, to keep them from the
sight of such as were not Initiated: And this sufficiently shows the weakness
and falsehood of his Consequence, viz. That the Christians could have no Written
Liturgies, because they concealed their Mysteries from the Uninitiated: But
since he has filled so many needless Pages upon this Subject, I will give some
short Touches upon all that looks like Objection in each of them.

First, He discourses, as if this Silence and concealing of Mysteries were to
be restrained, especially to the Fourth and Fifth Ages Disc. of Lit. page 28.
. And the two Authors which furnished him with these Quotations, Daile Dail. de
object. cult. lib. 2. cap. 25.
, and Chamier Chamier. Panstrat. Tom. 4. lib. 6. cap. 8.
, both say, This sort of Niceness did not begin till the Fourth or Fifth Age.
Now if this be so (and his Quotations generally fall within this Period) then
for all this doughty Argument, the Chrians might have Written Liturgies for
Three hundred years or more at the first, since they did not endeavor in those
first and best Times, to conceal their Mysteries, as these Men think: Therefore
we may have Precedents of prescribed Forms in the first Ages, though all this
were true.

Secondly, Their calling the Sacraments Mysteries, did not hinder them from
Administering them in an audible Voice before the Faithful every day; and
therefore this does not prove, That they durst not commit them to Writing; for
daily reading or speaking these Words in public with so loud a Voice, that all
the Faithful might hear and answer, was much more a publishing them, than
Writing them in Books committed to the custody of the Clergy: So that all that
Margen which he heaps up Disc. of Lit. page 29.
, only proves. That they concealed them from the Unbaptized, who were turned
out when these Mysteries began, as well as kept from seeing the Books, and so
remained ignorant of the Solemn Words; but the Faithful were so well acquainted
with the very Phrases and Expressions, that if the least hint were but given
them in a Sermon before a promiscuous Auditory, it put them in mind of that
Passage in the Offices which the Preacher hinted at: Which undeniably proves,
they were known and usual Forms; and being such, they must of necessity be
written down, otherwise such Variations would have been made, that no Appeal
could have been made to the Faithful, concerning any part of the Office;
because no Extempore Man now can appeal to his Congregation for his Words or
Phrases, used some time before: Therefore they were Mysteries only with respect
to the Uninitiated, but well-known Forms to the Faithful, and written down to
prevent all Variation.

Thirdly, As to the tedious Proofs of the Gentiles Secrecy Disc. of Lit. page
30, 31, 32, and 33.
, I have noted, that he owns they writ down these Mysteries; and page 32. he
says, That the Romans had a Book of their public Rites as old as King Tarquin
's Time; and that Valerius Max. mentions one, who was punished for letting an
unconcerned Person Transcribe it: Which shows, how impertinent all these
Quotations are to prove his Point; which is, That Mysteries must not at all be
committed to Writing. Indeed, fearing this Consequence, he adds in the next
Page, 33. If they did commit them to Writing, it was in such a Character, as
none of the Vninitiated understood: But then he makes out nothing, but that the
Egyptians described their Mysteries in such unintelligible Hieroglyphics;
which does not prove, that either Greeks or Romans writ them in such Figures;
much less does it show, that the Christians used any Hieroglyphics, to conceal
their Mysteries; and therefore there is no reason, to argue from that Custom
peculiar to Pagan Egypt, as if we might learn the Christian Usage from thence.

Fourthly, The excluding the Catechamens from hearing the Prayers, and refusing
to recite any Phrases of them in a Sermon made to a promiscuous Auditory, which
he speaks of Disc. of Lit. page 35, 36.
, are very good Arguments, That these Offices were celebrated by prescribed
Forms; which Words had they been suffered daily to hear in the Church, when the
Administration was performed, or had often heard them in Sermons, they might
easily learn and remember them. And it was, because they were prescribed,
constant, invariable Forms, that they durst neither let them stay in the Church
when they repeated them, nor openly mention them in a Sermon. Had they
Officiated variously, and in his Extempore way, they might have stood by for
Seven years, and heard the Sermons, in which some part of them was referred to;
and there had been no danger of their learning them. And since we see the
Heathens did write down their Mysteries, and make them known to the Initiated,
the Christians might do so also, and yet keep them secret enough from the
Unconverted, or Unbaptized; for they might as well keep them from seeing their
Books of Mysteries, as to turn them out of the Church, to prevent their hearing
them. And his instance of the Creed, page 37. proves this; for the Creed was
written down and expounded in the Time of Cyril and Ruffinus, and yet then, and
long after, it was kept secret from the Catechumens, till some small time
before the Day of their Baptism; therefore every thing that was written was not
published to the Uninitiated.

Fifthly, Baronius does not say, the Primitive Literae formatae were not drawn
up in Writing: Spondanus indeed, his Epitomator, does say something to that
purpose Disc. of Lit. page 38. c Spondan ^pit. An. 325. H. 44.
; but Baronius himself only says, That the Council of Nice would not put the
Words of these Formed Epistles (the private Cognizances by which
Stranger-Christians were known to be Catholics wherever they came) into the
Canons of their Council. But he adds, They agreed upon a Form there, and
setting down what it was, he says, Such was the Form prescribed by the
Fathers, for these Formed Epistles Baron. An. 325.. 166, 167. page 32^.
. But still it was a Secret, writ down then, but not published among the
Canons, for fear the Heretics might get Copies, and deceive the Catholic
Bishops thereby: Which was the very Case of Liturgies then; they were writ
down, but kept secret from the Unbelievers, though at the same time they were
known to all the Faithful. And for his alleging, page 42. That Writing them out
for many Ch^^^^^es must needs divulge them; The Formed Epistles also were
written out for every Bishop, and a Copy transcribed as often, as any of his
Diocese was to Travel into a strange Country, by showing which to the Bishop of
that remote City (who had a like Form written down beside him) this Stranger
was admitted to Catholic Communion: So that these were Written often out, and
yet kept secret from Heretics, as the Liturgies were also written out
frequently, yet still kept from the sight and hearing of the Catechumens; or if
any of them by chance came to the sight or knowledge of the Liturgick Forms (he
confesses page 43) that Man was immediately Baptized, and so obliged to keep
all secret from those without: And as to what he says there of the Pagans
torturing Christians, to get out the Secrets of their Worship, that proceeding
was over long before the Age wherein he says this Secrecy was so strictly
practiced: And therefore he should not urge those Methods: But if we grant this
Concealing Mysterios began sooner, there is no doubt, but the Faithful were
taught to be as resolute not to publish their Mysteries, as they were not to
deny their Faith; so that there was no danger of their being published by
Tortures. Finally, If the People had all their Responses, and their part of the
Liturgy by Heart (as they might easily have) there was no need of Writing out
the Forms for them, as he insinuates, page 44. and so, that could be no
occasion of publishing the Forms to Unbelievers. To conclude, There is nothing
in this tedious Ramble of my Adversaries for 16 Pages together, which does in
the least prove, That the Christian Mysteries were not celebrated by Written
Forms; and therefore there is nothing in it to his purpose, but on the contrary
much of it tends to prove, That the Divine-Service was then performed by
Prescribed Forms.

. 8. The next thing which looks like an Argument, is his deducing the Fathers
Extempore Praying from their Extempore Preaching: For when he has spent many
Pages in proving, That Origin, Cyril, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Atticus, Hierom
and Augustine, Preached (...), or Extempore: He concludes at last in these
Words, Thus they did Preach, and thus they might Pray Disc. of Lit. page 50 --
to page 60.
. I Answer, He seems very dubious; he dare say no more, than It is possible
they might Pray so: But still it is possible also, they might pray by Forms;
and it is more than probable they did so, because this Author has ransacked
every Corner of Antiquity* and cannot produce one plain Evidence wherein any of
these, or other Fathers, who are commended for Preaching thus, are either
affirmed to have Prayed (...), or Extempore, or commended for that Gift, which
our Adversaries think was then, and is now one of the main Qualifications for
the Ministry. We need not doubt, but if he had found any such thing, he would
have brought it out with all imaginable Triumph and Ostentation: He that is
forced to spend so much Paper to force two obscure Phrases into a Sense for his
purpose, viz. (...), and de Pectore; which do but remotely hint, That in the
Ages of Inspiration, when Justin Martyr and Tertullian lived, they prayed
without Book; How would he have triumphed, if he could have met with any plain
Evidence of their Praying Extempore? This would have done his business at once,
and gone far toward ending the Controversy: But when this Author cannot find
one word of this, but is forced here to falsify Nazianzen most grossly, and
pervert the Meaning of S. Ambrose (as was showed before) to make out a remote
Conjecture; but he has not one Positive Proof, no not here, where his Cause
needed it so extremely; We may conclude there is no Evidence, that any of these
Fathers did pray Extempore in Public; and thence it will follow, that after the
Fourth Century began, the Gift of Prayer was ceased, and the Usage of the
Church was to pray by Forms; yea, these very Fathers who preached Extempore,
and so could have invented their Public Prayers as well as their Public
Sermons, having acquired that Faculty; yet did not see fit to use it in their
Addresses to God, because they considered the Greatness of His Majesty, and the
Care and Caution to be used in speaking to Him, before whom Angels voil their
Faces; their Sermons were only spoken to mortal Men, but their Prayers
addressed to a Glorious, Immortal God; therefore they took freedom in the one,
but durst not in the other: There they used holy and known Forms, not out of
necessity, but choice; which shows their Judgment was, That Forms were the best
way of Serving God, in public especially; and though they were better Qualified
than our Dissenting Brethren for Extempore Praying, they rejected that Method.
All this we have reason to believe from the Universal Silence, concerning
Extempore Prayer in all these Ages, wherein we see, they do observe there was
an use of Extempore Preaching; and if this Gift of Praying on the sudden had
been so admirable a thing, and so necessary, to qualify a Man for the
Ministry, it is impossible but there would have been some memorial of the use of
it, and some of the Fathers must have been commended for excelling in it; but
no such matter appearing, while yet there are plain and express Proofs of
Liturgies; we conclude, that none then did use to pray Extempore in a Public
Congregation.

. 9. After this he Argues from the Liberty the Ancients took, to use several
Forms in Baptism with great variety; That they also used as much Liberty in
their Prayers Disc. of Lit. page 93.
; yet he tells us at first, That Tertullian says, The Law of Baptism is
imposed, and the Form prescribed by Christ Lex namque tingendi imposit^ est,
and F^rma praescripta. Tertul de Bapt. cap. 13.
, viz. in those words, Matthew. xxviii. 19. Go teach all Nations, and baptize
them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Now it will not
easily be believed, that the Holy Fathers, who took this prescribed Form to be
a Law bound upon them by the Authority of Christ himself, should think
themselves at liberty to alter this Form as they pleased, especially since we
know the Ancients generally declared those Heretics Baptism to be null and
void, who did not Baptize in this very Form of Words Can. Apost. Can. 49. Cy^r
ad Jubai. Epist. 73. Council Ni^end. Can. ult item Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 26.
: Which is a strong Proof, that these Holy Fathers believed this Form to be
invariable. Let us therefore see how he makes out the contrary. Why, First, his
Text and Margen are full of Instances, to show, That the Fathers used the Word
Baptizo in all Three Persons; I baptize thee, Be thou baptized, He is baptized;
and that they use, Tingo, Mergo, and Mergito, as well as Baptizo (e). Having
borrowed all his Quotations by Wholesale from Vossius and Vice comes Voss
Theses de Bapt. disp. 2. page 372. ^^c^^m. de v^t. Bapt. page 608.
: But indeed the Inference, That therefore they took a Liberty to vary Christ's
Form, is of his own inventing. And it is like the rest of his Sophistry: For
the first Word, viz. Baptize, Christ does not determine the Person in which it
shall be used; for he speaks not to one that he was Baptizing, but to his
Disciples, and so expresses it by the Participle, viz. Baptizing them, etc.
upon which the Latin Churches used the First Person (when they performed this
Office) I baptize thee; the Greeks generally used the Third Person, viz. M. or
N. is Baptized, as Theodorus notes; but this was no altering Christ's Form; for
that very Author there tells us, That the Water vanished out of the Font, when
an Arian Bishop altered the Gospel Form, in Baptizing one Barbas Theodor. Lect.
collect. page 187.
. Nor is this difference of the Greek and Latin Church, any ground for the
liberty which my Adversary pleads for, viz. the liberty for private Ministers
to vary the Forms of their own Church, as they please: For no Bishop or Priest
in the Latin Church was allowed to use the Third Person, nor did any in the
Greek Church use the First; so that every Clergyman was bound to use the Forms
prescribed in his own Country, and the Church of England does not impose any
more. Then as for his ridiculous ugring of the Fathers using, Tingo and Mergo,
etc. for Baptizo, we must note, that not one of his Instances, are any account
of the words used in the Actual Administration of Baptism; he cannot show they
used any word but [Baptizo] then: But his Proofs are out of the Fathers
occasional Discourses concerning Baptism, which they describe in their own
words and phrases as it happens; even as we call this holy Action, Christning
or Sprinkling the Child, as well as Baptizing, in our ordinary Discourse: But
would any Man, whose Head were right, infer from thence, That our Ministers, in
the Act of Baptizing, took liberty to say, I Christen thee, or, I Sprinkle
thee, etc. I am ashamed to confute such mean Sophistry! yet must add, That our
Lord neither spoke Latin nor Greek, but a Language which was Hebrew mixed with
Syriack; and it is strange, when His Words are to be turned into any other
Language in our common Discourse, that we may not translate them by any
significant Words: But this Liberty in ordinary Converse or Writing, is no
manner of proof, That the private Ministers of any Church, may vary the Words
used in their Offices, when they Administer the Sacrament of Baptism But he
goes on to prove this liberty of Variation, by the Fathers sometimes saying,
(...), sometimes (...), and so also In nomen, or In nomine; In, or Into the
Name of the Father, etc. Disc. of Lit. page 96.
; wherein the Fallacy is the same as before: For his Authors cited are only
discoursing of Baptism, not citing or reporting the very Words which they used
in Baptizing, and therefore they take this liberty: As if a Preacher or
Catechist should in a Sermon or Exposition, say, Our Church Baptizes Men into
the Faith of the Holy Trinity, or in the Name of the Father the Creator, the
Son the Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier of all Men: This would not
prove, that this Preacher or Catechist did not use the Words of the Churches
Form when he actually Baptized, nor show that we have here no prescribed Form
of Baptism. This is mere trifling. But his next Proof is disingenuous; for he
Argues, That some Ancients thought they were not obliged to name the Persons of
the Trinity, for if it was done in the Name of Christ it was sufficient; from
whence he gathers, That such Fathers would neither impose Forms of Prayer on
others, nor would observe what others had imposed on them Disc. of Lit. page 97,
and 98.
. Now here I must observe, that he has again taken all his Instances by which
he proves this, out of Vossius Voss. These. de Baptism. Disp. 2. These. 5. page
370, ad page 379.
: But that Learned Author was too generous to make any such false and frivolous
Inference from those Premises, and does not represent even the Premises
themselves as my Adversary does; for he tells us, That Irenaeus is not speaking
of Baptism in that place ( ad^. haer. lib. 3 c. 20.) which my Adversary cites,
and that Justin Martyr (another of my Adversaries Witnesses, page 99.) is not
repeating, but only paraphrasing the Form of Baptism; so that there are no
Ancient Fathers who allow this, but only S. Basil, and S Ambrose (who generally
follows S. Basil in all things); nor do they speak of any Church, where such an
Omission was permitted, or where Men were left at liberty to Baptize in what
words they pleased: Only they put the case, if a man were so Baptized in
Christ's name, whether he ought to be Baptized again; these two think he ought
not; because Factum valet quod fieri non debet. But these two do not advise any
so to Baptize, nor does it appear, that ever they took this Liberty; they only
Argue for the validity of such a Baptism, though it was done irregularly:
Therefore these Fathers, and such later Men as followed them, were not for any
Man's having liberty to alter the Form of Baptism, or the Prayers of the Church,
as my Adversary pretends: Besides, Vossius there declares (which my Adversary
conceals,) that more and greater Fathers, held that this alteration of the
Form, made the Baptism invalid, viz. Tertullian and Cyprian, (who says they
were Heretics who altered the Form thus,) as also Didymus, S. Augustine,
Fulgentius, Epiphanius and others Vossij These. de Bapt. disp. 2. etc. p. 374,
375.
. Now then, the most and best of the Fathers held it utterly unlawful to alter
the Form of Baptism, and consequently (by his way of Arguing,) to alter the
Liturgy or Prayers; and therefore most of the Fathers were against his
pretended Liberty. And from this matter of Fact, Vossius observes, First, That
mentioning the three Persons, is now, and has been of old, the usage of the
whole World; by which it is very probable, that it came at first from the
Apostles Vossius, ibid. p. 371.
. Again, he notes, Though Baptism should be valid, though the words of this
Form were altered; Yet, the old Form ought not to be innovated or changed, at
every Man's pleasure. And if Christ had not tied us to a certain Form of Words;
Yet it is much better to retain the old Form, which all Agree to be certainly
right; but it is disputable and uncertain, whether any other Form be so or no:
And surely, certain things are much to be preferred before uncertain idem ibid.
page 379.
. Thus this learned Man represents the Matter; and if my Adversary, who
transcribed his Instances, had imitated his Ingenuity He could not have framed
any Argument from hence, for his Liberty of varying Prayers; because he reckons
his Liberty a Privilege, a Duty, and an advantage to the Worship: But this
variation in Baptism was an irregular Fact, generally disliked, and censured,
so as to make the very Office Null, or at least very liable to be counted so;
it was an Illegal thing, seldom done, never commanded nor directed to be done;
only when it was done, it was condemned by many and excused by very few: And
suppose now, varying the Prayers, be such a Fact as this, is it Advisable or
Eligible? No, the Comparison shows the taking such Liberty, would be an ill
thing, for which scarce any would undertake to make an Apology: And so I have
done, with his Comparison between Forms of Prayer, and the Form of Baptizing.

10. His next Excursion is about the Creeds, and being decked in the Plumes he
has borrowed from Grotius, Vossius and Bishop Usher, he fills Four Pages with
Pompous Margens, to dress up this Argument, viz. That in the Primitive Times,
there was an Agreement in sense, not in Words as to the Creed it self; and he
thinks, that they who left themselves and others, at so much Liberty in Forms
of Creeds, would not limit themselves nor others, by Forms of Prayer. If the
Apostles Creed be objected, he looks on Ruffinus his Relation to be a Fable;
and says, that no Writer for 300 years took notice of it: And since the
Ancients would not be confined to this Creed, it argues, they would never be
confined to Forms of Prayer composed by others; and he notes, that the Author
of the Apostolical Constitutions has set down a Form of Creed, different from
that of the Apostles Disc. of Lit. page 99, 100, 101, 102, and 103.
. This is the sum of his Reasoning; Which when it is strictly examined, will
all appear to be either mistaken or fallacious. He first directs us to Grotius
upon Math. xxviii 19. where that Author brings in Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Clemens, Tertullian, Novatian, etc. using various Expressions, when they give
an account of its several Articles. But Grotius his Inferences, which he cites
in his Margen, page 100. are two. First, That when they say the Rule of Faith
was immutable, they do not respect one certain Form of words, received in all
places, but they respect the Force and meaning of the Interrogations. And
Secondly, That Cyprians words seem to him to show, that the Creed or Rule of
Faith in his time, was not yet tied to those words, in which it was afterward
found written; and yet it cannot be doubted, but the Sense of it was always the
same Grot. Com. in Math. XXVIII. 19. p. 288, and 289.
. Now though Grotius here be not so just, (perhaps) as he ought to be, to the
Antiquity of Creeds, and being a Modern Author, his Affirmation in this weighs
no more, than his Instances prove: Yet, I will wave that Dispute, and for the
present admit what he says were true, and then make Parallel between Creeds
and Liturgies. And in his First Inference, he only says, That when the
Ancients use various ways of expressing their Faith, they do not refer to one
certain Form of Words, received in all places, but only to the force and
meaning of the Interrogations: Which shows, Grotius did not think (as my
Adversary grossly does,) That every one of the Ancients in the places cited,
pretended to repeat the very Form of the Creed; but only to show the main
Doctrins of it, which in these occasional Discourses, is all that we can
expect: And therefore the variety of expressions does not prove, there was not
one Form of Creed, but that these Fathers, in these places do not refer to that
Form. Yet, Secondly, These Fathers all lived within 250 years after Christ; and
if we grant to Grotius* that then there was not one Form of Creed, every where
received, we may allow the Parallel with Liturgies, and suppose that in Cyprian
and Novatian's Time, and so upwards to Tertullian, Irenaeus and Justin Martyr,
there was not one Form of Liturgy, every where received; yet for all this
Liturgies might be used and received before the year 300, that is, before the
quiet settlement of the Christian Church 1400 years ago, and above 200 years
before my Adversary allows them to have come in. And this also is all that can
be inferred from his words, in the second Passage, viz. That in S. Cyprians
time, the Creed was not tied to that Form of words, wherein it is found written
down afterward. Though* he speak this modestly and only say, it s^ems so to
him: Yet let it be supposed true and certain, and then make the Parallel, and
no more will follow from thence but this, That the Liturgies of the Church,
were not written down in so many words, in the year 250, as we find them
written in afterward. Now this being in the Ages of Persecution, and while the
Miraculous Gifts lasted; it will not prove, that because the Church then had no
such Form of written Liturgy, therefore, now when the Church is settled, and
Inspiration ceased, we neither need, nor ought to have such a Form.

In the next Page, in the Margen he grants, the Creeds had more stated Forms in
the Fourth Century; though even then, the Creeds of several Cities, in the same
Country, were not Uniform, and he instances in Rome, Aquileia, and Ravenna in
Italy, referring us to Vossius and Bishop Usher Disc. of Lit. Marg. p. 101.
. And a little after he says, it was not put into set Form till the Fourth Age
or near it, but the Forms varied in several places, in the same Country. Now
because the Antiquity of Creeds, is not our business here, we will also for the
present suppose this to be true: And then if I may Argue from the History of
Creeds to that of Liturgies, (as he evidently does) the Consequence will be,
That Liturgies were put into set Forms, somewhat before the beginning of the
Fourth Age, though those great Churches, which were at that time independent of
one another, (though in the same Country) as Aquileia, and Ravenna in Italy,
which then were not subject to Rome, had some difference in the Words and
Phrases, as also in the Order and Method of their Liturgies. But as the Roman
Creed, was imposed upon all those Churches, which were under the Popes
Jurisdiction, properly so called; and the Aquileian Creed, and that of Ravenna,
were respectively imposed upon all the Churches subject to these two great
Metropolitans; So it must follow, (if Liturgies and Creeds kept pace, as he
supposes) that the Roman Liturgy was imposed on the Roman Clergy, and those of
Aquileia and Ravenna upon the Clergy subject to those Churches: And then my
Adversaries whole Book, (which is written to assert, that Liturgies were not
imposed before the end of the Fifth, or beginning of the Sixth Age, that is,
200 year after) is false and utterly wrong: And then also the Church of
England, both in composing a Form and imposing it, imitates a very pure Age of
the Church; viz. The time a little before the beginning of the Fourth Century,
or thereabouts, and has the Prescription of 1400 years, to justify her in
both: But because his main Author is Vostius, we will here observe, what that
learned Man freely owns as to Creeds, viz. That there was a ^orm in the
Oriental Church, very like to that which is called the Apostles Creed, long
before the Council of Nice. And this which we call the Apostles Creed, was the
Roman Form, b^f^re the time of that same Council; and the Creed of Aquileia
differed from this, but very little Vos^. de trib. ^ymb diss. 1.. ^0. page 24.
. Again, he says, these Forms were not made by any General Council, and were
so old in Ruffinus his time, that they were taken to be Apostolical Ibid.. 45.
page 31.
. And the Church of Jerusalem had a Form which seems to have been elder than
any of them, being explained by S Cyril, An. 350. and then delivered as from a
very ancient Tradition Ibid.. 51. page 34.
. And both he and Grotius (who fancy the Creed consisted at first of no more
Articles than those of the Trinity) do believe the remaining Articles about the
Catholic Church, the Remission of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the
Life everlasting, were added as early as Tertullian's Time: So that if these
Authors Conjectures be allowed, then there were Forms of Creeds in every great
and eminent Church before the Third Century began. From whence I thus Argue in
my Adversaries own way, and almost in his very words; It is not probable that
they, who had a Creed in a Set Form in every Principal Church, and did impose
this Form to be learned and used by all that were Admitted Members of that
Church by Baptism, even before the Third Century, should not also have their
Set Forms of Prayer, to the use of which all the Members of that Church, and
all under its Jurisdiction were obliged. How credible and likely is it, that
they who did not leave their Creed at liberty, also did not allow Arbitrary
Prayers? Since Heresies might creep in by the way of Extempore Prayers and
Hymns, as easily as by the use of various and arbitrary Creeds; If they thought
it requisite to limit the Rule of Faith, for this Reason, there was the very
same Reason to Limit the Prayers, Supplications, Lauds and Litanies See the
Disc. of Lit. p. 102, and 103.
. This is his way of Arguing upon a false Supposition, That the Creed was not
in a Set Form in the First Ages: Wherefore since it appears by his own Authors,
that it was in a Set Form, in or before the Third Century, he must allow this
to be a firm Argument against him.

It is nothing to my Question, to enter into the Controversy, Whether the
Apostles themselves made that Creed which goes under their Name: But after I
have considered all that Vossius, etc. have said in this Matter, I am verily
persuaded, That the Apostles themselves did make one Form of Faith at first,
but did not commit it to writing, because it was to be taught orally to every
Christian at his Baptism, and kept as the Cognizance, to distinguish between
Heretics and true Believers: and the likeness of all the ancient Forms to one
another, shows, they had one and the same Original at first, and were derived
from the first Planters of Christianity: As for the variety between these
ancient Forms in several Churches, it was the natural and necessary effect of
delivering it Orally, which in distant Countries, and in tract of Time by
passing through diverse hands, must needs produce some small difference in the
Order and Words; and that shows, That Oral Tradition is not so safe a way to
convey Articles of Faith, as Writing; and though the Apostles had left the
Scripture to be a standing Rule, to secure the Creed from any dangerous
Corruption, yet it was necessary to have this short Form besides, to teach the
Candidates for Baptism: But if the Reader desire to see this more fully proved,
I refer him to a Learned Book writ by a very Worthy Author, Mr. G. Ashwell,
Wherein (both by Arguments and evidence of Antiquity) it is strongly and
clearly made out, that this Creed was made by the Apostles themselves (...)
Apo^^^, or ^ D^scourse a^^^ting the Ant^^s and Aut^^ (...) Creed, P inted at
O^^a, 1683.
. And there it may be seen how bold my Adversary is, to give Ruffinus the Lie,
since all the Writers of that Age generally agree in the same thing: There also
it appears, that my Adversary is grossly mistaken in affirming, that the
Ancients took no notice of this Creed for above 300 Years. As for his Arguing,
That the subsequent Creeds varying from it, shows, they did not own that to be
Apostolical, especially since they preferred their own Forms before it, on the
most solemn occasions Disc. of Let. (...)
, it proceeds upon a Mistake: For Vossius owns, that the later superadded
Creeds were only taken to be Commentaries on the Former, and clearer
explications of such Articles as the Heretics had attempted to pervert; and he
shows, that they did not cast off, nor disuse the ancient Form when they made
these New ones: They kept the Apostles Creed still, and used that in the most
solemn Office of Baptism: Yea, they gave it the precedence before all other
Creeds; and therefore the Third General Council says, They received in the
first place, the Creed delivered to them by the most Holy Apostles, and then
the Confession made by 318 Holy Fathers in the City of Nice (...) etc. Act.
Council. Ephesin. Bin. Tom. I. par. 2. page 415.
. Wherefore this was used and reckoned in the first place, even after other
Creeds came in. Finally, He need not wonder, that the Creed in the
Constitutions, is not the same with that which we call the Apostles; because no
Man pretends now, that the Apostles made those Constitutions. The Creed found
there (as we have showed) is the Apostles Form, as it was varied at Antioch
about the Year 330, which Daille owns to be the Time when that Clemens writ the
Constitutions Daill. praef. ad Dissert. de relig. cult. objecto.
, (not the Year 500, as my Adversary falsely pretends Disc. of Lit. page 111.
. Now it is no wonder that the same Form in 300 Years time should be varied as
much in two several Churches so far distant, as Rome and Antioch; especially
when it was conveyed for the most part of that time only by Oral Tradition. To
conclude, The Apostles showed the way of making Forms of the things to be
believed, and if the Parallel hold between Creeds and Liturgies, then we have
reason to believe they first Composed Forms also, for the things to be asked of
God in Prayer, and to be spoken to his Honor in Praises: Which first and
Apostolical Forms are the foundation and ground of all the several Liturgies in
great and eminent Churches, which (like their Creeds) agree in the main
Essential parts, and have so much likeness, as to persuade us they all came
from one Original Form at first; but tract of Time and distacne of Place caused
some differences in the Order and Phrases in distant Churches: But so, that all
the Members of every great Church were obliged to learn the Creed of that
Church where they received their Baptism, and also to use the Forms of that
same Church, in whose Communion they lived. And this may suffice for his
Consequences drawn from the Primitive Creeds; because it is nothing to our
purpose when they came to be used first in the Communion Office, forasmuch as
he grants they were used in the Office of Baptism from the beginning.

11. He concludes this Set of Arguments by a large and tedious digression,
about the Variety used in the Form of Renouncing the Devil in Baptism; and here
again he fills his Margen with the Names of near twenty Ancients, who speak of
this Form of Renunciation in different Words, by which he hopes to prove, That
this Form was arbitrary, since not only diverse Churches differed therein, but
the Authors who lived in the same Church, yea, the same Author in several
places of his Works expresses it variously. And then comes his Inference, That
if they were not limited to a Set Form of Words in this Sentence, none can
believe they were, or would have suffered themselves to be confined to an
invariable Form of Words in Praying at Baptism Disc. of Lit. page 105, 106,
107, 108, and 109.
. Now, if we should grant his Consequence did follow from these Premises, then
we must expect at least, that the Premises shall be fully proved; but we shall
show, that he has not made them out sufficiently: For first, the greater part
of his Authors do not pretend to recite the Form, but are only applying the
Duty, in occasional Discourses; for which I need no other Evidence, but to
desire the Reader to consult the Places he produces out of Origin, Ephrem
Syrus, S. Basil, Cyril of Alexandria, Pseudo Dionysius, Justinian, Optatus, S.
Cyprian, S. Augustine in the two later places, and S. Hierom: These Fathers in
Homilies and practical Discourses speak of the thing, and press the Obligation;
but do not pretend to repeat the words; they express them in their own Phrases,
and therefore no wonder if they differ. Secondly, Many of these Witnesses do
not speak of the whole Renunciation, but some of the Renouncing the Devil only,
others only of Renouncing the World, as the Subject, upon which they were
treating, required; and it is strange that he should cite these Authors, to
make out a difference in the whole Form, when one speaks of one part of it, and
another Author treats of another part. Thirdly, Most of these Authors not only
lived in several Ages, but belonged to several distant Countries, and were
Members of Churches which had some difference in the Phrases and Order of their
whole Liturgy; and therefore their differing in the Words or Syllables of this
Renunciation, does not prove they had no Set Forms of Prayer in any Church; but
only that several great Churches had some Variety in their Forms, which we
freely grant, and it cannot hurt our Cause, since all were limited to use the
Forms of their own Church: Thus Origin belonged to Alexandria, Constantine's
Edict was forged at Rome, Cyril was of Palaestina, Basil of Cappadocia, Salvian
of France, Pseudo-Dionysius of Laodicea, Clemens of Antioch, Justinian of
Constantinople, Tertullian of Africa, and S. Ambrose of Milan. Now we have
proved, that there was a Variety between the Liturgies of these distant
Churches in many particulars, and therefore it is not strange they should
differ in expressing the Syllables of the Renunciation, supposing every one of
them had been repeating the Form of his own Church. Yet, Fourthly, Those of the
same Country, and espcially those of the same Church do either agree, or come
as near one another, as can be expected from Men, who are rather describing
than repeating the Form. Thus Ephrem-Syrus and Cyril of Jerusalem do agree
exactly, both of them, no doubt, referring to the Form used in Palaestina:
Salvian twice mentions this Form in the same words, referring to the Liturgy of
the Gallican Church; and S. Chrysostom differs very little from Justinian,
because both had respect to the Constantinopolitan Form, and that of Antioch
related in the Constitutions, is very near it: So Tertullian and S. Augustine,
where they speak closely, do exactly agree in the African Form. And it is very
probable, that Constantine's Edict refers to the Roman Form, Basil to that of
Naeocoesarea, and S. Ambrose to that of Milan. Now if each of these great
Churches had a certain Form, to the use of which all that belonged to it were
obliged, then probably they had also such a Form for other Prayers. And,
Fifthly, it is very plain that every great Church had such a Form, because the
Fathers do very often charge those who were Baptized, to remember the very
words in which they made this Renunciation; so does S. Ambrose Quid
interrogatus es, recognosce; Quid responderis. Ambros. de iis quae initiant.
cap 2.
, and S. Chrysostom (...). Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. hom. 2. p. 555.
. Now this Charge had been ridiculous, and had required an Impossibility, if
the Words were arbitrary, and every one of them had made the Renunciation in a
different Form of Words. I conclude therefore, That every Great Church had one
certain Form, and all of them were so like, that they must come from one
Original at first; and it was only length of Time, and distance of Place, that
had made the small Variations between the Forms of several eminent Churches:
Which also was the Case of Liturgies in general, and of the whole Baptismal
Office, as well as of this peculiar part of it. We have now done with all his
Arguments of this kind, and will leave the Reader to judge of the Modesty and
Truth of those mighty Brags, which he makes of the narrow search he has made
into Antiquity, and the full Answer he has given to all that either he could
meet with, or that others had produced on Behalf of Liturgies, whose Primitive
Original and general Use is but more cleared by all his Objections against them.

. 12. My Adversary concludes his Book, first, by fixing the Period when
Liturgies did come in; and, secondly, by a most odious Representation of that
Age: For the first, he concludes, That for Five hundred years after Christ (if
not more) the ordinary way of Worshipping God in public Assemblies, was not by
prescribed Liturgies Disc. of Lit. page 181.
. The falsehood of which Conclusion, this whole Discourse has sufficiently
discovered: And his not being able to produce one clear Proof, That Extempore
Prayer was the way of Worshipping God in public in all this Period, gives me
reason more justly to conclude, That for Five hundred years and more after
Christ, that kind of Praying was not used in Christian Assemblies; Because (to
use his own words) if there had been such a Way of Praying used constantly in
all Churches, for so long a time together, there would have been such clear
Evidence of it in many of the Ancients, that there might have been had as full
proof thereof, as of any one thing; and especially when this Author and his
party have been searching so narrowly in Antiquity for this, and are sensible
how much their Cause is concerned in it; and yet here is nothing produced that
is positive or express Disc. of Lit. page 179, 180.
. However, let us (for once) suppose that Extempore or Arbitrary Praying was
the Usage of the Church for Five hundred years together, or more, and that then
Liturgies began to be imposed: This was a remarkable and mighty change in the
Public Service of God, the restraining of a Liberty, which we must suppose the
Christian Priests and People had enjoyed down from the Time of the Apostles.
Now this could not have been done in an Age wherein there were so many eminent
Writers, and so many zealous Assertors of Apostolical Usages, but it must have
made a great noise in the World; some would have complained of and written
against this daring Innovation, and (as our Dissenters count it) bold
usurpation upon Men's Consciences, and manifest quenching of the Spirit. But my
Adversary (though very quick sighted) can find nothing of this Matter, he has
not one Quotation to this purpose: There is an absolute Silence in all Authors
of these Ages; none claimed this pretended ancient Right, none complained that
it was taken from them; nor did any so much as take notice of this eminent and
public Alteration; which undeniably proves there was no such Change then made;
and shows, that prescribed Forms had been used in the foregoing Ages, and
continued in this Century as they were before. My Adversary has noted what
Seditions happened in diverse Churches, and what Noise was made over all the
Christian World, upon a small alteration in an ancient Form; and is it likely
all People would be so quiet and silent, when the whole Manner of God's public
Service was changed at once? When we charge the Roman Church with the novelty
of her Corruptions, we prove that Accusation, by showing, That such as lived
before that Corruption came in, believed or practiced otherwise: That such as
lived when it was coming in, opposed it and writ against it; and many refused
to submit to it, after it was come in, as in the case of Images. But in this
unjust Charge no such thing is made out; wherefore we conclude, That Liturgies
are neither a Corruption, nor an Innovation; but the Pure and Primitive Way of
the Christians public Worship.

But, Secondly, he is so confident that Liturgies were brought in and imposed
about the Year 500, that he spends 17 Pages together (which is all the rest of
his Book) in vilifying that Age; and to this end he rakes together a mighty
heap of Quotations, to expose the Bishops and Clergy, and indeed all the People
of those Times, the design of which is (besides the gratifying his Ill Will to
the Sacred Order of Episcopacy) to show, That since the Governors of the
Church, and the whole Age, was so extremely bad and degenerate, when Liturgies
first were imposed; therefore they are a Corruption, and the Use of them is by
no means to be approved. But he has managed this odious Charge with so much
Spite, and so many Fallacies, That though his gross misdating the Original of
Liturgies, makes all this to be nothing to our Question, yet I cannot shut up
this Discourse, till I have showed, First, the weakness of this Argument,
suppoposing the Premises were true; And, Secondly, the many Fallacies and
Mistakes that appear in his managing of it, and in the Instances which he
brings to make it out.

First, The Argument it self is trifling, and the Reasoning very frivolous upon
Two Accounts. For,

First, No wise Man will say, that every thing must be Evil which is begun in
an ill Age: No Times were worse than those wherein our Lord began to Preach the
Gospel; no People wickeder than the Jews at that Time. The Northern Nations
were bloody and barbarous, cruel and persidious to the highest Degree, when the
Scripture was first Translated into the Gothic Tongue: And King Alfred's Age
was extremely Ignorant, and notoriously Vicious; yet then the Gospels, and
other excellent Books, were translated into Saxon. The Reformation it self was
begun in an Age when the generality of the Clergy and Laity both were as
destitute of Learning as they were of Virtue: But how ridiculous would he be,
that should disparage the Reformation, the Translating of Holy Scripture, and
the Gospel it self, by haranguing upon the Times when these things first
appeared in the World? There have been many Ill things brought in even in good
Times, and many Good things in bad Times; so that there is no Arguing from this
Topic with any solidity or certainty; indeed, if he had proved, that these Evil
Men brought in Liturgies, and none but Evil Men used them, and submitted to
them; that had been something to the purpose. Now this we might do, as to his
Dear Way of Extempore Prayer: For the Directory was first set up and enjoined
here in a Time of Rebellion and Sacrilege; in a Time wherein there were more
vile Hypocrites, and profligate Wretches, under the Mask of Religion, than ever
were known in this Nation in any Age before; which is largely made out by very
many Books then Writ, which beyond contradiction declare the Matter of Fact to
be true See Edward's Gangrena, in three Parts. History of Independency.
Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
. Yea, I could prove, That diverse who promoted this New Way of Praying, and
pretended to the Gift in a most extraordinary degree; were tried, and upon full
proof convicted of the blackest Crimes that Men or Women could possibly commit,
such as Witchcraft, Incest, and other Sins not to be named, and suffered Death
for them Mrs (...) in the Counte^n me, ^he^^. M^^^r Weer in Ra^^^ realrivus.
; which is more concluding against Directories, and Extempore Praying, than any
thing he urges against Liturgies. But I will not insist upon so odious and
ungrateful a way of Arguing.

Secondly, There never was any Age, of which the Good Men then alive did not
complain, as much degenerated, and represent as worse than any of those that
went before it; which is very learnedly proved, and the Reasons of it showed in
the ingenious Apology of Dr. Hakewell Hakewel's Apol. Book 4. chap. 1.. 1, and.
2.
. Now though the Zeal of the Complainers, and their good Design, may go far to
excuse them; and the general Depravity of too many in all Ages, make these
Invectives to be in a great measure true; yet it is very weak or malicious,
from these Pious Complaints heaped up together (without any mention of what was
good) to pretend to give a just Character of any one Age: For I will undertake,
by this fallacious Method, to represent any Age since our Savior was born, as
ill as he has done this, wherein he (by mistake) supposes Liturgies did come
in: But I rather choose to Answer him with the excellent Remarks of Seneca; who
told Lucilius, You are mistaken (my Friend) if you think Luxury and neglect of
Good Manners, which every one objects to his own Times, are peculiar to our
Age: These are the Faults of Men, not of Times. No Age has been free from
Crimes; and if you could judge of the Badness of any Times by this; I blush to
say it, but it is true, there were never bolder Wickednesses done, than in Cato
's Age Erras, mi Lucili, si existimas nostri seculi esse vitrum luxuriam and
negligentiam boni moris, and alia quae objicit quisque suis temporibus, Hominum
sunt ista, non temporum, etc. Senec. Ep. 97. page 177.
. And again he says, Our Forefathers complained of this, we complain of it,
and our Posterity will complain of it also Hoc majores nostri questi sunt, hoc
ros qu^r^mur, hoc pesteri nostri querentur. Senec. de benef. lib. 1. cap. 19.
. I shall add to this the like account, which one of our own VVriters gives of
this way of Arguing, which some of the Romanists used against him. I mean the
Pious and Learned Bishop Juel, We know (says he) that in the Times of the
Apostles, there were Christians who made the Name of our Lord be blasphemed,
and abused among the Gentiles. The Emperor Constantius, in Sozomen, complains,
That many were worse after they became Christians, than ever they were before.
Cyprian also in a doleful Discourse, sets out the Corruptions of his own Times
thus: That Discipline (says he) which the Apostles delivered, is corrupted by
Idleness and a long Peace: All study to enlarge their Patrimony, and forgetting
both what the Believers under the Apostles did, and what they always ought to
do, mind nothing, but to gratify their insatiable desire of increasing their
Estate: There is no Religion in the Priests, no sincere Faith in the Deacons,
no Charity in their Deeds, no regularity in their Manners; Men disguise their
Beards, and Women paint their Faces. And before him, Tertullian says, O how
miserable are we who are called Christians, and yet to this very hour act like
Pagans under the Name of Christians Juelli Apologia. page 65.
! By this, and much more which might be added upon the same Subject, it appears
to be a poor shift and woeful piece of Sophistry, to pick up all the Complaints
of any one Age, made by Good Men, thereby to disparage that Time, and expose
those Institutions which were then begun or continued; at this rate we see the
best Ages and wisest Practices may be misrepresented, by any one whose interest
it is, to reflect either upon the Persons or Things relating to any Century,
since our Savior's Days.

In the next place we will consider his managery of this Argument, which looks
so big upon unwary Readers; and this we will examine first in the general, and
then in the several particulars.

First, In the general, He assigns the Year 500, or some time, after that for
the true Point when Liturgies began to be imposed; but the poor Gentleman was
so blinded by his Prejudice, and so rash in the choice of his Instances, by
which he would make out the corrupt state of that Age wherein he supposes
Liturgies first came in, that all the particular Authors cited in these 16 or
17 Pages (except S. Gregory, quoted in the last Page) were dead before the Year
500, or at least writ before that Period of 500 Years after Christ (which falls
in the Year of our Lord 533): Which will be best made out by a particular
Catalogue of his Authors and their Ages, in this Order: Damasus, An. Dom. 366,
cited page 192 Basil -- An. Dom. 30, cited -- 192 Nazianzen, An. Dom. 370,
cited -- 192 S. Ambrose, An. Dom. 374, cited p. 192, 193 Theophilus Alex. An
Dom. 385, cited p. 194 S. Augustine, A. D. 396, cited p. 184, 185, 196 S.
Chrysostom, A. D. 398, cited p. 181, 182, 183, 186 187, 193, 198. Aurelius
Carthag A. D. 401, cited p. 195 Isidor. Peleusiota, A. D. 412, cited p. 182,
185, 186, 187, 193, 195 Zosimus Papa, A. D. 417, cited page 189 Theodoretus
Hist. A.D. 423, cited p. 184 Socrates Hist. An. Dom. 440 cited p. 188 Prosper
Aquitan. A.D. 444, cited p. 190, 191 Council. Chalcedon. A.D. 450, cited p. 196
Leo Imperator, An. Dom. 460, cited p. 197


By this Table it appears, that the eldest of his Authors lived in the middle
of the Fourth Age, and the last in the middle of the Fifth; the first was 134
years, and the last 40 years before the Year 500: So that unless they had the
Spirit of Prophccy, they could not give any account what would be the state of
the Church in that Age, which he designs to expose: And therefore all this is
random Shot, or aimed at a wrong Mark, and can serve no other end, but only to
gratify those who take pleasure in hearing of the Ignorance or Vices of the
Clergy. For if that Age, which these Authors describe, were not the Age when
Liturgies were first imposed, then all this Harangue is wholly impertinent to
the matter in question: Only thus much perhaps we might infer from it, That if
these Centuries which my Adversary has so blackned, were before the imposing
of Liturgies; then he (no doubt) believes there were no other Prayers used at
that time, but such as were either Arbitrary or Extempore: whence it will
follow, that all these proud, tyrannical, ignorant, vicious, superstitious and
scandalous Priests and Bishops (according to his calculation) prayed
Arbitrarily and Extempore, which will be as little for the credit of his Method
of Praying, as he meant it should be for the honor of our Way. I have only one
thing more to add, viz. That in other parts of his Book, and in a better humor,
he gives a tolerable good Character of the Fourth and Fifth Centuries, which he
so grossly disparages here; for he says, Many there were excellently
accomplished in the Fourth Age, and some till about the middle of the Fifth: So
that it would be much for the Credit of Liturgies if they could be found, while
there was any thing of such Eminency in the Church Disc. of Lit. page 155.
. And again a little after, Diligent and frequent Preaching was the happiness
of the Fourth, and part of the Fifth Age, and its security was the excellency
of those Bishops, who were the lights and ornaments of those Times Disc. of
Lit. p. 190.
. So that for ought I know, this Age was a good one, for all this long
Character of its degeneracy, and (if I had a mind) I could fill as many Pages
in its commendation, as he has done in its disgrace; and therefore if
Liturgies had come in then, it had been no hurt, no nor any disreputation to
them: However this Argument, thus managed, could not injure them.

Secondly, As to his formidable number of invidious Quotations, I have taken
the pains to examine them all; and besides, that jumbling of Authors and Times,
and repeating the same Instances twice or thrice, which is his usual way of
proceeding, I dare assure the Reader, there are some of them falsely cited, more
of them misapplied, and most of them impertinent; and though I doubt it will be
a little tedious, yet I will make some short Remarks upon them, by which it
will appear, that these Instances thus cited and applied, give a worse
Character of him that produces them, than they do of the Age intended to be
blackned by them.

Page 181, etc. If the Church were in so bad a state, in, and long before S.
Chrysostom's Time (as that Father piously complains) I would fain know when it
was in a good state? Wherefore this must be taken for Rhetoric, and the effect
of his Zeal against diverse evil Men, not for a strict and universal Character
of the Age; As we may learn from Isidore of Peleusium (who Wrote within 20
years after S. Chrysostom's Time, and was his Scholar) in an Epistle cited by
my Adversary very often (though he omits this Passage) who admires this Age
which S. Chrysostom condemns, and says, There were Bishops then, who were
lovers of Virtue, averse to Honor, delighting in Poverty, and Fearing God
Isidor. Pel. lib. 5. epist. 21. page 559.
. So that these holy Men blamed their own Times, and commended the former, and
no Argument can be drawn from these pieces of popular Oratory.

Page 182. Isidore of Peleusium (who is so often cited) was a pious, but
discontented Monk, living under the Jurisdiction of Theophilus; his dear
Master, S. Chrysostom's mortal Enemy; and he was further provoked by one
Eusebius, a very ill Man, who was Bishop of that Diocese where his Monastery
stood, and by the profligate Lives of Zosimus and two other wicked Priests,
ordained by the said Eusebius; and therefore he does not speak of the Church in
general (which a retired Monk could not be supposed to know) but in most of the
Quotations he refers only to Theophilus and Eusebius, and some ill Clergymen
in that Province; yet my fraudulent Adversary still applies these Passages, as
if he spoke of all the Bishops and Priests in the World. As for the place here
cited first, Isidore blames a Schism which had then happened for all the Evils
which were broken in upon the Church; and he adds, that they had now lost all
the ((...)), Gifts of former Ages Isid. Pel. lib. 3. ep. 480. page 410.
; so that it seems the Gift of Prayer was then gone. The next Quotation out of
Isidore Id. lib. 2. ep. 5. page 128.
only shows, that the Apostles Times were far better than those he lived in,
nor does he there blame any body, but himself, and so it is nothing to the
purpose.

Page 183. The next Page contains nothing but his affirmation, That the Service
of God was more corrupt than when it was first instituted. Origin indeed shows,
how the Pagans had corrupted it by their Idolatry, etc. which he applies to the
Christian Church above 200 years after Origen's Death; and S. Chrysostom is not
at all speaking of Religious Worship: In Matthew. hom. 50. page 323.

Page 184. S. Augustine is twice cited, as if he blamed the Church of his Time,
for prescribing numerous Rites and imposing them; yet he lived 100 years before
my Adversary allows there was any thing prescribed or imposed: But if we
consult his Words, it will appear that S. Augustine is only speaking of Corrupt
Practices, observed with great exactness by the Superstitious Vulgar not
enjoined by the Church: Aug. ad Jan. Ep. 119. cap. 19. idem de morib. Eccles.
lib. 1. cap. 34. It was these ignorant and superstitious People who began to
venerate Pictures and Sepulchers, for which the Church reproved them: And if
Petrus Gnapheus did (as he pretends) put in the name of the Virgin into the
Prayers, An. 483. He was a declared Heretic, and his Fact ought not to be
charged upon the Orthodox, who did not imitate him therein: But Forms had found
Entertainment long before this.

Page 185, 186. He fills his Margen with Isidore's Complaints of Theophilus and
Eusebius, and some others in those parts, as if Prelacy had degenerated, and
the Bishops grown Tyrannical all the World over: And he generally breaks off
his fraudulent Quotations just at those Words, which Isidore puts in, to
declare, he does not speak of all the Bishops and Clergy, no not in that
Province: So he leaves out -- (...) Isid. Pel. lib. 5. ep. 21. which place is
again so cited. page 187.
, These things I do not speak of all. Thus he writes horrid Corruption of the
Clergy Ibid. lib. 5. ep. 131.
; but will not quote those words -- (...) For all are not fallen into this
Gulf. Again, he cites another Epistle for a general Accusation; where he might
have found a large Encomium of one Clergyman, and this limitation. -- (...) I
do not accuse all Idem lib. 3. ep. 223.
. And he might, if he pleased, have seen a very high Character of Hermogenes, a
Bishop of that Age and that Country Idem lib. 5. ep. 448. p. 466.
: But his omitting all these, shows he designedly perverted this Author to
represent the Bishops and Clergy of this time, as being generally depraved;
which argues my Adversary, to be as destitute of Integrity, as he was of
Charity. I need not observe, that his Quotation out of S. Chrysostom; is no
more but a just description of the Episcopal Office, without any complaint
Chrysostom. hom. 37. Tom. 6.
. Nor that Isidore in the next place cited, is only speaking of the
forementioned evil Bishops and Clergymen Isid. Peleus. lib. 5. ep. 272.
: And it is not he (as the blundering Editor thought) but Nazianzen who adds
the next words. And as for that Good Man, it is well known, he was angry and
highly disobliged when he made the Oration here Quoted. And yet he does not (as
my Adversary says) wish there were no Prelacy; that is, No Bishops at all: But
only that there were no precedence of one Bishop before another, on the account
of the Dignity of their Sees; but that their Honor might be only according to
their desert and virtue Nazianz. Crat. ^8.
. And in his Rhetorical way of praising Athanasius, he plays the Orator in
seting out the Character of an evil Bishop, and then shows, how unlike
Athanasius was to such Nazianz. Crat. 21. in land. Athan.
: But no man can think, that a true description of all the Bishops of that Age,
is to be taken from such an occasional strain of Rhetoric.

Page 187. S. Jerome in his Cell, held Correspondence with, and paid Respect to
all the eminent Bishops of the World, and was far from thinking the whole Order
was degenerated into Tyranny: S Chrysostom does not say, He was afraid of all
the Bishops, or of the Bishops in general (as he pretends); but only of those
who opposed him, which were in number but 36: And at that very time he had far
more Bishops for him; but his Enemies oppressed him by the favor of the Court
Chrysostom. Ep 13. Tom. 7. page 95. See his Life in Dr. C^ve. p. 485
. And Arcadius the Emperor was very angry, by the Information which some
banished Monks had given him, when he says those hard Words of Theophilus of
Alexandria, and his Party Georg. Al. vit. Chrysostom. c. ^9. Tom. 8. page 212.
, who had done many evil Things; but this must not be applied as the Character
of all Bishops in that Age: And it is of those Bishops only that Isidore
speaks, which (as appears by his very words here cited) refer only to some of
the Bishops of that Country. For all under Theophilus his Jurisdiction did
neither join with him, nor follow his Examp^e Isid. Pel. lib 2. ep. 125. and
(which was ci^ed ^e ^^e) lib. 5. ep. 21.
: And how disingenuous is it (to say no worse) from his complaint of a Few, to
affirm, That Episcopacy it self was become a tyrannical Licentiousness, y^a,
and was turned into Tyranny. Besides, he cannot find one Complaint, that
imposing Liturgies was then called or accounted any part of Tyranny; none
accused any Bishops for that, which is the only Point we now dispute about.

Page 188. After a long description of evil Bishops and Clergy in general, he
comes in a Marginal Note to own, that Isidore confesses there were some
Bishops (in that Country, and at that time) who lived up to the Apostolical
Character: So that still, he cannot conclude from hence the whole Church was
degenerated. And his next Quotation relates only to the Tyranny of Theophilus,
and his Party, at Alexandria; yet Isidore says that then in that Church there
were famous Doctors, and approved Disciples Isid. Pel. lib. 5. ep. 126.
, which my Adversary omits; and here again quotes diverse Epistles, which he had
cited before Id lib. 3. ^p. 223. and lib. 5 ep. 21, etc.
; and at last quotes an Epistle, wherein Isidore only reproves one single
Clergyman Id. lib. 4. ep. 229.
; yet all these his careless Reader is to believe are good Evidence, to prove
the whole Church was then depraved.

In the same Page, Socrates blames no more but two Bishops, and that too in his
Partiality for the Novatians. And the Canon of Ephesus is a very good Law, made
to prevent one Bishops usurping over another, as is also that of Chalcedon
Council. Ephesians. Can. 8. Bever. Tom. I. p. 104. Item Council. Chal. Can. 12. ibid.
page 126.
. Now, though this show there were some Bishops then, who aimed at evil Things,
(as there ever was, and ever will be); yet the Major part of them in two
General Councils) who carried the Vote for these Canons, disliked the thing,
and took care to prevent it. So that these Laws show, the greatest part of the
Bishops were free from these Faults, and labored to reform the rest; and can
this be a Proof of the Degeneracy of the whole Church?

Page 189. What he observes concerning the Popes, who begun to aim at the
Supremacy about the Year 400, or soon after, is true in Fact; but this only
shows the corruption of one See, and he knows, the greatest part of the
Christian World (in that Age, and in diverse succeeding) opposed these Attempts;
which shows, the Church was not degenerated. And besides, this is nothing to
the Point of Liturgies, because the very Popes Two hundred years after this,
did not pretend to show their Supremacy by imposing their Liturgy on distant
Churches, (as we have seen in Pope Gregory's Epistle to Augustine the Monk); and
the Bishops of Lesser Sees, who did not pretend to this Supremacy, yet imposed
their own Churches Liturgy on their own Members. He adds to this a pious
Sentence or two out of S. Chrysostom, which are only general Complaints in
popular Discourses: But since this Supremacy began to be aimed at, in the Time
of Chrysostom, I wonder why he should say, That a Sentence of his levelled
against it, was forgot in his own Time, since it was more likely that it was
never known to those at Rome, who were designing then to be Supreme.

Page 190. Prosper, whom he cites for the evil Practices of Inferior Bishops,
declares he speaks only of some Bishops; and the Words are the Complaint of a
very Pious Bishop of that Age Prosper de v^ ^^^tempt. cap 21.
: Which Complaint Prosper answers very well in the next Chapter Ib. cap. 22.
; and a little alter he has a lovely description of such as were good Bishops
Ib. c^p. 25.
; and finally, he adds, And even at this time there is no doubt, but there are
many among us full of all those good Episcopal Qualities, which you have truly
described Pros^. ibid (...) 2. cap 2. and 3
. Now, is it not a vile Artifice of my Adversary, to cite the Complaint only,
as a general Character of all the Clergy of that Age, and not to mention those
many Commendations of the better sort of them, though the same Author in the
same place mentions both? as also, to talk of the suitableness of Liturgies to
such Pastors? Since, according to him, that way of Worship did not come in till
almost 60 Years after, when all these Pastors were dead; and by his
Computation, these Men all prayed Arbitrarily or Extempore.

Page 191, 192. He next goes about to set out the lamentable Insufficiency of
those who ministered by Liturgies (as he reckons) in the Year 500, by the
Testimonies of S. Basil S. Ambrose, and Nazianzen, who all died above an
Hundred years before that time: And S Ambrose only speaks of some few
Simoniacks, who in his Time were a disgrace to their Order Ambr. de Sacerd.
dig. c. 5.
. Nazianzen is only giving a Rhetorical Character of a Bad Bishop, to set off
the glory of Athanasius (as we noted but now Naz. Orat. 24. p. 378.
). And in the next quoted Oration, he says expressly, I neither dare, nor can
justly accuse all Idem Orat. ^0. in laud. Basilii, p. 335.
; which Words in the same Page my Adversary must see, and yet he omitted them
on purpose, to Arraign the whole Age. S. Basil does not charge the Western
Bishops with Ignorance in general, but only, That they did not, or would not
understand the case and condition of the Eastern Church Basil. ep. page 285.
: Yet this Man produces this Passage, to prove, that the Bishops of the West,
and the Chief of them, were a sort of Ignorant Fellows. His Margen applies it
to Damasus, and he attempts to prove, Siricius and I^nocent deserved the same
Character, whose Vindication I leave to their own Friends, it being no hurt to
my Cause, if two or three Bishops of one See were not so great Clerks, since
that Age was full of Learned Men and Famous Scholars: And he can have no
advantage to his Cause, if he could prove the most of these were ignorant,
because Innocent (the last of them) lived almost an Hundred years before he
will own Liturgies were imposed.

Page 193. That which he cites out of S. Chrysostom, relates only to some few
Evil Men, as the Places will show Chrysostom. de Sacerd. Orat. 3. page 24.
: And (as we noted before) S. Ambrose is speaking of such only as came in by
Simony Ambros de dign Sacerd. cap. 5.
. That Epistle of Isidore's, which he cites thrice in this Page, seems plainly
to refer only to one Simoniack Isid. Pel. lib. 5. ep. 276.
: And his next Quotation speaks only of some Corruption in one small Diocese,
occasioned by an Evil Bishop newly admitted to Rule there Id. lib. 3. ep. 245.
. And I appeal to any Man whether these be fit Proofs, that the whole Clergy
were then depraved and corrupted.

Page 194. The like Appeal I may make concerning his next Quotations. The first
place out of Isidore is only about Zosimus, one Ill Priest, Ordained by one
Evil Bishop Isid. Pel. lib. 5. ep. 426.
. The next Epistle expressly owns, that there were many Good Men remaining Id.
lib. 3. ep. 259.
. The third place divides those Bishops into two Ranks, Good and Bad, and
advises him to whom the Epistle is writ, to be of the former number Lib. 5. ep.
481.
. The fourth Quotation shows how some, especially the Bishop of Peleusium,
abused their Authority Lib. 2. ep. 50.
. The last Epistle says no more, but that some were much worse by their high
Places Ibid. lib. 2. ep. 71.
. In the same Page his Editor has blundered the Text, by referring to wrong
places in the Margen. But we will follow the order of the Margen; and, First,
Sozomen is only relating the History of S. Chrysostom's Deposing 13 Bishops in
the Lesser Asia, and Palladius reckons them to be but six who suffered this
Sentence Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 6. page 452. Georg. Alex. vit. Chrysostom.
; yet even these were thought to have so hard measure, and their Crimes to be
so small, that Chrysostom was very much censured for it See Doctor Cave's Life
of S. Chrysostom. page 476.
. The Character of Theophilus of Alexandria's Ordination, is cited from his
bitter Enemies, who hated him upon the account of Persecuting S. Chrysostom;
Yet it if it be true Georg. Alex. vit. Chrysostom. and Pallad.
, the whole Church ought not suffer, by the Facts of one evil Bishop. Nor must
Chrysostoms account, of those few Churches in Asia, which he saw in his Exile
Chrysostom. Ep. 2.
, pass for an account of the whole World.

Page 195. The first place in this Margen relates to the same thing, of which
he discoursed in the last Page; and here he says, Eusebius of Peleusium, (a
creature of Theophilus, and Isidore's Enemy) Ordained ((...),) in the Plural
number; but Isidore speaks only of one Zosimus ordained by him, who was ((...))
an Ignorant Fellow Ibid. Pel. lib. 3. Ep. 81.
. And the three next Epistles, concern only Zosimus and two more ill Priests,
which Eusebius had ordained Id. lib. 5. Ep. 51, 52, and 53.
; The two next Epistles also, only concer that single Bishop, and some few whom
he had ordained Id. lib. 5. Ep. 140. and 147.
. Only the Editor has here made a woeful jumble, and in the midst of a word
((...)) Ep. 147. has broken that word to pieces, and put down (...) -- and
then goes on with a whole Sentence, out of Epistle 140th, as far as to ((...).)
And then puts in the rest of the broken word, and Prints ((...),) Epistle
147th, making it neither good Greek, nor so much as good Sense. In the same
Page, we have an account of the Ignorance of the African Church, in the year of
Christ 401. But this was 100 years before he will allow the use of Liturgies;
and by his account, these Men were all to Pray Extempore, for which they do not
seem to be very well Qualified; so that a Man who Reads this, must be apt to
think, he has dated the Original of Liturgies wrong, because it is no way
Credible, that Aurelius the Bishop of Carthage, and S. Augustine here also
cited, would allow Men to Pray after that manner, who were so void of Learning
and Judgment, that they neither could avoid Solecisms nor discern Heresy. But
as to the matter of Fact, we have sufficient Testimony, (for all this good
Bishops complaint) that there were at that time, many very Learned Men in
Africa, and therefore this must be understood, only of some few Churches.

Page 196. He rakes into the Subscriptions of Councils, to find out some
Bishops who could not Write their own Names, but got others to Subscribe for
them; and hence he seeks to confirm his Notion, of the Ignorance of the Clergy
in this Age. But to this I must reply, that the Subscriptions of some Councils,
are not of any great Credit, nor void of Suspicion of Forgery Existimo^
subscriptiones illas quae hodie circumferuntur, fictas esse. Whitak. de Council.
Q. 4.
. But if we do allow those of Ephesus and Chalcedon to be genuine, and his
Quotations to be true, though I can find but one of them in Binius, (and have
not Crabs Edition of the Councils besides me); There are but 4 Bishops in both
these general Councils, who are put to Subscribe by others, because they could
not Write their own Names: But there were near 200 Bishops at the Ephesine
Council, and 630 at that of Chalcedon: Now suppose among 800 Bishops, there
were 4 who could not Write, I hope (since there were 796 who could Write), it
will not follow that the Age was Ignorant, or the most of the Bishops
unlearned. And besides, he grants that these unlearned Bishops, were not fit to
be trusted with making Extempore Prayers, and therefore it seems necessary that
these Bishops should have Forms prescribed, which they either Read, or got them
by Heart; and if so, then such Forms were used above 50 years before the Period
he assigns. As for his last Instance of Leo's not admitting any one to be a
Bishop, unless he were perfect in the Psalter; I observe that this Emperor
intended to prevent that Scandal, which had been given by those few unlearned
Bishops in former Times; and therefore would have none admitted, but such as
well understood the Psalter, which was a great part of the Liturgy, and part of
it to be Read every day among the Prayers; so that it is very probable, that
the usual Forms of public Prayer, were put into one Volume with the Psalter, as
our Common Prayer is at this day. And I understand the Historians meaning to
be, That Leo would admit no Man into any Order of the Clergy, who was not
perfect in the public Book of Offices Theodor. Lector. Col. lib. 1. p. 182.
; and if it be so Expounded, then it proves a constant and common use of
Liturgies, An. 460. However it is well known, that (whatever was the lowest
measure for qualifying a Man to be Ordained), there were very many Learned
Clergymen in that Age; Yea, and in the following Century also. But if the
Church were so depraved as he represents it, some time before, and a little
after the year 500; We have sufficiently showed, it does not hurt the cause of
Liturgies, which were certainly come into use, many Ages before. And thus I
will dismiss these Fraudulent and Invidious Reflections, upon the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries, desiring the Readers Pardon, for following my Adversary in so
Tedious a Digression.

CHAP. V. Of the Agreement of the Reformed Churches, in the Approbation and use
of Liturgies.
1. THere remains nothing now to make out prescribed Forms of Prayer, to be
agreeable to Vincentius, Lirinensis his Golden-Rule; that is* to have been used
always* by all Churches, and every where Vincent. Lirin. contra. Haeres. cap.
3. page 6.
; But only to prove the Reformed Divines, do generally allow and commend
Liturgies, and all the Eminent Protestant Churches use them. Now since the
Learned and Pious Promoters of the Reformation, did so narrowly examine into,
and so Unanimously reject all those Doctrins, and Practices of the Roman
Church, which did not agree to Holy Scripture and pure Antiquity; and yet none
of them, did ever reckon prescribed Forms among those Corruptions, but approved
and established them, in those Churches which they had reformed; we may
conclude, That Set Forms of Prayers and Liturgies are ageeable to Gods Word,
and to the usage of the best Ages of the Church. And we have at this time, a
more particular reason to make out this Consent of all settled Protestant
Churches, as to the use of prescribed Forms: Because our Adversaries are
perpetually calling upon us, to conform our selves to the Example of Foreign
Reformed Churches; and pretending, that to allow their way, will be a certain
means to unite all Protestants, both at home and abroad. We confess, the end is
a thing (at this Juncture) very desirable; but that which they suppose, is so
far from being a probable means to obtain it, That if we should cast off our
prescribed Forms, and set up their Extempore and Arbitrary way of Praying, we
should act contrary to the Judgment of the best Protestant Writers, and to the
Practice of the most famous Protestant Churches every where; but by continuing
the use of our excellent Liturgy, and binding all our Clergy to it, we follow
the advice and example of all our Sister Churches: And can they imagine, that to
oblige a few obstinate and singular leading Men, and their Ignorant and
Enthusiastical followers; we will bring such a reproach upon our Church, as to
cast away that Method of Praying, which is so consonant to Scripture and
Antiquity, and so agreeable to the Opinion and practice of the best
Protestants? It would be madness in us to do this, and it is little less in
them to expect it: However because some of them are to this day, deluded with
this gross mistake; That prescribed Forms are some of the remains of Popery,
and a Liturgy established, is not allowed in other Protestant Churches; I shall
conclude this Discourse, with some few proofs of the Opinion, and Practice of
the most Eminent Divines and Churches of the Reformation, both Foreign and
Domestic; and that in relation as well to Liturgies in general, as to our
Liturgy in particular, when I have first observed, that the Learned and
Industrious Mons. Durell, has Collected a great number of these Testimonies;
some of which I have here inserted, and added others of my own observation,
referring the Reader for fuller satisfaction, to his elaborate Book Durell,
View of the Gov. and public Worship of God, in the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas Print. L^nd. 1662.
. I begin with the Lutheran Churches, among whom the Reformation first began,
and who at this day do far exceed in number the Churches, which follow Calvin's
Method, and afford the greatest number of Foreign Protestants.

2. And First, for Luther himself; There is no Man, can or dare Question his
Approbation of Liturgies, and prescribed Forms of Prayer, it being well known,
that he appointed such Forms, for all those Churches which he Reformed; and in
his works, we have a Form of Common Prayer for the Church of Wittenburgh, drawn
up by himself out of the Mass Book; but so, as to leave out that, which he
thought to be Superstitious and Corrupted Forma Mist. pro Eccles Wittenburg Ep.
Luther. Tom. II. p. 384.
. And all the Churches of his Communion at this day, have and use a Liturgy
containing Collects, Epistles and Gospels, for every Sunday in the year: And
also Set Forms of Hymns and Canticles, Prayers and Litanies; together with
prescribed Offices, for all other parts of Ecclesiastical Ministrations, for
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, for Matrimony, Visiting the Sick, Burying the
Dead, etc. One of which lately Printed in a large Quarto, in the Danish Tongue,
imposed on and used in the Churches of Denmark, was lately showed, and in
diverse places intepreted to me, by an ingenious Pastor of that Country, Mons.
Ivarus de Brinch, who came over with the Forces into England the last Winter,
An. 1689. And besides the Agreement between our Collects, Epistles and Gospels,
and theirs, I observed that their Litany is, almost Verbatim, the same with
ours. And the Churches in upper Germany, which are Lutheran, have all such
Liturgies; I have one Book Dedicated to Joachim, Marquess of Brandenburgh,
Collected by Christopher Cornerus, Printed at Leipsick, An. 1588. with this
Title, The select Canticles of the Old and New Testament, with the pure Hymns
and Collects, which are wont to be sung, in the Orthodox and Catholic Church:
He means of the Lutherans, who do all to this day, Chant or Sing their public
Prayers, as we do in our Cathedrals. Now this Book contains their Canticles and
Hymns, as also the Versicles, Responses and Collects for every Sunday, and
Holy Day in the year; very like to those in our Common Prayer, and a Litany
exactly agreeing with ours; in the Petitions, the Order and the Responses. And
all these Offices are paraphrased by Cornerus Cantica sel^cta cum Hymn^ and
Collect^s pur^^ribus, etc. per ^^r. Corn^rum. (...). 1588.
, To which Litany aforesaid, I doubt but not Rivius alludes in his directions
to a Parish Priest; when as to Praying in times of Calamity he says, you have
ready, a Litany in the Vulgar Tongue, which you may use on that occasion; for
all that is necessary, to be asked both in public and private are briefly
contained there Jo. R^vii opera. Lib. de Officio pastorali page 705.
. Besides, I have also lately seen another Book published by Jo. Federus, with
this Title, A Book containing the Doctrine, Administration of the Sacraments,
and Ecclesiastical Rites, etc. used in the Territories of the Dukes of
Mecklenburg Liber continens Doctrinam, Admin^strat. Sacram. etc. in ditione
Duc. Megapolensium. ^rancfera An. 1562.
. In which there are Forms of Prayer and Praise, and prescribed Offices, for
all sorts of Christian Service, especially under the Title of Ceremonies Ibid.
page 189, etc.
. And in a word, all the Lutheran Churches every where impose, and constantly
use these Set Forms in their public Worship; and their most Eminent Divines
approve of this, as may be seen in Melanchton, who enjoins the reciting the
express Words of the Holy Forms Melancht. oper. Tom. 3. exp. in 6 Math. page
323.
. Chemnitius says, The Romanists unjustly condemn our Churches, because in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper, they choose as did the Ancients, to use Forms
of Prayer, which are Analogous to the Faith; and tend to edify the Church
suitably to these Times; in which are comprehended all the substantial things,
which were used in the Prayers of the Ancients Mart. Chemnitii, exam. Council.
Trid. par. 2. page 91.
. He grants indeed, they are not the very same with the Primitive Liturgies in
all things, but affirms that they agree with them in the Essential parts. I
will name but one more, viz. a Learned Danish Divine, who has writ a general
System of Theology; And he upon this Question, Whether it be lawful to use
prescribed Forms of Prayer? Determines, That it is lawful for all, and
necessary for many, to use a certain and prescribed Form of Words in Prayer
Caspari Brochmondi Theol. System. vniv. Par. 2. cap. 3. Casu. 15. page 494.
. To go on, The Protestant Churches in Poland and Lithuania, in two Synods held
there, Ann. 1633. and 1634. enjoined one certain Liturgy, to be used in all
those Dominions; The Preface to which is printed at large by Mons. Durell
Durel. vt su^^ in app^nd. page 321.
, to which Author, I shall also refer the Reader, for an account of the several
Liturgies used in Bremen Hessen, Transylvania, Hungary, Bohemia, etc. Id ibid.
S^^. 1. Number. 3. and 37, ^8 39, etc. p. ^. and p. 34^ ^5, etc.
. And I will only add that Memorable passage, in the Confession of Augsburgh;
All those Rites are to be observed, which can be performed without Sin, and
which conduce to good Order in the Church, such as certain Holy days, certain
Holy things to be Sung, and other such Rites C^nf^ss. (...). Art. 15. page 25.
: By Holy things to be Sung, They mean their Prayers, which are all Sung in the
Lutheran Churches, as we noted but now.

3. But perhaps some may Imagine, that those Churches who were Reformed by
Calvin, Zuinglius or others, are not so much for prescribed Forms as the
Lutherans; I will therefore here add a brief account of the Churches and
Divines of Geneva, France, Helvetia, Holland* etc. I begin with the Famous
Calvin, whose words have been often repeated, but must be set down once more,
because our obstinate Adversaries, who pretend so much Reverence for him, do
not regard them. As to the Form of Prayer and Ecclesiastical Rites, I do highly
approve, it should be certain, from which it may not be lawful, for any
Minister to vary in the exercise of his Function; as well in Consideration of
the Weakness and Ignorance of some, as that it may more certainly appear, how
all the Churches agree among themselves; And lastly, that there may be a stop
put to the giddy Lightness of some, who affect some kind of Novelties; and I
have showed before, that a Form of Catechism also is good on the same account:
So therefore, There ought to be, A stated Form of Catechizing, a stated Form of
Administering the Sacraments, and a public Form of Prayers Calvin. ad Protect.
Angl. Epist. 87. page 165.
. This was Calvin's advice, to the great Manager of the Reformation in England,
under the Pious King Edward 6th. Whereby we may discern, that he highly
approves of making and strictly imposing one certain Liturgy; and gives three
weighty Reasons, why it must be imposed upon all the Clergy, which Reasons
continue in full force even to this very day, and therefore if our Adversaries
will allow him, for an Umpire in this Case, they must conform to this Liturgy,
which is much more pure now, than it was in Calvin's days, and all those
Tolerabiles ineptiae (as he boldly called them) are now wholly left out. But to
proceed, Calvin himself also made a Form of Divine Service, which is used to
this day in the Churches of France, and in that of Geneva, and their Ministers
are bound to the use of those Forms, in all their public Administrations. And I
observe that Beza cites this Form of Prayer, and particularly that part of it,
which is concerning the Ministration of the Lords Supper, made (as he tells us)
by Mr. Calvin; wherein, he says, they had retained the Primitive Form, Lift up
your Hearts, with a proper Paraphrase upon it, and also kept many ancient Rites
Theodor. Ie^ ^esp. ad ^ranc bald. inter Tract. Theol Tom II. page 229.
. And Moses Amyraldus speaks of this Liturgy, when he says, And here for
Example sake, I will Commemorate that great Wisdom and Temper, with which those
public Forms of public Prayer were first composed which the Churches of France
and Geneva do use -- so that the very Papists, have put some of them into those
several little Prayer Books, which they publish in the Vulgar Tongue, and
deliver to their own People Amyrald. de secess. ab. Eccles. p. 225.
; assuring us he had seen this with his own Eyes, otherwise he could scarce
have believed it. And a little before, this Author wishes that all Reformed
Churches, would contribute their several Symbols; so as all Protestants might
agree in one Common Form of Prayer Id. ibid. p. 224.
. And not he alone, but all the Calvinists do generally allow, and use
prescribed Forms of Prayer, as Mons. Durell has very largely made out; to
whose Observations I will add two very Learned Men of the French Church, who
freely own, that Liturgies and stated Forms, are of very ancient use in the
Christian Church, and these are the Lord Du-plessis, and Mons. Daille, both
which my Adversary often cites, as if they were of his Opinion, concerning the
late Original of Prescribed Forms: But, first, Mornay Lord Du-Plessis, in his
Book of the Mass, having showed, That the Jews had Forms of public Service,
adds -- the First Christians then framed themselves after this manner of
Service Mornay of the Mass. Book 1. page 19.
, and so runs the parallel between the Jewish and the Primitive Liturgy -- And
a little after he tells us. That those Authors who lived about the Year 800,
declare, That some Forms were used from the beginning, and that they had
industriously searched out the ancient Service of the Church -- and they might
also in their days possibly find the Books of Rites or Prescribed Forms used in
the Church, before the Pope, assisted by the Power of Great Princes, had
abolished the use and memory thereof Id. ib. page 22.
. Again, he owns a very ancient Form of Prayer used at the Offertory Ib chap 5.
page 36.
; and says, there was a General Prayer for the whole World, and the Estate of
the Church, which the Greeks call (...), and (...) -- The Form whereof
continued (as we have seen it) since the time of the Primitive Church, and is
to be found and read in the Writers of that time Ib. page 37.
. He also confesses in the same place, that there was anciently One Form of
Salutation and Prefaces: Yea, in this whole Book he every where owns there were
Primitive Forms, long before the Roman Church had corrupted their Service; and
speaking of the Liturgies of the Greek and Latin Churches, he does not so much
as pretend they had no prescribed Forms; only he notes, That though in
substance the Service of these Churches do agree together; yet we must not
imagine there was one and the same prescript Form observed and kept in them all
Mornay, ut supr. chap. 6. page 43.
. We see he grants Forms in all Churches, but so as there was some Variety
between the Forms of several Churches. And now, how is it possible that this
Great and Learned Man (had he not been misinterpreted) should be Evidence for
my Adversaries Opinion of Liturgies, coming in after the Year 500? The like may
be said of M. Daile, who understood Antiquity, as well as any Writer that ever
was of the French Reformed Church. Now, he frequently cites the Book, which
goes under the Title of the Apostolical Constitutions, ascribed to S. Clement,
wherein there is a very ancient Form of Liturgy used (as we have showed) in the
Church of Antioch; wherein there are prescribed Forms for all the Parts of
Divine Service at large. Now this Learned Man thus speaks of that Writer, He
seems to have compiled his Work a little before the Nicene Council Daile de
Confirm lib. 2. cap. 11. p. 120.
: And in another place he says, In this Book of the Apostolical Constitutions,
I think no man who understands any thing of Antiquity, can deny, but that the
Author has painted out the Form of Ecclesiastical Worship, such as it really
was in those Times when he Writ Idem de Relig. cultus objecto, lib. 3. cap. 12.
. By which we see, that he believed, The Ecclesiastical Worship was performed
by a prescribed Liturgy, even before the First Council of Nice: Which appears
also to have been his Opinion, by his citing this Liturgy of the Constitutions,
with diverse other ancient Liturgies; and then concluding thus; We our selves
truly do not deny, but that very many of these Liturgies which we have produced
are ancient, and written about the very beginning of the Fourth Century, though
we think that they were corrupted by Additions and Alterations at several times
after their first Original Daile de cult. Latin. relig lib. 3. cap. 13. p. 359.
. Wherefore this studious Searcher into Antiquity can be no Witness for my
Adversary, since he very expressly affirms, That these Liturgies were written
out for Public use, in the very beginning of the Fourth Century; that is, as
soon as the Church became settled, by the Conversion of Constantine the Great.
To these we may add the Testimony of the Helvetian Divines, and others, who did
not Reform after Luther's Pattern: Bullenger says, The Church has
Supplications, she also has Holy days and Fasts; the Church celebrates the
Sacraments according to certain Laws, at certain times, in a certain place, and
by a prescribed Form, which is according to the received Rules and Usage of the
Church Bulleng. Decad. 2. Sermon. 1. page 38.
. In which Words he evidently justifies a prescribed Form, and owns, That the
Church has power to make such a Form, and that all her Members are obliged to
use it. The eminent Lud. Lavater himself published the Common Prayer Book of
the Tigurine Church, which I have seen and read: The Title of which is this, A
Little Book of the Rites and Institutions of the Trigurine Church; Wherein is
contained, The whole Order of their Divine Service, with the several Forms by
which they Administer the Sacraments, and all other Offices which belong to the
Ministerial Function De ritib. and institutis Eccles. Tigurinae Opusculum,
Edit. a Ludovic. Lavatero, An. 1559.
; so that they also have stated and prescribed Forms. And Zanchius, one of the
most Learned of the Divines of that Age, tells us, That Concord, and Decency or
Order, cannot be observed in the Church, nor can all things be done decently
and in order (as S. Paul commands) without Rules and Traditions, by which, as
by certain Bonds, Order and Decorum is preserved; because there is such
diversity in Men's Manners, such variety in their Minds, and such opposition in
their Judgments, that no Polity is firm unless it be constituted by certain
Laws; and without a Stated Form no Rites can be preserved Hieron: Lanch. Tom 7.
In Com. praecip. cap. Doctrine. Christ. Loc. 16.
. So that he pleads for the necessity of such a Form, and accordingly all
settled Protestant Churches have composed a Liturgy, and made Forms of Divine
Service for their Clergy to Officiate by: So have the Churches of Holland,
whose Common Prayer Book I have seen Translated into the Greek Tongue, with
this Title (...). Impres. Ludg. Bat. An. 1648.
, The Christian and Orthodox Doctrine and Order of the Belgic Churches, viz.
Their Confession of Faith, their Catechism, their Liturgy, and their
Ecclesiastical Canons. And in that Part which is their Liturgy, there are the
Forms of Prayer prescribed for Baptism, for the Lords Supper, and for all the
Occasional Offices; which Book so translated was Printed at Leiden, An. 1648.
To this I may add another Book, put out by Jo. Alasco, a Noble Polonian
Protestant, in the days of King Edward the Sixth; the Title whereof runs thus,
The Form and Manner of the whole Ecclesiastical Ministration in the Church for
Strangers, and especially Germans, appointed at London by the most Religious
King Edward the Sixth, An. 1550 Forma and ratio tota Ecclesiastici ministerii,
etc. Land. An. 1550.
: Wherein there are also diverse Set Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving, to be
used in the several Offices of their Church. And (to name no more) I have in my
possession a Scotch-Common-Prayer-Book, said to be Composed by Mr. Knox,
containing, A Calendar with Holy Days, The Psalms of David in Meeter, Forms of
Prayer in the Visitation of the Sick, Forms of Confession of Sin, A Form of
Intercession for all Estates of Men, A Form of Prayer for the King, Forms for
Administering the Lords Supper, and Baptism, The Form of Matrimony, and other
occasional Offices, etc. for the use of the Kirk of Scotland; Imprinted at
Middleburgh, An. 1594. I do not cite these Books, as if there were no other, or
no more Protestant Liturgies; but because I have seen all these lately, and
have most of them by me; and because these are sufficient to convince any man,
That all established Protestant Churches do approve of, and use Prescribed
Forms; so that if we should cast off ours, to oblige that sort of Dissenters
whom Mr. Clarkson Patronizes, we must act contrary to the judgment and practice
of the most famous Protestant Churches abroad, and the most eminent Reformed
Divines of all Nations; and therefore I refer it to any Man to consider, if
this be a probable way to unite us with all Foreign Protestants, as some vainly
discourse.

. 4. I know nothing can remain to be objected now, unless it be, That there are
some great and just Exceptions lie against our Liturgy in particular. To which
I shall not now Reply, by Repeating what I have said in my Larger Discourses
upon the Common Prayer, where every one of the Objections, that I have ever met
with, are considered and answered already: But I shall now show, what esteem
our Common Prayer Book has been in among the most learned and judicious
Protestant Writers, ever since it was first Composed. And I begin with
Alexander Alesius, an eminent Scotch Divine, who Translated King Edward's
Common Prayer Book into Latin; and in his Preface to it, he says, He did this,
that it might be seen and read by many for the honor of the English Church,
whose care and diligence herein he doubted not would be for the example and
comfort of some, and for the shame of others; and he hoped it might provoke the
rest of the Reformed, to imitate this most noble and divine Work, in settling
the Church -- believing, that God put it into his hands to publish it at that
time for the General Good Praef. ad Libr. precum per Alex. A^es. inter Buceri
script. Anglica^, page 373, 3^5, etc.
; with much more to the same purpose. And here I must note, that probably this
was that Interpretation of our English Service Book, which the judicious and
modest Mr. Bucer looked over so diligently, to satisfy himself whether he
ought to conform to it: And upon this he says, When I thoroughly understood it,
I gave Thanks to God, who had granted to this Church to Reform her Rites to
that degree of Purity: For I found nothing in them which was not taken out of
the Word of God, or at least which was contrary thereunto, if it were heartily
expounded Buceri censura super Libr. S^cro^ praef. page 456.
. And when by Archbishop Cranmer's special Command he had perused the whole
Book, in order to his censuring what he thought was to be amended; He declares
his Judgment thus, In the prescript Form for the Communion, and the daily
Prayers, I see nothing writ in this Book, which is not taken out of the Word of
God, if not in express Words, as the Psalms and Lessons, yet in Sense, as the
Collects; and also the Order of these Lessons and Prayers, and the Times when
they are to be used, are very agreeable to the Word of God, and to the
Constitution observed in the Ancient Church Buceri censura, etc. cap. 1. p. 457.
. And afterward, he is for writing down all holy Rites, and the Words of the
sacred Administrations; and he owns, that the Church of England has done this
very purely, and conformable to Christ's Institution. As for the things which
he modestly supposed might be altered for the better, it is evident, That most
of them were regulated afterward, and many of them were rectified according to
his Advice there; so that we not only see, he was clearly for the use of
prescribed Forms, but liked the Book of King Edward, with some few Amendments;
and had he seen our present Common Prayer, no doubt he would have wholly
approved it. The next Evidence shall be the most learned Archbishop of Spalato,
who affirms against Suarez, That the English Liturgy contains nothing in it,
which is not holy, which is not pious, and truly Christian as well as Catholic
Ant. de Dom. Spalat. osteus. error. Fran. Suarez. cap. 6.. 82. page 340.
. And a little after, -- The Form of Divine Offices, that is, of Public Prayers
for all England, which (as I have said) is taken out of the most ancient and
most laudable Liturgies (approved even by the Roman Church) collected with
great Judgment; so as to leave out those things which the Romanists themselves
are not very ready to defend Ibid. 37. page 342.
. Thus this Great Man stops the Mouth of a Malicious Enemy to our Liturgy: And
Causabon at the same time had as great an esteem for it. For in his Epistle to
King James the First he says, Your Majesty has such a Church in your
Kingdoms, partly so instituted of Old, and partly so regulated by your
Endeavors, that none at this day comes nearer to the Form of the most
Flourishing Ages of the Ancient Church, following a middle way between those
who have offended, both in the Excess and the Defect Causa^ Ep. ad Reg. jac.
prae^ix. ad exerc. Baron.
. And in an Epistle to Salmasius he says, If his Conjecture do not fail, the
soundest part of the whole Reformation is in England Id. Ep. ad Salmas. qu. 709.
. Moreover, Salmasius himself, though in some Points he differed from our
Church, yet relates it as a Reason of King Charles the Martyrs constancy to our
Liturgy, That the Form of it was long since approved by most of the Reformed
Pastors, and those, Men of the first Rank both in France and elsewhere; and as
being a Book which seemed to contain nothing, but what agreed to Piety, and to
the Evangelical Doctrine Salm^s. defens. reg. cap. 8.
. To him I will add another Man of incomparable Learning, who had no
Obligations to this Church of England, but rather the contrary; which is the
Famous Hugo Grotius, who says, I am sure the English Liturgy, the Rite of
Laying Hands on Children in memory of their Baptism, the Authority of Bishops,
of Synods consisting of none but the Clergy, and many such like things, do
sufficiently agree to the Orders of the Ancient Church, from which we cannot
deny, but that we have departed both in France and Holland Grot. ad Boetslaer.
ep. 62. page 21.
. And whoever considers these most Eminent Writers great Judgment in Antiquity,
may very well allow them to be sufficient Witnesses in this Question. But none
of the Foreign Divines are more full or more clear in determining this Matter
than the deservedly famous Lud. Capellus, who lived to hear of this very
Independent Sect, who rejected our English Liturgy, and all prescribed Forms;
and writ a most claborate Thesis, on purpose to answer and expose their
frivolous Objections; a Thesis deserving to be read by all English Divines, and
to be wholly translated into English for the Common Good, out of which at
present I will only recite a few Passages, viz. That as soon as Miraculous
Gifts ceased, and Heretics began to infest the Church, there was a necessity
for Liturgies, which wise and pious Bishops composed for the use of all the
Presbyters in their Diocesses Theses Salmurienses Praesid. Lud. Capello, par.
3. De Liturg. Formulis conceptis, These. 3. page 657.
. This was done chiefly in the Great Churches, as that of Rome, Alexandria,
Constantinople, etc. and followed by Lesser Churches Ibid. These. 4*
. These Forms were short and plain at first, consisting of some few Prayers,
and Lessons, cut of the Psalms and other Scripture, with the Blessing,
Consecration, and distribution of the Communion, etc. And such was the Roman
Office in the first Four Ages till Damasus's time; but augmented and corrupted
by the following Popes Ibid. These. 5.
. And then he has these Words, which I will transcribe at large; But about 140
years ago, when there was a Departure from the Roman Church, and the People
came out of Babylon, and withdrew themselves from the Pope's Tyranny; The
Authors of the Reformation, then purged the Holy Liturgy from all the
Superstition and Popish Idolatry, and took away all that was burthensom, and
that did not tend to Edification: And thus at that time there were diverse
prescribed Forms of Liturgies simple and pure, Composed by the several Authors
of the Reformation in Germany, France, England, Scotland, Holland, etc. which
differed as little as could be from the ancient Forms of the Primitive Church,
which Liturgies the Protestants have used hitherto happily, and with good
success, in their several Nations and Districts: Until very lately there arose
in England a sort of morose, scrupulous, and too nice (that I say not,
downright superstitious) Men, who for many trifling Reasons of no moment, not
only dislike the Liturgy hitherto used in that Church, but would have both it
and the whole Order of Bishops to be utterly abrogated and abolished, in place
whereof they would substitute that which they call their Directory -- To which
some wild and frantic Men add this Opinion, That it is unlawful to use any
prescribed Form, either in public or private Prayers, and that no good Man can
with a safe Conscience be present at these Prayers Id ibid. These. 6, and 7.
page 658.
. After this he acurately states the Controversy, by distinguishing about the
several Parts of the Public Service, and proves Forms may lawfully be used in
any part of it; but as to Prayers, he reckons it is most requisite they be made
by Forms These. 9. ad These. 23. page 659, etc.
And then he brings in all their Objections against Forms, and all their little
Reasons for their Arbitrary way, and very learnedly and solidly confutes them
all. I shall only mention the Heads (and refer the Reader to the Discourse it
self for his full satisfaction) viz. 1. He shows, this is not an imitation of
the Papists: 2. Not a burden to Men's Consciences: 3. Not worse, because it was
not the way in the Apostles Times: 4. A Directory is not sufficient security
against Heresy: 5 He shows. That though Forms are most necessary for the
Unlearned, yet the Learned ought not to be left free in the Public Prayers: 6.
He proves, this is not that Will Worship which is forbidden in Scripture: 7. He
confutes those who say, These are not our own Prayers: 8. And those who
pretend, they are against Christian Liberty: 9. Or that they spoil Ministers
Gifts: 10. Or do not profit the Auditory: And lastly, He answers that
Objection, That the use of Forms hinders our lifting up our Eyes in Prayer Id.
ibid. These ^4 etc. ad page 669.
. And after he has called all these, light and frivolous little Reasons and
petty Objections, He concludes the whole Question with five Positions: First,
That Forms are not absolutely necessary for all Persons, in all Times and
Places: Secondly, That they would not be generally necessary, but only because
all things are to be done decently and in order: Thirdly, That where there are
Unlearned Pastors, there Forms are absolutely necessary: Fourthly, Even where
there are Learned Pastors, a public Form is very useful and necessary for the
common Edification of the Church: Fifthly, The use of these Forms cannot justly
be condemned or disliked, since always and every where it is most convenient,
and has obtained in the whole Christian Church throughout all the World
perpetually for above 1300 years, and it is now every where used, but only
amongst these Vpstart Independents Id. ibid. These. 49. p. 669
: So that truly, the Moroseness or Scrupulousness, and Superstition, or rather
the petulant and obstinate boldness of these Men, is senseless and prodigious,
superstitiously to condemn, and foolishly to compare to an Idol (forbid in the
Second Commandment, to be avoided by all) a Thing, which is in it self most
innocent, whose use is most profitable, and its observation most convenient,
which has so long been practiced in the Universal Church, and never was yet
rejected by any Church; and which all the Churches of God every where now use
to their great benefit; but they reject it out of mere Whimsey, or out of a
Vile design, to bring in an unbridled Licentiousness and intolerable Disorder
into the Church. But amongst them such are most to be detested, who either will
not use the Lords Prayer, or none but that Form, and that without joining it to
any other Prayers public or private; and hold it a Sin for any good Man to be
in a Church or a Family where they use prescribed Forms, and account this to be
a just cause of Separating from such Worship, lest they should be defiled with
their Sin, who use such Forms. These are like those in Isaiah, Chap. lxv. 5.
which say, Stand by thy self, come not near, for I am holier than thou; these
are (says the Lord) a Smoke in my Nose; That is, They vehemently stir up my
Wrath against them. God grant they may return to a better mind Id. ibid. These.
50, and 51. page 670.
. Thus that pious and learned Author concludes his Learned Theses, and I will
only make one Remark more of his, concerning this Sort of Men, viz. That
nothing seems to incite them so studiously to condemn all Forms of Liturgy,
like the love of Innovation, and the design of introducing Corruption, that
under the specious veil and pretense of liberty of Praying and Prophesying,
they may bring in all kind of Sects into the Church; and therefore they make
Men believe that vain, false, and erroneous Opinion, viz. That in our Times, as
well as the Apostles, the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication is to be poured out
on the present Church, according to Joel ii. 28. and Zech. xii. 10. which is
the common and most pestilent Error of all Phanaticks about the Comforter which
Christ was to send Id. ibid. These. 28. p. 663.
: It is a Reformed Divine of the French Church, Second to none of his Time for
Learning, Piety, and Judgment, a famous Professor in an Eminent Protestant
University, who gives this Character of that Party of our Dissenters, who are
against all Prescribed Forms, and by it we may discern what Notion Foreign
Churches have of them, and of our Liturgy also. I shall end these Foreign
Testimonies with a Paper delivered to me, Signed by two Exiled French Pastors
of great Piety and good Learning, now residing in this City: We, whose Names
are hereunto Subscribed, being asked what we thought of Liturgies, have
expressed our Opinion in these Words: We think a Liturgy in the Church is not
only useful, but also necessary; For as there is, and ought to be One Rule of
Faith, so also there ought to be One and the same Form of Gods public external
Worship: And it manifestly appears, That the Protestants of the French Churches
never were against such Forms, because they had a Form for Administering the
Sacraments, for celebrating Matrimony, and certain other Prescribed Prayers
which none of us were allowed to recede from Carol. Daubuz. Minist Gal. Johan.
Costebadeus Minist. Gal.
. Dated at York, April 8. 1690. And now I will produce only two Domestic
Testimonies of Men most entirely Unexceptionable, and so conclude: The first is
that of Bishop Ridley, who died a Martyr for the Protestant Faith, and he in a
Letter writ to his Friends a little before his Martyrdom says, This Church had
of late, (i. e. in K. Edwards days) the whole Divine Service, all common and
public Prayers, Ordained to be said and heard in the common Congregation, not
only framed and fashioned to the true vein of Holy Scripture; but also set
forth according to the Commandment of the Lord, and S. Paul's Doctrine, for the
Peoples Edification in their Vulgar Tongue Bish. Ridlies Farewell, An. 1555. in
Fox, Acts and Monum. Vol. 2 page 1940.
. This was the Opinion of this great and glorious Martyr, concerning our
Common Prayer, before it was so refined as it has since been. And as to the
Liturgy, as it was Corrected by Queen Elizabeth, the incomparable Bishop Juell
in his never enough to be admired Apology, gives this Testimony of it; We have
come as near as ever we could, to the Church of the Apostles, and to that of
the old Catholic Bishops, and Fathers, while we know it was yet pure, and (as
Tertullian says) an incorrupt Virgin, not stained hitherto with any Idolatry,
or any grievous or notorious Error. And we have directed not only our Doctrine
but also our Sacraments, and our Form of public Prayers by their Rites and
Institutions Juelli Apolog. Lat. edit. Land. 1591. page 170.
. I need add no more Evidence in a matter so plain, for this will show to all,
whom Interest and wilful Prejudice does not blind, both that all Foreign
Churches, and Eminent Writers do approve of prescribed Forms, and that they as
well as our own Reformers, generally esteem our Liturgy, as a most excellent
Form of Service.

Wherefore, I will now conclude with a charitable and compassionate Address, to
those unhappy, but well meaning Dissenters, who are designedly imposed on by
their interested Teachers; I doubt not but many of them, sincerely desire to
worship God in the most acceptable way; and the reason why they separate from
our Worship, is because they have been industriously prejudiced against Forms,
as a Novel Corruption, a Popish Superstition, a Method of Praying contrary to
Scripture, and to the Judgment and Practice, as well of the Primitive and
Ancient, as of the Protestant and Modern Churches. But now, my Brethren, when
all this is proved to be nothing else but Falsehood and Malice, I hope you will
suffer your selves to be undeceived, and join with us in that way of Praying,
which was used by the Saints in the old Testament, enjoined by Christ in the
New, practiced by all those Holy Bishops and Devout Christians, who lived ever
since the first settling of the Church, and now allowed and observed in all
Regular Protestant Churches; And especially since we have a Liturgy so
generally approved by them all. You have heard their Judgments of it, and you
may see the Practice of these Foreign Protestants, who come hither from France
and Holland, Germany and Denmark; they all like our Worship, and as soon as
they understand our Language, join with us in it, There never (says Mons.
Bochart) was any of us in England, who did not freely come to your Divine
Service, as soon as they had learned your Tongue; none of us who did not
receive the Holy Sacrament from Presbyters ordained by Bishops, or if occasion
were, from Bishops themselves; which I my self profess, I often did with great
profit, while I studied Divinity at London and Oxford Samuel Bochart Ep. ad
Claris. Morleum. ap. Durel. p. 64.
. Foreign Protestants join with us, and wonder at you for separating from us;
And can you still be made to believe our Service is Popish, or that it is the
Protestant interest, either for us to cast off this our Protestant way of
Serving God; or you, by continuing in your Separation, to divide and weaken the
most famous and best established Protestant Church in the World? I do in the
Bowels of Jesus Christ beseech you to cast off your Roman-like implicit Faith,
in those who have so evidently deluded you, and to lay aside your prejudices,
which you may here see, are so ill grounded; For if once you discern your
Error, and can conquer your unfortunate Mistakes, I doubt not but all of you,
who have no other ends to serve but those of Piety, may come to our Churches,
and will find great comfort and benefit by our rational, pure and Primitive
Forms; and will soon see the Danger and Emptiness of that way of Praying, which
you have admired; Which will tend to your own Happiness, as well as to the
Peace and Establishment both of our Church and State. Consider what I say, and
the Lord give you understanding in all things, 2 Timothy II. 7. To the only wise
God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever,
Amen. Jude, ver. 25.

THE TABLE.
PART I.
An. D. Cent. Page Introduction, Of the Grounds for Liturgies in Scripture 1
Ancient Auhors and Councils. Philo Judaeus 60 I. 20 S. Clemens Roman. 90 21
Plinius Junior 93 22 S. Ignatius Antioc. 99 25 Lucianus Philos. 112 II. 29
Justinus Martyr 140 31 S. Irenaeus 179 39 Clemens Alexand. 192 40 Tertullianus
192 43 Hippolitus Martyr 220 III. 54 Origenes 230 55 S. Cyprianus 248 65
Gregorius Thaum. 253 72 Paulus Samosat. 269 4 Arnobius 303 IV. 78 Constantinus
Mag. 312 80 S. Athanasius 326 82 Flavianus Antioc. 348 86 S. Cyrillus Hierosol.
350 90 S. Jacobi Liturgia 95 Clementis Constit. 360 IV. 103 S. Hilarious Pictav.
eo. An. 114 Julianus Apostat. 361 115 Council. Laodicen. 365 117 Optatus
Milevit. 368 132 Epiphanius Cypr. 369 136 Gregorius Nazian 370 141 S. Basilius
Mag. eo. An. 148 ejus Liturgia 167 Pseudo-Dionys. Ar 371 174 S. Ambrosius 374
178 S. Hieronymus 378 189 S. Chrysostomus 397 196 ejus Liturgia 208 S.
Augustinus 398 225 Council. 3. Carthag. eo. An. 249 Council. African. 257

PART II.
An. D. Cent. Page Innocentius I. Papa 402 V. 4 Aurel. Prudent. 405 15 Isidorus
Peleusiota 412 17 Synesius Episc. eo An. 19 Celestinus I. Papa 423 22 Prosper
Aquitan. 430 27 Johan. Cassianus eod. A. 30 Council. Ephesians. Oec. 431 34 Petr.
Chrysologus 433 37 Socrates, Hist. Eccles. V. Sozomenus, Hist. Eccles. 440 41
Theodoretus Hist. Eccles. Council. Vineticun. 453 52 Vocomus and Musaeus 458 62
Sidonius Apollinaris 472 ibid. Petr. Cnapheus Haer. 483 66 Gelasius Papa 492 68
Caesarius Arelatens. 503 VI. 76 Concilia Agathens. 506 77 Concilia Aurelian. I.
507 81 Concilia Epaunens. 509 82 Concilia Gerundens. 517 ibid. Fulgentius
African. 518 84 Council. Valentinum 524 86 Council. Vasense 529 87 Benedictus
Monach. eo. An 90 Justinianus August. 530 93 Vigilius Papa 540 97 Council.
Nopsvestenum 550 103 Council. Bracarense I. 563 105 Council. Turonicum II. 570
109 Pelagius Papa 577 112 Leander Hispelens. 588 114 Gregorius Mag. Pap. 590
119 Leontius Byzantin. 594 136 Isidorus Hispalens. 603 VII. 139 Council.
Toletanum IV. 633 VII. 143 Council. Toletan. V. 636 etc. Council. Tolet. VI 638
158 Council. Tolet. VIII. 653 Council. Emeritanum 665 159 Council. Tolet. X. 675
ibid. Council. Constantin. in Trullo 680 ibid. Eccles. Brit. and Sax. VIII. 162
Ecclesia Gallicana 175 Eccles. Germanica 182 Agobardus Lugd. 831 IX. 188
Adrianus II Papa 868 193 Leuthericus Senon. 1004 XI. 195 Gregorius VII. Papa
1077 197 Paschalis II. Papa 198 Appendix. Chap. Of the Arguments urged against
the Antiquity of Liturgies, Chap. IV. 201 Of the Agreement of the Reformed
Churches in the Approbation and Use of Liturgies, Chap. V. 30^

FINIS.
A SCHOLASTICAL HISTORY OF THE Primitive and General Use OF LITURGIES IN The
Christian Church; Together with an ANSWER TO Mr. Dav. Clarkson's late Discourse
concerning LITURGIES.

By THO: COMBER, D.D. Precentor of YORK.

Publica est nobis and communis Oration. Cypr. de Orat. Dom. 5. page 310.
LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the
West End of S. Paul's, 1690.

To Their MAJESTY'S WILLIAM AND MARY, KING and QUEEN of England, etc.
May it please Your MAJESTY'S,
WHen Heaven had made Your Majesty's the happy Instruments of our late Wondrous
Deliverance, we did with great satisfaction behold Your Royal Cares were first
employed upon the securing our Established Religion, and the uniting all Your
Subjects in the Bonds of Peace: And since all Protestant Churches agree in the
use of Holy Forms, nothing can be more necessary to produce this Union among
us, than the removing all the Exceptions that have been taken against our
excellent Liturgy; which the pious Members of our Church admire, and by which
the Moderate Dissenters themselves do frequently worship God. But, I was
surpised to find some in this Juncture (when Your Majesty's had recommended
this to the Care of Your Clergy) not only decrying our Liturgy, but all
prescribed Forms of Divine Service, and thereby at once affronting all Reformed
Churches as well as ours, and rendering Your Majesty's gracious Designs of
uniting us impracticable: Wherefore the Justice and Necessity, which obliged me
to confute so false and so unseasonable a Charge upon our Primitive and
Established way of Worship must be my Apology, for presuming to beg your Royal
Patronage to these Papers, which modestly defend one of the Essentials of our
Constitution. And your Majesty's have given so many Eminent Demonstrations, of
your steady Resolutions to preserve this Church, that there is no room to doubt
of your Gracious Acceptance of these Endeavors, nor of our happiness under
your most Auspicious Reign; the Continuance whereof for the glory of God, and
the happiness of these Nations is unfeignedly desired, and daily prayed for in
the significant Words of our incomparable Liturgy, by

Your Majesty's most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Servant, THO: COMBER.

THE INTRODUCTION.
I Doubt not, but many who pass under the general Name of Dissenters, are so
sensible of the out Opposition of the Conforming ^lergy to the late
Encroachments ^ Popery, and the great Secu^ity which the Protestant Religion ^n
general receives from this Esta^^lished Church, that they would ^ake some steps
toward a happy ^eace and Union for our Common ^ood. But we cannot imagine that
^arty, who lately Published Mr. ^larkson's two Books, the one against ^^r
Episcopal Government, the other against our Liturgy, to have any inclination to
a Reconciliation. These are like those among whom Holy David Sojourned, who
were such Enemies to Peace, that when he spoke unto them thereof, they made
themselves ready to battle Psalm. cxx. ver. ult.
: For we had long since left off to Write against them, and were actually
treating of Accommodation with them; and while the Truce lasted, they not only
make hostile Preparations; but contrary to the Law of Nature an^ Nations, they
boldly commit Act^ of Violence, both against the Persons and Things, which of
all others are most dear to us Per inducias -- illiciti sunt omnes sunt actus
bellici, sive in personas, sive in res. Grot. de jur. Bell. and Pac. lib. 3.
cap. 21.. 6.
. I shall not question the Character o^ Learned and Judicious, which the Title
Page bestows upon the Deceased Author; because he wh^^ was so Learned to make
these Collections, was so Judicious to suppress them so long as he lived. But
though I know not the Publisher, I am sure he can make claim to neither of
those Characters: His want of Learning appears, in leaving diverse Quotations in
a wrong place, where they have no reference to the Text, and several References
in the Text to Passages in the Fathers, which because the Author did not, the
Editor could not cite; as also in such gross Mistakes both of the Names and
Tracts of the Ancients, as made it very difficult to guess at the intended
Quotations: And his want of Judgment appears in his being so hasty to publish
these indigested Collections at this unseasonable Juncture, that he took no
Time nor Care to fill up the imperfect Periods, nor cut off the nauseous
Repetitions, nor to clear the blundered Sentences of this Discourse, which
ought rather to be styled a Discourse against, than concerning Liturgies. Had
this been a time when their Way of Worship was not Tolerated, or when Ours was
imposed on them by Penalties, there had been some Excuse for this Attempt, to
prove Forms of Prayer Novel and Unlawful: Had we begun to provoke them by
exposing their Extempore Prayers (as we could easily do) that had been a fair
Apology for this daring Undertaking; but when all our Pens for some years past
have been employed against the late bold and dangerous Emissaries of the Roman
Church, (who were rather encouraged than opposed by some of these Gentlemen),
at This Season to become the Aggressors is ungrateful and inexcusable. Though
their Way be not established, but barely permitted, as Divorce was to the Jews,
and for the same Reason too Matt. xix. 8. Possum dicere quod permittitur, bonum
non est. Tert. ad uxor. lib. 1. page 163.
; yet we have not been willing to bend our Force against it, while there seemed
any hopes of a successful Treaty: But they without any sense of Honor, in
requital to our Civility, have not been content to vindicate their barely
permitted Novelties; but have attacked our Legal Way of Worship, while it is
guarded by Laws, and is the Public Religion of our National Church. It Is true,
if this great Searcher of Antiquity, had made any New Discoveries to clear the
practice of Extempore Praying, to have been the constant Usage of the Primitive
Church, the Editor had been pardonable for obliging this Age with so rare (and
as yet so unheard of) a Notion. But since this Author, who (to use his own
Words) seems to have been the best acquainted with the Fathers of any of his
Stamp, makes no discovery by that Diligence, which has ransacked all the
Corners of Antiquity for it Disc. concerning Liturgies, page 180, and 181.
; but a few forced Phrases, and Irregular, as well as Extraordinary Facts, to
justify their Prayers; but uses the meanest of Artifices to disparage Ours;
jealous, yea, judicious Men will be apt to conclude, That Conscience is not the
only motive to this party for Dissenting; nor Indulgence their only
Expectation, because they cannot take satisfaction in the Enjoyment of their
own Worship, unless they may disturb and expose Ours In this Case, the sober
Dissenters will certainly excuse us for thi^ necessary Self-defence: And ou^
Friends would justly censure us as the Betrayers of our Establishment, if the
vain hopes of gaining Men of such a Temper should make us silent under so heavy
a Charge: For this Discourse pretends to show, That Liturgies are a late and
Corrupt Way of Worship; and that Prescribed Forms were invented in the Ages of
Ignorance and Superstition, and have been supported ^y the Laziness of the
Clergy, and ^he Decay of true Devotion; but both Liturgies and all Forms hinder
the Pastors from exercising their Gifts, and the People from being edified by
the Divine Service. But all this is not proved by Arguments; a pompous show of
Antiquity, and a Margen filled with Quotations, is the Medium to make out this
severe Indictment. And possibly those of the Authors Principles, (who are
generally Strangers in the Fathers) may think he has mighty Evidence of his
side, while those who are skilled in the Primitive Writers, may easily discern
at first Reading, that his Instances are generally false, or impertinent, and
his Inferences forced and fallacious. This I have showed in the following
Papers particularly, and shall only now make a few general Observations, to
take off the Advantages which he seems to have by these numerous Allegations.

First, His Testimonies are not so many as they may appear to an hasty and
careless Reader, because He often repeats the same thing twice, yea, thrice
over in several parts of his Book. Thus the same places of S. Augustine are
transcribed often, as about correcting Prayers Disc. of Lit. page 48, and 113.
; about Barbarisms and Solecisms Ibid. p. 5. and page 142.
, about Praying in an House infested with Evil Spirits Ib. p. 66. and page 121.
: And He quotes one Passage in Celestine's Epistles thrice Ibid. p. 6. p. 29,
and 138
; in like manner he has dealt with the same places of Justin, Martyr, S.
Basil, Innocentius, and almost all other Fathers, who he thinks have any thing
which sounds to the discredit of Liturgy.

Secondly, His Testimonies are not so weighty as might be imagined at first
sight, because wherever his Margen is very full, it is always to prove
something which no Body will deny, and which is nothing to the purpose: As
about the Ancients delight to conceal their Mysteries Disc. of Lit. page 28,
29, 34, 35, 36, 42.
; about the Laying on of Hands in diverse Offices Ib. p. 51, and 52.
; about the Variety of Expressions in the Fathers, who only occasionally speak
of Baptism Ib. p. 95, etc.
, or of the Renunciation of the Devil Ib. p. 106, and 107.
. Now this arguaes a great scarcity of Testimonies concerning the Public and
Solemn manner of making Prayers in Christian Assemblies, which is the only
Point in question.

Thirdly, His Evidence is by no means clear and intelligible, and He seems to
design it should not serve to inform, but amuse; because he has jumbled all
Antiquity together, and thrown it into confused Heaps, placing the later
Fathers often before the former, and mixing the first, last, and middle Ages
together, without any order or coherence; yea, and citing the same Father in
little parcels in sundry and distant places of his Book: So that it is almost
impossible from him to learn the true Sense either of any Age or any Ancient
Writer, because those Matters which should help us to judge of this, are so
designedly scattered and dispersed.

Fourthly, His Quotations are not faithful, for he frequently disguises the
Evidence which he produces, both by false Translating diverse Passages, and
Citing them wrong: So in the Council of Carthage he reads, Quascunque for
Quicunque Disc. of Lit. page 44.
. And in that of Milevis, Cum prudentioribus collatae, for a prudentioribus
collectae Ib. p. 49.
; So he Translates (...) Cum his and caeteris hujusmodi gratiarum actionibus
Ib. p. 76.
; pretending they used a diversity in their Praises; whereas S. Chrysostom's
Words only import, That they did give Thanks for Variety of Blessings, for
these and all such like. And it is very remarkable, that he cites many Authors
imperfectly, drawing a Line thus -- and leaving out the most material Words, if
they seem to make against him. So when he perverts Nazianzen, as if he spoke of
Words in Extempore Prayer, he draws a Line before -- (...), and applies it
falsely to (...); but in Nazianzen there are three Substantives (The Throne, the
Altar, and the Holy Things) in that Sentence, which he twice leaves out Disc.
of Lit. page 60, and page 77.
, to which Substantives (...) plainly belongs; for it was not the Words, but
the Throne, the Altar, etc. which were present to him by the Holy Ghost. By the
same Trick he draws a Line in S. Cyprian after Quidam dicunt -- Ib. p. 98.
, to conceal the next Words, which show it was Heretics only which said this.
My Answer has variety of Instances of such like dealing, which a Man might
expect rather from the Disciples of Loyola, than from Persons that pretend to
Tenderness of Conscience.

Lastly, Whereas he often says, He has Answered all the Places of the
Ancients, which either others had alleged, or He in his diligent search of
Antiquity had met with, which seem to make for Liturgies Disc. of Lit. p. 179,
and alibi.
; I doubt not but to make it appear, that he has not only omitted, but
industriously concealed some Hundreds of Proofs for Liturgies, which I shall
produce in my Answer; and by comparing that clear Evidence with the slight
Testimonies which he produces to confute, it will appear to every Intelligent
Reader, that he resolved to keep all Testimonies of this kind out of sight,
except only those which he hoped he could either blunder or pervert to some
other Sense.

Having given this short, but just Character of his Book, I will say something
of my own; wherein I have taken Care, that this Illdealing should not transport
me into any Personal reflections, and am plainly content to show my Adversary is
either ignorantly or wilfully mistaken, without giving the Epithets that
properly belong to both kinds of Mistakes. Nor will I make it my chief business
to confute his Book; but to render my Discourse more useful than it could
possibly have been, if I had only followed him through his various Windings and
Turnings: I have Collected in every Century as many Testimonies, concerning
Liturgies, and their Antiquity, Original and Use, as my Time would permit, or
the Argument needs, though not all which might have been found; and I have
placed these in the exact Order of time, under the several Names of the
Fathers; and then reduced the scattered Pieces which he objects, under every
one of these Fathers as I go along, giving a distinct answer to them all that
are material; which I judge to be the fairest way, to find out the true Sense
of Antiquity in this Question. And by this distinct and regular proceeding, I
hope, not only to discover the Weakness of my Adversaries pretended Evidence,
but to give a clearer and fuller account, of the early beginning and general
use of Liturgick Forms, than has yet been done by any who have Writ upon this
Subject. And the use hereof may be First, to confirm the Devout Members of our
own Church, who are the greatest and most considerable part of the Nation, in
their just Veneration for those Holy Forms, by which they daily serve God, when
they find them so very agreeable to pure and genuin Antiquity; which the
Romanists have deserted, by new Additions to their Forms, consonant to their
Superstitious Innovations and Corruptions; and so have our High-flown
Separatists also, by new pretenses to a Gift of Prayer long since ceased, and
by Praying Extempore upon ordinary occasions in Public Assemblies; a Method
unknown to the Ancients, ever since there was a settled Christian Church. And
Secondly, I will not despair, but those moderate Dissenters, who honestly
desire to serve God in the best manner, and have been abused by False-Teachers
into an ill Opinion of Forms, may by perusing these Papers, lay aside their
Ill-grounded prejudices against Liturgies; when they clearly discern, that the
most Pious and Learned of the Primitive Martyrs and Fathers, in the best and
purest Ages of the Church, did always approve of and use prescribed Forms, in
their public Worship. So that they cannot reject Liturgies, as a corrupt,
carnal, cold and formal way of Praying, without condemming the Devotions of the
best and dearest Servants of God in all Ages, both of the Jewish and Christian
Church; Which is a censure as void of Truth and Modesty, as it is of Charity
and Humility. It is certain, Millions of Holy and Admirable Men, have Prayed
thus with wondrous Fervency, and God has heard such Prayers; and if they be
lawful in themselves, aceptable to Heaven, and sufficient to procure what we
Pray for; there can be no reason, why this Church should not enjoin them now,
as all other Modern regular Churches do, and the Primitive Church also did. I
grant such as have had a false Notion of them, cannot be expected to use them
so devoutly as others do; but if their Judgment were rectisied, those
prejudices would soon wear off, and a little Time, and Experience of the great
benefit of Holy Forms, would convince them, That a Pure and Prudent, Pious and
proper Liturgy, such as ours, is the most rational and Advantageous way of
Paying our public Service to Almighty God, and the greatest help to true
Devotion in the World.

I confess my first design was, to have gone through every Century that can be
called Ancient; but my time not permitting me as yet to transcrible all my
Observations in Vindication of the Antiquity of Liturgies, from the unjust
Cavils, of my Adversary, I have now published only the first Four Centuries,
till the rest be made ready; because if we find them within that compass, all
Men must own they are Truly Primitive: And it is not fit to delay a just
Censure of this Fallacious Treatise, Since that Party so extremely dote upon
it, as to think it unanswerable; For one of them, in his Book called, The
healing Attempt, (that is, a project to heal the Dissenters by the Wounds of
the established Church,) lately, talks at this vain rate concerning it, As to
what relates to stinted Forms of Prayer, the Judicious Mr. Clerkson in his
excellent Dicourse of Liturgies, having so Learnedly and fully discussed it, he
needs only commend its perusal to the Candid Reader, with an Assurance, That
until it be cleared that stinted Liturgies are Ancienter than that Learned
Person represents them to be, they shall be Freed from a strict Imposition.
Thus far he, Who has been so grossly mistaken in his Character of this
Discourse, that I know not how he can make satisfaction for being so Confident
in his Error, but by giving us another assurance, that, if we prove Liturgies
are much more Ancient than his Friend represents them to be, He and those, who
have been misled with him, will no longer disturb the peace of the Church and
Nation by opposing them, but will quietly submit to the strict imposition of
them, since it is no more, but to be obliged to Serve God in public, by the
most Primitive and Prudent way of Worship.

ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 13. Marg. read Philo, p. 34. l. 20. Marg. r. (...) p. 35. l. 28.
Marg. r. (...), p. 48. l. 9. r. of praying, (...) the Pagan way, p. 63. l. 3.
r. assign no, p. 85. l. 23. r. this cause p. 96. l. 3. r. Cardinal Bona, p.
101. l. 25. r. eldest Fathers, p. 109. l. 16. r. cannot be, p. 115. l. 22. stop
thus, -- parts, for the Heathen Worship, p. 123. l. 8. r. Liturgy is put for,
p. 139. l. 22. Marg. verbum praedicet, p. 154. l. 28. Marg. r. page 161. p.
156. l. 24. Marg. r. Coci censura, p. 176. l. 27, and 177. l. 16. r.
Constitutions, p. 190. l. 7. r. Public Service, p. 195. l. 3. stop thus, --
prov^^ before, there. p. 202. l. 19. r. is in the Manner, p. 207. l. 19. Marg.
r. de bapt. Servator, p. 211. l. 21. r. that the words, p. 212. l. ^. r. giving
us many, p. 228. l. 8. Marg. r. mundo, p. 243. l. 18. r. a Solecism, p. 251. l.
17. r. such Mistakes. With some other literal Errors, which the Judicious
Reader can easily correct

A Scholastical History OF THE PRIMITIVE ORIGINAL And general Use of LITURGIES
IN THE Christian Church.
The Introduction, concerning the Grounds for Liturgies in Holy Scripture.
. 1. THough LITURGIES have great reputation from their Ancient use in the
Church, and the principal design of this Tract be to prove that; yet since a
late Author is so bold to say, They pretend not to Scripture Discourse
concerning Liturgy, p. 1.
, I shall introduce my Discourse by showing, That Liturgies have a great
reputation also for the testimony which the Scripture bears to them, not only
as the Phrases and main parts of them are the words of Scripture; but because
the Holy Bible makes it appear, That the People of God from the beginning did
generally use Forms of Prayer and Praises in their public Worship. The Learned
Fagius thinks they are as old as the time of Enosh, when Men began publicly to
call upon the Name of the Lord Genesis iv. 26.
; but it is certain that the first piece of solemn Worship among the Israelites
recorded in Scripture, is a Form of Praise sung in parts by the Men and Women,
after their deliverance from the Egyptians Exodus xv. ver. 1. compared with ver.
21.
. Soon after, God himself prescribed a Form of Words, by which the Priest was
to bless the People Number 6.23.
, and Forms of Prayer for those who offered their First Fruits and Tithes Deuteronomy.
xxvi. ver. 5, and 13.
; yea, God prescribes a Form of Prayer for the Penitent Jews, and charges them,
to Take words with them, and turn to the Lord and say, Take away all Iniquity,
etc. and upon their using this Form He promises to heal their backslidings,
etc. Hos. xiv. 2, 3, 4.
. The Psalms of David were Forms of Prayer and Praise endited by the Spirit of
God, not only for his private use, but for the public service of the Temple 1 Chronicles. xvi. 7. 2 Chro. xxix. 30. and Chap. v. 13.
. And I could bring innumerable Proofs both out of Jewish and Christian Writers
(if it were needful) to show that the Jews did worship God by Set Forms, and
had a fixed Liturgy Josephus, Philo, P. Fagius, Scaliger, Buxtorf. Synag. Seld.
in Eutych.
; but I shall only refer to two Great Men: Doctor Hammond, who proves both that
they had Forms, and that their Forms were in the same Method with our
Common Prayer Dr. Hamm. View of Direct. p. 136. Oxford. Papers, p. 260. Vol. 1.
: And Dr. Lightfoot, who not only asserts they had stated Forms Dr. Lightfoot,
Vol. 2. p. 158. p. 1139.
, but sets down the order both of their Hymns and Supplications, gives us the
Words which they used Idem Vol. l. p. 922, 942, and 946.
, and learnedly demonstrates, that these Forms continued even to our Saviors
time, and long after Ibid. p. 157 and Exp: on Muti^ vi, 9.
* Now from this short, but full Evidence, we thus argue: If the Jews, who were
Gods only People, and the best among them, even such as were inspired, and in
the purest times of that Church, did worship God acceptably by Set Forms of
Prayer in their public Devotions, then a Liturgy is no argument of a corrupted
Church, no hindrance to servency, no way displeasing to God, nor unfit for
public Assemblies, as our Adversary pretends: But neither he nor his Friends
are able to produce one instance where either God disliked Forms, or good Men
complained of them, under the legal Dispensation. Therefore I may conclude,
That Liturgies are very agreeable to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and
may be justified from many places thereof.

. 2. To this it may be objected, That though this Method of Praying was
agreeable to the old Law, it is not suitable to Gospel Times. To which I reply:
First, That this yields the Cause as to the Jewish Church, and is a clear
acknowledgment, that the Faithful did then Worship God by Forms. But, Secondly,
Since the Duties of Prayer and Praise are grounded on the same Reason now that
they were then, and neither are, nor were intended to be abrogated; they who
say this, must assign some satisfactory Reason, why these Duties may not be
performed now in the same manner that they were performed then, otherwise it is
not probable that a Form, as such, is unsuitable to the Gospel way of Worship,
especially since Christ and his Apostles, who duly frequented the
Temple-Worship (where these Men grant Forms were used) did never show any
dislike of that way of Worshipping, and though they taxed their other
Corruptions very freely, they joined in these Forms, and never reproved the
Jews for using them. Thirdly, This way of serving God having been so anciently
and universally used, if Jesus had designed to alter it and set up the new
Extempore Way, there ought to have been an express abrogation of the Old Way,
and a positive institution of the New one, left upon Record, either in the
Gospels or Epistles: But it is so far from that, that we can prove our Lord and
his Apostles, allowed, made and used Forms of Prayer; For according to the
custom of the great Rabbis of that Age Jesus taught his Disciples a divine
Form of Prayer, to be added to their other Forms, as the peculiar mark of their
being his Scholars Dr Lightf. Vol. 2. p. 158.
. And it is observed by learned Men, that Christ took every sentence of this
Form out of the Jewish Prayers then in use Idem Exp. in Math. vi. 9. and Grotii
Com. in locum.
. So far (says Grotius) was the Lord of the Church from all affectation of
unnecessary Innovation. And we may note, that when they desired he would teach
them to pray, that was a proper occasion to have reformed the old method of
praying by Forms, if Christ had intended such a thing; but instead of any such
intimation, he gives them a new Form, and copies the several Petitions out of
the Jewish Liturgy, showing thereby his approbation of praying to God in a
prescribed Form. Which is also manifest from our Lords Hymn, which he and his
Apostles sang together after his last Supper (...), Math. xxvi. 30.
; and if this were not the Paschal Hymn, as the best Authors think Du-Plessis,
of the Mass, lib. I. chap. I. page 4.
, yet it could not be an Extempore Psalm (as Grotius fancies,) because the
Apostles sang with him, and so must know the words of it before Vid. Bez. not.
in Matthew. xxvi. 30.
. Again, His Prayer in the Garden (which was offered up (as S. Paul notes Hebr.
v. 7.
) with extraordinary Devotion) was a Form, because he thrice repeated the very
same Words Math. xxvi. 44.
; and by the way this shows the folly of those who pretend None can pray
devoutly, unless they vary the phrase every time they pray. To proceed, It is
very probable that our Savior used a Form of Prayer on the Cross, extracted
out of the XXIIth Psalm, which begins, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me Math. xxvii. 46.
? yet he had the same Spirit in the highest Manner, by which those Psalms were
indicted, and therefore of pure choice used Forms even on extraordinary
occasions. The Apostles observed the Jewish hours of Prayer, and worshipped God
with them both in their Temple and their Synagogues, but there is no account
that they set up a New way of Praying, or disliked the old; and S. Augustine
affirms, that they used the Lords Prayer even after they had received the
Spirit of God, and repeated that Form every day, even when they were in their
greatest state of perfection A^g. Hilar. Ep. 89. p. 82. G.
. And Beza (whose Authority will sway much with our Adversaries) tells us, That
S. Paul promised to come and settle Forms of Prayer at Corinth in the Church
which he had planted there; for when he expounds those words, The rest will I
set in order when I come, he says, That is, to settle those things which
pertained to order, as Place, Time, and FORMS OF PRAYER Beza, not. minor. in 1
Cor. xi. 34.
. I only note, he had this Exposition out of S. Augustine Aug. Januar. Ep. 118.
p. 116. c.
, who says, S. Paul intimates, It was too long for an Epistle, to set down
that whole order of Celebration, which the Universal Church observes, so that
he would leave that to be settled till he came. And hence the Dutch Divines, who
writ to the Assembly at London in the Civil Wars, say, They dare not condemn
all those godly Churches, who from the Apostolical and Primitive times,
celebrated Gods public Worship by prescribed and certain Forms Class. Walach.
ap. Falkn. libert. Eccles. page 111.
. So that they also thought Forms were settled in some Churches even from the
Apostles times, which I could prove by many other Authorities, but these may
suffice.

. 3. There are some Objections against these Proofs from the New Testament
dispersed up and down the discourse of Liturgies and other Writings of that
party, which I will here consider before I proceed.

First, Our Adversary brings many Quotations to prove, that the Ancients did
not believe the Lords Prayer was intended for a Form, but for a direction what
things they should pray for Discourse of Lit. p. 3, and 4.
: But all that heap of Authors which he cites, affirm no more than that it was
not only to be a Form, but also a direction. Which we freely grant; for if it
were intended at all to be used as a Form; then Forms are agreeable to the
Gospel way of Worship, and the using it as a Form, does not hinder it from
being a direction to draw up other Forms by; for all Authentic Liturgies (and
ours especially) are grounded on and drawn up by the Lord's Prayer; The
Collects for Grace being grounded on the three first Petitions; The Prayers for
all Earthly Blessings are grounded upon the Request for our daily Bread; The
Confessions and Litanies for pardon and deliverance from Sin, and all other
kinds of evil, upon the three last Petitions; and, The Thanksgivings, Hymns and
Praises upon the Doxology. So that I cannot but wonder at this Authors
impertinent filling a whole Page with Quotations, to prove it lawful to use
other Words in Prayer, while he is disputing against us who allow and use
Liturgies which are other Words, but such as are agreeable to it, both as to
the Form and Matter of them: His business was to prove the Lord's Prayer was
never intended by Christ, nor used by the Church as a Form: But almost every
one of his Authors grant it was a Form even in the places he produces. Saint
Augustine and Saint Chrysostom do so in him and in an hundred places more (as I
shall show when I come to them in Order.) Calvin in his Quotation calls it, A
Form dictated by Christ; and elsewhere says, That holy Men daily repeat it by
Christ's Command Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1. 23.
. Maldonat only tells us, We are not always bound to use these very Words.
Grotius owns, it may profitably be repeated in those very Words. Causabon (in
the place cited) is not speaking of the Lord's Prayer Causab. exercit. 14. number.
14. p. 235.
: And it was hardily done to cite Mr. Mede for his Opinion, who in the place
which he cites does not only prove the Lord's Prayer was a Form, but also that
the use of Forms under the Gospel is lawful and profitable Mede, Diatrib. 1. on
Math. vi. 9.
. Jansenius does not dislike the use of the Words of our Lord's Prayer as a
Form; but the minding only the Words, and not the Sense, he justly reproves. I
shall add, That his Friend Du-Plessis says, The Lord's Prayer was commended to
the Apostles for their ordinary Prayer Du-Plessis of the Mass, Book I. chap. 1.
page 9.
). I have been more particular in clearing this point, that I may show the
Reader, to how little purpose this Author usually fills his Margen; and may now
conclude, That Christ did intend this Prayer for a Form, and so it was used by
the Church in all Ages.

Secondly, We are often told of a Gift of Prayer which was in the Apostolic
Church, and this Gift enabling Persons (as they suppose) to express their wants
in Extempore Phrases, made Forms (in that Age, however) useless. I Answer, That
this Gift is not expressly mentioned in Scripture, nor in any ancient Author but
S. Chrysostom, and he holds it was a Miraculous Gift, peculiar to the Pastors
of the Church, and says, it was ceased long before his time; so that in S.
Chrysostom's Opinion, our Dissenters Extempore Prayers cannot proceed from this
Gift; and it is plain, they pervert all the places of Scripture which they
produce, to prove their claim to this Gift of Prayer. Christ indeed says, When
the Apostles (Martyrs or Confessors) were brought before their Enemies and
Persecutors, They need take no thought, how or what they should speak; for it
should be given them in that hour what they should speak Math. x. 19.
: But, What is this (says a Learned Father) to speaking before our Friends,
where premeditation is enjoined Isidor. Peleus. lib. 4. ep. 218.
? or what reason is there to apply this to the Prayers we make to God, to whom
we must not say any thing which we have not well considered on before we speak
it Eccles. v. 1, 2.
? Secondly, They allege that place of S. Paul, Romans VIII. 26. The Spirit also
helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray for as we ought, etc But
this place cannot be meant of the infirmity of wanting Words, because it is
here said, The Spirit makes intercession for us with groans which cannot be
uttered: and the Context shows, that S. Paul is speaking of the infirmity of
Impatience under present Afflictions, and praying for immediate deliverance,
even when it is not pleasing to God, nor profitable for us: Now this Infirmity
the Spirit helps, and teaches us to bear them patiently, and submit to Gods
Will, yea, to pray his Will may be done; yet in the mean time the Spirit pleads
with God to deliver us, and that with inexpressible ardency: So that this place
is no ground for any to expect the extraordinary assistance of the Spirit, to
teach them new Words and Phrases in ordinary Cases, and for their daily
Prayers. Thirdly, They tell us, S. Paul speaks of praying with the Spirit, and
praying with understanding 1 Cor. xiv. 15.
. I Answer, He is discoursing of praying in an unknown Tongue, which since none
of our Adversaries can do now, this place is nothing to their purpose; and I
much question, whether they who pray Extempore, can be said to pray with
understanding as to their own particulars, because they neither know before
what they are to say, nor can remember afterward what they have said: However,
the strict Meaning of this place is no More, but that if a Man, who had the
Gift of Tongues, prayed in a Congregation which understood not the Language he
prayed in, he must Make the People understand the meaning of his Prayer, or be
silent; but whether his Prayer were a Form or Extempore, is not said in this
place, which refers to the Gift of Tongues, and not to the Gift of Prayer. But
our Adversary has a peculiar Notion of this Gift of Prayer, viz. That it was
an ordinary Gift, common to all Christians, and continuing to this day; which
he proves, because all to whom the Apostles writ are exhorted to Pray in the
Spirit Ephesians. vi. 18.
, and to pray in the Holy Ghost Jude ver. 20.
; by which he understands, that they were all able to conceive their own
Prayers, and therefore he thinks, if they made use of Prayers formed by others,
they did not exercise their own Gift, nor pray as they were able Discourse of
Liturg. p. 128, 129.
. To which I Reply, That the absurd consequences of this Exposition ought to
make our Author ashamed of it, since it would follow from hence, That no Man in
their public Assemblies (except the Minister) did Pray in the Spirit, because
the Minister alone conceives the Prayer; and though it be Extempore to him, yet
it is a Form to the whole Congregation, who must pray in his Words, and not
exercise their own Gift of Praying by the Spirit in his Sense, which is to
invent the Words by the Spirit: Rejecting therefore this absurd Exposition,
that leads to so ridiculous a Conclusion, we shall note, That praying with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, Ephesians. vi. 18. signifies no more than
praying fervently and heartily; as loving in the Spirit Coloss. I. ver. 8.
, is put for loving fervently, and ex animo, from the Heart. Thus Grotius
expounds it, Praying not only with the Voice, but from the Heart Grot. Com. in
Ephesians. vi. 18.
. And thus, Praying in the Holy Ghost (Jude ver. 20.) implies, Praying with
that devotion and fervency which we are moved to by the Holy Spirit; but then
this is no extraordinary Gift, this is no more than what both Then and Now
every good Man, by the ordinary assistance of the Spirit, might and may do,
even by a Form; for he that repeats that so as to attend the Sense, and
heartily desires every Petition may be granted, he prays by the Spirit, or in
the Spirit, as these Scriptures exhort; and thus the People as well as the
Priest (in public or private) may and ought to pray in the Spirit. Which shows
that these places rightly expounded, are nothing at all to our Dissenters
pretended gift of Inventing new Words every time they Pray. We will grant there
was such a Gift in the Apostles times; But we judge St. Chrysostom knew much
better than they, what it was, and he thinks it was as Miraculous as the gift
of Tongues, with which St. Paul joins it: He says it was given only to one,
and affirms it was ceased long before his time; and seems to imply that the
Forms which were made in his Days, had their Original from the Prayers, which
were made at first by these inspired Men; Whose Prayers thus conceived were
written down, and so preserved and used when the Gift it self failed. And when
we consider the agreeableness of all Ancient Liturgies in the Method, and even
in many of the Phrases and Forms, and their near Resemblance to each other, we
may Rationally believe they were all derived at first, from that One Spirit,
which directed all Inspired Men in their new planted Churches, to ask fit and
proper things almost in the very same Words. And thus the Gift of Prayer was so
far from making Liturgies to be useless, that it really was the first ground
and Original of them, being Forms first endited by the Spiritual and Inspired
Men in the Apostolical Age, and Transmitted down to us by their Successors; For
which reason we ought to Reverence Ancient and Primitive Forms (many of which
(as will be proved) are yet in our Liturgy) far before those Extempore Prayers,
made by a pretended Gift, which has been ceased above 1300 years. And if we
compare the proper Phrases, acurate Method, and judicious well-weighed
Composure of our Forms, with the impertinence, Tautologies, Hesitation and
Confusion so visible in their Extempore Prayers, we shall be convinced that the
latter cannot proceed from the Spirit of God; nor ought to come in Competition,
with our excellent Forms. And this may suffice for the Scripture Period, which
gives great Reputation to Liturgies, and no Countenance to such as now pretend
to Extempore Prayers.

CHAP. I. Of Liturgies in the first Century.
1. This first Period is very obscure, because the Bishops and Pastors being
almost wholly employed in converting the Nations, did write very little; and
scarce any thing of that which they did write is come to our Hands: So that we
cannot expect much evidene for Liturgies in this Century, wherein however, this
Author could find nothing that made against them, and so has past it over in
silence; but we shall observe,

^^^lo judaens, Ann. Dom. 60.
First, That Philo and Josephus do both so describe the Essenes, that not only
Eusebius of Old, but diverse learned Men of these Ages, believe them to have
been Christians; or however that the first Christians exactly imitated their
Rites Philo de vit. Contemplat. Joseph. bell. jud. lib. 2. cap. ^. Eusebius. hist.
lib. 2. cap. 16.
: Among which was this, to rise before the arising of the Sun, and to Worship
God by certain Prayers received from their Forefathers, as Josephus tells us.
Now these Prayers could be no other than Forms, because they were delivered
down to them from their Fathers. Philo also relates that they had a Choir of
two sides, singing alternately, so that when one had begun to Sing, the rest
answered him, by repeating the ends of the Verses, in imitation of those at the
Red Sea: Now this way of alternate Singing, must be by some prescribed and
known Forms, or else the Choir could never answer one another: Yet these kind
of Prescribed Hymns, sung in this manner, Eusebius here calls, The Hymns used
among us Christians (...). Eusebius.
: And that excellent Historian labors to prove these Essenes were Christians,
by this Argument, among some others, because they Prayed and Sung Hymns, in set
Forms, early in the Morning as the Christians use to do: Wherefore Eusebius who
knew the first Age better than we, did believe this at least, that the
Christians then had Forms of Prayer and Praise, which are the main parts of a
Liturgy.

Secondly, Clemens Romanus Clemens Romanus, An. Dom. 90.
in his Genuine Epistle to the Corinthians, (for we need not cite any spurious
Tracts) intimates they then had a Liturgy, for he says, We ought to do all
those things in order, which our Lord has Commanded us to perform, viz. To
Celebrate our Oblations and Liturgies at certain times; -- and a little after
-- Let every one of you in his Order offer his Eucharist to God, keeping a good
Conscience with all Gravity, and not Swerving from the Determined Rule of his
Ministration; (...). Epist. ad Corinth. edit. Oxon. 1669. page 92.
which Golden Remain of true primitive Antiquity shows, that the public Service
was then performed in order by our Lords own Command; and that there was a
determined Rule for the Administrations, from which no Man might swerve: which
Rule being mentioned by this Writer, who was a Companion to the Apostles, could
be settled by none but by our Lord himself, or at least by the Apostles. And if
our Adversaries say, this was only a Method, not a prescribed Liturgy: I r^ply,
they cannot prove this; and yet if they could, supposing they needed an order,
even while the Gifts of Prayer and Inspiration remained, when these are ceased,
the Church may well be supposed to stand in as much need of prescribed Forms
now, as they did of a determined Order then.

P^^n^^ ^ua^^r, An. Dom. ^3.
2. Soon after this, we have an account of the Christian Worship, from the Pen
of Pliny, who Writ to the Emperor Trajan, what he had extorted by Methods of
Severity, from some of that profession, viz. That the Christians used to meet
on a certain day, before it was Light, and alternately sang an Hymn to Christ
as God; b^^ding themselves by a Sacrament, (not to any wicked thing, but) that
they would not Steal, nor Rob, nor commit Adultery, nor break their Faith, nor
withold the Pledge; Carmenque Christo, quasi Deo dicere secum in vicem, Plin.
lib. 10. ep.
Now if we remember Pliny was a Roman and a Heathen, we must suppose him to
speak in their Phrases, and among them Carmen dicere, was to repeat a Prayer in
a set form of Words: Vossius says it was called [Carmen] though it were not
Sung; for the Romans called every thing [Carmen,] which was in a set form of
Words. Vossius comment. in dictam Epist. Plin. page 47.
Brissonius also informs us, That they Prayed to the Gods [Solenni Carmine]
with a set Form of Words, Brisson. de formul. p. 97.
and that the Prayer for the Comitia was called Solenne Carmen, The solemn
Prayer, though it were not composed by any Poetic measures: Id. ibid. page 137.
And Livy speaks of the Solemn Form of Prayer in the same Phrase. Solenne
Carmen precationis, Live. lib. 39. cap. 15.
Wherefore since Pliny uses the Word Dicere, and not Canere, he may well be
thought to have meant, They said a Prayer to Christ as God, in a set Form of
Words. Yet because Tertullian, when he cites this passage, Paraphrases it, by
Singing to Christ and to God. Ad canendum Chr sto and Deo. Tertul. Ap. cap. 2.
We will allow it to be Expounded of an Hymn: but even so, since it was sung
alternately, it is certain it must be a prescribed Form; and since Christians
were to Sing, as well as to Pray by the Spirit, we may be sure Forms are no
hindrance to the Spirit; because if they were, it would be as unlawful to Sing,
as (they pretend it is) to Pray by a Form. We also add, that this account
exactly agrees with that of the Essenes, both in their beginning before
Sunrising, and their Singing by Turns: Wherefore since those Essenes had Forms
of Prayer as well as praise, we must conclude the Christians had so also: And
we must either suppose, that Pliny gave a very imperfect account of the
Christian worship, and absurdly imagine, that Christians only sang praises
without any Prayers in their Assemblies: Or we must grant he speaks of Hymns by
a Synechdoche, putting them for the whole Christian Service; of which the Hymns
were the greater and more Eminent part, and so mingled with the Prayers, that
the one could not be separated from the other: For the Christians imitated Paul
and Silas, who Praying, sang Hymns to God in the Prison (...) Act. xvi. 25.
. They therefore mixed Hymns and Prayers, and the Hymns were so great a part of
the Service, that to be present at the Morning Hymns Synod. Vinet. can. 14. An.
453.
signifies, to be at the Morning Prayer; And to be forbid to Sing in the
Church, (...). Isidor. Peleus. lib. 1. ep. 90.
imports Excommunication from the whole Service: Wherefore if the Hymns were
certainly in Forms prescribed, it is more than probable, the Prayers were so
also; because it would have been very odd and preposterous to break off from
Forms of praise, and run out into Extempore Prayers, in the ordinary Public
Worship; one part of which at this rate, must have had no kind of Congruity to
the other. Wherefore this Testimony proves that the greatest part of the
Christians public Service, was performed by prescribed Forms in the first
Century, and shows it is very probable, that their Prayers also were set Forms,
even in that early Age.

. 3. We have no Writer remaining in this Century but Ignatius, Ignatius
Antioch. An. Dom. 99.
who lived also in some part of the next: And from him it seems very probable,
that the Bishop did appoint one Form of Prayer and Supplication for the public
Worship, especially for the Administration of the Sacraments; for he charges
all those to whom he Writes, to do nothing without the Bishop; and orders them
of Magnesia, to do nothing without the Bishop and the Presbyters, nor to make
trial of things which seemed agreeable to their private Fancies; but when they
met together he tells them, they must have one Prayer and one Supplication: --
(...) ep. ad Magnes. p. 34.
declaring to those at Smirna, that the only Authentic Celebration of the
Eucharist and of Baptism, was that which the Bishop either performed or
allowed. Ignat. Epist. ad Smirn. page 6.
Now if their Prayers were varied every day, they could not properly be called
one Prayer; And if every private Minister, might order the Form of Baptism and
the Lords Supper as he pleased, (as our Extempore Men take on them to do;) how
could Ignatius say none was Authentic unless the Bishop allowed it? Therefore
it is likely, they then had approved and uniform composures, both for Prayers
and Sacraments. And as for their Praises, Socrates says, Ignatius first
brought the usage of Singing by way of Antiphone, into the Church of Antioch;
Socrat. histor. lib. 6. cap. 8.
and the same is attested by Photius. In Dr. Ham. view of the Directory, page
145.
Now if we consider, that this was the Method of Singing Hymns among the Jews
and Essenes; and also among the Christians in this Age in other places, it can
be no ways improbable, that Ignatius did set up this custom of Singing
alternately at Antioch. I know, some take exceptions at the Vision of Angels,
from whom he is said to learn this Method: but let it be Noted, that this was
an Age of Miracles, and that the Holy Scripture, represents the glorious
Seraphins Singing in this Alternate manner. Isai. vi. 3.
So that it is not unlikely, that so great a Saint and Martyr might have such a
Vision; and Theodorets silence of this, (which is all this Author pretends
against it, Disc. of Liturg. p. 167.
) may proceed from his taking it for granted, and supposing it was generally
owned and known. So that this will prove, Forms of Prayer approved by the
Bishop, and Alternate Singing, which must be in prescribed Forms, was used in
this Age: Wherein it seems there were Psalms and Hymns, written and composed by
the Faithful, to glorify Christ, the Word of God. As that Primitive Author
(cited by Eusebius) testifies, who Writ against the Heresy of Artemon; and
among other Mediums, confutes it, by citing these very Hymns, which had been
made almost from the beginning of Christianity, and were of so great Authority,
that in the Reign of Pertinax, Circ. An. 193.
they were quoted as good Evidence in a matter of Faith Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5.
cap. 28. page 145.
. Now an Extempore Hymn, could not be cited, nor be produced as a Testimony;
and therefore we conclude, there were Written Hymns, or Forms of Praise
composed and allowed as Evidence in points of Faith, from the very beginning of
Christianity. And therefore we have reason, to suppose there was a Liturgy and
Forms of Prayer also; and this may be sufficient for this dark Century.

CHAP. II. Of Liturgies in the Second Century.
1. WE have not many Writings of this Age, and none that had occasion to write
particularly of the Church Service; which they cared not to publish, lest the
Pagans, under whom they lived, should deride or blaspheme their sacred
Mysteries; and for this reason, we must not look for any clear Evidence of
Liturgies as yet; though considering the Gospel was in planting, and Churches
were but begun to be settled, there is as plain indication of the use of Forms
as can be expected.

First, Lucian the Jeering Pagan, Lucian. An. Dom. 112.
(who certainly had some knowledge of the Christian Rites,) describes his
coming into a Religious Assembly, which by all the Circumstances must be a
Christian Church; and he says, he there heard That Prayer which began with the
Father, and ended with the Hymn of many Names. (...). Lucian Philopat. p. 1128.
Where we see the Christians had a certain Prayer known by its beginning, which
therefore must be an usual Form: We may also perceive there was an Hymn at the
end of this Prayer, commonly called the Hymn of many Names: which therefore
probably was a Form also, or else this was no proper or certain description of
it. I need not determine whether he means this of the Lords Prayer, and the
Doxology only; though it is not likely so short a Form of Praise, (in which are
only the Attributes, not the Names of God,) should be called the Hymn of Many
Names. I rather think it might be meant of the Communion Office, which probably
began with Our Father, etc. and after some other less remarkable Prayers, they
added the Tricagion, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts: But whatever the
particular Forms were, this is certain, they were Forms of Prayer and Praise,
known by their proper Titles, and that suffices to prove That Forms were then
used in the Christian Worship.

2. Justin Martyr does often speak of the Christian Assemblies, Justin Matyr
An. Dom. 140.
and of the several Duties there performed, Prayers and Hymns, Baptism and the
Holy Eucharist; but gives no account in what Words they celebrated these
Offices; for when he mentions. Baptism, he only says, They are taught to Fast
and Pray, and ask of God the forgiveness of their former Sins. And being
brought where Water is, they are Regenerated in the same manner, as we were
Regenerated, Just. M. Apol. 2. p. 93.
which shows, that even in his time, they began to conceal the particular
manner of Celebrating these Mysteries. So that we cannot expect much light from
him, as to the Christian Forms: Yet we must remember he lived in Palestina, and
conversed much with the Jews, who then used Forms of Prayer and Praise, for
which he never reproves them, nor does he speak of any difference between the
Jewish and Christian Worship, in this particular. But he has some general
expressions, which incline me to believe they had Forms in his time. I shall
not insist upon his saying, they prayed for the Conversion of the Jews, and the
deliverance of the Gentiles from their Errors, and for all Men Just. M. dialog.
cum Tryph. p. 363. and p. 335.
; Though these are pieces of ancient Litany: But I will observe that when he
speaks, of the bringing the Newly-baptized Person to the place where the
Faithful worshipped God, he says, They there made Common Prayers for
themselves, for the Person Baptized, and for all other Men every where, with
great fervency. (...) Apoli. 2. p. 97.
Now Common Prayers do signify Forms that are known to all, and in which all
may join; and therefore S. Cyprian speaking of the Lords Prayer, which was that
Form, which all the Christians used and repeated together, calls it, a public
and Common Prayer Publica est nobis, and Communis Oration. Cypr. de Or. Dom.
; and to such Forms which all locally joined in, Ignatius (before cited)
refers, when he speaks of One Prayer and one Supplication. But our Adversary,
who will not allow this plain and natural exposition of Justin's Common Prayer,
stretches another ambiguous Phrase of his most extremely, to make it signify
Extempore Prayer, viz. ((...)) The first place, he cites for this is in the
next Page; The President offers up Prayers, and in like manner Thanksgivings as
well as he is able (...) Apol. 2. p. 98.
; this, he gives us twice over Disc. of Liturg. p. 68. and p. 115.
, and most extremely glories, in it, spending ten Pages in Quotations, (most of
which are nothing to the purpose) to strain it to his Sense of inventing Words
as the Spirit enabled them, or Praying Extempore. To all which I answer, First,
That if this were the Sense, it will not follow that because the ^ishops in
Justin Martyrs time, were inspired to make Extempore Prayers, therefore every
private Minister in this Age, when Inspiration and that Gift of Prayer is
ceased, has the same ability now. Secondly, It seems he is hard put to it for
proofs, when he is forced to lay so great stress on a single ambiguous Phrase,
which may be otherwise interpreted, since this Phrase can be no solid proof,
unless his were the only Sense of it. But, Thirdly, I shall make it out, that
it does signify otherwise in this place. For (...) here, answers to (...) in
the place before cited; That declares the Prayers at Baptism were made
Fervently, or with all their might (...) apud Hesych. (...).
. And this shows that the Prayers at the Eucharist were made (as Du-plessis
Translates it) by the President, with all the power and might that was in him.
And thus in Scripture the same Phrase is used by the LXX. (which version,
Justin both uses and imitates,) for doing a thing with all our might (...)
Eccles. 9.10.
. For Solomon advises us, to do what we are about with all Application of Mind;
and when the Phrase is applied to Prayer, it must signify to Pray as Fervently
and devoutly as we are able: And doubtless when we desire the several things
Prayed for in a Form with all the Earnestness and Vigor we can, we may
properly be said to pray (...), as well as we are able, or to the utmost of our
power: As in Plautus, Orare opere maximo, signifies to entreat or beg a thing
with extraordinary importunity Nunc te hoc orare jussit opere maximo. Plaut.
Mostel. iii. 2. Maximo te orabat opere. Eunuch. iii. 3.
. So that the power here spoken of, refers to the affections, and not to the
Phrases or expressions of him that prays; And therefore it has no relation to
Extempore Praying: Yea, if we review the place of Justin Martyr again, we shall
see, that this Phrase does not follow ((...)) Prayers, but ((...))
Thanksgivings; So that it does chiefly, if not only, relate to the Hymns used
in the Eucharist, which the Bishop offered up with all his might, that is, with
all Fervency. Now these Hymns, as we have proved before, were known Forms, and
yet Justin Martyr says, they were offered up (...). Wherefore this Phrase
cannot be expounded here, that they made the Hymns Extempore. And our Adversary
is forced to false point and miserably wrest a parallel place in this Author,
to make it seem to belong only to Extempore Prayer Disc. of Liturg. p. 114.
115. he leaves out the stop between (...) and (...) vid. loc.
; whereas there, this Phrase is very evidently joined to the Word Praising,
with the Words of Prayer and Thanksgiving in all our oblations, praising him
((...)) as well as we are able (...) Just. M. Apol. 2. p. 60.
. And withal it must be noted, that in this latter place, the Phrase is not,
(as he pretends) applied to the Minister, but to all the Christian People, who
no doubt joined in the Hymns in public, with all possible Fervency and
Devotion; (and that was (...),) yet did not make those Hymns Extempore. I
suppose when the Son of Syrach said to the Jews, when you glorify the Lord,
exalt him as much as you can -- and when you exalt him, put forth all your
strength -- (...)
, (where the Greek Phrase is almost the same,) no man will be so absurd to
imagine, -- (...). Ecclus. Cap. xliii. Ver. 30.
he bid them every one make Extempore Hymns; For he plainly means, They should
recite the Forms (used in their Nation,) with all imaginable Vigor and
Devotion. And thus Origin (cited by him) applies the like Phrases; For he
says, all Christians in their own Tongues prayed to God, and praised him as
well as they were able (...) Orig. in Cells. l. 8. p. 402.
. And again speaking of all Christians, he says, they Worshipped God and his
only Son -- according to their ability with Prayers and Praises (...) Ibid.
page 386.
: Not that every private Christian invented his Prayers and Praises Extempore,
but used the Forms made for them (in public, especially) with Vigorous
affections, and Fervent Devotion; And if these places of Origin, do at all
belong to Christians public Worship, (as they must do, if they be to the
purpose in this dispute;) then we may be sure, private Christians were not
allowed to make their own Prayers and Praises Extempore there; that would have
bred such confusion, as St. Paul forbids expressly 1 Cor. xiv. 26.
; and yet Origin assures us, they offered them up (...), therefore that Phrase
must not be restrained to Extempore Prayer. No nor ((...)) which he cites out
of Nazianzen, where also all Christians are exhorted As well as they were able
to Sing that Triumphant Hymn, (upon Julians being cut off,) which Israel Sang
when the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea (...), etc. Naz. Orat. 3 page 54.
. For Nazianzen there sets down the very Words, which he would have them all
Sing, being indeed that same Hymn which is Recorded, Exodus xv. only adapted and
fitted for this Occasion: Now if this Form was to be Sung ((...)) as well as
they were able; then the Phrase means no more here, but as Devoutly as they
could, and cannot be applied to Extempore inventions, to which he would gladly
restrain it. I grant when this Phrase is applied to another subject matter,
such as writing Books, or Preaching, it sometimes signifies doing these things,
as their Fancy and parts enable them; but all his Quotations of this kind are
nothing to this dispute, where we are only to consider the Phrase, as it is
applied to praying and praising God. So pro viribus in S. Augustine, signifies
the strength of Devotion, not the strength of Fancy.
And there we have showed it never signifies doing these Extempore, but doing
them very Devoutly; wherefore (that we may not tire the Reader (as he does,)
with numberless Quotations, which are not to the point,) we conclude that the
Bishop in Justin Martyr, did pray as earnestly as he was able, but not
Extempore. I have been the larger in refuting this Exposition because it is his
main Argument, which he repeats and urges over and over, and triumphs in, as
sufficient to carry the whole Cause; whereas for any thing appears, it rather
proves the Christians had Forms of Prayer and Praise at the Celebration of the
Eucharist in Justin Martyrs time.

. 3. Irenaeus is as wary as Justin Martyr, S. Irenaeus, An. Dom. 179,
not to publish any of the Words used in the Christian Offices, though he speak
both of Baptism and the Eucharist, and of the Prayers and Praises there, in
general. Only when some of those Heretics made an Argument from the conclusion
of a Form of Doxology to prove their Fancies by, on that occasion he is forced
to mention it, and say, They allege (says he) also, that we in our
Thanksgivings do say World without end (...) Iren. adv. haer. l. 1. c. 1. p. 16.
. Now these words are the very Conclusion of the Gloria Patri -- and being
urged by the Heretics in way of Argument against the Orthodox, it must be a
known, constant and never varied Form, of common use in the Church; and
therefore we may infer from thence, that in Irenaeus his time, the Christians
praised God in public by this very Form which we now use, Glory be to the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now
and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. And (as we shall show presently)
the same Argument, and grounded upon the same public Form is mentioned in
Tertullian Tertul. de spe^^ac. p. 83.
, in this same Age; which proves, that the Gloria Patri -- was a Form not only
in the Gallican, but also in the African Church.

Clemens Alex. An. Dom. 192.
In this Century lived Clemens of Alexandria, who tells us, The Church is not
only the Name of the Place for public Worship; but the Congregation prostrating
themselves in Prayers, having all as it were one common Voice, and one Mind
(...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
; alluding no doubt to those words of S. Paul, That ye may with one Mind and
one Mouth glorify God Romans xv. 6.
; that is (says Grotius) That when ye praise God and pray to him, ye may do it
not only with the same sound of Words, as Doxologies and Litanies use to be
said; but also with a Mind full of mutual Love Grot. in loc.
. So that praying and praising God as it were with one Mind and one Mouth,
signifies performing these Offices by responsory Prayers and Praises, as they
did in their Litanies and Doxologies of old, which must be in known Forms,
because the People not only joined in heart with the Minister, but vocally
answered in their turns, they and the Priest often making up the Sentence
between them, and therefore are said to have as it were One common Voice: So
that this passage is a Paraphrase upon Ignatius his One Prayer and One
Supplication, and upon Justin Martyr's Common Prayers; and it shows there were
Forms mutually repeated between Priest and People in Clemens Alex. his Time.
Our Adversary would evade this by pretending, This one common Voice is meant of
the Minister, who is the Peoples Mouth to God Discourse of Liturg. p. 136.
; but let it be noted, that Clemens is not speaking of the Minister alone, but
of him and the whole Congregation together; and if the Minister had said all
the Prayers, he must save said plainly, They had one common Mouth, or Voice;
but his Words are, Having as it were one common Voice; which notes, that they
joined Voices in responsory Forms, and so made many Voices like unto one Voice;
and this uniting of the Minister and People in putting up their Common Prayers,
showed also the union of their Minds and Affection. Moreover, we may the more
reasonably believe, that the Christians had Forms in Clemens his Time, because
he says, They allotted certain hours for Prayer, the Third, the Sixth and the
Ninth, in imitation of Daniel and the Jews Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
. Now the Jews used Forms, and it is likely those who imitated them in the
Times, would do it also in the Manner of Praying. Nor can we think that they
who prayed so often, would vary the Phrase every time: What were the Words of
their Forms then, Clemens no way relates; but the main Petitions were, First,
For the pardon of Sin; Secondly, For deliverance from Temptation; Thirdly, For
ability to do good Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 6.
. Now these being the constant and common wants of all Men, and things daily
needful for every one, it was most fit to ask them in a set Form of Words; and
if they had prayed for these things Extempore, Clemens could not have been so
positive in the Method, as he seems to be. I had almost forgot one of his
Objections, which is, That the Christians then lifted up their Hands and Eyes
to Heaven in Prayer, which shows they had no Books Discourse of Liturg. page 9.
and Clem. Alex. ibid.
. I reply, It proves no such matter, because though the Priest did read his
part out of a Book, the People might lift up their Hands and Eyes, so long as
he prayed alone; and by frequent use of the common Forms, both they and he
would be so ready at the accustomed Words, as to have liberty enough to look
off from their Books and look up to Heaven, as we in this Church often do in
the use of our Liturgy.

. 4. At the same time flourished Tertullian, Tertullian, An. Dom. 192.
in whose Works we have sufficient evidence that they used Forms of Prayer and
Praises: For he declares, That Christ has fixed a new Form of Prayer for us,
who are his Disciples, viz. The Lord's Prayer, which he expounds in a peculiar
Tract Tertul. de Orat. cap. 1.
; And in diverse places calls it, The lawful and the ordinary Prayer De Orat.
cap. 9. and de Jejun. cap. 15. page 553. de fuga in persec. cap. 2.
; there being clear proof in him, that the Christians daily repeated this very
Form. Now, if they used but one Form in their Devotions, they could not think
Forms were unlawful, nor imagine that Forms stinted the Spirit, as our
Dissenters now believe: Yea, that they used in public to pray by Forms, seems
to be intimated in that Passage, That the Christians met together, and as if
they were drawn up to Battle, did jointly set upon God with their Prayers,
which Violence was acceptable to the Almighty Quasi manu facta precationibus
ambiamus; haec vis Deo grata est. Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
; for this implies their joining Voices as well as Hearts. And though he do not
give us the very words of their Litany, because he writ to the Unbelievers; yet
he describes some of the things which they desired of God to bestow on the
Emperors, viz. That they might have a long life, and a quiet Empire; that
their Family might be safe, their Armies valiant, their Senate faithful, their
People virtuous, and that the whole World might be in peace Tertul. Apol. cap.
30.
: And it must be noted, that Tertullian could not have quoted these particulars
as a proof of the Christians Loyalty, if they had not generally asked these
very things; Extempore Prayers would have been so various, that they could have
been no evidence in this or any other case. Moreover, he calls the Offices used
in the celebration of the Eucharist, Divine and Solemn Rites; and adds, That
after these solemn Rites were finished, the People were dismissed -- Dominica
solennia -- transacta solennia and dimissa plebe. Tert. de anim. cap. 9.
; where, though he studiously avoid reciting any part of the Office, yet he
intimates by that Phrase, it was a Form, because Solennes Preces, Solemn
Prayers among the Romans, were those certain and solemn words in Prayer, from
which they might not vary Brisson. de formul. lib. 1. page 61.
. He also says concerning Baptism, That Christ had not only imposed the Law of
Baptizing, but also prescribed the Form of it Tertul. de Bapt. cap. 13.
. So that Baptism doubtless was performed then by a certain and set Form; and
though our Adversary argues, that Tertullian uses variety of Words concerning
this Form Discourse of Liturg. page 94. and 95.
; yet it is to be noted, that this is only in his discoursing concerning it,
where Tertullian does not pretend to cite the words, but mentions the thing
occasionally: As to the Laudatory part of the Service, it appears from him,
that they sang Psalms and Hymns alternately, and therefore in Forms Tert. ad
uxor. lib. 2. page 172.
, one of which Forms was the Gloria Patri, which he describes, as Irenaeus did,
by the last words, World without end, Amen. For he asks the Christians, If they
could give testimony to a Gladiator in the Theater with that Mouth which said
Amen in the Church; or if they could say, World without end to any but God or
Christ Ex ore que Amen in sanctum protuleris, gladiatori testimonium reddere
(...), alii omnino dicere nisi Deo and Christo. Tert. de spectac. page 83.
? From whence we may infer, that the Glory be to the Father, etc. which was a
Form in the Gallican Church in Irenaeus his time, was also a Form used in
Tertullian's time in Africa, and so may be justly taken for one of the
primitive and universal Forms by which all Churches did glorify God: And it
will be very hard for our Adversary to give a Reason why they might not use
Forms in their Prayers, as well as in their Praises. He urges against this one
passage of Tertullian, where describing their Love Feasts he says, After they
have washed their hands and brought in Lights, they called for some to sing
either Psalms, or somewhat of their own Composing Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
Discourse of Liturg. p. 126, and 143.
. But if we look on the place, we shall find this was after the public Worship
was done, at their common Meal; and if this Hymn was taken out of the Psalms,
then it was a Form most certainly; or if it were of their own Composing,
probably it was made at home; however, it will not follow, that now those
miraculous Gifts of Inspiration are ceased, we may compose Extempore Hymns,
because they did it in an Age when many had those Gifts. Some other slight
Objections he raises out of this Author against Forms of Prayer: As, First,
That Christians then looked up to Heaven when they prayed Tertul. Apol. cap.
30. Disc. of Liturg. p. 9.
. But this was answered before, and yet we must add, that Tertullian affirms,
they did not always look up to Heaven in Prayer; For sometimes he says, They
did not look up with confidence toward Heaven, but imitated the Publican, who
prayed with an humble and down-cast Countenance Idem de Oratione, c. 13.
. And S. Cyprian observes, That the Christians did not impudently lift up their
Eyes to Heaven Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 4. p. 310
: So that no Argument can be drawn from the one posture or the other. But his
main Objection out of Tertullian is that Phrase of Sine monitore, quia de
pectore, viz. That the Christians prayed without a Monitor, because they prayed
out of their Breast, that is, as he expounds it, prayed Extempore Tertul. Apol.
cap. 30.
. To which I cannot yield, because a dark phrase of an obscure Author, which is
capable of many Interpretations, must not be allowed for a proof of a new
Method of Praying. I confess Bishop Bilson modestly says, This seems to be
meant of the miraculous Gift of Prayer, which dured in the Church unto his time
Bilson's Christian Subject, part 4. page 411.
. But then he supposes this Gift ceased soon after, and believes that Liturgies
came into use long before the time of S. Basil or S. Chrysostom Id. ibid. page
437.
: So that if we allow this Bishops Exposition, none of our Adversaries
Consequences will follow; for it does no way prove, that Ministers may now pray
Extempore after the miraculous Gift of Prayer is ceased, because those who had
that Gift, prayed in that manner. Though I confess I see no need thus to
expound the Phrase; For allowing Rigaltius his ingenious observation, that
Tertullian here opposes the Christians way of praying to the Pagans, who had a
Monitor standing by them when they recited their Solemn Forms, who prompted
every Sentence to them that made the Prayer. But the difference lies in this,
That the Christians had their Prayers by heart, and could repeat them out of
their Memory, and he who can remember a thing needs no Monitor Memini tametsi
nullus moneas. Terent. Eunuch. II. 1. ver. 10.
. Whereas it seems the Gentile Priests were not very perfect in their Prayers,
and had not committed them to their Memory, because they stood in need to have
a Monitor for every Sentence. Now if this be the sense, then it supposes the
Christians had Forms which they could say by heart, or repeat de pectore, and
then it makes for us, and utterly discards Extempore Prayers. Secondly, Another
Learned Man explains this Phrase of those Secret and Mental Prayers, which
every private Christian used in the solemn Assemblies on the stationary days,
in the intervals between the public Offices, while all the Congregation kept
silence. Now these Prayers being not Vocal, there needed no Monitor for them,
being only made (as S. Cyprian expresses it) silently and modestly within the
secrets of their own Breasts Tacit and modeste intra ipsas pectoris latebras.
Cypr. de Orat. Dom. See Falkner's Libert. Eccles. page 117.
; and if we consider how long they stayed at these stations, viz. for Nine
hours together, and how certain it is that all the time was not taken up in the
public Offices of Reading, Expounding, Singing and Common Prayer, it will not
be improbable that some space was allowed there for these Mental Prayers
Albaspin. lib. 1. obs. 16.
; and if these be the Prayers Tertullian speaks of, then they are nothing to
the Public Offices about which we dispute. But Thirdly, Upon a due survey of
the place it appears, Tertullian is here proving the Christians sincere
Loyalty, and showing they exceeded the Heathens in this Virtue, and therefore
made better Prayers for the Emperors, than their Pagan Subjects: For the
Pagans had imbrued their hands in their Emperors Blood; But the Christians
(says he) lift up their Hands to Heaven, as being innocent. The Pagans veiled
their Faces in Prayer, and might well do so, to hide their blushing at the
contradiction between their Actions and their Prayers; but Christians prayed
barefaced, and without any Guilt to make them blush: Pagans had a Monitor,
because they had not laid their Petitions much to heart, nor could they think
of them so readily as the Christians, who needed no Monitor, because they
prayed from their Hearts Oration de Conscientia procedit. Tertul. Exhort. ad
cast. cap. 10. p. 513.
most sincerely, affectionately, and with a true concern for the Emperor's
safety: So that to pray out of the Breast, is to pray ex animo, from the Heart
and Soul, the Breast (in all Authors) being usually put for the Mind and Soul
Manibus expansis, quia innecuis; capite undo, quia non crubescimus; denique
sine monitore, quia de pectere eramus pro omnibus imperatoribus, etc. Tertul.
Apol. cap. 30.
. Thus then we see there are three ways of expounding this obscure Phrase, each
of which is more likely to be Tertullian's sense than his, and one of them must
be expounded of Forms of Prayer; wherefore we cannot fear any Argument to be
raised from hence against the use of Liturgies in public, which undoubtedly
began to be generally received before the end of this Century.

CHAP. III. Of Liturgies in the Third Century.
. 1. THough we have more Writers, and consequently more Evidence in this than
in the former Age, concerning Common and prescribed Forms, yet there are
several Reasons why the Fathers of this Century do not frequently mention the
Words of those Forms: First, Because their business was chiefly to convert
Heathens and confute Heretics, and most of their Writings being upon those
Subjects, they had little occasion to Mention their Ways of Worship, which in
those days of Persecution was performed generally in private. Secondly, They
knew the Heathens derided their Worship, and would ridicule and blaspheme it,
if they had known it; and the Heretics who disowned the Churches Authority
which composed these Offices, would not allow any Argument drawn from the
public Service; so that it was not fit to quote their Liturgy when they writ
either to the one or the other of these two sorts of Adversaries. Thirdly, They
kept the Knowledge of these Forms from their very Catechumens, till they were
actually baptized, and kept them as a secret and sacred Mystery among the
Faithful, and therefore cautiously forbore the Mention of them in such Writings
as were to come into all hands. I know Dailee pretends this opinion and
practice of keeping these Mysteries secret, did not obtain till after the end
of these three Centuries Dail. de relig. cultus object. l. 2. c. 25. page 321,
etc.
. But he is grossly mistaken, as I could prove by many passages; but I will only
instance in two, viz. Tertullian in the last Age, and S. Cyprian in this: the
former argues, that the Heathens could not know what the Christian Worship was,
because the Faithful would not discover it, since it was customary to keep all
Mysteries secret -- especially such as were punished, if they were discovered.
And Strangers (he says) could have no knowledge of them, since even pious
Initiations ever keep out the profane Ex forma omnibus mysteriis silentii fides
debeatur -- and pp. -- unde extraneis notitiae, cum etiam piae initiationes
arceant profanos. Tert. Apol. cap. 7. p. 8.
; that is, not only the Heathens, but the Christians in their pious ways of
Worship kept out all Strangers, and such as were not fit to know them. Thus
Tertullian and S. Cyprian tells an Heathen, who reviled Christianity, he ought
not to answer him; because that which is holy is to be kept in our own Breast;
for our Lord says, we must not declare it to Swine, and expose it to Dogs
Sanctum quotidie jubeamur intra Conscientiam nostram tenere. Cypr. ad Demetr..
1. p. 324.
: And from that same Text of Matthew. VII. 6. the same Author proves, That the
Mysteries of our Faith are not to be profaned by publishing them to those
without Idem lib. 3. test. ad Quirin.. 50. p. 429.
. Wherefore since it is so clear even in these early Ages, that they were
scrupulous of publishing their ways of Worship, we may conclude that no full
and clear account of their Forms at large can be expected among these Writers:
And it is sufficient that they mention some, and darkly hint at others of those
Mysterious Forms sometimes, and that they do plainly attest they had a
prescribed Liturgy, though they had but seldom an occasion or an inclination to
tell us what it was.

Hippolytus, Mar. An. Dom. 220.
. 2. Among the Writers of this Age, the first is Hippolytus a Bishop and
Martyr, who in his discourse of the End of the World, and the Coming of
Antichrist, puts it among the Signs of those evil Times, That Liturgy shall be
extinguished, singing of Psalms shall cease, and reading of Scripture shall not
be heard (...). Hippol. de Consum. Mund. Bib. Patr. T. 2. p. 357.
. Which shows that the public Service (of which he there speaks) consisted then
of three parts, The ministration of Prayers, Singing of Psalms, and Reading the
Scripture: And the first of these is called Liturgy, which though it signify
any public Service in general, and be sometimes applied to the whole Public
Worship; yet where it is limited only to Prayers (as it is here) it implies a
Common Form used generally, which will be more probable to be this Fathers
Sense, if we consider that he says, Liturgy shall be extinguished, that is,
the public Forms shall not be permitted to be used, which cannot be properly
said of Extempore Prayers, they being an inward Gift (as our Adversaries
pretend): And Antichrist himself has no power to extinguish or put out Men's
Gifts: He may suppress the use of Forms of Prayer; but the Extempore Men's
faculty was not liable to any such interdict, as could extinguish it: And why
may we not believe the Prayers in this Age were suitable to the rest of the
Offices? They sang by a Form out of a Book, and read the Lessons out of a Book,
so that they scrupled not the use of Forms; wherefore there is no ground to
believe they disliked Forms of Prayer, and consequently nothing to hinder us
from expounding (...) in the usual sense, viz. of the Public Liturgy, which
Antichrist would not allow the Christians to use.

. 3. Our next Author is the Famous Origin, Origin, Adam. An. Dom. 230.
who has so clear and convincing a Testimony for the use of a Liturgy in his
Homilies on Jeremy, that the Learned Centuriators were convinced by it, that
Set Forms of Prayer were used in his time, for they thus cite the place, It is
(say they) without question, that they had some Set Forms of Prayer (in this
Age); for Origin in his XIth Homily on Jeremy, seems to allude to those we now
call Collects, where he tells us; We frequently say in our Prayers, Grant, O
Almighty God, grant us a part with thy Prophets, and with the Apostles of thy
Son Christ; grant that we may be found at the Feet of thy only begotten
Formulas domque quasdam precationum absque dubio habuerunt. Cent. Magdeb. cent.
3. cap. 6. page 135.
. And if we consider, that our Savior promised to such as were effectually
Converted, that they should sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God Matthew. viii. 11
; and that the Holy Apostles and Prophets are described in Scripture as
rejoicing together in Heaven Revel. xviii. 20.
, we shall be convinced this Form of Prayer is grounded upon Christ's Promise,
and upon the Word of God, and consequently must own the Prayer to be pure and
primitive. Indeed our Adversary uses many Artisices to wrest this Testimony
from us Discourse of Liturg p. 141.
, but all in vain: First, he says, Ruffinus made many additions to Origens
Homilies, so that possibly this may be one of his Additions. I Answer, If he
were sure Ruffinus added this, yet since he lived in the next Century, that
would serve to confute him, who maintains there were no prescribed Forms till
the Fifth or Sixth Age: But we can make it very probable Ruffinus did not add
this passage; First, because there is nothing in it, but what agrees, well
enough to Origen's time, and to his Doctrine. Secondly, In Ruffinus his time
they had made some steps toward Invocation of Saints, and therefore had it
been a Prayer composed by him, there would have been some footsteps of that
Superstition; some Address to, or expectation from the Apostles and Prophets;
whereas this Prayer only supposes them to be in Heaven, and desires God to
grant us a part with them. Again, Our Adversary says, These Words (if they be
Origens) will no more prove this was a prescribed Form, than S. Paul 's was,
Ephesians. I. 16, 17. where he says; He ceased not to make mention of the
Ephesians in his Prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ -- might give
them tht Spirit of Wisdom, etc. I Reply, His Parallel will by no means hold,
since the Apostle only relates and reckons up the things he asked for them; and
speaking to the Ephesians, gives them an account of the Subject of his
Petitions for them. But Origin is repeating the Words of a Prayer, and speaks
directly to God, therefore this must be a Form of common use, as the Magdeburg
Divines believed it to be. Having thus detected his Sophistry and answered his
Cavils, and so cleared this Evidence for a Set Form, we shall more easily
understand that Origin refers to an usual Liturgy in another place, where he
says, They who serve God, through Jesus, in the Christian way, and live
according to the Gospel, use frequently (as becomes them) night and day the
enjoined Prayers (...). Orig. in Cells. lib. 6. page 302.
. Whence we infer, that the Christian way was to serve God night and day with
prescribed Prayers; for the Participle ((...)) signifies not only a thing
enjoined or commanded in general, as Isocrates and Aeschines use the word
(...), Isocr. -- (...), Aeschin. ita Math. i. 24.
, but so enjoined, that the very order and manner of doing it is set down and
particularly appointed: So those directions concerning the Leper's offering his
Gift, which Moses prescribed in the Old Law, Levit. xiv. 4. is called, doing
that which Moses ((...)) commanded them; that is, which he prescribed how they
should do Math. viii. 4. Mark i. 44. Luke v. 14.
; and the Word whence it is derived, signifies to methodize, put in order, and
to place Soldiers in their Ranks Cor. 15.23:
; so to do all things (...), according to Order 1 Cor. xiv. 40.
, is to act according to a prescribed Rule; which Rule S. Paul says, he will
make or prescribe when he came 1 Cor. xi. 34. (...).
. This then being the proper and natural signification of this Word, we may
reasonably expound it of Prescribed Forms of Prayer both for Morning and
Evening, of which (as the Centuriators observe,) Origin speaks in other places
Magdeb. Cent. 3. cap. 6. page 134.
. But our Adversary would shift off this proof also, First, By asking, If these
were not private Prayers Disc. of Liturg. page 140.
? I Answer, The Words are general, not restrained either to public or private
Prayers expressly; but it being certain the Christians had a custom to assemble
Morning and Evening to Prayers, the phrase of using these Prayers, Night and
Day, seems chiefly to be referred to public Offices. Secondly, He asks, If no
Prayers can be commanded but in Set Forms? I Reply, The Word does not barely
signify Prayers commanded, but enjoined according to a prescribed Order (as I
have proved). Now Prayers left to the Invention of Men to be daily made new,
cannot properly be called Ordered Prayers. And therefore though Christian
Ministers were commanded to preach, yet the Words and Method being left to
their invention or choice, our Adversary can no where find ((...)) made use of
as an Epithet for a Sermon or Homily. Note also, Origin does not say, The
Christians made these enjoined Prayers, but used, them; which supposes they
were made, into a prescribed Form before. Thirdly, He enquires, If there be no
Commands for Praying frequently, but Human Prescriptions? and I must ask, what
is this to the purpose? Origin is not speaking of Commanding Men to pray, nor
declaring whether the Duty of Prayer be prescribed by God or the Church: He is
speaking of the Prayers themselves, and gives them this Character that they
were Ordered or Prescribed: so that he is very impertinent to tell us of Divine
Commands to pray frequently, since Origen's Words are not about Obeying a
Precept to Pray; but using ordered, enjoined or prescribed Prayers, which all
ingenuous Men must own to be in Forms, and that proves a Liturgy, because it is
[Prayers] in the plural Number. Thirdly, in the same Books against Celsus, when
Origin cites some certain passages out of the Psalms, ^e brings them in with
these Prefaces, We and in the Prayers -- or, We say often in the Prayer (...).
Orig. in Cells. lib. 4. p. 178 (...), ibid. page 197.
. And thus -- it is said in the Prayer --; or, The prudent when he prays,
^aith -- Idem lib. 6. page 285. lib. 7. page 354.
. Now when we consider, that the Psalms were the main part of the Jewish
Liturgy, and that the Christians in the first Ages inclined to imitate their
Forms; and above all the Old Testament, admired and frequently used the Book of
Psalms, and took their Forms of Praise from thence, we may conclude, they
borrowed many Forms of Prayer also from the Psalms, and transcribed them into
their Liturgy, so that Origin appeals to these passages, as being known by the
Christians to be a part of their Prayers: Which will still be clearer, when we
observe, that the Abassine Christians, who are very tenacious of primitive
Rites, and derived most of their Usages from the Ancient Church of Alexandria,
(as Ludolfus relates) Take most of their daily Prayers out of the Psalter
Ludolf. hist. Ethiop. lib. 2. cap. 12.
. And therefore Origin, who belonged to Alexandria, no doubt refers by these
Prefaces to the public and known Liturgy, then used in that famous Church. Our
Adversary is not pleased at this Inference; and whereas his own Eyes are so
blinded with his Extempore Way, that he cannot see the clearest light for
Forms, he says it argues a Fancy deeply tinctured with Liturgies, to suppose
this to be any proof of them: But let it be noted, he barely asserts it is no
proof, and most falsely represents the matter; for he says, When Origin quotes
any passage out of the Psalms, he thus speaks, etc. Discourse of Liturg. p. 139.
. Now this is not true, because, first, Origin in that very Book cites an
hundred passages out of the Psalms without any such Preface, without saying,
They are found in the Prayers, etc. Secondly, The places which he does cite
with such a Preface, are always very proper to be used in a Liturgy, as Forms
of Praise or Prayer: Such as these, The Earth is full of the Goodness of the
Lord; and, Open thou mine Eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law:
Create in me a clean Heart, O God; and the like. So that these and no other
passages being said, to be found in the Prayers, etc. no doubt we have all
imaginable cause to think, that these very words of the Psalms were in Origin
's time used in the Churches Liturgy, and prescribed in the Forms of Public
Prayer. Especially since he can ascribe no sufficient Reason, but the peculiar
use made of these Select places in the public Offices, which made Origin quote
them with such a Preface, and cite other passages of the Psalms, as he does
other Scriptures, without any Preface at all Fourthly, Our Adversary cites
another place out of Origen's Homilies (taken at the second hand from Daile) to
prove, they used no Forms of Prayer in that Age; because it is said, Our
Thoughts must not wander after our Senses in Prayer, but be wholly intent and
fixed on God, not being disturbed by the Idea of any External appearance Orig.
in Number. hom. XI.
. I shall not here need to fly to his help at a dead lift, that possibly
Ruffinus the Translator did put in these Words: For allowing them to be
genuine, it must be more unlawful to let our Minds wander after new Phrases,
and our Fancy rove about for Matter, Order and Words, which is the case in
Extempore Prayer, than it is to repeat the Words of a known Form, which we can
say by heart, or read without disturbance; because the actings of the Fancy and
Invention in Extempore Prayer, do much more hinder the Mind from steady
thinking upon God, than having a Book before us in the recital of a common and
usual Form. Lastly, I hope it is needless to repeat what was showed before,
viz. That Origen's Phrases of Praising God as well as we are able (...) Orig.
in Cells. l. 8. page 402.
, and Praying to him with all the might we have (...). Id. ib. page 386. See
the Discourse of Liturg. p. 127, etc.
, do not at all prove Extempore Praising or Praying was then in use: Or show,
That Ministers then used no Forms in the public Worship, both because Origin
says this of all the People, who cannot be supposed universally to have had
this Gift of Praising God and Praying to him Extempore; nor, if any of them had
it, were they allowed ordinarily to exercise it in public Assemblies: And also,
because the Phrases do signify no more than Praying or Praising God by Forms,
with all possible fervency and devotion. Origin therefore is a good Witness for
Liturgies, and all his Sophistry cannot draw one Argument from him against the
use of them in his time.

. 4. The holy Martyr S. Cyprian S. Cyprian. An. Dom. 248.
witnesses the very same thing: For that he was not against the use of Forms
of Prayer, may appear from his allowing the Lords Prayer to be used, as a Form
of Prayer, which Christ himself gave us Cypr. de orat. Dom.. 1. page 309.
. And he would have us repeat the very Words of it, because we may be assured,
The Father will know the Words, which were made by his own Son Id. ibid. 2.
; Yea from the manner of drawing up this Prayer, so as all the People are
supposed to repeat it with the Minister, he justifies the use of Set Forms,
wherein the Congregation bears a part, for he observes, That the Christians had
a public and Common Prayer Publica est nobis and communis oration. ibid.. 5. p.
310.
; and that Christ Commanded us to Pray for all Men, in a Common Prayer wherein
all agreed Oratione communi, and concordi prece, pro omnibus jussit orare.
Cypr. ad cler. and pleb. ep. 8. page 24.
. Now suppose we grant that he speaks this of the Lords Prayer, yet since all
other Prayers, were to be drawn up by this pattern, this will prove, that their
other Prayers were in all things like to this, that is, that they were not made
Extempore, but were put into a Form as the Lords Prayer is; and repeated by all
the Congregation, either with, or after the Minister. But there are still more
evident Proofs in him, not only of Forms, but of a Liturgy, viz. where he cites
and explains those very Words of Common Prayer in the Prefaces, which were used
in all Churches in the same Words: for he persuades Christians to attend to
their Prayers in public, by putting them in mind that the Priest before the
Prayer, prepares the Hearts of the Brethren, by a Preface premised, saying;
Lift up your Hearts; so that when they answer, We Lift them up unto the Lord,
they may be admonished to think upon God alone Ideo and sacerdos ante
Orationem, praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes dicendo, Surium corda,
ut dum respondeat plebi, habenus ad Dominum, admo^eatur se nihil aliud quam
Dominum debere cogitare. Id de orat. Dom.. 22.
. Now here we have a Form of Words used in the Eucharist, not only in Africa,
but both in the Eastern and Western Churches; and this also used by way of
Response, and divided between the Priest and People, which is impossible to be
done in any thing that the Priest says Extempore. And though he cites no more
of this Preface than the first Words, yet other Authors, both in the African
and Greek Church, mention the rest of this primitive Form, viz. It is meet and
right so to do, etc. Even as it is yet, (in so many Words) Transcribed in our
Communion Service; wherefore the Judicious Centuriators do rightly infer from
hence, That there were undoubtedly Set Forms of Prayer in S. Cyprians time
Magd. Cent. 3. cap. 6 p. 135.
, which they prove by citing this Preface. Yea B. Bilson concludes from this
and other passages, that Christ's Church, taking her direction from S. Paul's
Doctrine, framed her public Prayers in such order, that the Pastor and People
both jointly and interchangeably, Praised God and Prayed to him, each with
other, and each for other Bilson of Christian Subjection. Part. 4. page 435.
Now how could there be these fixed places for Responses, if the Priest had
made only one long Extempore Prayer (as our Dissenters do?) It is plain from
this very method of Responses, that there were then public Forms allowed and
used. And we may observe not only by this Preface, but also by another passage,
that the African Church and the Eastern, did hugely agree in these Liturgick
Forms; because as the Greeks say, Give holy things, to those that are holy
(...) Lit. ^. Basil. Chrysostom. and Clem. Constit.
. So it seems they did at Carthage, where (as S. Cyprians Notes) they were
daily charged to keep that which was holy in a pure Conscience, according to
our Lords command, not to cast that which is holy to Dogs Cypr. ad Demetr. p.
324.
. That is, in the Eucharist (which they then daily celebrated) they used that
Phrase, Give holy things to holy Persons. For though S. Cyprian writing to a
Heathen, will not express the very Form it self, yet he comes so near it, that
he can mean nothing else, being obliged to conceal the sacred Offices from
Demetrian. And that is the reason also why, when he has occasion to mention
the Christian Litany, he does it only by setting down these general Heads of
things desired therein, viz. For driving away Enemies, for procuring Rain, and
either for removing or moderating adversities; we always pour out our
Supplications and Prayers, as well as for your peace and safety Cypr. ad
Demetr. p. 324.
; so that our Adversary is very weak, in despising those who urge this of as a
Form of Prayer Disc. of Liturg. p. 137.
; because none of us think it was the very Words of the African Liturgy; and we
know Tertullian describes it, (when he also writes to Heathens) in different
Words; but if we compare the two Fathers, or both of them with the ancient
Litanies, wherein the general Heads of Evils which were to be Prayed against,
were named by the Priest, and the People answered, O Lord hear us, or O Lord
deliver us; we may conclude, they had a certain Form, but concealed the Phrases
of it from Unbelievers. But the disputer against Liturgies, who fraudulently
conceals all but the last of these Testimonies, picks up another passage or
two, by which he hopes to show there were no Forms used in S. Cyprians time.
The first is in his Epistle to Pope Lucius, where he says we cease not in our
Prayers and Sacrifices, to give thanks to God the Father, and to his Son Christ
our Lord, Praying and requesting, that he who is perfect, and makes us perfect,
would keep for you, and perfect in you, the glorious Crown of a Confessor Cypr.
Epist. 58. p. 163.
. Hence he infers, that being at liberty, to put up any occasional Petition in
the Eucharist, they could not be confined to any Set Form Disc. of Liturg. p.
66.
; and that it had been a vain thing to tell him of this, if it had been the
common Form, which he knew before Ibid. p. 68.
. To the first I answer, he must learn to distinguish between reciting the
Words of a Form, which are addressed to God; and relating in a Letter the sum
and substance of the things desired, when the speech is directed to a Man. Now
these Words are no Prayer, nor addressed to God; S. Cyprian is only telling
Pope Lucius, what things in general they asked for him. Yet if these had been
the Words of this Prayer and made by S. Cyprian, the Primate of Africa, on this
great occasion of the chief Bishop of the Wests, being banished; it would not
follow, that because a Primate of Africa, on an extraordinary occasion put in
one new Petition into the usual Office, therefore in ordinary times private
Ministers may vary their Prayers every day. To his second inference, viz. that
supposing this were the common Form, he need not have told Lucius of it: I
reply, if this were then the African Form to supplicate for Confessors, yet
Cyprian might rationally give Lucius an account of it; First, because it is not
certain that they at Rome knew the Form of Praying for a Confessor at Carthage;
or if they did, Lucius could not know, till he was thus informed, that it was
used for him: So that whether it was the common Form or no, it will not serve
out Adversaries purpose; for let it be noted, if S. Cyprian had Prayed to God
for Lucius every day Extempore in various and other Words, he had told him a
manifest Untruth, when he said he Prayed for him in these words, That he who is
perfect, etc. So that if these had been the words which S. Cyprian used for
Lucius, (as he supposes,) they must have been a Form, and were prescribed for
that occasion by S. Cyprian, to his subordinate Clergy. His second allegation
out of S. Cyprian for such occasional Prayers, is that there are also mention
of such occasional Prayers, in the Epistle to Moses and Maximus Disc. of
Liturg. p. 68.
; but he durst not cite the place at large, which only speaks of private
Prayers made by these Confessors in Prison, in which S. Cyprian desires to be
remembered, believing God would grant them whatever they prayed for: But there
are no petitions mentioned, nor any account whether they prayed with or without
a Form; so that this Quotation is as impertinent, as his third instance is
fraudulent; For he cites S. Cyprian, to prove that the Form of Words used in
Baptizing was varied by some; but he leaves out those Words, which utterly
spoil his Argument; Quomodo ergo quidam dicunt -- (there he draws a line) --
modo in Nomine Jesu Christi, etc. Disc. of Liturg p. 98.
. But S. Cyprians Words are these, How then do some say, who are out of the
Church, yea against the Church; that if a Pagan, be any where or any ways
Baptized in the name of Christ Jesus, he may obtain Remission of Sins Cypr. ad
Jubai. Epist. 73.
? Therefore it was manifest, Schismatics and Heretics, varied from the Form;
and S. Cyprian disputes against the practice, and proves that it makes the
Baptism null and void. So that our Adversary is at a low Ebb, when he would
prove an usage of the Church, by the practice of its Enemies, and founds their
Extempore variations, upon the Opinions and the use of Schismatics and
Heretics.

Gregorius Thaumaturgus An. Dom. 253.
. 5. Gregory Thaumaturgus Bishop of Naeocaesarea was Contemporary with S.
Cyprian; and though he had so extraordinary a measure of the Spirit, that he
did many Miracles; yet he was so much for a Liturgy, that we have the Testimony
of S. Basil (an Unquestionable Witness) concerning him, that he appointed a
Form of Prayer for that Church of Naeocaesarea, from which they would not vary,
in one Ceremony, or in a Word; Nor would they add any one Mystical Form in the
Church, to those which he had left them; yea, when their Offices grew to be
deficient by reason of their Antiquity, the Bishops who succeeded this Gregory,
would allow no addition to be made unto that which he had established (...)
Basil. de Spir. S^^cto, cap. 29. page 221.
; and it seems he had appointed also a way of singing the Psalms, of which the
Naeocaesarean Clergy were so extremely tenacious, that when S. Basil would have
brought in a better Way, they opposed him in it, and objected that it was not
so in the Days of Gregory the Great Basil. Epist. 63. ad Cler. Naeocaes. page
843, 844.
. Now, how is it possible to have a clearer proof in the World for prescribed
Forms than this, That in an Age while Miraculous Gifts lasted, a Bishop full of
the Spirit, Appoints a Form of praising God by Psalms, and prescribes a
Liturgy, containing the Ceremonies, the words of Prayers, and the Form of
Consecrating the Holy Sacrament, and this Liturgy used for above an Hundred
Year without any variation or addition, by the Bishops of that Province and all
their Clergy? This is not like his Arguments, squeezed out of misconstrued
Phrases, or built upon vain Suppositions and remote Conjectures. It is plain
and undeniable Matter of Fact, of which I shall say no more but this, That S.
Basil does not relate this as any thing extraordinary in Gregory, nor remark it
as a thng strange and done no where else; so that it is probable, most of the
Eminent Bishops of each Diocese, did compose or collect a Form of Prayer for
their several Churches before the ceasing of Miraculous Gifts; but our
Adversary (alas) could find nothing of this kind in all his search for
Antiquity, or at least he was so wise to conceal what he could not pretend to
Answer.

. 6. Not long after this Paulus Samosatenus, Paulus Samosatenus, Episc.
Antioch. An. Dom. 269.
an Heretical Bishop of Antioch, was offended at those Hymns which were sung
there in honor of our Savior Christ, and composed others, pretending that
those Hymns which he rejected, were written but lately, and composed by Persons
that lived but a little before his time (...) Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 24.
. From whence it appears, that there were prescribed Forms of glorifying and
praising our Lord Jesus, used at Antioch, and written at least as early as the
beginning of this Century, and some of them perhaps long before See Chap. I..
3. of this History.
. Now Psalms and Hymns (as we have proved) were a very great part of the
Primitive Worship, and S. Paul had commanded all, to Sing as well as to Pray
with the Spirit; therefore if they Sung by Forms, it is probable they prayed by
Forms also, there being no reason why the one should be performed Extempore
more than the other, and it being very fit one part of the public Service
should be like the other: But our Adversary asks, Why this Bishop did not alter
the Liturgy also Discourse of Liturgy, p. 26.
? And though I am not bound to answer all his random Questions and
suppositions, grounded upon this Negative, that Eusebius does not say, He did
alter the Liturgy: Yet I shall Reply, That Hymns are more proper than Prayers
are, to set out and magnify our Savior's Divinity, and so were much more
offensive to this Heretic, than the Prayers, which were only addressed to the
Father in the Name of Christ, as our Mediator, which the Arians allowed him to
be: And therefore Paulus began to reject the Hymns; but probably he might have
proceeded further, if he had not been so early discovered and expelled before
he could make any more Alterations. Nor is it unlikely, that the Liturgy was so
ancient at Antioch, being extant in Ignatius's Time, that he durst not venture
upon that at first.

I shall add no more in this Century, but to observe, That in the Epistle of
Dionysius of Alexandria, recorded by Eusebius, it appears to have been the
general usage of the Church for every one of the People to say, Amen, when they
heard the Priest offer them the Sacrament and say, The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 35. p. 180.
. Which was a Form so universally used in all Churches of the World, that we
may conclude it was enjoined by all Liturgies; otherwise it had been impossible
that all Christians should have so exactly agreed in that Form, at that place,
and on that occasion. We proceed now to Times of greater Light, and more clear
Evidence.

CHAP. IV. Of Liturgies in the Fourth Century.
. 1. THat the Use of Forms and stated Liturgies did not begin, in the end of
the Fifth, nor in the entrance of the Sixth Century, is very plain from the
preceding Testimonies, which sufficiently confute our Adversaries Assertion.
Yet if we had no Evidence of settled Forms of Prayer before this Age, it had
been enough to justify our use of them, because this is the first Century
wherein the miraculous Gifts were ceased, and the Church was settled under
Christian Magistrates. Wherefore since we plead for the use of a prescribed
Liturgy in an established Church, it is as much Antiquity as our Cause needs,
to show we have Precedents for it from this Age; that is, as soon as the
Primitive Churches Circumstances and ours did agree. Now the Centuriators tell
us, that upon the Settlement of the Church, The Bishops appointed Prayers for
all things necessary, for the happy state of the Empire, for the Emperors, for
the safety of the Church, for public Peace, and for the Unconverted
Episcopipreces Sacras ordinarunt pro omnibus rebus necessariis, etc. Magd.
Cent. 4.. 7. page 498.
. Now if the Bishops appointed such Prayers, doubtless the Inferior Clergy did
use them, and that shows there was a prescribed Liturgy: Yet our Adversary
strives by all kinds of Artifice to hide this plain Truth, and the first
Authors he produces in this Century are Arnobius and Lactantius, to prove the
Christians looked up to Heaven when they prayed Discourse of Liturg. page 9.
. Which we freely grant; but reject his consequence of their having no Written
Forms, since Experience shows, that both Priest and People, by frequent use of
our Common Prayer, may and do often look up to Heaven, when they pray by this
Form. And as for one of these very Fathers, ARNOBIUS, An. Dom. 303.
viz. ARNO BIVS, though he writ against the Gentiles, a little before the
Settlement of the Church, and therefore speaks very cautiously of the Christian
Rites Ita de Eucharistid loquitur -- viz. ut ad illud quod dabitur, possint
esse paratae. Arnob. lib. 2. page 65.
, yet there are some Intimations in him of the use of Forms: We adore (says
he) him that is higher than all, and pray to him by a Venerable Service --, we
supplicate him with Daily Prayers --, and vocally call on him for that which we
need --. To venerate this supreme King is the end and design of these Divine
Offices --: To him, according to custom, we all prostrate our selves, adoring
him with our joint Prayers, and requesting of him things, just, honest and fit
for his holy Ears Hic propositus terminus divinorum Officiorum, hic finis est.
Huic omnes ex more prosternimur, hunc Collatis Precibus adoramus, etc. Id. lib.
1. page 13, 14, and 15.
. Now this Venerable Service of Daily Prayers, vocally performed in Divine
Offices, wherein all the Christians joined and bore a part, can be no other
than stated Forms, known before to the Congregation; and unless the Ministers
and People had used such Forms, Arnobius could not be sure they should always
ask things fit for Gods holy Ears. The same Author in another place evidently
points to that Litany which Tertullian had briefly described in his Apology,
saying, In our Conventicle we Invocate the Supreme God, praying for Peace and
Pardon to all Men; For the Magistrates, the Armies; for the Emperors, for our
Friends and our Enemies; for those that are alive, and those that are dying
Arnob. adv. gent. lib. 4. page 152.
; which are the very Heads that other Fathers set down, when they do not design
to quote the Words of their Litany, but only to describe it in a public
Discourse.

Constantin. M. An. Dom. 312.
. 2. The first Christian Emperor, Constantine the Great (who now established
by Secular Laws the true Worship of God) is our next Evidence for the use of
prescribed Forms: For Eusebius, who was an Eye and Ear witness of those
Transactions which he relates concerning him, gives us an Account, That he
ordered his Palace after the manner of a Church, and that when the Christians
were assembled, he would begin to take the Books into his hands, either for
explaining the Holy Scripture, or repeating the prescribed Prayers, in his
Royal Family (...). Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 4 c. 17. p. 395.
. He also relates, That he made a Form of Prayer for his Guards, which they
were to use every Sunday Id. ib. c. 18.
; and he taught them to recite this Prayer, with hands lifted up to Heaven, and
with the Eyes of their Minds lifted up still higher, even to the King of Heaven
Id. ib. c. 19.
. The very Words of which Form, Eusebius sets down Id. ib. c. 20.
; and commends the pious Emperor, because he was a Teacher of the Words of
Prayer (...). Eusebius. de laud. Constantin. p. 465.
Now we learn from hence, First, That repeating Prayers out of a Book was the
usage of Christians in the Church; because when this was done in Constantine's
Family, it made his Court to resemble a Church. Secondly, That it was reckoned
a pious thing to compose and learn a Form of Prayer; which Eusebius would not
have commended, if Forms had not been esteemed lawful, and commonly used in
public; And, Thirdly, That those who use Forms of Prayer, either by committing
them to memory, or by frequent use, might often lift up their Eyes to Heaven in
the repeating of them. So that we may grant his Instance of Constantine's
Effigies on his Coin, represented as in a praying posture, with Hands and Eyes
lifted up to Heaven Disc. of Liturg. page 10.
. For since we are sure he used Forms, this only shows the folly of his arguing
from that posture, that such as did use it could not pray by a Form. I shall
therefore conclude this Evidence with this further Observation, That we cannot
doubt that Christians had accustomed themselves to pray by Forms in Public
before the time of this Religious Prince, who was guided by those Bishops who
had been Confessors for the Faith, and yet composed and used Forms of Prayer,
and was highly commended for it; nor did any of that Age object this, as any
Innovation in the Christian Worship; but Eusebius particularly reckons it as an
Instance of his Piety, that He ordered all his Army at a certain Signal given
by one Man, to send up one and the same premeditated Prayer to God (...) Vita
Constant. lib 4. cap. 19.
. Which shows, That the Christians did then worship God by premeditated and
prescribed Forms, and not in the Extempore way, which our Adversaries pretend
to be the ancient Mode.

S. Athanasius, An. Dom. 326.
. 3. Soon after flourished the Great Athanasius, in whom there are evident
marks of a public Liturgy; for we have noted before, That the People can never
make certain and vocal Responses, but only where the public Prayers are made in
a known Form; but nothing can be plainer, than that they made such Responses in
the Diocese of Alexandria. For he alluding to the ancient Litanick way of
Praying, declares, when he said, Let us pray for the safety of the most
Religious Emperor Constantius; that all the People immediately answered with
one Voice, Christ help Constantius Athanas. Apol ad Constant. page 156 and 157.
. In another Tract he tells us, The People mourned and groaned to God in the
Church; all of them crying to the Lord and saying, Spare thy People, good Lord
spare them; give not thine Heritage for a reproach to their Enemies Idem Epist.
ad Solitar. page 239.
; which is an original piece of Litany, and a known Form prescribed in
Scripture, retained in the Primitive Church, and continued still in use among
us. Athanasius also speaks of the Prayers at the Communion, as a distinct
Office; affirming, That the People offered up these Prayers with one Voice, and
without any manner of disagreement; adding, That in that great multitude there
was but one Voice, when they unanimously answered, Amen Idem Apol. ad Constant.
page 159.
. From these and other Testimonies the Centuriators confess there were Forms of
Prayer used at Alexandria in his time Magdeb. Cent. 4. cap. 6. page 412.
; and the Learned Bishop Bilson observes, That the Church (in that Age) thought
it not enough, for the Simple to say Amen they knew not to what; but requiring
and appointing their devout, distinct and intelligent Answers, Confessions,
Blessings and Thanksgivings, as well in the ministration of the Lords Supper,
as in other parts of their public Service Bilson's Christ Subje^t. part 4. p.
435.
. So that it is plain, he believed there was a Form wherein the Peoples part of
all Offices was appointed by the Church, which could not be done in the
Extempore way. I shall only further note, That Athanasius orders the People, to
sing the Psalms in the very Words wherein they are written: Affirming, That he
who thus repeats them may be confident God will hear these Supplications Ath^n.
de inter. Psalm. page 303.
. Which confirms that which was observed before out of Origin, That the Church
of Alexandria had many Forms of Prayer out of the Psalms.

As for my Adversary, He omits all these passages, and (as is usual with him)
he mentions nothing of this Father but two places, out of which he hopes to
raise some Objections against Forms of Prayer. First, He says, The Arians, who
charged Athanasius with burning the Bible, do not mention any Indignity done to
the Liturgy; whence he gathers, there was no Liturgy used there ourse of page
13.
. But let it be noted, that he falsifies the Historian who says, they charged
him with burning The Holy Books (...) Socrat. hist. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 539.
(in the plural Number) which may very well take in the Liturgy as well as the
Bible, being reckoned also an Holy or Sacred Book: And we have showed, That in
the Emperor Constantine's Court, there were Books of Prayers, as well as of
Holy Scripture, and therefore it is likely there was so also at Alexandria: For
even in the relation of the Arians Cruelty there, He writes of a Virgin who was
very ill treated by them, who had her Psalter (wherein were many of their Forms
of Prayer) in her hand Athan. ad Orthod. de perfec. Arian. page 171.
. Secondly, He alleges a place out of Theodoret, which affirms (as he says)
That the Devils were more afraid of Athanasius his Prayers, than of others; and
thence concludes, that he prayed Extempore Discourse of Liturg. p. 129.
. I Reply, That Theodoret makes no comparison between his praying and others;
and if he had, it would utterly have spoiled his Cause; because, if the Devils
feared Athanasius Prayers more than any others, as being Extempore, then it
would follow, that all others had prayed by Forms; so that upon that
supposition Athanasius had prayed Extempore, contrary to the general use of the
Church. But indeed, Theodoret is only saying, That the Devil hated him for his
fervent Praying, and rational Preaching, by which he converted many Theoderet.
hist lib. 3. cap. 8.
; he makes no comparison between him and others, nor does he say one word to
prove, that Athanasius did not pray by a Form; we therefore will freely grant
our Adversary, That not Phrases, but Devotion of Mind is the Fountain of
Prayer. And we argue from thence, That it was Athanasius his Devotion, not his
Phrases, that was so terrible to the Devil: That crafty Spirit is not afraid of
new Words, or Extempore Phrases; it is the inward Devotion of Mind which he
dreads, and that Athanasius did doubtless exercise, to a very high degree, even
in the use of those Forms, which were then allowed and prescribed by the
Church. Wherefore our Adversary gains nothing by this Father.

^^vianus Antioch. An. Dom. 348.
. 4. In the time of Athanasius, Leontius an Arian was Bishop of Antioch, who
having altered some few Words in the ancient Form of the Gloria Patri, used to
repeat it in a low Voice to conceal that alteration; but as soon as the
Orthodox perceived the Fraud, Flavianus and Others would not communicate with
this Leontius, but worshipped God in a separate Congregation. And in this
Assembly, Flavianus and Diodorus divided the Choir into two parts, and made
them sing the Psalms of David alternately; which Custom (as Theodoret says)
beginning first at Antioch, was soon received all the World over Theodoret.
hist. lib. 2. c. 24.
. Now from hence our Adversary infers, that the way of singing alternately
(which necessarily supposes a Form to sing by) came but late into the Church;
and he charges Socrates with downright Falsehood, who ascribes the Original of
this way of Singing to Ignatius Discourse of Liturg. p. 167.
. But first, if all our Adversary says were true, this Age cannot be accounted
very late, for Christianity had not been settled Twenty years in Peace when this
practice began at Antioch. But he wrongs Theodoret by his Inference; the
Historian does not say this way of Singing began then; for we have showed out
of Eusebius concerning the Essenes, and out of Pliny, Tertullian, etc. that
Hymns and Anthems were sung alternately, and therefore in Forms from the very
beginning of Christianity, and the Gloria Patri (as Theodoret here notes) was
at this time so ancient, and so known a Form at Antioch, that the Orthodox
would not endure the least word of it to be changed. Wherefore he only says,
That the Custom of singing David's Psalms alternately, did then first begin at
Antioch; which may be true, and yet Ignatius (for all that) might long before
bring in the way of singing Hymns alternately (...). apud (...). lib. 6. ^^^
. And, if we consider that Paulus Samosatenus had put down the Hymns made in
Honor of Christ soon after Ignatius his time, and that diverse of Leontius his
Predecessors in this See of Antioch were Heretics ^^^^doret. (...) 22. (...).
^ap. 10.
; it is not improbable these Bishops might alter (not only the Hymns, but) the
Old way of singing them; so that Flavianus did rather restore than invent this
Alternate Singing. However this is certain, that he applied it to David's
Psalms, and that S. Basil, S. Ambrose, and all eminent Bishops every where
began to sing the Psalms that way (...) we still do in our Cathedral (...) nor
did any Christians (before (...) ^^ssenters appeared) ever find any fault with
it: Yea, this way of Singing by turns, was so taking at Antioch, that it drew
all the People from Leontius; so that he was forced to beg of Flavianus to come
back to the Church, And perform the same Liturgy there -- (...) Theodor. lib.
2. cap. 24.
. For we must observe, that in these separate Assemblies the Orthodox did more
than barely sing Psalms, they had all the public Service, which is here called
A Liturgy: And that consisted of Praise and Prayer; The Praises were the
Psalms, Gloria Patri, and other ancient Hymns which were restored by this
Congregation of True Believers, and were all certainly in Forms, as we may
conclude from the way of singing them: The Prayers are not mentioned here by
either of these Historians; But Socrates relates, that soon after this (in
opposition to the Arians) S. Chrysostom enlarged the Evening Prayers (...)
Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 7.
, which must be by adding to the Forms; because, if it had been in every
Ministers Breast to make those Evening Prayers longer or shorter, as he pleased
in his Extempore Way, there could have been no addition made to them. And if
Flavianus in his time used Prayers as well as Psalms in his Congregation (as
the word Liturgy imports) it is very unlikely that the Prayers should be of one
fashion, and the Praises of another; therefore we shall conclude, That both
their Prayers and Praises were celebrated by known Forms, as they were wont to
be in other Orthodox Churches, where we have seen that the People had their
Responses and bore their parts, as well in the Prayers as they did in the
Praises: Nor can we think the Arians would have omitted to charge the Orthodox
with Innovation, both in Praises and Prayers, if they had now first begun in so
divided a Church as Antioch, to use prescribed Forms in either of these Duties.

Cyrillus, Hieros. An. Dom. 350.
. 5. S. CYRIL was made Bishop of Jerusalem in the midst of this Century, but
his Catechetical Discourses were composed long before. And they are of two
sorts; First His Catecheses to the Unbaptized, wherein we can expect no account
of Liturgy, because in that Age they thought it profaned the Mysteries of
Divine Worship, to teach Unbelievers the Things or Words used there, which they
conceived none but the Baptized or the Faithful ought to know: So that our
Adversary is very impertinent to cite these Discourses to the Unbaptized, to
prove, There could be no Written Forms then used, because they kept their
Worship close, as being a Mystery Discourse of Liturg. page 34
. For S. Cyril only says, They spoke of these things covertly to the
Catechumens, that the Faithful who knew them might understand, and those who
knew them not, might not be prejudiced (...) Cyril. Catec. 6. page 60.
. Now if the Father speak of the Christian Worship (as he supposes, who cites
him in this Dispute) this only shows, that the Strangers did not know it; but
it seems by Cyril, that the Faithful knew it so well (being a known Form of
Words) that if it were but darkly hinted at, they presently understood the
Ministers meaning, which they could not have done if the Prayers used among the
Faithful had been made Extempore, and varied every day. So again, where he
cites a Caution that S. Cyril gives the Faithful in his Preface, Not to tell
any thing to the Catechumens, who as yet were out of the Church (...) Cyril.
(...). Disc. of Liturg. page 41.
: I would only ask, how the Faithful could remember the various and uncertain
Phrases of Extempore Prayers, so as to be able to repeat them again? Indeed
there might be danger of their doing this in constantly used Forms, and the
very Caution supposes they used such in those days. But we need not fly to
Suppositions, we have our Adversaries Concessions, as to the Second sort of
Cyril's Catechetical Discourses, viz. those to the Faithful, which are called,
His Mystagogical Catechisings: Our Author grants, It appears by S. Cyril, that
the People had of old some part in the public Service Disc of Liturg. page 44.
citing Cyril. Catech. mystag. 5.
. Now we have showed that cannot be, unless the Public Service be in known
Forms; so that it is an unparallelled Insolence in him to cite this very place
of S. Cyril again afterward Discourse of Liturg p. 138.
, and challenge any Judicious Eye, to discover any thing of a Form therein:
For, if the Reader have not S. Cyril's Works to consult, let him look upon Mr.
Clarkson's own Book Discourse of Liturg. Marg. of page 14^. and of page 175,
176.
, where he himself cites out of this very place of S. Cyril very many Ancient
Forms, which then were almost generally used in all Churches, and particularly
in the Church of Jerusalem, in their public Office. And all of those Forms and
Responses (which he cites) being put together, make up as clear and full a
Liturgy (as to the Peoples part especially) as can be set down in Writing: But
since he is so confident, we will first observe one thing, and then set down
the particulars. The Observation is this, That S. Cyril was here expounding the
Liturgy (not to Priests, who are presumed to understand their part of the
Office;) but to the Faithful, who knew the Words of these public Forms, which
required their distinct Answer, but perhaps might not fully understand the
Sense; and therefore S. Cyril here briefly passes over the Priests part, and
only enlarges upon the Peoples share of the Office. This being premised, Let it
be noted, that S. Cyril says to his Auditors, That in the Eucharistical
Office, The Priest cries, Lift up your hearts, and says he, You answer, We
lift them up unto the Lord -- Then the Priest says, Let us give thanks unto
the Lord; and you reply, It is meet and just Cyril. Cateches. Mystag. 5.
; which are the very Forms that we meet with in S. Cyprian, etc. above 100
years before. But S. Cyril goes on to the Priests part, and there indeed only
mentions the general Heads, for which he gave God Thanks in an Eucharistical
Collect.

Next he mentions The Seraphic Hymn, viz. Holy, Holy, Holy; and speaks of their
singing together with Angels and Archangels. Then he briefly describes The
Prayer of Consecration, and The Prayer for all Estates of Men, which were said
by the Priest alone. And, after this (says he) you say the Lords Prayer,
(which being the Peoples part, is there largely expounded:) And then the Priest
said, Give Holy things to those that are holy; And the People Answered, There
is one Holy, even one Lord Jesus Christ. Then one begins to sing that Psalm, O
taste and see how gracious the Lord is, etc. And when they receive the Bread and
the Cup, they are to say at each of them, Amen. Finally, after they have
Communicated they must stay for that Prayer, Wherein God is praised for making
us partakers of these Mysteries Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5. a page 240. -- ad
page 245. Vide locum.
. Now if we compare this with those Accounts already produced out of the
FATHERS, or those that follow; or, if we examine it by the Ancient Liturgies,
or by our own Communion Office, This is so full a proof of a prescribed Form
being then used at the Eucharist, in the Church of Jerusalem at that Time, that
he must have a Forehead of Brass who can deny it. Indeed, being a popular
Discourse made by a Catechist, he does not presume to set down and explain the
Priests part; but that is made up by the Ancient Liturgy, which goes under S.
James his Name, the Ancient part of which I will now prove was the public
Service of the Church at Jerusalem, long before S. Cyril's time.

. 6. The Liturgy of S. JAMES.
I have often wondered to see many Learned Protestants dispute earnestly against
those Ancient Liturgies, which now appear to the World under the Name of S.
JAMES, or others of the Apostles, and level all their Arguments against the
Titles, and the Modern Corruptions of these Liturgies: Since neither those of
the Roman nor Reformed Church, who (in this Age) defend them, are so vain to
pretend, either that the Titles imposed on them are true, with respect to all
that is contained in these Liturgies; or, that all passages in the Modern
Copies are Apostolical. So that to go about to prove, That S. James did not
compose that whole Office which is now extant under his Name is highly
impertinent, since no Body in this Age of any Note has affirmed it. Bellarmin
and Card. Bonaventure, with others of the Romanists; Dr. Hammond, and diverse
Learned Reformed Divines do confess, That the Title does not belong to all that
which is now found in this Liturgy, and own, that diverse things have been added
to it in later Times: But that which we maintain is this, That the Liturgy now
extant under S. James his Name, does contain many Primitive Prayers and
Responses, which were the public Forms used at Jerusalem long before S. Cyril's
Time: And though S. James be not the undoubted Author of this Office, yet if it
were made and used at Jerusalem before the beginning of this Century, that is
sufficient to confute him (who ascribes the Original of all Liturgies to the
Fifth and Sixth Centuries) and will fully prove Liturgies to be as Ancient as
the settling of Christianity it self; which is all that I am obliged to make
out. Now that the main of this Office was used long before at Jerusalem, I
think is very clear from the harmony and agreement which we find between S.
James his Liturgy, and that described by S. Cyril, and expounded to the
Catechumens of that Church; The accounts differ only in some Words and Phrases,
but agree in many places in the very Syllables, and in all places in Method and
in the Sense; the difference being not so great, but it may be well imputed to
variety of Copies, and to the diverse Ages, in which the Liturgy was
Transcribed; every Age delighting to alter something in its Ancient Forms, as we
see in our own incomparable Liturgy, which has been more than once revised,
and altered in some places. But let it be considered, First, that there were
public Forms at Jerusalem in S. Cyrils time, and that he who expounded part of
them, while he was a Catechist, could not be supposed to make these Forms,
therefore they were in use long before him; and to prove this, let us note,
that S. Cyril pretends not to be Author of these Offices; but when he has
delivered them and expounded them, he calls them Traditions, (that is, something
conveyed down to them from their Fore Fathers,) and charges them to keep them
(...) Cyr. Cat. Mystag. 5. page 245.
. So that at least they were made by some Bishop of Jerusalem before that Age;
It Is true, Cyril does not mention S. James his name, but he having been the
first Bishop of that See, and probably laying the Foundation of this Liturgy
there, soon after Cyrils time, ( viz. within 80 years,) Proclus Bishop of
Constantinople, An. 434. calls this Liturgy by S. James his name; saying, it
was so large, that Men who were engaged in secular business could not attend
it, and so desired S. Basil to compose a shorter Form Proclus Constant. Epist.
de traditione divin. Missae, ap. Bonav. de rebus Liturg. lib. 1. cap. 9.
; And though that, and S. Chrysostoms, had made this Liturgy to be laid aside
at Constantinople; yet the famous Council of Trullo Council. Constan. ^in Trullo
can. 32 An. Dom ^80.
, there, cites it under S. James his name, as Authentic evidence in a dispute:
It is therefore most notoriously false, in our Adversary to say Balsamon
declares in his notes upon this Canon of Trullo, that the Greeks under the
Patriach of Constantinople, and those of the Diocese of the Orient, utterly
disclaimed this Liturgy, 1200 years after Christ Disc. of Liturg. p. 149.
. For Balsamon there affirms, that S. James the Brother of our Lord, being the
first Bishop of Jerusalem, first delivered an holy Liturgy; but the Church of
Constantinople (having another Form in his time) did not receive it, nor would
he permit the Patriarch of Alexandria to use it in his great Church, as he
desired, though Balsamon confess it was used by those of Jerusalem and
Palestine on great Festivals, even in his time Balsam. not in 32. can. Council.
in Trull. Bever. Tom. 1. page 193.
. So that the Greek Church did not utterly disclaim this Liturgy; they owned S.
James to have been the first Author of it, and held Communion with those
Churches which used it; only having for some Ages used other Forms, they
thought not fit to permit this Liturgy, to be read in their great Church; and
this confirms my Position, viz. That there was anciently such a Form of Prayers
used in the Church of Jerusalem: But our Adversary objects Disc. of Liturg.
page 149. etc. ad p. 154.
. First, That this Liturgy is not mentioned by any Fathers or Councils: I
reply, The matter of it, and the very Words are mentioned by many Fathers, and
the very name and Title, (as we have showed) are found in Proclus, and in the
Council of Trullo. Secondly, If S. James made it (he says,) it ought to be
accounted Apostolical, and ought never to be added to, diminished or altered.
Answer, If S. James had made it for his Church of Jerusalem, other Apostles
might make other Forms for other Apostolical Churches; so that S. James his
Liturgy would not have been necessary for all places. But he knows, we hold that
S. James, and the other Apostles Celebrated the Sacrament at first, by very
short Forms, probably using only the Lords Prayer, the Words of Consecration,
and an Hymn of praise: and while there were inspired Bishops, they added diverse
Collects, Responses and Prefaces, which being writ down and remembered, brought
forth the Primitive Liturgies in the next Age, after those Miraculous Gifts of
Prayer ceased. Now since all Liturgies retain those things which are essential
and were certainly Apostolical, in other parts of the Office, every Church may
vary as they find expedient. Thirdly, He objects that there are many
Corruptions and gross Superstitions in this Liturgy. Answer, We freely confess
it, and as freely own, that none of these are either Apostolical, or so much as
Ancient; But let it be noted these Corruptions crept in by the itch of
altering, which has infected every Age, and all Churches; and by this means
brought in all the Corrupt Opinions of every Age, into the service of God; thus
the names of Saints and Ora pro nobis got into the Roman Litanies, about the
ninth Age, or somewhat later; but he would be an odd Logician, who should argue
that the Roman Church had no Litany before the ninth Age, because the
invocation of Saints, came in about that time; Since in their Litany, there are
other Petitions very Pious and agreeable to the Doctrine of the pure and
Primitive Church; yea, the very Phrases are found in the most ancient and
Orthodox Fathers; and there are yet extant some Manuscript Litanies, without
any names of Saints. So as to this Liturgy, there are many Corruptions in it,
which are modern Additions; but there are also many Pious and excellent
Prayers, agreeable to Scripture, and to the best Antiquity; yea, the very Words
of which are found in the Orthodox and elect Fathers. Fourthly, Therefore
whereas he objects, that we had better wholly reject this Liturgy, because we
know not how to separate the Corruptions from what is pure and Orthodox. I
reply, We can easily distinguish between them; for we desire to justify no more
of this Liturgy, than what is agreeable to the Scriptures, and to the Doctrine
and Practice of the first four Centuries. And there is enough of those Primitive
passages in this Liturgy, to convince any reasonable Man, that there was a Form
of public Prayers and Praises prescribed and used in the Church of Jerusalem,
long before S. Cyrils time; and therefore I place this Liturgy here, as being
an Authentic Evidence, there were Forms of Prayer allowed in this Age, which is
all that I am concerned to prove. I conclude with Causabon's observation, that
the Liturgy under the Title of S. James, which is now extant, is partly true
and partly false Causab. Exerc. in Baron. xvi.. 41. page 384.
: And truly all Du-Plessis his Arguments, (which our Adversary has
Transcribed) do only show, that S. James was not Author of all that Liturgy,
which now goes under his name Du-Pl^ssis (...) he Mass. (...) 1. chap. 2.
; but that learned Man never inferred from thence, (as this Author does,) that
there were no public Forms used in the Fourth Century; for Du-Plessis
acknowledges, there was an Order and Form, for the Celebration of the Sacrament
in this Age; and shows wherein it differed from the Modern corrupted Roman Mass
Idem ibid. Book 1. chap. 4. p. 30. etc.
, and this may suffice to say concerning this Liturgy of S. James.

. 7. There is another Liturgy in the Apostolical Constitutions ascribed to
Clement; Clement's Constitutions, circ. An. Dom. 360.
and though the Author to make the Forms and Rites of his own Age look more
Venerable, falsely claps the Apostles Names upon them; yet he is owned by all
Judicious Men, to have been a Person Learned and well Skilled in Ecclesiastical
Offices, and is allowed to be worthy of Credit, (even by our Adversary Disc. of
Liturg. p. 39. marg. and p. 110.
), in that which he relates concerning that time wherein he lived, which (as we
will presently show,) must be at least as early as the middle of this Century.
Wherefore so early, we have a clear and undeniable Evidence, that there was a
prescribed Liturgy, and Forms of Prayer used upon all public occasions. The
particulars are too long to insert, but the several Heads are these. These
Constitutions have the Form of the Deacons warning those who were to
Communicate, no^ to come with Malice or Hypocrisy Constit. Apostol. lib. 2.
cap. 58.
; They mention the alternate Singing of David's Psalms Ibid. cap. 61.
, begun at Antioch not long before. A short account of the general Litany, made
by the Deacon, for the whole World and every part of it, for Priests and
Princes, for the Bishop and the Emperor, and the Peace of all Id. ibid.
; and also the Form of the Bishops Blessing, and of the final Prayer Id. ibid.
page 45
, probably to be used in ordinary Assemblies. In these Constitutions, we find
private Christians enjoined to say the Lords Prayer, as a Form thrice in a Day
Ibid. lib. 7. cap. 25.
; and we have Forms drawn up for their use, both before and after the Sacrament
Ibid. cap. 26.27.
, and upon diverse other occasions Ibid. cap. 34, 35 etc.
; There is also an Office of Baptism, with Forms of Renunciation of the Devil,
and confessing the Faith, as also a Form for Consecrating the Water, etc. Ibid.
cap. 41, 42, 43.
: An Office for the Ordination of a Bishop Lib. 8. cap. 3.
, and also for the Ordaining Priests and Deacons, etc. Ibid. cap. 24, 25.
. But most particularly there is the Office at the Communion, with all those
Forms, used at those most Solemn Assemblies Ibid. lib. 8. (...) 5. ad (...)*
. That is to say, The Litany said by the Deacon, for the Catechumens (the
Faithful answering to each Petition Domine miserere,) with the Bishops Prayer
for them. The like Litany and prescribed Prayers, for those that were
possessed, those who were to be Baptized, and for the Penitents. And after
these were all gone out, there is also prescribed a Litany by the Deacon, and a
Prayer by the Bishop, for the Faithful. After which follows Forms prescribed
for the Salutation, the first Benediction, the offering of their Gifts, the
invitation, the Preface, Lift up your Hearts, etc. The Hymn called Trisagion,
(to be sung by all the People:) And also a Form for consecrating the Elements;
An intercession for all Estates of Men; The order for receiving and saying
Amen, when they do receive; The singing of the xxxiv. Psalm, O taste and see how
Gracious the Lord is. Finally, there is a public Form of Prayer after the
Communion, and the concluding Benediction, with many other Forms, on other less
Solemn occasions, Particularly there are Forms, for Morning and Evening Prayer,
(as our Adversary confesses Disc. of Liturg. page 162. Marg.
.) Now if all this will not amount to a Liturgy, then there is no such thing in
the World; and if it be a Liturgy, then prescribed Forms must needs be used
when this Author writ: yea and long before, otherwise he could not have
pretended, that the Apostles were Authors of these Forms; his very pretending
that, shows, that those of that Age had lost the memory of the first composers
of these Forms; and this Author took advantage from their Immemorial use, to
ascribe them to the Apostles. Now our Adversary being aware of this, though he
dare not deny these Constitutions to be good Evidence for that time wherein
they were written, yet labors to disparage, and baffle this clear Witness, by
several Crafty Cavils and Objections.

First, He thrusts this Writer down above one whole Century, and pretends he
lived in the end of the Fifth, or the beginning of the Sixth Age Disc. of
Liturg. p. 110, and 111.
. But this is most notoriosly false, as may be proved. First, Because the
Fathers of the Fourth Century cite it, as a known Book in this Age. Secondly,
Because the matter of these Forms are exactly agreeable to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Third and Fourth Centuries. For the first point, Athanasius
reckons this Book, (which he calls the Doctrine of the Apostles,) among those
which the Fathers allowed ^o be Read in the Church; therefore it was extant
long before his time Athan. Epistol. ad Ammam. Monach.
. Eusebius also computes it among those Writings, which, though they were not
Canonical Scripture, yet were approved by the Ancients, and distinguishes it
from the Books, which the Heretics had Forged Eusebius. Hist. lib. Cap. 19. page
71.
. S. Cyril in the middle of this Century, cites that passage about the Phaenix
out of it, and ascribes ^t by name to Clemens Cyril. Catech. 18. p. 213.
Collat. cum Constit. Clem. lib. 5. cap. 8.
; which he would not have don, if it had not been then accounted an approved
Book, and well known to those of his Age. Epiphanius quotes it very often, (in
his Book against Heresies,) by the express name of the Apostolical
Constitutions, as an Author of eminent Credit, and whose Testimony was
sufficient, as to what was a Primitive usage Epiphan. Panar. lib. 1. Tom. 3.
Haer. 45 and Lib. 3. Tom. 1. Haer. 75.
; and he gives this Character of them, That many doubted of them, but did not
reject them. For (says he) all regular Order is contained in them, and there
is nothing contrary either to Faith or Worship, or to the Rule of Church
Government Epiphan. Ibid. lib. 3. Tom. 1. Haer. 70.
; that is, they contain all necessary directions, as to Doctrine, Divine Offices
and Discipline. Now if this Book had this Reputation in this Fourth Century, we
must believe it was written sooner, and we may well allow it as good Evidence,
for Matter of Fact at least in this Age, where we are content to place it; and
we hope our Adversaries will not be able to except against our modest
assignation of the Constitutions to the later part of this Century, because Mr.
Cook thinks their true Author was Contemporary with S. Basil, who died An. 378
Discou se of L^turg. p. 110. Ma^g.
. And Monsieur Daile reckons these Constitutions among the most ancient Books
which are Apocryphal and confesses, They were published soon after the year of
Christ 330, and therefore he cites them as good Evidence for the Usages of this
Century and the former D^^le p aefat. ad l ^run. de Relig. ^^^tus obj ^o,
p^o^e^nem.
; for which reason he must allow them to be a sufficient Witness for the use of
Forms and Liturgy in these two Ages. And truly, Secondly, We may prove this
Book to be at least thus ancient by the Matter of it, which is Primitive, pure
and pious, and the Forms are taken out of Scripture, or the Writings of the
most genuine Fathers, and are proper to the several occasions, and agreeable to
the Opinion and Practice of these Ages, being free from those grosser
Corruptions of the later Times, such as Invocation of the Virgin Mary, the
Saints and Angels; Adoration of Images, Crosses and Relics; the Sacrifice
Propitiatory of the Mass; the Popes Infallibility and Supremacy, with such
like: Yea, this Liturgy being allowed to have been used in this Century, and
not mentioning any of these things, is a good proof, That they are all
notorious Corruptions and Innovations; there is nothing but some Charitable
Prayers for the Dead, without any respect to Purgatory, which can be excepted
against in these Offices; because we see in Arnobius and others, that this
Usage was crept into the Christian Worship, at least as early as the beginning
of this Century. Wherefore we conclude, that these Constitutions, and the Forms
contained therein are a clear and convincing Evidence, that a prescribed
Liturgy was used in this Age.

But, Secondly, our Adversary goes on to raise other Scruples; For he tells us
out of this Author, that they were so strict in concealing their Mysteries,
that if a Catechumen by chance had been present, they immediately Baptized him
Discourse of Liturg. page 43. Marg.
. I Answer, It is very pleasant for him to cite a Book wherein all these
Mysteries are written down at large, to prove there were no Mysteries written
down in that Age; and it is very weak, or something worse, to say they
concealed them from the Faithful, because they kept them secret from the
Catechumens: He knew very well that in ^^is Age they did write down their
Offices, but charged the Priests and Faithful, to keep these Words and Writings
from the Unbaptized. Another Objection is, That the Creed set down in the
Constitutions, is not the same with the Apostles Creed, therefore there was no
certain Form of Creed Discourse of Liturg. p. 103.
. I Reply, The Creed here set down was the Form then used in that Church, of
which this Author was a Member (probably of Antioch)* And as new Heresies
arose, it was necessary for all Churches to make larger Paraphrases upon some
Articles of the old Creed, to secure all that were admitted into the Church
against those Heresies: But still this Creed thus Paraphrased, was a Form
prescribed to all that were Baptized in that Diocese, and that is enough to
prove there were Forms used in every Church; nor do I see any thing that he can
infer from hence, but that since the Apostles made that Creed which goes by
their Name, and yet this Creed differs from it; therefore the Apostles did not
make these Constitutions themselves, which we freely confess. Like this, is his
Objection about the Form of renouncing the Devil in Baptism, which is not set
down in the same Words in these Constitutions, as it is in other Fathers
Discourse of Liturg. p. 106.
. I Reply, This was the Form at Antioch, that in S. Cyril was the Form at
Jerusalem, that in S. Chrysostom the Form at Constantinople, and the difference
between them is so very small, that it shows they all were taken from one
Original; and all Churches had Forms of this Renunciation; yet in several
Diocesses they had some diversity in expressing it; but this does not prove
either that they had no Forms, nor that any Inferior Minister was left at
liberty to express it as he pleased, these being obliged to keep to the Form
prescribed in their own Church. I shall only desire the Reader to observe, that
in that large Margin, where he has heaped up variety of Forms of Renouncing
the Devil, one half of them are not the Words of any Churches Form, but only
short and occasional descriptions of it in lax Discourses, and so are not to be
urged as various Forms. Lastly, He picks up several Phrases dispersed up and
down the Constitutions, pretending that the Priest was at liberty to say those
or such like Prayers and Praises Discourse of Liturg. p. 110, 111.
. But first, He falsely expounds most of these Phrases; for when that Author
says, The Priest must pray, or say thus; or, must say these Words, or those
which follow (...) Constit. Apostol. l. 7. cap. 43, 45. l. 8. c. 29, etc.
; and then immediately subjoyns a Form, it is clear to all, that the Priest is
to say that Form and no other. And the same sense may very well be put upon
those other Phrases of the Priests saying such a kind of Prayer, or the Bishops
giving such a kind of Blessing (...) and (...), etc. Constit. ibid. l. 7. cap.
45. and lib. 8. cap. 16.
; viz. that these Phrases do intend no more, than that they shall Pray and
Bless in this wise, or after this sort. For it must be granted, that we have a
prescribed Form for the absolving of the Sick, from which no Minister may vary;
and yet the Rubric before it says, The Priest shall absolve him after this
sort Rubric in Office for Visiting the Sick.
. Wherefore the Author never meant by these Phrases, to leave the Priest to say
what Prayers he pleased in an Extempore way; and indeed when he has set down a
Form, a Prayer made Extempore is not such a like Prayer, nor a Prayer after
that sort. But suppose we should grant (which I do not think we need yield,)
that these Phrases do signify their making any other Form like this, still
this obliges them to Forms; and being these Phrases are but four times in all
that large Book of Offices, it was no great matter to leave the Bishop
(especially) at liberty, to change the Form three or four times in so great
variety of Prayers, Praises, and Benedictions. And if all the rest were fixed
and stated Forms, from which none might vary, that is enough to prove my
Position; and this Objection can no more weaken it, than a Man's alleging, that
Canon of Praying before Sermon in this Form, or to this effect Book of Canons.
; and that Rubric which bids us exhort the sick Man after this Form, or other
like Rubric in Office for Visit* Sick.
; would prove, there was no prescribed Liturgy in the Church of England,
because some liberty is left in a few Cases; yet this is the most that can be
made of this Toping Argument, though we grant all he can desire. I conclude
therefore, that there was prescribed Forms, and a Liturgy used before the
Middle of this Fourth Century, and that these Forms in the Constitutions, were
the Liturgy of some eminent Eastern Church.

. 8. We have no less Authority than S. Hierom, to prove, that Hilary S. Hilary
Bish. of Poictiers, An. Dom. 360.
Bishop of Poictiers, Made one Book of Hymns, and another of Mysteries Hieron.
Catalog. Script. page 378.
; that is, he composed a Liturgy; and since he had lived in the East where
Liturgies now were commonly used, we may reasonably believe he brought the same
Usage into the Gallican Church: For he says, That those without, may hear the
Voice of the People Praying and singing Hymns within the Church, and may
perceive their making Responses to the devout Confessions in the Offices of the
Divine Sacraments Et inter divinorum quoque Sacramentorum officia responsionem
devotae contessionis accipiat. Hilar. Com. in Psalm. 65.
: Which shows, they had an Office for the Holy Communion, wherein the People
bore a part, as they did also in the Hymns and other Prayers, for all which
there were Forms appointed: And these Forms were used Morning and Evening; for
he tells us, That the day began with Prayer, and was closed up with Hymns Idem
in Psalm. 64.
; and blames those whose Lips murmured they knew not what, and while their
Thoughts roved and their Mind was busied about other things, did not attend to
the Office which they were reciting. These and many other passages in him make
it plain, that the Gallican Church had Forms and a Liturgy in this Age.

Yea, it will appear, That all Christian Churches had so, if we consider the
Method that Julian the Apostate Julian the Apostate, An. Dom. 361.
took to establish Paganism, which was to accommodate it as much as possible to
Christianity, the Rites of which he saw were then very popular and taking: And
therefore he devised to make a Form of Prayers in parts, for the Heathen
Worship to set up Schools and Lectures of Philosophy, and to enjoin Penances to
Offenders: Which things (says Nazianzen) are clearly agreeable to our good
Order (...) Nazian. in Jul. Orat. 3 p. 102.
. And Sozomen relating the same thing, says, That Julian designed to adorn his
Gentile Temples with the Order of Christian-Worship; and therefore among other
things, He appointed prescribed Prayers upon Set-days and Hours (...) Zoz.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 15.
. From whence it is as clear as the Sun, That in Julian's Time the Christians
generally used a Form of Prayer in parts, so that the People could make their
Responses, and that they had proper Forms appointed for certain Days, yea, for
the several Hours of Prayer in every Day; and this was so grateful to the
People of that Age, that this ingenious Apostate in one of his Epistles yet
extant, advises his Pagan Priests, to Pray thrice a day, if possible, or
however Morning and Evening, both in private and public; and to learn the Hymns
of the Gods which were made in older and in later Times --; adding, that there
was a Liturgy for these Priests, and a Law directing them what to do in their
Temples, from which they might not vary Julian. Fragment. Epistol. in oper. page
552.
. So that he had actually brought the Christian Orders into the Service of the
Heathen Gods; and because Christians had Responses in their Prayers, and sung
their Hymns alternately; so did he appoint the Pagans, to pray and sing by such
like Forms.

. 9. The next place must be assigned to the Council of Laodicea, The Council of
Laodicea An. Dom. 365.
which is one of the earliest Synods, after the settling of Christianity, and
its Canons have always been received, by the Catholic Church; And here we have
many convincing proofs, that the Christians then had written and prescribed
Forms of Prayer and Praise, and used a Liturgy in the Service of God. First we
find an order, that the Heretics, who returned to the Church, should learn the
Creeds (...) Council. Laod. Can. 7. Bever. Tom. 1. page 455.
; probably the Apostles and the Nicene Creed: However they must be Set Forms,
or otherwise how could Men learn them? Secondly, In this Council we meet with
Canonical Singers, who sang out of written Books, and none but they are allowed
to Sing in the Church (...) Ibid. Can. 15. p. 459.
; that is, as Balsamon well Notes, to begin the Hymns; for the People were
always allowed to follow them, and Sing with, and after them. Now if they had
Forms of Praise written in a Book, why might they not have their Prayers
written also in a Book? It Is certain they had no great esteem for Extempore
composures, nor for variety of Forms neither, because they forbid the Reading
of Psalms, composed by private Men in the Church Ibid. Can. ^^ p 480.
; And enjoin the use of the same Office for the Evening Prayer, at whatever
hour of the Afternoon it was said, which is the true meaning of that famous
Canon, about which our Adversary raises so much dust: The Words of it are
these, That the very same Liturgy of Prayers, ought to be used always, both at
three in the Afternoon and in the Evening (...) Can. 18. Bev. Tom. 1. p. 461.
, that is, says Balsamon, they forbid Men to reject the Prayers, which the
Fathers had appointed for three in the Afternoon, and to make new Prayers of
their own, on pretense they used them, at the time of the Evening Hymns. And
Zonaras says, The Council rejects new Prayers, and allows none but such as had
been approved in a Synod, nor would they permit Men, to use Prayers of their
own making in public; but the same Prayers, which had been delivered down to
them, were to be said in every Assembly Balsam. and Zonar. apud. Beve^eg. ibid.
. To which I will only add this. That the whole day being divided by the hours
of Prayer, as it had formerly been among the Jews; the Morning hour took in the
time from Six till Nine; The Noon-hour of Prayer, was said any time between
Nine and Three, and The Evening-hour Prayer might be said between Three in the
Afternoon and Six at Night; soon after which was the time for Singing those
Hymns at the first lighting of Candles; and it seems some put these two last
Offices together, and having said the usual Forms for Evening Prayer at Three
of the Clock, when they were to Sing the Evening Hymns at Candles lighting,
Composed new Forms of Evening Prayer, and used them in the Church, which the
Synod forbids, and enjoins the same Liturgy or Forms of Prayer, which had been
used in the Afternoon, to be repeated over again with the Hymns in the Evening.
Now this Canon made in the Eastern Church, where Liturgies were then commonly
used, must be expounded of a Set and prescribed Form; and therefore diverse of
the Presbyterian persuasion have confessed, that Liturgies have been used for
at least 1300 years See Falkner's Vindic. of Liturg. page 140.
. And Smectymnuus derives the use of them from this Canon, and believes the
sense of it to be, that none should vary but always use the same Form Smectym.
Answer to remonstr. p. 7.
. But our Adversary resolves right or wrong, that Liturgies shall not be
grounded upon this Canon; Wherefore, first he Assigns a date to the Council
later than he ought, for he says it was in the latter end of the fourth
Century Disc. of Litu^g. p. 61.
; whereas it was held soon after the middle of it. Secondly, He reserves this
Canon to the latter end of his Book, not daring to produce it, till he had
prepossessed his Reader with a false Notion, That there were no Liturgies in
this Age Ibid. p. 155.
. Then he recites the Words, of it wrong, putting the Evening before the Ninth
hour Ibid p. 156.
: And in another place, he brings in Caranzas false Translation of this Canon,
who leaves out the main Words, [the same Liturgy] and only Reads it, That
supplications ought always to be Celebrated, at the Ninth hour and in the
Evening Caranz. in the Disc. of Liturg. p. 162.
. But not trusting to any of these shifts, he spends five or six Pages together
in Laboring to pervert the Sense of it; and I must beg the Readers patience,
while I follow him. His first device is, that The same Liturgy of Prayers, may
signify only the same Prayers used often; but the Words not prescribed or
imposed on them by others. I Reply, the Words of the Canon are not used often,
but the same Liturgy of Prayers to be used always. So that if he grant us, (as
here he seems to do) that they were the same Prayers, then it will follow, that
the Synod imposed and prescribed them to be used always. And there is nothing
in the Canon, to import that these Prayers were of their own composing, no such
Word as (...), or de pectore; yea we see Balsamon and Zonaras say this Canon
expressly forbids such Prayers; and yet if the Priests of that Age had made
them, the Council enjoins them never to make any more, but always to use the
same Prayers; but if they had been at Liberty to make new Forms, these could
not be called the same Prayers. But Secondly, He shows all his learning to
prove that (...) did not then signify a Book, or Model of prescribed Forms of
Prayer: But he might have spared all those Quotations, which are brought to
make out, that it signifies The Administration of a public Function or Office,
since we grant that is the general signification of this Word. But we are to
consider it, only as it is applied to Prayers and Praises, and then I affirm,
it signifies a Form of Prayer. Thus Causabon tells us, that beside the general
Notion of a public Function, it also signifies, The prescribed Order for
Celebrating divine Offices; of which kind are those published under the Titles
of Peter, James, Andrew, Basil and Chrysostom, partly true and partly false:
The Latins call it, The Order, or Office; the Greeks sometimes, the Method,
etc. Causab. exercit. in Baron. xvi. p. 384.
. And since it does signify a prescribed Order sometimes, we may reasonably
judge, it does so in this Council; because we see the Hymns, which were a great
part of the public Service, were written Forms, as the xvth Canon, (cited
before) shows; and because Liturgies were then very usual in the Eastern
Church, where this Council was held. And we can prove, (...), was used for a
prescribed Form of Service, not only after this Council, but before it; So when
Flavianus sung David's Psalms alternately at Antioch, (before this Council,) the
Bishop desired, That the same Liturgy, might be used in the Church (...)
T^eo^^ret. lib. 2. cap. 2.
, which may fitly be interpreted, that they would bring those Psalters so
distinguished, for alternate Singing, and use them in the Church. And in the
Council of Sardica (An. 347.) a Bishop coming to a strange City is ordered, To
assemble and perform his Liturgy there (...) Con. Sard. Can. 12.
. Here says Balsamon, Liturgy is not put for Prayers: And Zonaras says (...)
signifies, to send up the accustomed Hymns to God Balsam. and Zonar. in Loc.
Bever. Tom. 1. page 500.
. Our Adversary also grants, that the Heathens had written Forms, and prayed
out of a Book; yet Julian calls the Times when they officiated in their Temples
by these Forms, The time of their performing Liturgies. And when their course
was expired, that he calls, The time when they were not using Liturgy in the
Temples (...) -- and (...) Julian. ep. Fragm. page 552.
. So we may explain Nazianzen, whose Father (as we shall prove) prayed by a
Form; that he was very ill when he came to Church, and was often cured, only by
saying his Liturgy (...) Naz. Orat. 19. page 313.
; and thus we must explain Synesius, where he says Andronicus made him so
unfit to pray, that he was forced to omit the Liturgy of the Altar (...) Synes.
epist. 57. page 193.
; that is, the Communion Office, which was usually performed there. In the Acts
of the Council of Ephesus (An. 431) we read of The Morning and Evening Liturgy;
which can be meant of nothing else but the Forms of Prayer appointed for public
Assemblies in the Morning and Evening (...) Council. Ephesians. B^n. Tom. 1. par 2.
: So also in an ancient Ecclesiastical Historian, a Bishop beginning the
Prayers, is said, To begin his Liturgy The^dor. Lect. page 188.
: And in Theodoret, That place of S. Paul's Epistles, viz. The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. (...) Theodor^t. p. 128. epist. 46. v^xit An. 423.
is said to be, The Preface of the Mystical Liturgy; and accordingly we find it
in the Apostolical Constitutions, placed just in the beginning of the
Communion-Service, or (in Theodoret's Phrase) of the Liturgy for the Sacrament.
I confess I cannot but wonder at my Adversaries citing Justinian also, as if
Liturgy in him did not signify a Form of Prayer; though all men know, the
Greek Church had a Form of Liturgy in his time, and the very places cited by
him have that signification: As when he allows the Nuns one grave old Man to
make the necessary Responses, and One Priest to perform the Liturgy, and give
them the Holy Communion (...) God no ^ tit. 3. de Episc. and C^^r. L. 44.
. So also to sing the Night, the Morning and Evening Prayers and Hymns (which
were in prescribed Forms then) is called the performing the Divine Liturgies
(...) Ibid. L. 43.
. And this is distin guished in another Law from private Devotions; where he
permits men to have a place in their Houses for Prayers, Provided they do none
of those things there which the holy Liturgy does prescribe -- (...) Authent.
coll. 5 tit. 13. Nov. 58.
; where the Holy Liturgy can mean nothing else, but the Book or Office wherein
the Forms of administering the Holy Sacraments was contained; and therefore my
politic Adversary only names this place, but durst not cite it at large. But
those places which he does quote, may properly enough be so expounded: For, to
exclude a Clerk from the Liturgy (...) Cod. lib. 1. tit. 4. L. 33.
, is to suspend him from saying the Public or Common Prayer: And the penalty
upon those who disturb Mysteries or Liturgy (...) Authent. coll. 9. tit. 6.
Nov. 123. cap. 31.
, is no doubt to be inflicted upon those who disturb a Priest in administering
the Sacrament, or in saying his public Office of Prayers. Wherefore we
conclude, that ((...)) when it is applied to praying or praising God, does very
often signify the Form prescribed; and therefore it may very probably signify
so in this Laodicean Council, wherein there are many Evidences, that there was
such a prescribed Form See Can. 15, and 59, cited before.
. And one Canon appropriates the (...) to the Deacons, who (as Balsamon notes)
were to observe the (...), or loud pronunciation of the last Words in the
Collects by the Priest; and with this (...) then they gave notice to the People
to answer, Amen, or make their Responses as the Liturgy required. Now these
Responses at certain places, signified by the Deacon to the People, necessarily
imply a written Form Vid. Balsam. in Council. Laod. Can. 22. Bever. Tom. I. page
463.
; therefore in a Church where written Forms were used, (...) must signify the
prescribed Office. But this will be more clear if we consider the word joined
with it, viz. (...), The same Liturgy of Prayers; this must be expounded of
repeating the same Forms over again, which is the sense we plead for: And if we
translate it, The same ministration of Prayers (as he desires) still it cannot
be meant of new and varied Extempore Prayers, the Priest who prays so
differently cannot properly be said to use the same Ministration; and if this
had been the Councils Sense, then these words ((...)) signify nothing, in that
Case it had been enough to say, Let there be Prayers at Three and Six: But when
they say, Let there be the same Liturgy or public Office of Prayers at Three
and Six; the meaning must be, That they shall repeat the same Prayers, and
therefore the Office was a prescribed Form.

To this my Adversary Objects, That if the Canon be so expounded, then it
decrees that one and the same Form shall be used at several Hours. I Reply, The
Prayers at Three (which is the beginning of the Evening, when the Sun declines
apace) were then, as they are now, Prayers proper for the Evening, and so might
well enough be used when the Evening Hymns were sung, especially by such as by
necessary business were not at the Church at Three in the Afternoon. And it is
plain, that though there were Forms of Hymns at Candlelighting (as my Adversary
takes pains to prove); yet there seems to have been no distinct Form of Prayer
for this Season; under which pretense some bold and zealous Men (like our
Dissenters) would have brought in their own Composures, which the Church here
forbids, and ties them up to the same Forms which were used at Three in the
Afternoon. We conclude therefore, That this Council liked not Extempore
Prayers, nor Forms made by private Persons, Laity or Clergy, but obliged all to
the same Liturgy, when it was proper for the several Seasons. I need not answer
his Instances about the several stated Forms of Hymns and Prayers for the
several Hours of Prayer, since if this were in the Time of the Laodicean
Council or before, it makes against him, and proves prescribed Forms were much
Ancienter than he is willing to grant; and yet these mentioned in the Canon
being Evening Prayers, might properly be said either in the beginning or the
close of the Evening: But if his Instances of such Forms be later than this
Council, they are impertinent; since the following Ages made more Hours of
Prayer, and more proper Forms to them than were known in the Time of the
Council of Laodicea, which rather than it would endure such Prayers as our
Adversary contends for, made them say the same Office over again at
Candle-lighting, which some of them had repeated before at Three in the
Afternoon. And thus we see these Evening Prayers were Forms.

There is another Canon in this same Council, Can. XIX. Council. Laodicen.
which is a clear proof that the Morning Prayers, when the Eucharist was
administered, were Forms also: For the XIXth Canon exactly describes the Order
of this Service, as S. Cyril and the Author of the Constitutions had done,
saving that this Canon only mentions the Method; but the very Words of the
Forms named here, are in the Constitutions: And the Method both here and there,
and in S. Cyril and the Liturgies of S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, do so exactly
agree, that we may be sure this Canon points to the Forms which were then
commonly known and used. After the Sermon this Canon says, First, there was a
Prayer for the Catechumens, (which Causabon tells us was a Form Vid. Causab.
exerc. in Baron. XVI. page 398. ^
, and we may read the Words of it in the Apostolical Constitutions) after which
They were dismissed: Then (says the Canon) followed a Prayer for the
Penitents, (which Albaspinaeus says was) made in set and appointed Words, and
it recited also every one of their Names Certis destinatisque verbis pro
^psorum p^^nitentiam salute supplicabatur, corumque nomina inter ipsas
orationes proferrebantur. Albasp. Obs. iib. 1. cap. 25.
): And then they were dismissed, as the Catechumens were before: Then (says
the Canon) follows Three Prayers for the Faithful; the first to be recited
secretly, the other two with a loud Voice, or with Exclamation (...) Cum
exclamatione.
. The first of these I take to be the Collect, which the Bishop alone makes for
the Faithful, without any Response to be made by the People after it, the Form
of which we have in the Constitutions, Lib. 8. cap. 14. and the saying this
(...), does not mean that it was whispered so as none could hear it; but it
signifies, that there was no Exclamation at the end of this Prayer, nor in any
part of it were the People called upon aloud to join their Responses, because
it was said by the Bishop alone: But the other two, are the two Litanies set
down in the Prayers of the Faithful Constit. Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 13, 18, and
19.
, which Litanies were always said, (...), with loud Voice, and an Exclamation
especially at the end of every Petition, to give notice to the People to be
ready with their Responses, Domine miserere, or the like. So that the Author of
the Constitutions is the best Comment upon this Canon of Laodicea, and both
makes it very intelligible, and proves the Offices were all done by a stated
Liturgy and in set Forms. I know my Adversary tells us, This Canon is no more
than a Rule for Order in placing the Prayers used at the Sacrament Discourse of
Liturg. page ^. and page 61.
. But if we grant this, it will be no advantage to him, because Forms of Prayer
are more capable of being kept to one certain Order, than Extempore Prayers can
be: And there is one thing in this Canon which makes it more than probable,
that the Prayers for the Faithful were Forms; and that is the Reason why (as
this Canon speaks) they dismissed the Catechumens; which seems to be for fear
by daily hearing these Forms, they should remember the Phrases of these
Mysteries, and discover them to profane and common Ears: For if these Prayers
had been Extempore, and the Phrases varied every day (as my Adversary pretends)
the Catechumens might safely have stayed there, it being impossible they should
so learn or remember those various Expressions, as to relate them to any body
after they were gone home. Finally, Why should we not believe this Order, was
the Method of the public Forms of Prayer; there being the same Order exactly
observed in all those Ancient Forms which are extant at this day; and not one
word that intimates any such thing as an Extempore Prayer, or frequent
variation of the Forms either in this Council, or in any Father or Council
about this time? And this may suffice for these Canons which after all his
shuffling Objections are good Evidence for a stated Liturgy in this Age.

Optatus Milev. An. Dom. 368.
. 10. Optatus Milevitanus, though he writ on a different Subject, yet he has
diverse Expressions, which suppose and imply, that there was in his time a
Liturgy used in Africa: For he mentions the Peoples joining with the Priest in
the Divine Service, and blames the Donatists, for shutting the mouths of all
Christian Nations, and forcing all the People to be silent Optat. Milev. lib.
2. page 47.
; which shows they used alternate Singing and Responses among the Orthodox, and
that Method cannot be but by Form. Yea, he declares there were some certain
Words so established and enjoined by Law in the celebration of the Sacrament,
that the Donatists themselves could not pass them by Illud legitimum in
Sacramentorum mysterio praeterire non posse. Id. ibid. page 53.
; and from their using these Words he draws an Argument against their Schism,
which he could not have done, if they had not been fixed and a Set Form. My
Adversary mistakes this passage, and fancies that Optatus refers to the Prayer
of Consecration, which could never be omitted Discourse of Liturgy, p. 61.
; but the holy Father explains himself in the same Page, and shows us, that he
means the Prayer For the Holy Catholic Church. You say (says Optatus) that you
offer for that One Church, which is diffused over the whole World Offerre vos
dicitis pro una Ecclesia quae sit in toto terrarum orb diffusa. Optat. ibid.
: Thus he says the Orthodox prayed, and this was so established, that the
Donatists (in this, exceeding our Dissenters, that they had not thrown off the
Churches Forms) could not omit it. And thus the Learned* Fr. Baldwin expounds
it, He means (says he) that Solemn Form of the Canonical Prayer, in which it
is said, We offer unto thee this Sacrifice for that One Church which is
diffused over all the World Fr. Bald. notis in Optat. page 185.
: Which Words also are in the Mystical Prayer set down by the Author of the
Apostostolical Constitutions Constit. Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 13. and cap 18.
, and are found with little variation in that very Prayer in all the ancient
Liturgies. Now by [Legitimum] Optatus cannot mean that these Words were
enjoined by the Law of Christ, because this Form being not enjoined by any
Scripture, therefore it must signify a Form enjoined by the Laws of the
Church, which in that Age did so strictly enjoin this very Prayer, that (it
seems) None might omit or pass it by. And there is another Form of
Ecclesiastical Appointment in the same Author, brought in with the same
Preface, You cannot omit (says he again to the Donatists) that which is
established by Law; for certainly you say, Peace be with you Et non potuistis
praetermittere, quod legittimum est, utique dixistis, Pax vabiscum. ic. lib. 3.
page 73.
. Now this was the Form of Episcopal Benediction, we have it in all old
Liturgies, and it is plain by Optatus his raising an Argument from these Words,
That the African Church had them in their Liturgy, which was so firmly
established that none could omit any part of it, No, not so much as alter the
order: For Optatus again says, After you have absolved the Penitents,
presently you turn to the Altar, and cannot omit the Lords Prayer Mox ad altar
conversi Dominicam Orationem praetermittere non potestis. Idem lib. 2. page 57.
. So that the very order of repeating the Lord's Prayer at the Altar, in the
beginning of the Prayers for the Faithful (which was but of Ecclesiastical
Institution) could not be changed. Moreover we find in Optatus, That there was
a Rumor spread upon the coming of some from the Emperor, that Alterations
would be made in the Communion Service, which startled the People; but they
were quieted again when they saw The Solemn Custom and wonted Rite observed,
and discerned, that nothing was changed, added or diminished in the Divine
Sacrifice Cum viderent in divinis Sacrificiis nec mutatum quicquam, nec
additum, nec ablasum. Id. lib. 3. page 75.
. From whence it appears there was a known Form for the Communion, an Office so
well understood by the People, that they could perceive when it was altered in
any particular: So that doubtless those Christians were not used to variety of
Phrases, nor accustomed to the Extempore Man's Fancy, to celebrate in a longer
or shorter Form, as he pleased. Again, he repeats the very Form of Exorcising
those who came to be Baptized Maledicte exi for as. Optat. lib. 4. page 79.
, and the Form of the Responses when they renounced the Devil, and repeated
their Creed at Baptism Id. lib. 5. page 86 and 89.
. And when we put all this together concerning known Forms of Words, which
could not be altered nor omitted, and were enjoined by Law, we may conclude
they had a written Liturgy in Africa in his time: And it is very probable that
this Book of Prayers, was one of those Books (in the Plural Number) which the
Donatists (as he complains) took away from the Holy Altar, from whence the
Peoples Prayers were wont to be sent up to God Idem lib. 7. page 98.
. And since they had a written Form (as the Forecited passages show) it is
probable that the Liturgy as well as the Bible was then lying upon the Altar.

Epiphanius. An. Dom 369.
. 11. We can expect no great account of the Sacred Forms in Epiphanius, since
he is so very nice in speaking of Mysteries, that he will not repeat the Words
of our Savior's Institution, but thus expresses them, He took these things,
and giving Thanks, said, This is that of mine, etc. (...) E^^phan. in An^orat.
p. 432.
. And he reckons it a ridiculous thing in the Marcionites to celebrate their
Mysteries before the Catechumens Epip^au. Panar. contr. Marcion. p 136.
. For his own part he will say no more, when he comes to describe the
celebration of the Sacraments, but this, The other Mysteries of the Laver (i.
e. Baptism,) and the internal Mysteries (i. e. the Eucharist,) are performed
according to the Tradition of the Gospel and of the Apostles -- only he says,
There were in the Church constantly Morning Hymns and Morning Prayers, as also
Prayers and Psalms at Evening or Candle lighting Id. ibid. prope finem Labri.
: But though he do not tell us what the several Forms were, yet we may be
assured they used Forms then in the Churches of Cyprus; First, because they did
so in all the other Churches* wherewith Epiphanius held Communion. Secondly,
Because he does so highly commend the Apostolical Constitutions, as containing
all regular Order, and being agreeable to the true and Orthodox way of Worship
Epiphan. Panar. lib. 3. Tom. 1. haer. 70.
; and yet we have seen, there is a prescribed Liturgy, and complete Forms of
Prayer for all occasions, set down in those Constitutions. Thirdly, Because he
derides Montanus and other Heretics, for pretending to inspiration and such
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit as were then ceased. Now though this being
added to other testimonies of this Age, be proof sufficient to those that are
unprejudiced, that Epiphanius allowed and used Set Forms of Hymns and Prayers;
yet our Adversary has picked up a passage out of an Epistle of his Recorded by
S. Hierom, and extant only in Latin, to prove that the Prayer for all Estates
of Men, in the Communion Office, was not a prescribed Form; because when
Epiphanius was accused for Praying in that part of the Office, for John Bishop
of Jerusalem, thus, O Lord grant that John may believe aright, he is not very
sure what Words he used; nor does appeal to any certain Form; and thence he
concludes there was no Set Form for this Prayer, in the time of Epiphanus ^isc.
of Lating page ^2. 63, etc.
; And this Argument he triumphs in extremely. To which I shall now reply, That
if all he supposes were true, the act of one single Bishop upon an
extraordinary occasion, would not weigh down all the Evidence we have produced
to the contrary; and if so Eminent a Bishop as Epiphanius, upon so great an
occasion as a Metropolitan 's falling into Heresy had altered two or three
Words of the usual Form; this will not prove, that the inferior Clergy were
always left at liberty to Pray Extempore; yet that is the liberty this Author
pleads for. But Secondly, The very accusation which John of Jerusalem brings,
against Epiphanius, strongly supposes there was a known Form, by which they
prayed for the great Bishops, and that made his varying from it, to be easily
discerned and ill taken. And Thirdly, The answer of Epiphanius clears the
matter: For he first denies that he used those Words, which were charged on
him, saying, it would have been a rude thing, to use such an expression of that
Bishop in public, though he owns he always prayed so for him in his Heart. And
Secondly, He does appeal to the public Forms, and so tells him what Words he
did use; for he says when we make that Prayer, according to the Communion
Office, we say, for all Bishops, and for you also: Keep him who Preaches the
Truth; Or certainly thus, Hear us Lord, and keep him that he may Preach the
Word of Truth, as the occasion required, and as the Office for Prayer directed
Quando autem complemus orationem secundum ritum Mysteriorum and pro omnibus,
and pro te quoque d^cimut, custodi illum qui pradicat veritatem; Vel certe ita,
Tu praesta Domine, and custodi, ut ille verbum pradicit veritatis, sicut
occasio Sermonis se tulerit, and habuerit Oration consequentiam. Epist. Epiphan.
ad Johan. Hieros. ap. D. Hieron.
. The right understanding of which Answer, depends upon observing three things.
First, That he affirms he performed this Prayer (secundum ritum mysteriorum)
according to the usual Office for the Sacrament; had the Greek been extant,
probably there it would have been ((...)) Secondly That he says it was one of
the two ways mentioned, as occasion required [and habuerit oration
consequentiam] now (...) (which is literally translated here Consequentiam)
signifies, an Order prescribed: So that we must observe, that there are two
Prayers in Epiphanius his friend, the Author of the Constitutions, which are
Forms by which they there pray for the Bishops, at the time of the Sacrament
Constit. Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 13. and cap. 18. Item in Liturg. D. Jacobi
semel. In Liturg. D. Basil. ^is orant p^o Episcopis ut recte tractent verbum
veritatis.
; the Sense of both Forms being much of the same, with what Epiphanius says he
prayed, but the Words are somewhat different: And very likely, the Forms for
Jerusalem and Cyprus were also two, and had both these ways prescribed,
Custodi illum, etc. and Tu praesta Domine. So that Epiphanius who strictly kept
to the Words of his Form, to his ((...)) Liturgy, is confident he never prayed
for John of Jerusalem, but one of these ways, either the former way in the
beginning, or the latter way in the midst of the Communion Service. For
Thirdly, Had he taken that liberty, which my Adversary pleads for, and prayed
Extempore, or varied the Phrase daily, he could not be so confident, that he
never had used those Words, which John of Jerusalem here charges him with: Nor
could he have been certain (as we see he is) that he did use one of these two
Phrases, each being part of a distinct Form in that Office. So that this
passage does not disprove, but confirm the use of a Liturgy, by Epiphanius.

. 12. Greg. Nazianzen, An. Dom. 370.
We have very little in Gregory Nazianzen concerning Liturgy, for he was very
strict in requiring, that none of the Christian Mysteries should be divulged to
strangers; and the most considerable of his works are Sermons, made in the
Church before the Catechumens went out; so that there he is very cautious of
publishing the Forms of Divine worship (...). Nazianz. Orat. 40 p. 672 Item
Orat. 42. page 687. etc.
. Yet that passage concerning the Apostate Julians designing to imitate, the
Christians, in their way of serving God, and so making a Form of Prayers in
part, for his Pagan Temples, (which is related by Nazianzen See before. 8. An.
361.
; shows that in his time the Christian worship was performed by Forms of Prayer
which had Responses, and of which the People bore a part: And we may be assured
of two things; First, That this way of worship, was more ancient than Julians
time; for he would not have imitated an innovation, or a Method taken up
lately, or only by few. And Nazianzen tells us, That Julian saw, Christianity
was Famous for its Doctrins, but more Famous and remarkable for those Forms of
the Church, anciently delivered and still preserved -- (...) Naz. Orat. 3. page
101.
; which Forms most certainly were Forms of Prayer, and of Administration of the
Sacraments, derived (as Nazianzen believed,) from Ancient Tradition, and
retained to his very time; and to imitate the Doctrins, we see Julian set up
Schools and Lectures; to imitate these Forms, he appointed a Form of Prayers in
parts. Secondly, Nazianzen did believe this way of Praying by Forms, to be very
agreeable to the Gospel, because he there says, That these Forms of Prayer and
other things before mentioned, were clearly belonging to the good Order of the
Christians -- (...) Id. ibid.
; So that we may be sure both of the use of Forms of Prayer in this time, and
of Nazianzens approving them. This Evidence for the Antiquity of Liturgies, my
Adversary suppresseth; but cites two other places out of Nazianzen, which he
would persuade us will make out the use of Extempore Prayers. First he tells
us, that Nazianzen being to discourse of the holy Ghost, prays that he may be
enabled thereby for the expressions Disc. of Liturg. p. 59.
. The words are these, That being to speak of the Spirit, he may have the
presence of the Spirit; and that it may give him such a faculty of discoursing,
as he desires, at least such as is suitable to the occasion Nazianz. Orat 44.
p. 409. (...) which he translates, in the plural number Give me such
expressions.
But let it be noted, that this is not properly a Prayer, but a Rhetorical
Apostrophe in the middle of an Homily, by the polite style whereof we may
conclude, it was composed in his Study before he he came to the Church; and
therefore both the Prayer and Homily were made in his Closet; however being
part of a Sermon, this is nothing at all to the Churches public Prayers, about
which we dispute; For many Conformists do use such Apostrophes to God or
Christ, or to the holy Ghost in their Sermons, yet none will argue from thence,
that we have no Liturgy in England. Secondly, He pretends that Nazianzens
Father prayed at the Eucharist by the Spirit, and shortened the usual Prayers
there, when he was sick; And of this, he his so proud that he quotes it twice
Discourse of Liturg. page 60, and page 76, and 77.
; But he gives us only the Epitome of this story out of the Centuriators, which
he imagined sounded more to his purpose; Therefore we will give the Fathers own
Words, who says, His sick Father awaking the Night before Easter, first moved
himself a little, and then more strongly; soon after he called on his Servant
by Name with very low Voice, to give him his Garments and lend him his Hand;
the Man came with amazement and did readily obey him; and leaning on him as on
a Staff, he imitated. Moses upon the Mount, and staying up his Hands in the
posture of Prayer, he readily performed the former and latter part of the
Mysteries of the People, in few words indeed, because he was weak in Body, but
with a Mind (it seems) very perfect. O admirable! Without a Pulpit, on the
Pulpit; a Sacrificer without an Altar; a Priest at a distance from the things
to be consecrated: but these things were made present to him by the Holy
Spirit, as he knew, though those who were present did not see them: After this
repeating the accustomed Words of the Eucharist, and Blessing the People, he
went to Bed again (...), etc. Naz^^at. 19. page 305.
: After which he relates how he Recovered and went to Church, and solemnly
celebrated the Sacrament with the whole Church, on the first Sunday after
Easter. Where I think the Centuriators, and our Adversary both, mistake the
point in supposing the old Bishop to do all this in the Church; for there is
nothing in the Relation to show, that he went out of his Chamber, and his being
without a Pulpit, an Altar, and the things to be consecrated, ( viz. the
Oblations of the People brought to the Church) do make it plain, this was a
private Communion celebrated in his Chamber to some few that were about him;
yet he performed that as nigh the public Forms as he was able: And though he
abbreviated the long Prayers before the Consecration out of mere necessity, yet
he kept strictly to the Words of Consecration, as he was wont to do; he did not
alter that Form in the least: So that a Man may as well argue, We have no
larger Office for the Communion in our Liturgy, because we have a shorter
Office for the Sick; as our Adversary can infer from this short way of private
Communicating in a case of necessity, and in a Chamber, That there was no Form
of Prayers for public Communions in that Age; yea, we see by the weak old
Bishop 's coming as near the Public Form as he was able, and in the most
Essential part keeping close to it, that there was a Public Liturgy then. And,
Secondly, Our Adversary both in his Greek Note, that in citing the Greek after
-- (...), he draws a Line to conceal his being without a Pulpit, etc. and goes
on thus, -- (...), etc. See the Marg. of Discourse of Liturg. page 77.
and Latin omits all those Words, viz. of his being without a Pulpit, an Altar,
and things to be consecrated, on purpose (first) to abuse this Reader into the
mistake of the Bishops being in the Church, to which we see he did not come
till a Week after: And then (secondly) he would make us believe that ((...))
These things, refers to his abbreviation of the Office to his Short Words, that
so he may pretend Those Words were given to him by the Inspiration of the
Spirit; which is a manifest falsifying of the Father, who says, The Pulpit,
Altar, and Consecrated things, ((...)) These things were made present to him by
the Holy Ghost, as Nazianzen believed, though no Body there saw them, which is
a flight of Rhetoric usual in him; but upon the gross perverting this
Expression, all our Adversaries Argument of Expressions and Words in Prayer
being given by the Holy Ghost, does depend. I beg the Readers Pardon for this
Excursion, which clearly demonstrates, that this Adversary of mine did wilfully
misinterpret the Greek after he had read it; and cited it with a designed
omission, to hook in an Argument for his false Notion of praying Extempore by
the Spirit; but when genuine Antiquity affords no better Testimonies than this,
They have more use of their Wit than of their Integrity. But I doubt not all
impartial Men will gather from this very Instance, truly represented, That
Nazianzen's Father always used a Liturgy in the Church, and that the Son means
those public prescribed Forms, when he tells us, He was always better when he
could get to the Church, for the bare saying of the Liturgy cured him (...)
Naz. Orat. 19. page 313.
. And this may suffice for Gregory Nazianzen.

S ^ASI^. An Dom. 370.
. 13. His contemporary and dear Friend was S. Basil, who is not only a good
Evidence for Liturgies, but composed one himself; so that our Adversary is
forced first to conceal most of his Proofs for Public Forms, and then to hunt
about for Objections against both Forms in general, and his Liturgy in
particular; but with how little success, shall now be showed in this Method:
First, we will produce the Proofs which he has suppressed or labored to
pervert; Secondly, we will reply to his Objections; and, Thirdly, justify the
main part of his Liturgy to be a genuine composure of S. Basils.

First, We begin with his Evidence for Public Forms, and the first shall be his
vindication of that way of praising God which he had set up at Naeocesarea,
which we will give at large in its due place, because our Adversary has but an
imperfect account of it, and places it in the latter end of his Book Discourse
of Liturg. p. 166.
. The Words are these, As to the Psalmody for which we are accused, I answer,
That the Custom now set up is consonant and agreeable to all the Churches of
God; for the People rising while it is yet Night, go early to the House of
Prayer, and with much pains and trouble, yea, with many Tears, make their
Confession to God; and afterward rising from Prayer, they stand up to sing
Psalms; being divided into two parts, they sing by Turns, answering one
another: Then they comfort themselves by considering Gods Word, and casting
away all vain thoughts, mind this alone. After this one is ordered to begin the
Hymn, and the rest follow; and thus with variety of Psalms and Prayers
intermixed the Night is spent. As soon as Day appears, they offer to the Lord a
Psalm of Confession, all as it were with one Mouth and one Heart, every one
making these Penitential Words to be his own: And if you reject this, you must
reject the Egyptians, those in both Lybia's, in Thebais and Palestina; the
Arabians, Phenicians, Syrians, and those near Euphrates; yea, in a word, all
among whom Watchings, Prayers, and common Psalmody is used D. Basil. Epist. 63.
ad Clor. Naeoc^sar, page 843, 844.
. Now from hence it is plain, that the People joined with the Priest in the
Prayers, as well as in Singing of Psalms and Hymns; and Bishop Bilson alleges
this place to prove, That the Service was common to the Priests and People, and
parted between them by Verses and Responds (...) of Christ. Subject. pa^. 4
page 434. with page 453.
: But Extempore Praying and Singing cannot be performed by alternate Responses;
therefore these Christians had known and prescribed Forms, both for their
Prayers and Hymns. Yet, Secondly, This Very way of Praying was used then in
most Churches of the Christian World: Therefore, Thirdly, Most Churches in the
World had Used Liturgies before S Basil's time, and he highly approved that way
of public Worship. It may be some will object, However this shows that there
was no Liturgy at Naeocesarea before. I Answer, if it were so, That was a
particular Church, and this was not above Forty five year after the settling of
Christianity. But if the Reader look back into the last Century, it will appear
they had a Form of Prayers and Hymns in this very Church above an Hundred year
before, even in the days of Gregory Thaumaturgus; and S. Basil did not so much
alter the Method or Words of that Liturgy, as the way of Singing and Saying it;
and this the Clergy of Naeocesarea Accused him for.

Secondly, In this very Epistle S. Basil mentions a Litany with Approbation,
which was brought into the Church of Naeocesarea long before his Time, though
after the days of Gregory Thaumaturgus; so that in this Age that Litany
probably might be near one Hundred year old (...) Basil. ep. 63. page 844.
. But Litanies were Forms of Supplication for pardon of Sin, and averting
Judgments, wherein the People always bare a part, and to which they Answered,
Lord have mercy on us, etc. or Lord hear us, or Grant this good Lord; yea,
there are two Passages of this very Litany, or some other as ancient, which are
mentioned in S. Basil's Epistles: The first is this, We pray, that the rest of
our Days may continue in peace; We request that our Death may also be in peace
(...) Basil. ep. 68. page 856.
. We cannot be certain these are the very Words of the public Form, because
they are only occasionally spoken of in a Letter; but they are certainly in the
Litanick way; and if we compare them with the Ancient Litanies, we shall find
them come so near the Words there used, that we cannot doubt but he refers to
some of these Forms; Wherein they pray, That they may pass the rest of their
Life in peace; and request, That at their Death they may make a Christian end
Liturg. D. (...), lio ^atr. p^g. 4, 5. and Liturg. (...), ^^d. page 70. and
C^^r^^t. Apostol. ^i^. 8. ca. 43.
, which are almost the very same Expressions, differ no more than the Liturgies
of several Churches are wont to do. The second place in S. Basil is in an
Epistle which he writ to a Friend that was gone into Seythia, who feared he
should be forgot in his Prayers, S. Basil tells him, This was impossible,
unless he should forget the Work which God appointed him for: And you (says
he) being one of the Faithful, cannot but remember the Offices of the Church,
wherein we intercede for our Brethren who are gone to Travel; for the
Soldiers; for those who profess Christ's Name; and for them who bring f^rth the
Spiritual fruit of good Works (...). 141. page 1014.
. Now all that are acquainted with the Ancient Forms of Litany, know they
always prayed for Christians traveling in strange Countries; for such as
believed in Christ; and for those who brought forth the fruit of good Works;
for the whole Army, etc. Liturg. Ja^^^, ut su^r. ^^g. 89. item Condit. Apo^^.
^. 8. cap. 13. and cap. 18. Lit. (...) and Chris.
. It Is true, these are mixed with diverse other Intercessions; but S. Basil picks
out those Passages of the Litany which belonged to this Man's circumstances, who
seems to have been a Soldier gone on an Expedition into Scythia, and to have
been not only a Christian but to have been eminent for Charity and good Works.
Our Adversary indeed boldly affirms this Passage is not sufficient to prove the
Use of Forms Discourse of Liturg. p. 137. 138.
: But when we consider the exact agreement betwixt this and the ancient
Litanies, this eminent Instance out of the genuine Works of so great a Bishop
in these early Times, wherein we see he refers his Friend to known and public
Offices, both proves those parts of the ancient Litanies to have been
Primitive, and shows that there was a Litany in S. Basil's time.

Thirdly, There are many Evidences that he approved of Forms of Prayer, for he
commends the way of praying by conjoined Voices in Responses, where he says,
That a Prayer wherein there are not conjoined Voices, is not half so strong as
otherwise it would be (...) Basil. Ep. 68. page 856.
: So that he thought Forms of Prayer, in which the People joined their
Responses to the Priests Words, were the most effectual way of praying; and he
says, Their bearing a part or share in any Prayer, made it far more profitable
(...) Bas. Ep. 392. page 1174.
. Therefore he esteemed this way of praying, (which can only be performed in
prescribed Forms) would be soonest heard by Almighty God: And for this Reason
he made a Canon or Form of Prayer for his Monks, charging them whenever they
prayed, to use their Voices, and also to continue until the last Prayer of the
Canon (...) Bas. asciet. Tom. 2. p. 243, 244.
; and he orders them to reject those thoughts whith took off their Minds from
the Canon of Prayer, that is, the prescribed Form, which was to be the Canon or
Rule by which he appointed they should always pray: And so great a lover he was
of Forms, that he ordered those Monks should be rejected who would not learn
the Psalms by Heart Basil. regul. brev. page 549.
; which no question were to be some of their Forms of Prayer and Praises. We
will conclude with one Observation, viz. That our Adversary grants, there was
an Hymn for Candlelighting in S. Basil's time (...) See Disc. of Liturg p. 361.
; but he omits that the Father there says, It was a certain Form of Words used
by the People so long before his time, that he knew not which of the Ancients
composed it; but yet none blamed the People for using this old Form, which was,
Let us praise the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit of God (...) Basil. de
Sp. Sancto. cap. 29. page 220.
. All which Passages do abundantly prove the Use of Forms in S. Basil's Time;
but this Author concealing most of these, and misrepresenting the rest, has
sought out some other places of S. Basil, by which he would confute this our
Assertion.

. 14. Which Objections we will first fairly produce, and then plainly answer.
Objection first, S. Basil (says he,) was against writing down Mysteries, and
so could not be for written Forms; and this he proves by his Epistle to
Meletius wherein S. Basil says, he will not fully write his Message, having a
trusty Messenger who might relate it Disc. of Liturg. p. 37.
. I reply, This was only private business to a friend, and no way concerns
Divine Offices; wherefore the Allegation is impertinent. Secondly, He cites his
Book de Spiritu Sancto, where he says, The words of Consecration, upon the
taking up of the Eucharistical Bread, and the Cup of Blessing, which of the
Saints has left in writing? We are not content with that which is Recorded in
the Apostle and Gospels, but we say other things before and after, as having
great efficacy in the Mystery, taking these things from unwritten Tradition
Basil. de Sp. Sancto cap. 27. Tom. 2. p. 210. 211.
. And hence he infers, that there were no written Forms in S. Basil's time; yea
he calls this direct Evidence that there could be no such Forms in writing, and
repeats this fraudulent Argument four several times, according to his custom
when he thinks he has gotten a considerable testimony D^s^. of Litu^g. p. 38.
and page 73. page 7^. and page 109.
; wherefore I shall answer it fully. And First, it does not well become our
Adversary, who gives such Odious names, to those who cite any spurious
Writings, to lay such mighty stress upon a Tract, which he himself suspects to
be none of S. Basils works Ibid p. 110.
; and which all those Authors, whom he cites to prove his Liturgy to be Forged,
do generally reject as a Forged piece Era^m. praes. ad suam ve^s. istius libri
loci censura. p. 121. Rive^i censur. p. 305. Scultet. medul. page 1054. Ush e
and Daile in isto Authore page 110.
; it is no great proof of his own sincerity, to fetch his topping Argument, and
urge it over and over till the repetition become Nauseous, out of a Tract that
he believed to be suspicious at least. But Secondly, I will take no advantage
from hence; for (after all) I see no Reason to deny the piece to be Genuin; but
let it be as he pleases, it maks nothing for his purpose; For S. Basil does not
affirm, that these Eucharistical Prayers were not written in his time, but that
they were derived from an unwritten Tradition; Now this sufficiently proves,
that anciently they were Forms, because it is impossible for an Extempore
Prayer, that is to be daily or often varied, to be conveied down from our
Forefathers by Tradition; whatever is so delivered must be a Form of words,
either written or learned by heart, and so taught by the Elder to the younger
Priests; Wherefore even in this Sense, these additional Prayers in the
Sacramental Administrations, were Forms made by the most Primitive Fathers, and
taught to their Successors, and so conveyed down by oral Tradition. But
Thirdly, this is his Fallacious perverting of S. Basils Words, and not the true
Sense of them, For the ((...)) unwritten Traditions here spoken of by S. Basil,
are not things which never were written down by the Fathers (as he falsely
pretends): Because both he and diverse of the Ancients had written about many of
the Rites and Usages, which he there calls ((...)) unwrirten Traditions, an
Hundred times. As for instance, about the hours of Prayer, turning to the East,
when they prayed, and about the Prefaces before the Eucharist, etc. But S.
Basil only says, these things were not written in Scripture, they were not
enjoined there, those Saints or holy Men, viz. the Apostles and Evangelists,
had not left Orders in Scripture for these Rites and Forms; which must be his
meaning, because he goes on and says, We are not content with that which is
Recorded in the Apostles and the Gospels: That is, besides the words of
institution, there were Forms of Prayer and Praise before and after, in the
Sacraments, delivered down from the Primitive Fathers, which he does not say
were never writ down by them, but were not writ in Scripture. For S. Basil
calls the Scripture by way of Eminence, (...), and all Rites and Forms not set
down there, though they were writ down by the Fathers, he calls ((...)) not
written things; which is further clear by the occasion of this whole Chapter,
wherein S. Basil is vindicating himself, for using a Phrase and Form of
Doxology which was not written in Scripture; and his Argument is, That the
Church used many Rites and Forms, which were not written in the Bible; such as
renouncing the Devil, and Praying toward the East, and the Forms used in
Sacramental Administrations: Now Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian and
many others (as we have showed,) had written concerning every one of these
things; but still they were ((...)) not written in Scripture, but derived from
Tradition; and therefore they ought not (says S. Basil) to blame me, if I used
a Form of Doxology not written in Scripture. Now this clear exposition of the
place alleged, shows our Authors base disingenuity, who to serve a turn, and
patch up an Argument against Liturgies, wilfully perverts S. Basil's words;
which being rightly understood, are so far from condemning Forms, or proving
they were not written, that they prove they were composed long before S Basil's
time and then owned for Catholic Traditions. Finally whereas he insinuates,
that S. Bosil counts these Forms to be Mysteries not to be published, and
thence infers that to write them down, was to publish them, and therefore
doubtless they were not written down. I reply, That these Forms were daily used
among the Faithful, and they were not nice to publish them to these; it was
only the Catechumens and Infidels from whom they kept these Mysteries; and
considering the charge they laid upon the Faithful and the Priests not to
divulge them to those who were without the Church; there was no need to be
afraid to write them down, since the Books were only in their custody, who then
believed it was a damnable Sin, to let the Unbaptized see these Books, or hear
the words of them. And he has answered this Argument himself, by showing us,
that the Heathens (who also counted their Forms of worship to be Mysteries, not
to be divulged to the uninitiated) did write these Forms in Books, which were
kept by their Priests Compare Disc. of Liturg. page 28 with 122. and 123.
; Therefore writing is very consistent, with concealing Mysteries from
Strangers. And there is nothing in this place of S. Basil, which proves there
were no written Prayers in his time.

Thirdly, He alleges that S. Basil in Prayer with the People, used the
Doxology two ways, both Glory be to God and the Father, with the Son and with
the holy Ghost --, and --, by the Son in the holy Ghost Basil. de Sp. Sanct
cap. 1. page 144.
; and though the same Father say, that the Form of Baptizing, the Creed, and
the Doxology ought to agree; yet he varied this short Form twice in one day;
from whence he infers more than once, that S. Basil would not be bound up by
any Form Disc. of Liturgies page 104. and page 130.
, I answer, This Objection is taken out of the same suspected Tract; but I will
let that pass, and observe, that though S. Basil says, this was done in the
Prayers with the People; yet it does not follow, that this was in any part of
the Office; it might be in the conclusion of his Forenoon and Afternoon Homily;
which being performed at the usual hours of Morning and Evening Prayers, and
when the People were met to Pray; yea the Prayers both going before and
following the Homily, he may properly enough say this was done in the Prayers
with the People. Now these Homilies or Sermons being S. Basil's own composures,
he thought he might vary the Doxology there, as he used to do at other times,
but fortuning to use an expression that savoured of the Arian Heresy, The
Orthodox People, who had been used to a right Form of Doxology in their
Liturgy, ever since the days of Gregory Thaumaturgus, (as was showed before)
were able by that, to censure these new and strange ways of expressing himself
(...) Basil. dc. Sp. S. cap. 1.
: And were so angry at him for this Variation, that he was forced to write this
Book, to vindicate those Phrases. Wherefore this variety of Doxology, being not
used in the Liturgy, but the Sermons or Homilies, is nothing to his purpose;
nor will it prove that S. Basil varied from the prescribed Forms, much less
will it make out, there were no prescribed Forms, since our Clergy use variety
of Doxologies at the end of their Sermons; but it would be Ridiculous to Argue
from thence, that they will not be bound to say the Gloria Patri, in that Form
wherein it is set down in the Liturgy. If it be again objected, that S. Basil
has great variety of Doxologies yet extant, in the end of his Homilies, and
therefore had this variation been after Sermons, the People could hardly have
perceived it: I answer, The latter of these Forms, was used by the Arians in a
very ill Sense, to intimate the inequality of the Father and the Son; and
though no doubt S. Basil meant well, yet it did so evidently tend toward
Heresy, and was so very different from the Old Orthodox Form in the Liturgy,
that the People (who could digest various Phrases in unprescribed Composures,
provided the Sense was Orthodox,) took check at this dangerous Variation; and
by the way we may learn from hence, how great a security it is to the Faith,
for the People to be accustomed to Orthodox Forms, which does enable them to
observe, yea, and correct any kind of dangerous Innovations. But if my
Adversaries will not allow this variation to have been any where but in the
Prayers, though there is no Reason to allow that, yet supposing it were so,
Then this was an Action of S. Basil, which is not to be imitated; and since he
had like to have run into Heresy, by taking this undue liberty, it will make
nothing for the Credit of Extempore Prayers, that they expose such as use them
to the danger at least, of venting Heretical expressions involuntarily. And S.
Basils being forced to beg Pardon for it, shows it ought not to be quoted for a
Precedent; yet after all, it this variation were in the Prayers, it shows there
were then Forms well known to the People, and confirms us, in the necessity of
prescribing and imposing such Forms, to prevent Heresy from creeping into the
Church; which otherwise may get ground even, by the well meant expressions of
some Eminent Extempore Man.

Fourthly, He affirms that S. Basil did not teach his Monks, to pray by any
Liturgy, but to choose their Expressions out of Scripture Basil. Constit.
monast. cap. 1. p. 668. and 669.
. I answer, Diverse of the learned deny this Book to be genuin Scultet. medul.
p. 1056. See Discourse of Liturg. p. 120.
; but if it be S. Basil's it will not help his Cause, because these are
Directions for the Monks private Prayers in their Cells, and therefore do not
belong to the Public Offices about which we dispute; yet even in that Book he
makes Forms both of Praise and Prayer for their private use; and though he
allow his Monk to collect Sentences of Scripture also for this purpose, yet he
would have those Sentences put into a Form, and he was to offer that Form up
((...)) (that is) as devoutly as he was able; by which we not only learn, that
S. Basil much approved of these Forms; but we see that the Phrase of ((...))
about which he made such a stir in Justin Martyr, does properly signify, The
using a Form of Prayer with all possible devotion. I shall only add, That when
these Monks prayed all together, they had a Form also, which S. Basil calls
their Canon or Rule, as we showed before.

Lastly, Out of the same Tract he observes, that S. Basil would have his Monk
in Prayer, to have his Mind upon God alone, and nothing else Basil. Constitut.
Mon. cap. 1. page 671.
; and he fancies, this was very hard to do, if the Monk had his Book to mind;
and thence he infers, they had no Prayer Books Discourse of Liturg. p. 121.
. But we may remember, that S. Basil ordered his Monks to get the Psalms by
Heart; and if they got their other Prayers also by Heart, that would utterly
spoil his Inference: Yet suppose they did read their Forms* by frequent use
they would soon be so perfect in them, that a few glances sometimes on their
Books would serve to help them to repeat them right, and not divert their Mind
from God at all. And we who use our Common Prayer, know by Experience, that the
Liturgy being early become familiar to us, we have nothing to mind but only God
when we pray; whereas those who pray Extempore, have their Fancy so busy in
inventing new Phrases and Matter, and their Thoughts so taken up with what they
have said, are saying, and are to say next, that they cannot steddily keep
their Mind upon God: And the Congregation also are so busy in observing the
new Phrases, that they cannot have such fixed Thoughts, as they (who being
accustomed to their well known Forms) have no other thing to do, than to watch
their own Hearts, and keep them close to the Duty they are about. And this may
suffice to confute all his far fetched Objections out of S. Basil, and to show
they are all of them very insignificant.

. 15. But we must carry this Matter further, and will prove, that S. Basil The
Liturgy of S. BASIL.
not only approved Forms, but made a Liturgy himself; which we shall make out
by sufficient Evidence in every Age since it was Composed. First, His dear
Friend Nazianzen, who knew him best of any Man, says in his Encomium, That the
Prayers which he composed, were the Ornament of his Throne (...) Greg. Na^.
Orat. 20 p. 34^.
. Secondly, The Life of S. Basil (said to be writ by Amphilocius) tells us, He
prayed to God for such Grace, Wisdom, and Understanding, as might enable him to
offer up the unbloody Sacrifice, in Words of his own, by the direction of the
Holy Ghost: And (the Author says) our Savior appeared to him, telling him,
His Request was granted; whereupon he first pronounced, and then writ down the
Liturgy which bears his Name Vita Basil. per Amphil^c. inter Opera D. Basilii.
. I shall not undertake to justify the Miracle, that may have been added by
some Admirers of this Liturgy; but the Matter of Fact on which it was grounded,
was always taken for a certain Truth in very ancient Ages; and as I need not
this Testimony, so I had not cited it at large, but to check our Adversaries
Confidence, who cites Bishop Jewel, saying, That Basil besought God, he might
celebrate with Prayers of his own making Disc. of Lit. Marg. page 73.
: by which he hopes to abuse his Reader into thinking, that Basil desired to
make daily new Extempore Prayers; Whereas Bishop Jewel refers to this Passage
in S. Basil's Life, and it was a Liturgy of his own Composing that he begged
abilities for. We proceed to Proclus (who was Bishop of Constantinople within
fifty years after S. Basil's Death, and who personally knew S Chrysostom); and
he says, That S. Basil seeing Men's sloth and degeneracy made them weary of a
long Liturgy, though he thought there was nothing unnecessary or tedious in
that of S. James, which was used before; yet to prevent the weariness of
Priests and People, He delivered a shorter Form Proclus de tradit. divin.
L^^urg.
: The reason is fair, and the Authority of this Writer being so near S. Basil's
Time, is very weighty. Again, Petrus Diaconus, Contemporary with Fulgentius,
who lived in Africa not very much above an 100 years after S. Basil's Death,
cites this Liturgy as an undoubted piece of his genuine Works, in his Dispute
against the Pelagians, in these Words: S. Basil ( Bishop of Caesarea) in his
Prayer made at the holy Altar, which all the Eastern Church uses, among other
things says, Grant, O Lord of Hosts our defense, we beseech thee, that the
evil may be made good; and those that are good, keep them in their goodness
Petrus Diac. de Incarnat. c. 8.
. From whence we note, first, That these Words are still in that very Liturgy
which bears S. Basil's Name. Secondly, That within little more than one Hundred
years after S. Basil's Death, it was used as S. Basil's Liturgy by all the
Eastern Church, and known even in Africa by that Name. Thirdly, That it was of
so great Reputation and Authority then, and there, as to be quoted for
unquestionable Evidence even against Heretics. Wherefore we conclude, it was
certainly of his Composing, it being morally impossible that any Forgery in his
Name, should be so early and generally received in the Eastern Church, where he
was so well known, and should get such Credit among the Africans, that even
Heretics durst not except against it. To this we may add, Leontius (a Monk of
Constantinople) who lived in the same Century with Fulgentius, and cites this
Liturgy for Evidence against Nestorius L^ont adv. Nestor. lib. 3. An. ^90.
. In the very next Age it was quoted as good Authority against the Error of the
Armenians by this August Title, The Mystical Service delivered to us in
Writing, etc. and then they cite a Passage of S. Basil's Liturgy, as that which
was daily used in their Church Council. 6. Constant. in Trull. Can. 32. An. ^^0.
Beve^. Tom. I. page 192.
. We need proceed no lower, because the whole Greek Church gives constant and
universal Testimony to it ever since, as a genuine Composure of S. Basils.

However, we will hear our Adversaries Objections against this evident Truth:
And the first is a manifest Falsehood, viz. That no ancient Author mentions it
Dis^ourse of Litu g. p. 162, etc.
: For we have seen many of the Ancients do attest it: Secondly, He says, Many
Words, Rites, and Persons are spoken of in it, which cannot belong to S. Basil
's time. To which I Answer, That the Modern Copies now extant, have many late
Corruptions in them, and we do not defend any one of these; but if these be
cast out, there remains many primitive, pious and excellent Forms of Prayer and
Praise, which are very agreeable to the genuine Works, and to the uncorrupted
Age of S. Basil; and these are all the Passages in it that we defend, and
account to have been the Composure of S. Basil: And if there were but Five
Pages of this kind, that suffices to make out my Position, viz. That S. Basil
made a Liturgy, and that these Forms of Prayer were generally used in public in
his time; but the Reader who will peruse this Liturgy, will find the far
greatest part of it, to be holy, pure and primitive Forms; and the Prayers,
Responses, Hymns and Doxologies, most of them both for Matter and Style
agreeable to this Age, and attested by the Writings of the Fathers, both of
this and former Centuries. As to the Persons mentioned in this Liturgy, who
lived after S. Basil, their Names were taken out of Modern Manuscripts, Copied
from some Liturgy which was in use in those later Ages wherein such Persons
lived: But though these Names were not in S. Basil's Original, yet they do no
more prove, He never made the Original Liturgy ascribed to him, or that he made
no Liturgy, than our praying for the present King and Queen, or our having
Offices for the Fifth of November, and the 30th of January, prove, That the
Main substance of the Common Prayer Book was not Composed in the Time of King
Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth: So that I cannot but blush at such
Learned Men, as (for want of better) urge such trifling Sophistry for
Arguments. Thirdly, My Adversary objects, That diverse Learned Protestants count
this Liturgy spurious. To which I Answer, That Many also count the main of it
to be genuine; but all Learned Protestants, except my Adversary, do grant
enough for my purpose, viz. That S. Basil did make a Liturgy, which
sufficiently proves the Use of Liturgies in This Age. Du Plessis himself (out
of whom my Adversary steals most of his Arguments) confesses, There is some
appearance and likelihood, that Basil and Chrysostom* did ordain a prescript
Form of the Administration in their Diocesses Mornay of the Mass, Book I. Chap.
6. page 50.
. The Learned Rivet, will not affirm that it is wholly spurious, though he
think (as we do) that many things were added to it, and some things altered
afterward Riveti. censur. page 310.
: And Causabon (as we noted before) accounts these Liturgies, partly false and
partly true Causab. exercit. in Baron. xvi. p. 384.
; with these also the Famous Salmasius (though no great Friend to ancient
Forms) does agree Salmas. contra Grot. op. posthum. page 254.
. Bishop Bilson cites many Passages out of them, and justifies them to be
authentic, so far as they agree to the genuine Works of S. Basil, and other
Fathers of that Age Bilson, Christian Subject. part 4. page 437.
. And, -- to name no more, Chemnitius says, He will not deny but Basil and
Chrysostom did make some such form of Prayer --; but he says, That what we
read now under their Names, is not all genuine, sincere, nor certain Chemnit.
exam. Council. Trident. part 2. page 191.
: Which we freely grant, because it follows, that some of that which now goes
under their Names, is genuine, sincere and certain. Fourthly, He urges the many
Corruptions which are in the Modern Copies, such as praying to Saints and the
Blessed Virgin, Prayers for the Dead, etc. to which we have given an Answer
before, and shall now only say, That these are added to the old Form; and a
judicious Antiquary may easily distinguish these Novel Additions, from the old
Primitive Forms, which are not to be cast away because some have added
Corruptions to them. We do not justify, but reject these Additions, and there
is enough besides to prove our Position; therefore I will only add, that in
these Liturgies there are many Passages, which condemn the present Doctrins of
the Roman Church; and it would be pity to cast away these because of some Dross
mixed with them, which when we have separated, the pure Primitive Silver will
remain. I conclude therefore, That S. Basil made a Liturgy, and that the
Christians in his Days used to pray by prescribed Forms.

. 16. The Books which pass under the name of Dionysius Areopagita, Dionysius
Areopag. or rather, Apollinaris Laod. An. Dom. 370.
and especially that of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, have in them many
Indications of a Liturgy, but were writ in this Age, as is supposed by
Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea, who was a great Friend of S. Basil's, and has
been noted not only for his High-flown Style, but also for putting out Books
under the names of the most Ancient Fathers Dr. Caves Apostol. life of Dionys.
Areop. number. 13. etc.
. But whether he were the Author of them or no, doubtless they must be
ancienter than the sixth Century; because many of the Rites here expounded were
disused before that time, and because there is express mention of them, as
cited by S. Cyril of Alexandria, who lived in the beginning of the fifth
Century Liberati, Brev. cap. 10. apud Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 182. Script.
An. 553.
. However Liberatus who Records this and allows Dionysius his Works to be good
Evidence, lived in the middle of the sixth Century; and if these Books had been
writ but little before, it had been Ridiculous to have urged them for Evidence
in dispute. S. Gregory also the Great, who lived in the same Century, wherein
Daile pretends these Books were writ, cites the celestial Hierarchy under the
name of Dionysius Areopagita, and calls him, an Ancient and Venerable Writer
Greg. Mag. hom. 34. in Evang. p. 138.
; yea, in the very beginning of the sixth Century, this Book is cited under the
name of Dionysius by two Writers, of the Greek Church An. 527. Leont. Byzant.
contr. Nest. lib. 2. and Anastas. Sinaita Anagog. contempl. in Hexam. lib. 7.
, and Maximus writ Scholias. upon these Books, Anno Dom. 640. Wherefore this
Author having such Credit, and being mistaken for the true Dionysius in the
fifth and sixth Ages, could not live in later times than these, wherein we now
place him; and we desire no more than our Adversary allows, viz. that he may
have Credit, in reporting the usages of his own time (p). Disc. of Liturg. p.
39.
Now though this Author, is so very fearful of discovering Mysteries, (an
evident Token of his living in this Age,) that he will not plainly write down
any one Form; Yet we may see clearly, that they had a certain prescribed Form,
both for the Administering of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper. First, By his
writing a Commentary and Contemplations, upon these Mysterious Administrations,
which had they been performed in the Extempore way; he could not have done.
Secondly, Because he assures us, that not only, the Psalms were sung
alternately Dionys. de Eccles. Hierar. cap. 3.. 2. page 283.
, but that the Congregation did always join with the Priest, in Singing the
Hymns, in Baptism and the Eucharist Ibid. cap. 2.. 4. page 252. and cap. 3.. 2.
p. 284.
. So that these must be Forms; yea his Scholiast thinks, that Dionysius plainly
enough declares the Song of Miriam, to have been the first Hymn at Baptism, and
the xxix Psalm the Second, which are both Forms of Praise Schol. Maximi. page
267.
; and so is the xxxiv Psalm, O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, which he
intimates was sung after the Eucharist Dionys. Eccl. Hier. cap. 3.. 15. page
301.
; and it is very observable, that the Liturgy in the Constitution prescribes
that very Psalm, as an Hymn in that very place Constit. Apostol. lib. 8. cap.
20.
. Thirdly, And not only in that instance, but in all the whole proceeding of
these Mysteries, this Pseudo-Dionysius, does so exactly follow the Order and
Method; yea and allude so often to the Phrases of the ancient Liturgies,
especially that of Antioch, (which was near to Laodicea where Apollinaris
lived,) contained in the Constitutions, that there is no doubt but he had this
very Liturgy in his Eye, when he writ these Commentaries: I could prove this by
innumerable particulars, if it were worth while; but I shall refer it to the
Reader, to compare these Books of Dionysius with the Liturgy in the Apostolical
Constitution, and he will be convinced, that he commented upon that very
Liturgy, as plainly as he, (in his Mystical way) can be expected to do. Lastly,
There are many Forms of Prayer, supposed to be well known to the Faithful all
along these Discourses, as also Forms of renouncing the Devil, professing the
Faith, etc. He mentions also the Bishops Praying for peace to all, and then
their giving each other the kiss of charity Compare Dionys. Eccles. hier. cap.
3. page 284. with Constit. Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 15.
; And calls the Prayer for Commemoration of all the Faithful departed, the
Reading of the Holy Dypticks, which we know was a Custom mentioned in the
Council of Laodicea. And he says the Priest, having confessed his unworthiness
to Celebrate, then goes on to Cry out to Christ, Thou have Commanded us to do
this in Remembrance of Thee, which is part of the Form of Consecration Dionys.
Eccles. Hier. cap. 3.. 12. page 298, 299.
. Which being put together, is as much Evidence as we can desire or expect,
from so Mysterious a Writer; that there was a prescribed Liturgy in this Age,
known to the Faithful and of daily use.

. 17. I proceed to S. Ambrose, S. Ambrose, An. Dom. 374.
who confirms the same Truth; and we learn from him, That there was in his Time
Forms both of Praise and Prayer: The first our Adversary grants, in saying, He
imitated S. Basil 's way of singing Psalms and Hymns by turns, and brought this
Custom into the Church of Milan, from whence it spread almost over all the
Western Church Discourse of Liturg. p. 167.
; and there are great and very ancient Authors who testify the same thing Aug.
confess. lib. 9. cap. 7. Paulin. vit. Ambros. p. 79. (...) ipse Ambro^. Com. in
Luc. cap. 15. Tom. 3. p. 169.
. Now we have showed that Alternate Singing can no way be performed, but by a
known Form, and therefore S. Ambrose his Flock (who no question sang with the
Spirit, and with fervent Devotion, yet) sang by Forms: Yea, S. Ambrose himself
takes notice, That the Music in the Parable of the Prodigal, signifies, The
whole Churches singing together, and the People of different Ages and
Qualities, like the several Strings of an Instrument, with one accord answer at
the Psalm, and say, Amen Ambros. Com. in Luc. ut supr.
. He also says, He was accused for deceiving the People by his Hymns in Verse;
and he owns that he made such Hymns, and taught them to the People; who now
could every day praise the Trinity with their Mouths, and with Verses glorify
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost Idem Cbacione de Basilicis non tradend. Tom. 4.
page 104.
. Which cannot be meant of the Gloria Patri, etc. That was an ancienter Hymn,
and did not consist of more than one Response; so that probably it may be meant
of the Te Deum; which though our Adversary will have to be a later Composure
Discourse of Liturg. p. 167, and 168.
; yet the Matter of it is so excellent, and so void of any mixture of the later
Corruptions, that it is not unworthy of so great an Author, nor of so pure an
Age; The Chronicle of Dacius one of S. Ambrose's Successors, says, He Composed
it Chron. Dacii Med. lib. 1. cap. 10.
; and though some Manuscripts ascribe it to one Abundius, who was Bishop of
Coma, An. Dom. 450. that is, about 70 years after the Death of S. Ambrose; and
another Copy calls it, The Hymn of Nicetius, who was Bishop of Triers, An. Dom.
530. that may arise from such Manuscripts as were for the use of these two
Churches, which probably might ascribe this Hymn to one of their own Bishops,
who first brought it into their Service. This is certain, That S. Benedict
mentions it in his Rule, which was writ Anno 530 Regula D. Bened. cap. 11.
; and the Council of Toledo in the next Age approves the Hymn made by S.
Ambrose, as being fit to be sung in the Church Council. Tolet. Can. 12. Anno
633. Bin. Tom. 2. par. 2. page 349.
, which can be no other than this Te Deum, which has been reputed to be his,
by All Churches ever since. This I thought fit to say concerning this pious and
excellent Hymn, which probably was made by S. Ambrose; but however that be, it
is certain he made diverse Forms of Praise, which is that I am to prove. And the
like Evidence we have in him concerning the use of Forms of Prayer; For he
calls that place of S. Paul, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2. The Ecclesiastical Rule,
delivered by the Master of the Gentiles, which all our Priests use; For they
supplicate for all Men, and pray for the Kings of the World, that the Nations
may be subject unto them; so that they Reigning in peace, we may serve our God
in tranquillity of mind, and quietness --. And he goes on to describe the
Prayers for those in Authority, for plenty, for deliverance from Sedition, and
for the prosperity of the Public --. He mentions also the Prayers for those in
diverse Necessities, and the Thanksgivings for all the Mercies we daily receive
from God Ambros. Com. in 1 Timothy cap. 2. Tom. 3. page 574.
: Which are the Heads of general Intercession used in all ancient Liturgies,
and come as near the Words of some of them as can be expected, in a Commentary
where he does not cite the very Words, but show the agreement of these Forms to
the Apostolical Rule. In another place he refers to this Prayer briefly, and
notes, that immediately before the Prayer of Consecration, there is premised a
Prayer for Kings, and all others Oration praemittitur pro r^gibus, pro caeteris.
Id. de Sacram. l. b. 4. c. 4. p. 366.
: But as to the Prayer of Consecration it self, He gives us the very Form of
it; Would you know (says he) with what Heavenly Words it is consecrated? Hear
the very Words, The Priest says, Make this Oblation, ratified, rational and
acceptable, that it may be for a Figure of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who the day before he Suffered, taking Bread into his holy Hands, etc.
Then reciting the Words and Actions of the Institution, He goes on to tell us,
that the Priest adds, -- Wherefore we being mindful of his most glorious
Passion, of his Resurrection from the Dead, and of his Ascension into Heaven,
do offer unto thee this immaculate, rational, and unbloody Sacrifice, this holy
Bread and Cup of Eternal Life; desiring and praying, thou will accept this
Oblation upon thy Heavenly Altar, by the hands of thy Angels, as thou did
accept the gifts of thy Servant the Righteous Abel, and the Sacrifice of our
Father Abraham, which was offered to thee by thy High Priest Melchisedec
Ambros. de Sacr. lib. 4. c. 5, and 6. page 367, etc.
: Which is an express Form, and the same with the primitive Roman Canon, till
the New Doctrins of a Propitiatory Sacrifice and Transubstantiation compelled
them to alter their old Forms, to suit it with their later Opinion. He also
declares the Form of Administration, The Priest says, The Body of Christ; and
Thou say, Amen Id. ib. p. 368. -- and vide Constable. Apostol. lib. 8. cap. 20.
Ubi habemus eandem Formulam.
, He also tells us, That the Lord's Prayer concluded the Office Ibid. lib. 5.
cap. 4. page 370.
: And concerning that Ancient Hymn, the Trisagion, He says, That in most of
the Eastern, and diverse Western Churches, in the Oblation of that Sacrifice
which is presented to God the Father, the People and the Priest with one Voice
say, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, all the Earth is full of thy Majesty
Lib. de Spir. Sanct. Tom. 5. page 525.
. Moreover, He mentions the old Form of the Bishops Saluting the People, by
Praying, Peace might be with them Ambr. de dign. Sacerd. cap. 5.
. We have also in him, The Form of renouncing the Devil Id. de Sacr. lib. 1. c.
2 p. 354.
, and of Consecrating the Water in Baptism Ib. lib. 2. cap. 5. page 359.
; and a Form of asking those who were to be Baptized, concerning their Faith in
the Holy Trinity Ibid. cap. 7. page 360.
. He informs us also; That the Church had ordered a Prayer for the Bishop Id.
Com. in Rom xv. Tom. 3. page 331.
: And he prescribes the LI Psalm as a very proper Form of Prayer for a sincere
Penitent to use in private Tract. ad Vi^g. laps. T. 4. page 455.
, and recommends some Verses of the XLI Psalm, as fit to be said when we go to
Visit those that are Sick Com. in Psalm. xli. Tom. 2. page 755.
: So that it is not only past all contradiction, that S. Ambrose used and
approved Forms; but we might collect almost an entire Liturgy out of his Works:
And we have the Testimony of Walafridus Strabo, who lived almost 900 year ago,
That S. Ambrose made not only a Communion Office, but Composed all other.
Offices for his own Church and others, which the Church of Milan retains to
this very day Walafrid. Strab. de ^eb. Eccl^s. cap. 22. An 840.
. There is also other ancient Evidence, that he made such a Liturgy in Card.
Bona, de reb Liturg lib. 1. cap. 10. but this (like all other ancient
Liturgies) has also been mixed with ^ome of the Modern Corruptions; however,
his genuine Works give us Evidence enough, that there were prescribed Forms of
Prayer and Praise in his time.

Let us now examine what our Adversary has gathered out of S. Ambrose, to
oppose this plain Proof: First, He is one of those Authors, who calls the
Prayer of Consecration, A Mystery; and this he tells us twice over Discourse of
Liturgy p. 28, and 29.
. But yet we have showed, that he has actually writ it down; so that it could
not be his meaning, That it was such a Mystery as might not be committed to
Writing; and that shows, that our Author gets no advantage to his Cause by
citing this place Ambros. de Fide ad Great. lib. 4. cap. 5.
. Secondly, He would prove that S. Ambrose counted Praying Extempore, to be
praying by the Spirit, and for this he quotes his Epistle to Horontianus
Discourse of Liturg. page 60.
. I Answer, S. Ambrose is not speaking of the Public Service, but of private
Prayer in that place, and therefore the Allegation is impertinent: Besides, He
does not say, the Spirit furnishes us with Words and Phrases; but helps us to
apply our Minds to pray, and keeps out Carnal thoughts, making us content with
such things, as we naturally wish to be quit of, because they are for our good:
And both here and elsewhere he explains that Phrase of the Spirits helping our
infirmities, Romans viii 26. to be meant of the Spirits giving us such patience,
that we shall not desire to be presently freed from our Afflictions Ambros. ad
Horont. lib. 5. ep. 4. page 290. and Com. in Romans viii. Tom. 3. p. 293.
; which is nothing at all to his Notion of Extempore Prayer. In another place
He expounds those Words, Praying always in the Spirit, to signify, Praying
with a pure Conscience, and a sincere Faith, which he who prays by a Form may
do Com. in Ephesians. vi. p. 516.
. And certainly, he who knew it was always his Duty, to pray by or with the
Spirit, and yet used and approved a Form; must believe it possible to pray in
or by a Form, and yet to pray by or with the Spirit. Thirdly, My Adversary
objects a Passage out of S. Ambrose his Epistle to his Sister Marcellina, viz.
That while he was Celebrating, he heard that the Arians had seized upon one
Castulus, just as he was performing the general Collect; whereupon he ordered
the Prayer suitable to that Occasion, which one that had been Fettered with
prescribed Forms could not have liberty to do Discourse of Liturg page 67, and
68.
. And here, first, I shall observe, He is to prove that the Inferior Ministers
ought to be at liberty, to order all the Prayers, as they please, in the
ordinary Service of God: But his usage is to instance in some irregular Fact,
upon some single extraordinary occasion, done by some great and eminent Bishop;
which, if his Instances prove true, will never justify his Opinion: And truly,
this was an Extraordinary Bishop, who was fit to make a Liturgy, and a very
extraordinary Case, The City being all in an Uproar, and S. Ambrose was told in
the middle of his Office, That his Friend Castulus was like to be murdered by
the enraged Arians; upon which sad and sudden occasion, he for that once put in
One Petition, which was only, That God would help Castulus; and there is
nothing in the Original Relation to show us he did it aloud, so that possibly
he might stop a minute, and in his Heart pray to God, to help the poor Man Vid.
Ambr. Ep. 14. ad Marcellin. Sor. Tom. 5 p. 205.
; But whether this request were Mental or Vocal, it was on so sudden and
unusual occasion, that for all this, S. Ambrose might be (as he calls it,)
Fettered with a Form upon ordinary occasions; yea we have proved he was so, and
that this general Collect was a Form also. And if a great Bishop now, should
hear that his dearest Friend or nearest Relation, was suddenly fallen into
danger of Death, while he was Praying for all Estates of Men at the Altar; No
Man would blame him, if he did Mentally or Vocally, put in such an Ejaculation
as, Lord help my dear Friend, etc. Nor would any whose understanding were not
Fettered with strange prejudices, Argue from thence, either that this Bishop
never used a prescribed Form; or that all the Ministers in his Diocese, were
left at liberty on ordinary occasions, to alter the Liturgy as they pleased.
But as to his Reflection upon Forms, I must observe, that our Lord Jesus saw fit
to bind us in such Fetters, when he gave us a Form of Prayer; and that which
binds us to a regular performance of our Duty, and assists us to do it better,
is like the Tackle of a Ship, or the Cords which bounded each side of the Old
Grecian Races, helping us, and directing us both at once. There are some
indeed, who count their Vicious Appetites are too much Fettered by the
Commandments of God, and the Laws of the Land; and like the Sarmatians fancy,
Licentious and Lawless Madness, to be the only liberty Licentem amentiam
libertatem existimarent. Am. Marcellin lib. 17.
. But neither God nor our Governors for all this, do see sit to take off these
useful Chains; and Aristotle has taught us, that to Live as the Government
requires us, is no Slavery (...) Arist. Pol. 9.
. Liberty is not a Power to do what we list, but what we ought to do; Now Laws
and Forms direct what we ought to do, and hinder us only from what is Evil, or
Dangerous; and therefore do not prejudice our Liberty, but guide us to use it
so as may be consistent with the Common-Good: And wise Men do not desire to be
at liberty to talk Nonsense, and Blasphemy; nay, nor to speak impertinently,
immethodically and rashly before God, and a great Congregation; but the Gospel
teaches us, that such as need Chains and Fetters most, are most impatient of
them and most apt to break them Mark, v. 4.
. But to return to our History.

. 18. Though S. Hierom S. Hieron. An. Dom. 378.
were no Bishop, yet his learning and Authority was so great, that, (as our
Adversary seems to grant Disc. of Liturg. p. 171.
, he directed Pope Damasus, in Regulating the public Offices at Rome; so that
what Marianus Victorius reports in his life, is not improbable, viz. That at
his instance Hallelujah was sung at Rome, after the custom of Jerusalem; and
the Gloria Patri in the end of each Psalm, was also sung there after the manner
of Antioch; from him also Rome received a corrected Copy of the Septuagints
Psalms, to be read and sung in the Church -- eo emendante Roma legendo^
canendosque in Ecclesia, LXX interpretum Psalmos suscepit. Marian. Victor. in
vit. Hieron. E. Gregor. Mag.
; I note by the way, that the ignorant Editor of Mt. Clarksons Book, (for I
would not suspect the Author,) Ridiculously mistakes the Septuagints
Translation of the Psalms, and puts in [70 Psalmos suscepit]. viz. That Rome
received Seventy Psalms from S. Hierom. -- risum teneatis amici. But from the
Quotation rightly stated, we may observe that S. Hierom, could not be against
Forms of Praise in the Public Pervice; when he prescribed both the Hallelujah
and the Gloria Patri, (which are such Forms) to the Roman Church, or at least
advised the Pope to prescribe them. And his Works abound with Testimonies, That
Forms both of Prayer and Praise, and alternate Singing of Psalms after the way
of Antioch was used in Palestina, and approved by him while he was there: The
Instances (though but occasionally mentioned by S. Hierom) are so many that we
must cite them briefly: He advises a pious Lady, to bring up her young
Daughter in Piety, by accustoming her to rise before day to Prayers and singing
Psalms, and by teaching her to sing Hymns Morning and Evening, and to Pray at
the Hours of Nine, Twelve and Three Hieron. ad Laet. Ep. 7. p. 59.
. Now this Child could not be taught either to Pray or Sing otherwise than by
Forms. He also gives advice to another Virgin, to perform her Order of Psalms
and Prayers at Nine, Twelve and Three, as also at Evening, in the Night and the
Morning Id. ad Demetriad. ep. 8. page 74. and Id. ad Eustach. ep. 22. p. 189.
. He also tells, That he learned the Psalms by heart in his youth, and daily
repeated part of them, as an Office of Devotion Idem adv. Ruffin. lib. 2. Tom.
2. p 335.
. Moreover he directs those Religious persons who lived with him, or consulted
him, to get every word of the Psalter by heart -- and to answer the Psalm in
their Turn Hieron. ad Rustic. ep. 4. page 45, 46.
. In his time also they had an Order of Singers, whose Office was to Chant the
Psalms and Hymns in the Church Id Com. in V. Ephesians. Tom. 6 page 420.
. Yea, it is very plain from him, that they had a Choir which sang alternately,
and began always with Hallelujahs Idem ad Sabin. ep. 48. page 305. and Epitaph.
Paulae, page 232.
: And that all the People at Funerals joined in Singing Psalms and the
Hallelujah, till they made the gilded Roof of the Temple to shake and Echo
again Idem in Epitaph. Fabiolae.
. Moreover, he mentions that so famous Form of Holy, Holy, Holy, which the
Greek call Trisagion Id libr. de XLII. Mansionibus.
. And he speaks of the Morning and Evening Hymns wherewith God was delighted
Id. Com. in Psalm. 64. Tom. 7. page 158.
. Now it is certain all these were Forms of Praise; and yet if these Christians
had not sung them with the Spirit, God would not have been delighted with them;
and therefore we may praise God devoutly, acceptably, and with the Spirit, in
and by Forms, as S. Hirom, and the holy Men and Women in his time did. Nor have
we less Evidence that they prayed by Forms: For he occasionally mentions two
Passages of their Litany, The Church says, From thy remembering the Sins of our
Forefathers Hieron. Com. in Psalm. 38.
, where, Good Lord deliver us, or the like, must be added to make up the
Sentence. So again he tells us, It is the Voice of the Church, and he wishes,
God would hear her when she cries, O Lord grant us thy Peace Id ad Rustic. ep 4
page 49.
: which very Phrase we know is used in all the ancient Litanies; therefore he
must refer to those public Forms, when he cites those Words as the Voice of the
Church. As to the Communion Service, no Man can doubt but that the People used
there daily to repeat the Words of the Lords Prayer as a Form, who considers
that he says, Our Savior taught his Apostles to appoint the Faithful every
day, in the Sacrifice of his Body, to say, Our Father, etc. Idem adv. Pelag.
lib 3. page 469.
. He also calls the Prayer of Consecration, The Solemn Prayer Id Com. in Zeph.
cap. 3. Tom. 5. p. 489.
. Now we showed before, that PRECES SOLENNES, were always in a Set Form of
Words. He also mentions that Universal Form of receiving the Holy Sacrament,
and immediately saying, Amen Id. ad Theophil. ep. 62. Tom. 2. p. 270.
; which being used in the Eastern Churches, in Africa and at Milan, and
prescribed by the ancient Offices of those several Churches, those who followed
them in this Rite, probably did so in the rest of that Office. Again, It is
evident from him, that those who were Baptized, were asked the very Words of
the Apostles Creed Idem adv. Lucif. Tom. 2. page 189.
, and he frequently refers to the Form of Renunciation there used. Now
considering S. Hierom did not write purposely of Liturgy, these occasional
Passages may suffice to show us there was a Public Form used in his time; and
(as we noted) He commends S. Hilary for making a Liturgy; and Book of Hymns
Hieron. Catal. script in Hilario, p. 378.
, and therefore could not dislike prescribed Forms; yea, Durandus does not only
say, That he made an Order for reading the Scripture (as our Adversary would
have it Discourse of Liturg. page 7^.
; but his Words are, He appointed what Psalms, Lessons, Epistles and Gospels
should be read every day, (and cantum ordinavit magna ex part); that is, He
ordered many of the Forms of Prayer and Praise, both which were chanted or sung
in Durandus his time Durand. ^ational. lib. ^. cap. 1. sol. 89.
: And he means no more but this, (which S. Gregory had Recorded before) That
the Missal of the Roman Church was corrected and set in order by S. Hierom in
Pope Damasus his Time. From whence we infer, that S. Hierom was not like our
Adversary, for rejecting Liturgies, but correcting them, and sending them to
such Bishops as had Authority to impose them.

Our Adversary, though he pretends to have searched Antiquity very diligently,
could find nothing in S. Hierom which showed the use of Forms; and it seems he
could discover but one Passage in him to urge against the use of them, and it
is a very slight one, viz. That S. Hierom censures and reproves the Deacons,
because in the Offertory at the Communion, they recited publicly the Names of
such as offered, and the Sums which they either gave or promised. Now this
Custom he thinks was not prescribed, and therefore he infers, that those who
officiated were left to their Liberty, to use what Expressions they thought sit
Disc. of Liturg. p 65, and 66. ex Hieron. Com. in Ezekiel xviii and in Jer. xi.
. To which I Reply, That it has been proved before there was a prescribed Form
to pray for all Estates of Men; and in this Collect they commemorated such
Eminent Persons as died in the True Faith, whose Names were read out of the
Dypticks, and this was a certain written Form, which no Priest might alter.
Here also they mentioned the Names of such as had Offered at the Communion,
even from S. Cyprian's time, who orders the Writing down and commemorating the
Names of such as had contributed to redeem Captives Cypr. Ep. 60. and Epist. 66.
. But the Names of these living Offerers varied every day, and the Church could
no more prescribe these Names, than ours can prescribe what Sick shall be
prayed for, or what Christian Names shall be used in the Matrimonial Office:
And this miserable Logician may as well prove our Ministers are left to their
liberty, to use what Expressions they please in the general Prayer for the
Sick, because in some Churches they name twenty new Names there in one day: Or
in the Office of Matrimony, because they put in William and Mary, or John and
Elizabeth, as to pretend that the General Collect in the Primitive Church was
not a prescribed Form, from the Priests varying the Names of the Offerers. As
for their mentioning the Sums offered, that was a Corruption no doubt; but we
see it came in at that part of the Office where the Church was forced to leave
the Minister at liberty; so that he has spoiled his own Cause by this
Instance, which affords us a good Argument against Extempore Prayers, and
leaving Men at liberty in Divine Offices, as being a dangerous Gap to let in
Corruptions.

S. Chrysostom, An. 397.
. 19. The deservedly Famous S. Chrysostom, has left us so many rare memorials
of his Piety and Learning, and so many clear Evidences of his affection for
Liturgies, that he alone might be a sufficient Witness, if our Adversary were
not pertinacious: And this Author is so dazeled with the brightness of his
Testimonies, that he grants enough to show, that Public Forms were used in his
Time, and approved by him, though still according to the custom of his Party,
he denies they were used in this or the next Age; holding the Conclusion, when
he is forced to quit the Promises. For he grants, First, That the Lord's
Prayer is called by S. Chrysostom, That Prayer which was established by Law,
and brought in by Christ (...) Chrysostom hom. 2. in 2 Cor.
.: And that the very Words of it were taught to the Baptized, and the Form it
self repeated in the Daily Service of the Church, once (at least) in one
Assembly Discourse of Liturg. page 3.
. We note by the way, that our Adversary means the Communion Office here by the
Daily Service; but takes no notice that the Christians had other daily
Assemblies, viz. at Six in the Morning, Three in the Afternoon, and at
Candle-lighting. Now if the Lord's Prayer were repeated but once at one
Assembly, yet still it might be repeated Four times in one day. Secondly, He
grants there is in S. Chrysostom an Order visible, that is, a certain Method,
wherein they agreed to administer the several parts of Worship, particularly in
the Sacrament; so as each had its known fixed place Discourse of Liturg. page 5.
. Thirdly, He cites S. Chrysostom, to prove the People of old had a part in the
Prayers Ibid p. 44.
. Fourthly, He owns, That S. Chrysostom did bring in the usage of Singing
alternately, that is, by Turns and Responses, into the Church of Constantinople
Ibid. p. 168.
. Now let us put all this together, and if they used the Lords Prayer so often
every day as a Form, and had a certain Order for the several parts of Worship,
so that every part had so known and fixed a place, and so that the People could
bear a share, and make their Responses in this Worship, both as to the Hymns
and the Prayers; doubtless this Order was a Liturgy, because if the Words of
it, as well as the Method, were not prescribed, the People could not know where
and when to come in with their Parts: Thus then he has given up the Cause, and
owned a Liturgy in the Fourth Century. But we have better Arguments than his
Concessions, (who never produces any one Evidence for Forms, but what he hopes
he can answer) since S. Chrysostom abundantly assures us, not only that there
was a Liturgy in his time, but sets out the Method, and explains the Words and
Phrases of those Forms, as often as any occasion offers it self. And, First, He
tells us, Their Office consisted of Prayers, Litanies, and Prefaces (...)
Chry^. hom. 3. in Colost Tom. 4. p 106.
; more particularly He mentions one Prayer for the Catechumens Hom. 2. in 2
Cor. p. 553.
, and three more: The first is the Prayer full of Mercy, when we pray for those
that are Possessed: The second is for those under the Censures of the Church,
to desire Mercy for them: The third Prayer (says he) is for our selves Com. in
Matthew. hom. 72. edit Front. Vol. ^. p 768.
, that is, for the Faithful. And in another place he says, Both Priests and
People make Common Prayers for the Possessed, and the Penitents; and all of
them say that one Prayer, the Prayer full of Mercy Hom. 18. in 2 Cor. edit.
Savil. page 647.
. Now, for the better understanding here of, let it be considered that S.
Chrysostom was bred up at Antioch, before he came to Constantinople; and
therefore the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, who (as we noted before)
has set down the Liturgy of Antioch (as it was used before S. Chrysostoms
time) must be the best Commentator upon S. Chrysostom; for here he plainly
alludes to some known Liturgy, and probably to that in the Constitutions, or
one which had corrected it in some few things, both in the Expressions and the
Method; yet they are so very like each other, that both seem to have been but
one Liturgy originally. Now in that Liturgy in the Constitutions, there are
just so many Prayers, and exactly in the same order; The first for the
Catechumens, the second for those that are Possessed, the third for the
Penitents, and the last Pray^r for the Faithful (...) Apol^^ (...) c^p 5. ^
^^p. ^. c^p. 13
. And this Author makes us understand what S Chrysostom means by The Prayers
full of Mercy: For these are the Forms of Litany, which they made for these
several sorts of Persons; and when the Deacon has repeated the Petition, viz.
For such and such things, and -- let us pray to the Lord; the People answer to
every Petition, Lord have mercy (...) D^ac^^^ pepul^^ ut prad^x. (...) C^n lit.
A^ost^^. cap 5.
. From the frequent Repetition of which Sentence. S. Chrysostom calls this the
Prayer full of Mercy; and to assure us he means this very Litanick Form, he
says, It is a Common Prayer, made both by the Priests and People ^^^^stom.
(...) p^g. ^^.
. And that it was enjoined we may also be assured, because when he is about to
set down the very Form of this Prayer for the Catechumens, he brings it in with
this Preface, The Laws of the Church command, that the Prayers shall be made
thus (...) Id. hom. 2. in 2 Cor. p. 553.
; which shows it was a Form established by Law, and he there repeats the Words,
and expounds it as he goes on: And though it be long, yet to silence all that
deny the use of prescribed Forms, we shall here recite it.

First, The Deacon says, Let us pray earnestly for the Catechumens: And then
he begins the Prayer, Beseeching the All-merciful and Compassionate God to hear
their Prayers -- To open the Ears of their Hearts -- To instruct them in the
Word of Truth -- To plant his fear in them -- To confirm their Minds in the
Faith -- To reveal to them the Gospel of Righteousness -- To give them an
Heavenly Mind, wise Reasoning, and a virtuous Conversation -- To make them
continue in his Law day and night -- To deliver them from all evil and absurd
Actions -- And from all the Temptations of the Devil, and Assaults of the
Adversary -- To cloth them with the Garment of Immortality in his due time --
To bless their going out and their coming in -- To bless their Houses and their
Servants -- To bless their Children, and bring them to perfect age and
understanding -- To make all things work together for their good -- After this
the Catechumens (who had kneeled while this Litany was said) are bid to rise up
and pray, For an Angel of Pea^e (...) alio scil. hom. 3. in Coloss. Tom. 4. p.
106.
-- That their Affairs might prosper -- That this and all the days of their
Lives might be peaceable -- And that they might make a Christian End. After all
they are bid, To commend themselves to the living God by Christ Jesus, and so
to bow their Head and depart Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2 Cor. page 553 -- ad page 556.
. Here therefore we have a large Form in Words prescribed and enjoined by the
Church, upon every Period of which this Holy Father makes a Comment; which he
could not have done had it been usually varied, or had it been an Extempore
Prayer: The Form also is the manner of Litany, room being left for the People
to say, Lord have mercy, after every Petition. And I must observe further, that
this very Litany is very short expressed in the Liturgies of S. Basil and S.
Chrysostom, there being (in the former especially) no more but the beginning of
the Sentences; Thus, Ye Faithful for -- That he would instruct -- That he would
reveal, etc. which are the initial Words of the main Periods of this very Form
which S. Chrysostom expounds, and it seems were so well known to the Deacons
then, that it was enough to set down the initial Words of some Sentences, which
proves it was constantly used and become familiar Vid. Liturg. D. Basil, Bib.
Patr. Tom. II. page 45. Et Liturg. Chrysostom. ibid. page 71.
. And it is much for the Credit of those Liturgies, that S. Chrysostom in his
genuine Works expounds a Form so very like those in the Liturgies, that any Man
may discern those are the Epitome of this Larger Form. To this I must add, That
the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions has set down this Litany at large,
many Petitions of it being the very same Words, viz. To hear their Prayers --
To open the Ears of their Hearts -- To bless their going out and coming in,
etc. And other Petitions are the very same things with very little alteration
of the Phrase -- viz. To reveal to them the Gospel of his Christ -- To plant
his holy and saving Fear in them -- To make them meditate in his Law day and
night -- To grant them the Laver of Regeneration, and the Garment of
Immortality, etc. Clem. Constit. lib. 8. cap. 5.
. And indeed, Excepting the difference in the order of some Petitions, and some
Phrases, there is an exact harmony between this Litany in the Constitutions,
and that in S. Chrysostom; the Variations being no more than may be expected
from variety of Copies transcribed for the use of two several Diocesses, and
corrected by two several Bishops for their own Clergy: This is certain, That
there was far more difference between the Missals of Salisbury and York, than
are in these two Forms; yet both were used in one Kingdom, by those who were
Members of the same National Church. Nor can we wonder at these little
differences in the ancient Litanies, considering the aptness of every Eminent
Bishop, to order something in the public Service; it suffices to make my
Position good, that they were Forms prescribed, that probably had all sprung
from one Original; (For all these Old Eastern Litanies agree in the main) but
some Phrases, and something of the order of the Petitions were varied in the
Transcripts for diverse Provinces: And since this small Variety was in S.
Chrysostom's Time, we may conclude, The Primitive Form from whence they were
all derived must be much Elder.

The next part of Liturgy was the Prayers at the Eucharist, when none but the
Faithful were present; And these S. Chrysostom describes also so exactly like
that Office which is in the Apostolical Constitutions, that it is evident
either those very Forms, or some little different from them were used in S.
Chrysostoms time; the Reader may compare the passages, which I shall cite out
of this Father with the places in the Constitutions noted in the Margen, and he
will be satisfied of this great Truth. In this Office, there was a Litany Clem.
Constit. lib. 8. cap. 13. and 19.
, wherein, as S. Chrysostom says, they were bid to intercede with the merciful
God, for Bishops and Priests, for Kings and all in Authority; for the Land, the
Sea and the Air, yea for all the World Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2. Cor. page 557.
. Which is as plain a description of that Litany, as a Lax discourse will
admit. And both S. Chrysostom, and the Constitutions note this was said by all
of them kneeling. After this the Holy Father Observes, they arose all together,
and then the Bishop imparted Peace, saluting them in this Form, Peace be with
you. The People answering, and with thy Spirit Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2. Cor.
page 647. Clem. Constable. lib. 8. cap. 15.
. But as to this Form, it was often used in diverse places of the public
Service, as the old Liturgies show, and S. Chrysostom does attest; saying, We
everywhere Pray for Peace; in the Church we desire Peace; in the Prayers,
Litanies and Prefaces, the Bishop frequently salutes us with Peace, saying,
Peace be with you, and Peace be with you all; When he enters the Church, he
begins with this: So also before Sermon De isto ritu vide item Chrysostom. hom.
36. in 1. Cor.
: So when he blesses, when he enjoins the kiss of charity, and when the
Sacrifice is done, he says again, Grace be with you and Peace; you answering,
And with thy Spirit Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Coloss. Tom. 4. page 106, 107.
. After this followed these Primitive and Universally used Forms of Preface,
which are sound in all the ancient Liturgies, with little Variation. viz. Lift
up your Hearts. Answer, We lift them up unto the Lord. Of which S. Chrysostom
says, Did you not promise the Priest, (to be devout) when he says, Lift up
your Hearts and Minds? And you replied, We Lift them up unto the Lord Chrysostom.
ser. 38. de Euchar. and poen. Item hom. 22. in Hebr. Constable. Apostol. lib. 8.
cap. 16.
. Then he tells us, the Praises were common and performed by both Priest and
People: For first (says he) You receive their Words (that is, Let us give
Thanks to our Lord God) and then you join with them, and add, it is just and
right so to do. After which begins the act of Praise Chrysostom. ut supr. hom.
18. in 2. Cor.
, which no doubt is that Form in the Constitution, It is meet and Right so to
do, etc. Constit. Ap. ut supr.
. And as for the Hymn called Trisagion which is Holy, holy, holy, (and follows
in the Constitutions,) S Chrysostom mentions it very many times, in his genuin
Works. For he wonders how they dare Slander their Neighbors, who with the
Cherubins, Sing Holy, holy, holy Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 14.
; and he wonders, they who are admitted to Sing the same Hymn with, Cherubins,
Seraphins, Angels and Archangels, dare laugh or behave themselves unseemly in
the Church Id. in 2. Corinthians. hom. 18. page 647. id. Orat. 74. de Bapt.
Servant. hom. 24. in act. Ap.
. So that nothing can be more certain, than that this Hymn was sung in this
very Form, in the Eucharistical Office at that very time. And so was the Glory
be to God on high also; for he says, The Faithful know what the Cherubins sing
above (that is, Holy, holy, holy,) and what the Angels sang below (that is,
Glory to God on high Chrysostom. hom. 9. in Ep. ad Coloss.
, intimating they were both sung in that Office. S. Chrysostom also confirms
this in another place, saying, in our Eucharist we say, Glory be to God on
high, on Earth Peace, good Will toward Men Idem hom. 3. in ^p. ad Coloss.
. To this we may add other ancient Forms* which he occasionally mentions, such
as these, to stand up and with great Decency Id. hom. 4. de natura Dei.
; And that Holy things, must be given to Holy persons Idem hom. 17. in Hebraeos.
; Both which passages are in the Liturgy in the Constitutions, in so many Words
Constit. lib. 8. cap. 15. and cap. 20.
. And also in every one of the ancient Liturgies, which go under the names of
S. James, S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, in all which also there is a Form of
Prayer, after the Holy Communion Constit. lib. 8. cap. 22.
; and S. Chrysostom has a Homily to reprove those, Who left the holy Liturgy
unfinished, and went out before the last Prayer; which is the Title of that
Homily Chrysostom. Tom. 5. edit. Front. Dac. et. p. 522.
. All which abundantly proves, that there was a set and prescribed Liturgy at
that time, by which the Eucharist was Administered.

I might be much larger in my proof of this, had I time to make a narrower
search, in the learned Volumes of this elegant Father; but I take this to be
sufficient, especially if we consider the Evidence we have, that S. Chrysostom
did compose that Liturgy as to the main, which now goes under his name; The
Authorities and Arguments for which, being much the same, with those produced
for the Liturgy of S. Basil See before in this Chap.. 15.
, we refer the Reader thither; And shall here only observe, First, That Proclus
who was S. Chrysostoms successor at Constanstinople, and came into that See
within 27 years after Chrysostoms Death, affirms; That this Holy Father like a
good Pastor, who was careful of his Flock, resolved to root up all the
pretenses, which human sloth was wont to make; and therefore drew up a shorter
Form of Prayers, for the celebrating of the Eucharist, lest Men who hate to be
confined too long, being deceived by the craft of the Devil, should omit this
Divine Ordinance Proclus de traditione divinae Missae.
. And the Greek Church has ever since used this Liturgy, as the genuin
composure of S. Chrysostom. Secondly, The main part of this Liturgy, is found
either explicitly, or by plain intimations, in the genuin Works of S.
Chrysostom, who reckons up the same Ceremonies, Hymns and Prayers, and
generally in the same order. And also upon occasion comments upon, and explains
both the Rites and ancient Forms; and covertly refers to many more passages in
this Liturgy; only he would not speak out, because his Homilies were Preached
to a promiscuous Auditory. Thirdly, There is a great part of this Liturgy, very
pure, Primitive and worthy of this great Author; even so much of it as is
Recorded in his own Writings, and in the Works of S. Cyprian, S. Cyril. S.
Basil. S. Augustine and others, or so much of it as is taken out of Holy
Scripture. And in all this, there is nothing of Praying to Saints, to Angels,
or the blessed Virgin; nothing of any Prayers for delivering the deceased from
pain; nothing of venerating the Cross or any other Image. The passages which
look this way, are later Patches tacked to this holy Liturgy in corrupter
times, easily distinguishable from the Original composure, both by the Style
and Matter; wherefore these Parts we reject; but must not throw away the Wheat
with the Chaff, there being no Father, to which some corrupt Additions have not
been made; but we must not for the sake of these spurious Tracts, reject that
which is true and genuine. Fourthly, Since it is so clear, that Forms had been
long used in the Church, and that the Gift of Prayer was ceased before this
Century began; it cannot but be very probable that so great a Bishop, of so
eminent a Diocese, and with so large a Jurisdiction, should model and correct
the ancient Forms, and adapt them to the use of the Churches under his care; as
S. Basil had done for those under his charge; especially since no ancient
Author, did ever contradict this Universally received Notion, That this Liturgy
was made by S. Chrysostom; Nor does any Historian, assign any other Person as
the maker thereof, or mention this Liturgy as coming into use, in any other Age.

. 20. And now we will consider those things which are objected both against the
use of Forms in this Age, and against the Authority of this Liturgy; my
Adversary produces diverse places out of S. Chrysostom, to prove, that Words
spoken in the Celebration of the Sacraments, were Mysteries, which S.
Chrysostom thinks ought to be concealed; and therefore he supposes there were
no Written Forms in his time; however none of his Wrting Discourse of Liturg.
page 29. and page 35, 36, 37.
. I have often answered this Argument before: But I shall now observe, That
this Notion of the great Sin of divulging Mysteries to the Unbaptized, hinders
S. Chrysostom in his Discourses (which are generally Sermons, Homilies and
Orations, made to a promiscuous Auditory) from giving as many Passages of the
Ecclesiastical Forms, which he generally there wraps up in dark Expressions;
yet his appealing to the Faithful, and telling them they knew and remembered
such and such things, is a certain sign, that there were known and prescribed
Forms: For how could he appeal to the Initiated, or tell them they knew or
remembered such or such a Passage (which he darkly hinted) if Sacraments had
been celebrated, or Prayers made in the Extempore way, by Phrases daily varied?
Thus in those Instances which my Adversary brings, Speaking of the Litany used
by the Faithful, S. Chrysostom says, It is a Mystery, but the Initiated know
how it abounds with Mercy (...) Chry^ in Matthew. hom. 71. p. 451. Disc. of
Liturg. page 29.
. This must be some Form which they knew, otherwise he could not have made this
Appeal: So when this Father speaks of the mystical Words in Baptism, he doubts
not but those who were baptized, could remember what they Answered Id. Hom. 40.
in 1 Cor. p 514. Disc. of Liturg. Marg. page 29.
; which shows, they Answered in a certain Form of Words: And it appears they
also had a set and certain Form of renouncing the Devil, because S. Chrysostom
appeals to the Initiated, and bids them Remember those Words by which they
renounced the Devils Tyranny Hom. 2. in 2 Epist. ad Cor. page 555.
; yet our Adversary, by a dexterity of arguing peculiar to himself, cites this
to prove there was no Form of Renunciation Discourse of Liturg. p. 37.
. By which rare Art also he quotes S. Chrysostom's Exposition of Gal IV. 28.
where he says, The Faithful knew the Divine Words pronounced by the Priest at
their Baptism Chrysostom. hom. in 4 Galat. p. 748. Disc of Liturg. p. 37.
, to prove there were no Forms; and yet if there had not been known Forms, this
Appeal could not have been made: For no Dissenting Pastor, who Officiates
Extempore, can appeal to his Congregation, and say, You know, or you remember
the Words of my Prayer this day Twelvemonth, or indeed this day Seven-night.
Under this Head we may place all his needless Quotations, to prove that
Catechumens and Penitents were excluded from these Mysteries Discourse of Lit.
p. 35. etc.
: For we grant the Matter of Fact; but the natural Inference from thence is,
(not that they durst not write Forms, as he weakly pretends, but) that they
used constant Forms; and these being Mysteries above the Capacity of the
Unbaptized, they feared by often hearing they might learn them, which they
fancied was a profanation of their Mysteries: But had their Prayers been in new
Phrases every day, there had been no need to exclude any Body; they might have
challenged them all that were present, to remember any thing if they could.
This silence and secrecy therefore, was to secure their Forms from the
knowledge of the Unbaptized: Though as the Heathens writ their Mysterious
Prayers, and yet concealed them* by charging the Priests to keep both Books and
Forms from the knowledge of the Un-iniated; so might the Christians also well
enough keep their Written Forms secret, by charging the Priests and Faithful
not to discover them, and excluding the Catechumens, whenever these Forms
were used. Secondly, He would prove, that he who Officiated, was left to his
liberty by some general Expressions in S. Chrysostom ^^scourse of (...). page
66.
; viz. The Priest in the Mysteries -- offered up Prayers for them Chrysostom.
Hom. 41. in 1 C^r p. 524.
; and, The Priest of God stands to offer the Prayers of all -- he trembles when
he offers up Prayers for thee Id. hom. 15. in Hebr. p. 515.
. I Answer, That S. Chrysostom in the former place cites the Words of those
Prayers, and in the second evidently supposes a Set Form: And when he has
made it clear, there can be no Prayers offered up to God, but Extempore; then
this will be an Argument, till then it is extremely frivolous. Thirdly, He
thinks the Prayers at the Eucharist were not written, and could not be gotten
by heart, being ordinarily very long, which he proves by Chrysostom's saying,
The Priest stands, not bringing Fire, but the holy Spirit, and makes a long
Supplication -- that the Grace of God might fall upon the Sacrifice Chrysostom.
de Sacerd. Orat. 3. p 16.
. To which I Reply, that it is nothing to the purpose how long this Prayer was,
because it is certain it was a Form, and was written in so many Words in the
Apostolical Constitutions, where we find this very Petition to which S.
Chrysostom alludes, placed in the middle of the Prayer of Consecration, That
God would send his Holy Spirit upon this Sacrifice -- (...) Constit. Apost.
lib. 8. cap. 17. Lit. Chrysostom. in Eucholog. p. 77 Lit. Basil. ibid. page 169.
; which is also in S. Cyril, and both in the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom and S.
Basil: So that this Long Prayer being written before Chrysostom's Time, need
not to be got by Heart, and therefore all his Inferences from that false
Supposition do fall to the ground: Nor can he pretend, that the Priests
bringing the Holy Spirit (here mentioned) is meant of his praying by the
Spirit, that is, (as he thinks) Extempo^e; because the Spirit here, is the
thing prayed for, and that which the Priests Prayers brought down upon the
Christian Sacrifice, as Elijah's Prayer of old brought down Fire upon the Legal
Sacrifice. Fourthly, He tells us that S Chrysostom says. It required greater
confidence than Moses and Elias had, to pray over this Sacrifice; from whence
he gathers, that there was no need of such Confidence, if their Prayer were
written in a Book before them Discourse of Liturg. page 75.
. But if the Reader consult the place in the Father Chry^^st. de Sacerd. lib.
6. T^m. 6. page 46
, He will easily discern how this Passage is perverted to serve an ill Cause S.
Chrysostom is setting out the dignity of the Gospel Priesthood, who are to
intercede with God, to have Mercy not upon one City, but upon the whole World,
even upon all Men. Now he thinks that the confidence of Moses and Elias (who
prayed but for one Nation) would not suffice to fit a Man for this
Intercession; alluding to the Litany, where (as he notes) they pray, That Wars
may cease in all places, and all Troubles be removed; and that Peace and
Prosperity, and a deliverance from all Evils public and private may be obtained
Chrysostom. ibid. Who afterward treats of the Priests praying over the Sacrament.
. These are plainly Litanick Supplications, which were written down long before
this Age, (as we have showed); and therefore the Confidence was not needful to
invent Words Extempore, but to enable a Mortal sinful Man to ask so many and so
great things from so glorious a God, for so many persons. As for the Confidence
of his Party, it is indeed greater than that of Moses and Elias; for they were
really inspired miraculously, and so might intercede for the Jews, for ought I
know, Extempore, on some extraordinary occasions; but these Men who are not
inspired, dare upon ordinary occasions daily vent their Extempore Conceits
before God and their Congregation; but whether there be not more Boldness than
Prudence in this, let him judge, who considers that Solomon says, Be not rash
with thy Mouth, and let not thine Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God;
for God is in Heaven and thou upon Earth Eccles V. 2.
. Fifthly, He cites a place of S. Chrysostom, where he shows what is meant by
the Cup of Blessing, and reckoning up some of the Heads of those things for
which they gave Thanks, He adds, -- with these and other such like
Thanksgivings we approach; whence he infers, That the Priests enlarged
themselves in such like particulars, according to discretion Discourse of
Liturg. page 76.
. But first he was forced to translate the place falsely, or else it would not
have been for his purpose. S. Chrysostom says (after he had reckoned up diverse
general Heads of Mercies,) For these, and all such things as these, giving
Thanks, so we approach (...) Hom. 24. in 1 Cor page 396.
: He does not say, With these and other such like Thanksgivings; that is his
perverting the Father. Secondly, S. Chrysostom being making a popular
Discourse, does not repeat any part of the Thanksgivings, but describes some of
those Mercies, for which they gave Thanks at the Sacrament: One principal Head
of which was, For delivering Mankind from Error, and for bringing them to be
Heirs of his Kingdom; Which is one of those Heads for which God is praised in
that large Form of Thanksgiving in the Constitutions Non permisit genus humanum
perire. Constit. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 17.
as it is also in the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom Liturg. Chrysostom. Euchol. p. 75
. Therefore they were Forms of Praise, wherein they gave Thanks to God for
these Mercies, and all such like, those very Forms being a Recapitulation of
all Gods Mercies to Mankind; and therefore this place which so plainly refers
to the Forms then used, is so far from helping him, that it consutes him; and
he gets nothing by it, but the honor of grounding an Argument on a false
Translation. Sixthly, He cites S. Chrysostom as the only Father, who mentions
the Gift of Prayer as an extraordinary Gift; and he insinuates, that this Gift
of Prayer made Forms needless in this Age Discourse of Liturg. p. 129.
. Had he quoted this place at large, it had spoiled his Cause again: For S.
Chrysostom is expounding that place of S. Paul, The Spirit helps our
Infirmities, Romans viii. 26. And says, There was a miraculous Gift of Prayer in
the Apostles Times, which was ceased so long ago, that as it was not easy for
the People in his days to understand the meaning of S. Paul: Only he observes,
Those Forms of Litany wherein the Deacon goes before, and reckons up what the
People shall pray for, to which they make their Responses; These Prayers (he
says) are an Emblem of that Apostolic Custom, when the new Converts not
knowing what to pray for, the Inspired Man by the Gift of Prayer went before
them, and made Petitions for them (...) Romans 14 ^n Romans viii. page 120
: This is the sum of what Chrysostom there says. So that S. Chrysostom
believed the Gift of Prayer was ceased long before his Time, and therefore they
used Forms, recited between the Minister and the People; and if that Holy
Father believed this Gift were ceased then, what would he think of those who
boldly pretend to it in our days, could he live again upon Earth? This is
certain, He did not think Praying or Singing by the Spirit, was doing so
Extempore: for he says, To sing with with the Spirit, is to sing not only with
the M uth, but with attention of Mind (...) Hom. 9 in Coloss. edit. Fr^nt. Tom.
11. p. 227.
. So that according to S. Chrysostom, whenever we devoutly mind, even our
Forms of Praise and Prayer, then we sing and pray by the Spirit. Lastly, He
cites the Life of S. Chrysostom, to prove, That the Greek Church accommodated
the Service to the Season; insinuating, as if every Priest Officiated as he
thought suitable to the Time (u). But, first, Disc. of Liturg. p. 160, and 161.
his Editor ignorantly cites for this Bid, in the Life of Chrysostom, which
should be Leo; forbid never writ this Fathers Life: Yet the Authors Mistake
is worse, for he falsifies Leo in Chrysostom's Life, who does not say, They
accommodated the Service to the Season; but, That upon Easter Even, they used
the Hymns proper for that Night, Baptized such as had been Catechized, and
performed the Liturgy, which was accustomed to be used at that Season -- (...)
Leo in vit. Chrysostom. Tom. 8. p. 288.
. So that my Adversary egregiously prevaricates in turning accustomed Offices
and a Liturgy prescribed, for the most famous primitive Vigil before Easter,
into his new way of accommodating Prayers to it, by private Ministers Fancies:
Which was not allowed in any Regular Church since the settling of Christianity.

My Adversary makes no particular Objections against S. Chrysostom's Liturgy,
but what are answered in my Reply to his Exceptions against S. Basil's: So that
I might here conclude my Vindication of this Holy Father, but that I have met
with a Manuscript Collection of Objections against this Liturgy, taken out of
Du-Plessis Mornay of the Mass, Book I. Chap. 6. page 50.
, which I will briefly Answer. First, The Variety of Copies is objected. I
Reply, This shows the Antiquity and large extent of this Liturgy; and if there
be some differences in these Copies, there are so in the very Books of
Scripture: And considering the many hands which had transcribed this Liturgy in
all the Diocesses of the Syrian and Greek Churches, during the space of 1100
years, before it was printed; the greatest wonder is, that there were not more
Differences. Object. 2. Some Copies mention Praying for the Dead, and
Invocating the Blessed Virgin, others do not. Answ. It is certain those Copies
which have least in them, come nearest to the Original, which (as we have
heard) was at first Composed for abbreviating the Office; and we justify
nothing which is not very agreeable to S. Chrysostom's unquestioned Works, and
to the Doctrine of that Age; there being enough of that kind to assure us, there
were Forms of Prayer in this Time. Object. 3 The Trisagion is mentioned in this
Liturgy, which came not into use till one Hundred years after S. Chrysostom's
Time. Answ. This is false, for the Hymn of Holy, Holy, Holy, or Trisagion, is
mentioned by S. Chrysostom in his undoubted Works, and by diverse Fathers before
him. It Is true, that addition to it, of Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal,
came up one Hundred year after this, and some later Copies put in this
Addition; but in the best Editions, after the purest Manuscripts, This Hymn is
found in the simple and primitive Way Eucholog. Graec. Lit. Chrysostom. page 76.
and Lit. Basil. page 166.
, without any addition: Yet Du-Plessis may be excused for making this
Objection, because he never saw Goar's Edition. Object. 4. The Word (...), or
Mother of God, came not in till long after the Time of S. Chrysostom; and if it
had been originally in his Liturgy, no doubt it would have been urged against
the Heretics. Answ. This is very true but the genuine Inference is not;
therefore all the Liturgy is corrupted; but therefore all those Prayers to the
Blessed Virgin, and Hymns wherein she is glorified, are later Additions to the
old genuine Office, which we freely acknowledge. Object. 5. In this as well as
in S. Basil, we find Incense offered up for the Remission of Sins; which is
Blasphemy. Asw. This also is a Modern Addition, which has no foundation is S.
Chrysostom's Works; and that we may be sure it is so, Jac. Goar (the acurate
Editor of this Liturgy) tells us, That the ancient and truly genuine Liturgy
begins after this Preface, and all the Ceremony of offering Incense is over
Eucholog. page 64.
; so that it is no wonder to find a Corruption in a part added to it in later
times. Object. 6. Diverse Persons are named in this Liturgy, which lived long
after S. Chrysostom's Time, viz. Alexius the Emperor, and Nicholas (not Pope
of Rome, but) Bishop of Constantiple; and S. Chrysostom himself is there
invoked. Answ. The old Latin Copy printed at Antwerp, An. 1560. which was taken
out of some Manuscript writ in the Age of that same Emperor and Patriarch, had
these Names: But that is no Argument that this Liturgy was first made in that
Time, because the Transcribers put in such as in their Time were to be prayed
for; but the New Editions of these Liturgies have no Emperors or Bishops Name
at all, only (...) leaving it to the Priest to add the Names as Persons
changed. To conclude, I have not seen one solid Objection against the main Body
of S. Chrysostom's Liturgy; and there is enough of that which we defend, and is
genuine, to show, that Liturgies were used in this Age; and there is clear
Evidence and good Reason to believe, not only that S. Chrysostom approved of
Forms, but that he Corrected the Ancient Office, and made all that is
Essential, pure and primitive, in this very Liturgy, which now goes by his
Name. And this may suffice for this Father.

. 21. At the same time when S Chrysostom was Famous in the East, S. Augustine S.
Augustine, An Dom. 3^.
flourished in the African Church, and He also is a good Witness for us in this
Age: For it is impossible he could be against Forms of Prayer written in a
Book, and to be read out of it, because he affirms, That Christ therefore left
us a Form of Prayer in writing, knowing, Words were necessary to move^ us and
that we might look upon that which we ask Nobis ergo necessar^a sunt Verba,
quibus commovean^ur and inspiciamus quid p^tamu^. Aug. ad Prob. Ep. 121. p. 129.
; Now for the Church to imitate Christ, and write down our Prayers in a Book,
could not be a fault in the opinion of S. Augustine, who owns the Lords Prayer
to be a Form, and in diverse places affirms, that the Faithful repeated it every
day Aug. de verb. Ap. Ser. 31. Item hom. 42. and alibi.
; And therefore he will not grant, that any Christians wanted the Spirit to
help them with Words and Expressions; that (he says) cannot be the meaning of
our not knowing what to Pray for, as we ought, Romans viii. 26. because it is not
Credible, that either the Apostle, or those to whom he Writ, were Ignorant of
the Lords Prayer Id. ad Prob. Ep. 121. page 129.
. And therefore he goes on to expound the Spirits helping our infirmities; of
the Spirits giving us Patience; so that we do not pray absolutely, to be
delivered out of our Afflictions, as naturally we should do, if the Spirit did
not convince us they were for our good. So that S. Augustine takes away the main
Text, on which our Adversaries ground their Extempore Prayers, and thinks there
is no need for the Spirit to furnish us with expressions. We have now seen by
other Fathers, that they had a Liturgy in every Church, by which care was taken
for proper expressions; and S. Augustine seems to have believed, that the
Original of these Liturgies, the most essential parts (wherein almost all
Churches agreed) was from S. Paul himself; for he says (as my Adversary cites
him Disc. of Liturg. Marg. page 173.
,) The Apostle speaking of the Eucharist, presently adds, The rest will I set
in order when I come; giving us to understand, that though it was too long for
an Epistle, to intimate all that order of Administration which the Universal
Church observes; yet he did ordain, that which is every where observed without
Variation Aug. ad Januar. Ep. 118. p. 116.
. Now the use of Forms was every where observed; and though there was some
little variety, in the Longer Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving, which were made
afterward; yet the use of the Lords Prayer, the Prefaces, the Prayer of
Consecration, as to the Evangelical Words, and some of the Hymns, All which
were Forms, and of Universal use, these S. Augustine affirms were ordered and
ordained by the Apostle when he came to Corinth; so that he maks the Original
of using Forms of Prayer and Praise in the Sacrament, to be Apostolical: And
the same thing he affirms in another place, where he is arguing against
Heretics; Let us look (says he) upon the Mysteries of the Ecclesiastical
Prayers, which the whole World has received by Tradition from the Apostles,
and which are uniformly Celebrated in every Orthodox Church, that the Rule for
our Prayers may fix the Rule of our Faith O^secrati^^rum quoque sacerd^talium
Sacramenta respiciamus quae ab Apostolis tradita in t^to modo atque in omni
Catholica Ecclesia Uniformiter Celebrantur, ^^ legem credendi lex statuat
supplican^, Aug. de Eccles. dog. cap. ^^. Tom. 3. page 4^.
: He must mean this of Forms, Extompore Prayers being invisible, but these
might be looked on: yet these, he says, were derived from Apostolical
Tradition and uniformly Celebrated; therefore there was then a written Liturgy,
appointed at first by the Apostles, (as S. Augustine thought) and used by all
Christians; to the Words of which he appeals for Evidence against Heretics in
matters of Faith: Now if the Prayers had been daily varied by the Extempore
Gift, he could not have appealed to the Words of them; and if these Forms had
been composed, but a little before this time of S. Augustine, he could not have
urged their Authority in matters of dispute with Heretics or others; Therefore
they had Forms written in former Ages, and by their Antiquity, become of great
Authority in this Century. Whereupon the same Father wishes, that such as are
weak and doubtful in the Question of perseverance, would look upon those
Prayers of theirs, which the Church always had and ever will have -- ut
intuerentur Orationes suas, quas semper habuit and habebit Ecclesia. Aug. de
bon. persev. lib. 2. Tom. 7. page 279.
; That is, upon the public Liturgy, from the certain Words of which he draws
Arguments, to satisfy their doubts, not fearing they would question the
Authority of those Prayers, which the Church ever had used from the beginning.
And therefore he boldly challenges Vitalis, (who h^ed some Erroneous Opinions)
to dispute, if he saw fit, against the Prayers of the Church, when he heard the
Priest of God at the Altar, Exhorting his People to Pray, so and so, etc. Aug.
ad Vital. Ep. 107. page 102.
; which shows not only that there were Forms, (because Extempore Prayers, can
never be urged for, or alleged against the Church.) But it shows that these
Forms, were by long usage become so venerable, that their Authority was
esteemed sacred and indisputable: And they were accounted the best Evidence of
Apostolical Tradition, after the holy Scripture; The particulars, of this
African service, (agreeable to the parts of the Greek Liturgy,) S. Augustine
says were these, The Singing of Hymns, reading of Lessons and Sermons; the
Prayers made by the Bishop in an audible Voice, and the Common Prayer enjoined
by the Deacon -- aut Ant^st^tes clara voce deprecantu^, aut communis Oration v
ce Diaconi indicitur. Aug. ad Januar. Ep. 11^. p. 119.
: That is, the Collects and the Litany; to the First of which the People
answered Amen: To the Second they made Responses at the end of every Petition,
which assures us they were Forms of Prayer; And that Common Prayer properly
signifies such a Form, in which both Minister and People have their several
parts. Of this Litany or Common Prayer, there are diverse Petitions mentioned in
S. Augustine, upon occasion; and though (being writing Letters,) he does not
always cite them in the same Words; yet the Phrases are so very much alike, and
the Sense and Order of them is so exactly the same, that we may be sure he
alludes to some known Form; Thus (he says) in one of the places before cited,
the Church prays -- That Faith may be granted to unbelievers; that Idolaters
may be delivered from their ungodly Errors; that the Vail may be taken away
from the Hearts of the Jews, so that the light of Truth may shine unto them;
that Heretics may by Repenting receive the true Faith; that Schismatics may
be restored by the Spirit of Charity; that the lapsed may partake of the
remedies of Repentance; and that the Catechumens being brought to the Sacrament
of Regeneration, may have the Treasures of Heavenly mercy opened to them Aug.
de Eccles. dogm. cap. 30. p. 46. ut supra [f].
. In another place he describes so many of these Petitions more briefly, as
concern his present Question; The Minister (says he) prays -- For unbelievers,
that God would convert them to the Faith; for the Catechumens, that God would
inspire them with the desire of Regeneration; and for the Faithful, that by his
Gift they may persevere in that which they have begun Idem ad Vital. Epist.
107. page 102. H
, -- and a little after, The Faithful pray for themselves, that they may
presevere in that which they have begun Id. ibid. page 103. H. and eadem verba
iterum, ibid. p. 104. I.
; which Sentence is twice mentioned in one Epistle, where also he says, When
do you hear Gods Minister Praying with a loud Voice, -- That God would make the
unbelieving Gentiles come over to the Faith, and do not answer Amen Id. page
104. G.
? And in another Book, -- When did not the Church use to Pray -- That
unbelievers may believe -- And for the Faithful, that God would grant they may
persevere in him even to the End, To which (says he) the People answer Amen
A^g. de (...). 7. ^^g. ^^^.
. Now my Adversary makes it an Argument against Liturgies, that S. Augustine
here speaking of the same Prayers, cites them in various Words Disc of (...).
page 21 and 22.
. But I have already observed, he is writing Epistles, and does not pretend to
quote the very Words; but yet he describes the things Prayed, in Phrases so
very like each other, that we may be sure, he referred them to a common Form
the Words of which were so well known, that he need not strictly tie himself to
repeat them. As if I were writing to two several Persons, and should prove the
Church of Englands Charity, by saying in one Letter, that on Good Friday she
prays for the Conversion of Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics; and in another
Letter, by saying, she Prays, that God would convert the Jews, convince the
Turks, and make Infidels and Heretics become true Believers: Supposing those I
writ to were well acquainted with the Collect for Good Friday; None but such an
Arguer as I have to deal with, would gather from thence, That the Church of
England had no prescribed Collect for this day and this occasion: And there is
the less regard to be given to this Scruple, because there are so many other
clear Proofs in S. Augustine, that there were certain Forms in his Time, in the
African and in other Churches. He tells us, That all Nations, Grecians, Latins
and Barbarians, used that Form, Lord have mercy upon us Aug. Pascentio Ep. 178.
page 164.
. Now this we know was the Response in the ancient Litany; And that same
Preface before the Trisagion, which we have anciently met with in S. Cyprian,
and many others, is often mentioned and expounded in S. Augustin's Works; So
often as the Priest says, Lift up your Hearts; the Spiritual Man can boldly
and safely say, We lift them up unto the Lord Ei quoties Sacerdos dixerit
sursum corda, secure and fideliter dicunt se habere ad Dominum. De Temp. ser.
54. page 153.
. In another place, Our Heart (says he) is in Heaven, and therefore it is not
without cause that we hear those Words; Lift up your Hearts Id Com. in Psalm.
148. page 377.
. And again, to show it was of universal as well as daily use, he says, All
Mankind throughout the World, do daily as it were with one Voice answer, That
they lift up their Hearts unto the Lord Quotidie per universum orbem genus
humanum una pene voce respondet, sursum Corda, se habere ad Dominum. Id. de
vera Relig. c. 3. p. 158.
. Moreover he gives us, as clear Testimony of the rest of this Preface, You
know (says he to Dardanus) in what Sacrifice it is said, Let us give Thanks to
our Lord God Aug ad Dardan. ep. 57. page 57.
; and the like he writes to Honoratus Id. ad Honorat. ep. 120. page 124.
: To which the Answer was then, as it is now in our Common Prayer, It is meet
and right so to do. For thus S. Augustine discourses, That which is said in the
Sacrament by the Faithful, Lift up your Hearts, And, We lift them up unto the
Lord; is intimated to be the Gift of God; and therefore the Priest admonishes
those to whom he had spoken, To give Thanks to our Lord God; and they Answer,
It is meet and right -- ut Gratias agant Domino Deo nostro. Et dignum and
justum esse respondent. Aug. de bon. persev. lib. 2. Tom. 7. p. 276. Item Aug
de bono videit. cap. 16.
. There can be nothing plainer therefore, than that this very Form was used in
the very same Words, both in the Eastern and African Churches; and it was also
used in the Western Church so exactly in the same Form, that we may justly look
upon this as a piece of Primitive Liturgy, which no Church presumed to alter.
He also speaks of a Prayer of Consecration, by which the holy Elements were
blessed, The Petitions of which were concluded almost in every Church with the
Lord's Prayer Quam totam petitionom fere omnis Ecclesia, dominica Oratione
concludit. Aug. Paulino, ep. 59. page 62.
; and he tells us, that the Sacrament was delivered to the Faithful in these
Words, The Body, or The Blood of Christ; to which they always answered, Amen
Aug. de verb. Ap. Ser. 31. page 87. and enar. in Psalm. 32. page 49.
; which very Form had been used in Africa ever since Tertullian's Time, as we
showed before; and we have also found it in the Eastern Churches, and at Milan,
as well as here. Finally, He mentions a certain Vow in the Post-Communion,
wherein the Faithful do promise to remain in Christ; and adds, That the whole
Office is concluded with a solemn Thanksgiving Aug. Paulin. Ep. 59. page 62.
, that is, with a known Form in Words prescribed (as Solemn plainly imports).
Now this is exactly agreeing to our Liturgy, wherein we have a Prayer with a
Vow, to offer up our selves to Christ, and conclude with that solemn
Thanksgiving, Glory be to God on high: And as for the Praises of God, S.
Augustine highly commends the Custom of Milan, For the Priest and People to sing
Hymns in the Church alternately, which can be no otherwise than by Forms Aug.
Confess. lib. 10. cap. 33. page 41. and ad Januar. Ep. 119. p. 119.
. He also approves and defends the Custom of Carthage, in singing Hymns at the
Altar, taken out of the Psalms of David Id retract. lib. 2. cap. 11. page 10.
: And particularly he mentions the Usage of Singing the Hallelujah at the Altar
every Lord's Day Id. ad Januar. Ep. 119. page 119. and ad Pascentium, Ep. 178.
p. 164.
: So that Africa, in his Time, had many Forms of Praise; and therefore
Possidonius, among other effects of the Persecution, that broke out after his
Death, laments this especially, That it made the Hymns and Praises of God in
the Church to cease P^ss^^^. vit. D. Aug. prope finem.
. To conclude, This Holy Father was so great a lover of Forms, that there is
yet extant in his Works a very pious Form of Prayer, which he used after his
Sermons Aug Oper. Tom. 8. p. ult.
; so that where the Church had not prescribed to him, he saw fit there to use a
Form: And if we had time to make a narrower search in the Works of this Learned
Father, no doubt we might trace out the whole African Liturgy, used in his
Time; but those who will be satisfied with Reason and Truth, will be abundantly
satisfied by the Instances here produced, That there were Forms both of Prayer
and Praise, daily used in that Church.

. 22. My Adversary, who pretends to a narrow search into Antiquity, had the ill
Fortune to miss most of these obvious Passages; but he has found out diverse
that are more obscure, which he urges to prove there were no prescribed Forms.
First, he says, The Ancients did not think Christ enjoined them to use the
Lords Prayer in the Eucharistical Office; and that S. Augustine declares, Our
Lord in delivering this Prayer, did not teach his Disciples what words they
should use, but what things they should pray for Disc. of Liturg. p. 3.
, As to the first part of this Objection. The Ancients generally expound that
Petition of our daily Bread, to be meant of the Sacramental Bread; and most of
them testify, They used the Lords Prayer as a Form in this Office. Many of
them, and particularly S. Augustine, call it, The Prayer enjoined by Christ's Law
Aug. hom. 42. and de temp. ser. 126.
; and S. Hierom expressly says, That Christ taught the Apostles, to appoint it
to be said in the Sacrifice of his Body Hieron. adv. Pelag. lib. 3.
: So that this Assertion of our Adversaries, is a manifest Untruth. And for the
second part of the Objection; S. Augustine is speaking of Mental Prayer, (as his
own Quotation shows -- cum in penetralibus mentis orarent. Aug. lib. de Mag.
cap. 1. Tom. 1. p. 122. Disc. of Lit. page 3.
;) and in that sort of Prayer wherein no Words are to be used, he says, Christ
by the Words of this Form taught them, to whom and for what they should pray in
secret: But how impertinent is it in my Adversary, to cite this as S.
Augustin's Opinion about the use of this Form in public Offices, and in Vocal
Prayer, about which alone we now dispute? There are innumerable places in this
Father to assure us, he believed Christ did teach it to be used as a Form in
Vocal and Public Prayer: He calls it, The daily Prayer which the Lord taught --
by daily saying whereof our daily Sins are blotted out Id. de Civ. Dei, lib.
21. cap. 27. p. 232.
; yea, he affirms, The Faithful used to say these Words every day Id. Hom. 14.
page 79.
, and repeated them with united Voices among the holy Brethren; and therefore
he charges all, both Men and Women, to learn this Form Id. de Temp. Sermon. 126.
page 191.
; and tells the Catechumens, They must say this Prayer daily when they are
Baptized; because it was daily Repeated at the Altar in the Church, the
Faithful hearing it Id. Hom. 42. page 116.
. So that the truth of this Matter is, that S. Augustine plainly declares,
Christ taught it as a Form, and so the Primitive Christians used it; and he
only intimates, that it is also a direction to draw up other Prayers by, to the
same sense in other Words; and they made that use of it also in drawing up
Liturgies by that Pattern, and in modelling their private Devotions into Forms,
agreeing in sense with this Divine Form, which is the true meaning of that
place Discourse of Lit. page 5, and 6. and page 60. ex Aug. ad Prob. Ep, 12.
, which he twice cites, viz. that it was lawful to use other Words in Prayer,
if it were to the same sense. Secondly, He says, S. Augustine complains, that
some of his Brethren used Heretical Prayers in their Sacramental
Administrations; which he supposes could not have been, if they had then any
allowed Liturgy: Which Argument, according to his Custom, he urges in two
several places Disc. of Liturg. p. 46. and p. 113. ex Aug. de bapt. contr.
Donat. lib. 6. cap. 25.
. I Answer, That he ought not to have brought this in, to prove there were no
Forms for the Eucharist (as he here does: See Discourse of Liturg. page 44.)
because the Father is only speaking of Prayers made at Baptism, not of Prayers
made at the Lords Supper; so that he abuses his Reader and S. Augustine both,
in applying this to the Eucharist.

But Secondly, These Prayers were no essential parts of the Office of Baptism;
there was (as S. Augustine in this place assures us) a certain Form besides,
which none might vary from; and these Bishops did use this Form, which made the
Baptism to be valid, notwithstanding these additional Prayers newly thrust into
the Old Office, which were composed by Heretics, or Babbling Persons Certa illa
Evangelica verba, sine quibus non potest Baptismus consecrari -- Non est
Baptismus Christi, si verba Evangelica quibus symbolum constat, illic
defuerint. Aug. de bapt. contr. Donat.
. But it seems these weak Brethren, (who were also Bishops, and therefore
Augustine who was a Bishop, calls them Brethren,) designed to make the Office of
Baptism more complete, by adding some Prayers before and after the essential
Form of Baptism; and wanting Judgment, chose either silly or Heretical Prayers
for the use of their Diocesses; which indeed showed their want of Judgment, but
did not make the Baptism Null. This is the true case: From whence I observe
First, That no Argument can be drawn from hence, for the inferior Clergies
choosing their own Forms, or being at liberty to Pray Extempore; for if they
Baptized any, they were obliged to use the Forms, which their own Bishop had
chosen. Secondly, Let it be noted, These Additional Prayers were Forms composed
by others, as S. Augustine plainly declares; nor does he censure these
well-meaning Brethren of his, for using Forms, but for using silly or Heretical
Forms; which shows that the Churches way of Praying then, (even in occasional
Offices, such as Baptism) was by Forms; and had it been otherwise, the putting
these Forms to an Extempore Office, had been like setting a piece of New Cloth,
into an Old Garment; wherefore we may reasonably suppose, the old Office which
contained the Essentials of Baptism, that is, the Lords Prayer, the
Renunciation, the asking them the Creed, the Prayer of Consecration and the
Hymns, were all certain Forms; but some Weak and Ignorant Bishops, thought this
not enough, and would needs add new Composures to their ancient Office; but
they had so ill success in this attempt, that I make no doubt, this gave
occasion to the African Church at this very time, to Ordain that no more
Prayers should be added to any part of the Liturgy, which is the Sense of that
Canon of Carthage, as I will presently show. Thirdly, I must remark also, that
the Gift of Prayer, must have been ceased in Africa before this time; because
had there been such a Gift, the Bishops must have had it; and then neither
would the Unskilful or Heretical have composed needless Forms, nor these weak
Bishops have wanted any sort of Forms; their very choosing such composures
shows, they could not make Prayers Extempore. Though they were Ignorant, yet
miraculous Gifts would have enabled these, as well as those of greatest
learning, to make Orthodox Prayers on the sudden. And if the Gift of Prayer was
ceased, as it was then, and is much more so now, it will follow, they needed
Forms, as we also now generally do. Lastly, Let it be considered the Fact was
irregular, S. Augustine censures it, and the Church saw the ill Consequences of
it; yea, and made a Canon to restrain this mischievous liberty for the Future;
therefore this must not be urged for a precedent to us, to leave Ministers at
liberty, either to Pray Extempore or choose their own Forms; that were to make
Faults and things of ill Consequence, a pattern for our imitation.

Thirdly, He objects that S. Augustine says, some Bishops and Ministers called
upon God with Solecisms and Barbarisms; and he Tauntingly asks, if these
Barbarisms were prescribed Disc. of Liturg. p. 51. and again p. 132.
? But he forgets that the holy Father says there, None ought to deride them
for this, when he twice makes himself Merry with this Rare Argument. The
notorious Fallacy whereof will be exposed, if we consider that he wilfully
mistakes these Solecisms and Barbarisms, for false Grammar and downright
Nonsense, that so he might fairly pretend, that no Church could prescribe such
Forms. But S. Augustine explains his own meaning and discovers our Authors
craft, when he defines, Solecism to be when we do not duly join Words that are
rightly put together; and a Barbarism to be the pronouncing a Word, with other
letters, or another sound than the Latins used Aug. de doctrine. Christ. lib. 2.
cap. 1^. Tom. 3. page 7.
; and he instances in the Peoples singing, Floriet for Florebit, in the Latin
Psalms. Yea, in the place cited by my Adversary, he describes the Persons
Guilty of these Solecisms and Barbarisms, to be such as did not understand the
Words they pronounced, or could not rightly distinguish them Aug. de Catec.
rudibus, cap. 9. Tom. 4. page 218.
. Now this must refer to reading Prayers out of a Book, which some of the
Ignorant Africans, could not do so acurately after the Roman mode, but that (as
S. Augustine here observes;) Those who came from the Schools of Grammarians and
Orators, derided them for this false and harsh pronunciation of their Latin,
calling these mistakes, Solecisms and Barbarisms. But the devout Father excuses
these Rustical Pastors, and blames those who censured them, because God minds
the inward devotion more than the pronunciation. So that upon the whole case,
we may determine, That this instance is so far from proving Extempore Prayers
were then used, or that there was no written Liturgy, that it first shows these
could not be Extempore Prayers; because such as could not pronounce Latin
truly, could certainly not Pray on the sudden in that Language. Secondly, It
proves there was a Liturgy written in Latin, so elegant, that though the
African Pastors, and People too understood it; yet by reason of their rough and
harsh Dialect, they could not Read and pronounce it so exactly, as to please
the learned Critics: However, God did accept of these Forms, thus Rustically
pronounced, when they were said with true Devotion. So that when our
Adversaries designed Sophistry is laid open, this proves an Argument against
himself.

Fourthly, We are told out of S. Augustine, that one of his Presbyters, being
desired in his absence, to Pray in a House infested with evil Spirits, Went,
and Celebrating the Sacrament there, Prayed with all his Might, that this
Vexation might cease, and by Gods mercy it ceased presently Orans quantum
potuit ut Cessaret illa Vexatio, Deo protenus miserante, Cessavit. Aug. de Civ.
Dei. lib. 22. cap. 8.
. Now from hence, he draws two Inferences in two distant parts of his Book,
First, That the Prayer for all Estates of Men, at the Eucharist was not a Form
Disc. of Liturg. p. 66.
. Secondly, That there was no Form of Prayer, for this occasion Ibid. p. 121.
. And he twice Transcribes the passage at large, supposing (no doubt) it is
unanswerable. But if the Reader look into his Quotation, he will easily
observe, First, That the Sacrament was over before this Prayer began, and that
this was not the Prayer for all Estates of Men, (beeause neither the House nor
the Devil can be ranked under that head;) but it was a Prayer upon that
particular occasion; for he Prayed that God would cause that Vexation to cease:
I confess he puts a stop after Quantum potuit, which makes it seem as if this
Prayer was a part of the Eucharist; but this pointing is false, and his own
invention; For S. Augustin's Words show, that the Sacrament was first
Celebrated, and then came this Prayer, wherein he desired as earnestly as he
could, that this Vexation might cease. So that this passage is impertinently
cited to prove, that the Prayer for all Estates of Men in the Eucharist was not
a Form. Secondly, If we grant that Quantum potuit, signifies according to his
Ability, and intimates that he Prayed Extempore upon this Extraordinary
occason; All which can be gathered from hence, is, that they had no Form of
Prayer in Africa then, for casting the Devil out of an House: But that is no
Argument to show they had no Forms for public Worship, on ordinary occasions,
since we have no Form for this extraordinary contigency; but none must Argue
from thence That we have no Common Prayer. Yet Thirdly, I see no Reason to
grant that Quantum potuit, signifies any more than that this Presbyter Prayed,
with as Vigorous a Devotion as he was able, or with all the powers of his Soul;
because it is not a long-winded Prayer, nor variety of new invented Phrases
that the Devil fears, but an earnest and fervent Prayer: And we could give many
Instances where this Phrase is used only to denote doing a thing earnestly and
devoutly; one Example shall suffice at present, where the Jews (who always in
that Age praised God by Forms) are commanded, when they praise God, to exalt
him as much as they can Benedicentes Dominum exaltate illum quantum potestis.
Ecclesiastic. 43. in sine.
; by which the Son of Syrach did not intend to oblige every ordinary Man to
make an Extempore Form of Praise in the highest strains of Rhetoric; but only
enjoined them, when they used the Forms of Blessing, to say them with all the
joy, gratitude and devotion imaginable: And if we explain the Phrase thus, then
this Passage will not suffice to prove so much, as that they had not a Form for
dispossessing Houses or Persons infested with Evil Spirits.

Lastly, He says, Augustine did not take any offense at the Varieties used in
the Sacrament, though they were more than could be known Discourse of Liturg.
page 82.
; and for this he cites the Retractations, which mention his Epistles to
Januarius, and a Passage out of his Epistle to Jubaianus, intimating, that
every Bishop in these Cases might do as he pleased. But all this is manifest
Sophistry: For whereas he applies this to the Eucharistical Prayers. S.
Augustine is not treating of any Variety in them: Yea, he himself cites S.
Augustine in one of these Epistles, affirming, That there were many things in
the Sacrament universally observed without any variation, and these were
Instituted by the Apostles Dis^ourse of ^^turg p. 173 Marg ex Aug. ad ^anuar.
Ep. 118.
; that is, the Prefaces, Prayer of Consecration, etc. (as we noted before)
these were Forms, and not to be varied from. But the Variety which S. Augustine
speaks of, is a Variety in Rites and Ceremonies in the Churches of diverse
Provinces and Countries; these he Instances in, and affirms there was great
Variety in these, and that every Bishop in these Matters, had power to appoint
such Rites as he thought to edification; S. Augustine (being only a Bishop, no
Primate or Metropolitan) would not impose the Rites used in his own Church upon
any: But as to the main parts of this Service, he often observes, all Churches
did and ought to agree in them. Wherefore it shows a want of better Arguments,
when he is forced to urge the Variety of Rites in diverse Provinces, to prove,
that they varied the Prayers themselves every day; which false Notion, neither
he nor any of his Friends have or can make out. And this may suffice for S.
Augustin's Judgment and Practice, both which are clearly on our side.

. 23. The Third Council of Carthage, An. Dom. 398.
We should here have concluded this Century, but only our Adversary produces
some African Canons, and pretends they show there was no prescribed Form at
this Time in that Church: First, He cites the 23d Canon of the Third Council at
Carthage Discourse of Liturg. page 44.
in these Words, That no Man in Prayers shall name either the Father for the
Son, or the Son for the Father: And when they are at the Altar, the Prayer
shall always be directed to the Father: And what Prayers-soever any shall Copy
out for himself, he shall not use them, unless he first debate them with his
Discreeter Brethren Council. Carthag 3. Can 23. Bin. Tom. 1. par. 1 page 575.
. This Canon evidently consists of Three parts: The first, to correct the
irregularity of naming the Father for the Son, or the Son for the Father; and
hence my Adversary infers, That those who were guilty of this Fault, did not
use prescribed Forms, and supposes the Church left them at liberty for the
future, to use what they thought sit, only imposing this on them, Not to name
the Father for the Son Discourse of Liturg. page 45.
. I Answer, This first Clause (for any thing appears in the Canon) is meant of
private Prayers, and so is nothing to our Question; it was a Fault committed by
private Christians, who had the misfortune to Copy out Heretical Forms. But
suppose the Council refers to those Ignorant Bishops lately mentioned in S.
Augustine, who for the use of their own Diocesses writ out Heretical Forms, not
knowing them to be such, wherein those who held Heterodox Opinions about the
Trinity, had altered these Names in favor of Sabellianism or Arianism: These
were Forms, and no doubt prescribed by these Bishops to their own Clergy; but
the Council rejects all these new Forms, and reduces them to the old Liturgy,
which they were sure was Orthodox, and wherein we see the Prayers began with an
Address to the Father, and concluded through the Son; so that they order, None
shall begin with the Sons Name, or end with the Fathers: However, it cannot
well be understood how this Council could prevent such Ignorant persons from
making this Mistake, but by obliging them to use the Churches Forms, where they
take it for granted, these Names were always right placed: So that in effect
this prohibits all new Forms of Prayer, and binds them to the Old ones, wherein
such Instances could not be made. And our Adversary supposes this Council to be
extreme Silly, in saying they left such Men (as (he grants Discourse of Liturg.
page 46.
) were fit to be confined to prescribed Forms, because they could neither make
nor judge of Prayers) to their liberty, to do as they thought fit; this makes
the Canon Nonsense, (for how should these Men know when they ought to name the
Father, and when the Son) and exposes the whole Council, who could no way
prevent this Mistake, but by casting away all such new Forms, and confining all
Men to the Old ones; and without supposing such, we cannot make Sense of the
Canon; which Supposition is not made at random, because we have abundantly
proved out of Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Optatus, and S. Augustine, (who was one of
this Council) that there were Forms used of Ancient time in the African Church.

The second Clause of the Canon refers to the public Prayers, all which (and
not only those peculiar to the Eucharist) were then made at the Altar: And
these Prayers were then in the public Forms (as they also are now) directed to
the Father, which Method none but Heretics can be supposed to alter; and lest
any should bring in any Heretical Forms into these Offices, the Council
(supposing still the Public Forms were thus made) orders all Prayers at the
Altar should be directed to the Father; which is as much as to bind them to the
old Forms. I need only here observe, the Reason why the public Prayers at the
Altar were all to be directed to the Father, which is, because Jesus Christ is
there set forth as the Propitiation for our Sins, and our only Advocate; it is
by him and his Redemption there represented, that we hope to engage the Father
to hear us; By Him therefore, and not To Him, these Prayers must be made. Here
we declare we only rely on his Interest and Intercession, and by reason of His
Death here represented, the Sacrament has been ever esteemed the most
effectual way of prevailing with God the Father, to whom therefore, here, our
Prayers are most properly addressed: And so they were then, as I could prove,
if it were needful, by many Passages of the Orthodox Fathers: So that this
Clause also supposes, the public Forms were rightly drawn up, and forbids any
alteration to be made in them in this Point, wherein some had been culpable by
writing out Heretical Forms, and prescribing them ignorantly to their own
Diocesses.

As for the last Clause, our Adversary reads it falsely; the Words are Quicunque
sibi preces aliunde describit; Vera Lectio Canonis. At ille legit, Quascunque
sibi preces aliquis describit. Confer. Bin. ut supr. cum libro isto, page 44.
, Whoever writes out any Prayers from any other place for himself: But he
perverts it thus, What-Prayers-soever any shall Copy out for himself; where
note, he leaves out the main Word, Aliunde, From any other place, which plainly
refers to a public and prescribed Liturgy; he that writ out any Prayers from
thence, need not show them to any; but whoever he were, Bishop or private Man,
that writ out Prayers from any other Form, he was not to use them in public, or
private, till they had been viewed and judged of by the most able Bishops.
Whence we may justly infer, First, That there was a Written Liturgy, thoroughly
Orthodox, out of which if any Man writ out any Forms, he was sure they were
right, and need not show them to any, but boldly use them either in public or
private. Secondly, That some itched after other Forms then, as now also many
do; to restrain which dangerous humor, this Council first obliges those who did
this (whatever they were) to show these Forms taken from other places, to the
more Judicious; and within a few years another Council allowed no Prayers to be
brought in, but such as had been allowed by a Synod. Thirdly, That all this
Clause may very well be referred to private Prayers, because it is very
probable, that some for their private Devotions collected Forms out of the
Liturgy; Others transcribed them from some New Compositions; but the Heretics
had been so busy, that the liberty of using these was not to be allowed, till
some Judicious Men had viewed and approved them. Lastly, We may observe, That
this Clause wholly relates to Written Forms; it supposes the Persons here
spoken of, did never pray otherwise than by Written Forms; whether it be
explained of public or private Prayers, this is certain, they writ them out of
Forms, and after they had Copied them out, used them as such: So that this
utterly confutes my Adversary, and shows, That the general use of Africa was to
pray by Forms. This very plainly proves, the Gift of Prayer was now ceased
there, and manifests their Folly, who pretend in our days, that it is a general
Gift. This shows, that none did pretend to Extempore Prayer, but all either
writ out Forms from the public Liturgy, or from some other place; wherefore our
Adversary had a singular assurance when he produced this Passage against
Written Forms. These were certainly Written Forms: And he had best ask, how
these African Christians could look up to Heaven, or mind God alone in Prayer,
when they were bound to look on their Books, into which these Forms were
transcribed; or enquire how their Mysteries could be concealed, being written
down? This Matter of Fact baffles all his far fetched Objections; and let him
interpret the whole Canon as he please, it will show the use of Written Forms,
and manifest the mischief of leaving Men at liberty to choose Forms for
themselves, even in his own way of expounding; this shows so many ill
Consequences of varying from the stated and established Forms, that following
Councils were forced to enjoin them more strictly than ever: And his Friends,
Smectymnuus, were so honest to confess, That as the Laodicean Canon Ordained,
None should vary, but always use the same Form; so the Carthaginian Canon,
further limited the Form Smectymn. Answer to Remonstr. page 7.
: So that in their Opinion, this Canon is an Evidence of the use of limited and
prescribed Forms, and a Restraint upon such as would vary from them.

. 24. Council of Africa, Can 70. co^. temp.
The same also is the Sense of that 70th Canon in the African Collection; the
true Reading of which in all the eminent Editors of it is This, Concerning the
Prayers which ought to be said at the Altar, it seems good, that those
Prayers which have been heretofore Confirmed in the Council, whether Prefaces,
Commendations, or Impositions of Hands, shall be used by all; and by no means
at no time shall any Prayers against the Faith be brought in; but let those
Prayers be said which have been Collected by the more Discreet Can. A^ric. apud
Bin. 103. Tom. 1. par. 1. page 780. ita in Justel. Cod. Tom. 1. p 385. in
Beveridge dicitur Can. 106. Council. Carthag. Tom. 1. page 640.
. My Adversary could raise no Arguments from this Canon, till he had falsified
the Reading of it Discourse of Liturg. p. 48, etc.
: And therefore, First, He leaves out the first Words, Concerning the Prayers
which ought to be said at the Altar, which though some Copies make the Title of
the Canon, yet none but my Adversary wholly omit them; and Dr. Beveridge
proves, they are really a part of the Canon it self, as even the next Words
(which depend on these) do show, Concerning the Prayers, etc. It also seems
good, etc. Secondly, My Adversary translates (...), and the Latin, Preces quae
probatae fuerint; The Prayers which shall be allowed in a Council; nay, He
argues from his own false Translation, that these could not be a Liturgy
established, because they were not yet approved Discourse of Liturg. page 53.
: Whereas every Man may see that both the Greek and Latin Words are of the
Preterperfect-Tense, and not the Future; wherefore they refer to the time
perfectly past: And so S. Paul uses this very Greek Word Galat. iii. 15. (...).
, For a Covenant or Testament, which had been confirmed and ratified long
before: And therefore Balsamon expounds these Words, Prayers which had been
confirmed before, and were Customary (...) Bals. Annot. Bev. page 640.
; and an ancient Scholiast says, that the other Word ((...)) here signifies
The whole Liturgy (...) Schol. in Codic. Amberbach. Bever. Tom. 2. page 208.
, which is very Rational, because the Canon treats of Prayers which ought to be
said at the Altar, and reckons up the several essential parts of the Liturgy,
Prayers (properly so called,) Prefaces, Commendations, and Imposition of Hands.
Now then, if all these parts of Liturgy had been heretofore confirmed and
ratified in Council, then it undeniably follows, That there were Forms of
celebrating the Eucharist in Africa, settled by Ecclesiastical Law before the
time of this Council, and my Adversary had no shift to hide it, but by
corrupting the Words of the Canon: As he does again, Thirdly, in translating
(...), May be used by all, whereas we must join ((...) --) with this Word (...)
And then it will run thus, It seems good to us, or, We order such Prayers shall
be performed by all: For if (as he insinuates) Men might use these approved
Prayers, or might not use them, then this Council enjoined nothing, but left
all Men at liberty, which is absurd to imagine, where they make a plain Decree,
To have these Prayers used by all. Whence we observe, Here are all the
Essentials of a Liturgy, which had been confirmed before by a Council, and are
now enjoined upon all Ministers, so that they are bound to use them. But,
Fourthly, He has yet another false Translation of the last Words ((...)) which
he renders [Which shall be Communicated with the more discreet,] but very
fallaciously, the Verb not being of the Future Tense, nor yet signifying, to
Communicate a thing with another, but, to gather together; and this very Word
in the same Tense in the New Testament, is translated, Were gathered together
(...), Matthew. xiii. ^ C^p. xxii. 34.
. So that the Council speaks not of new Prayers hereafter to be communicated to
the more discreet; but of Prayers which had been collected and gathered already
out of ancient Forms ((...)) by learned and discreet Bishops and Pastors: So
also in the Canon of Milevis, a prudentioribus Tractatae, is the African Phrase
for Prayer Composed Inde Homiliae, etc. vocantur Tractatus, hoc est,
Compositiones.
by the more Learned and Judicious. My Adversary therefore falsifies the Canon,
to impose upon his Reader, That any Man might make New Prayers, or pick them up
where he pleased, and use them after he had showed them to the more Discreet:
But it is plain, that the former Canon of Carthage hoped to have kept out
Impertinent and Heretical Prayers, by obliging such as had writ out any Forms,
to show them to the more discreet before they used them; which Remedy not
proving effectual, This African Canon makes a strict Order against all manner
of Prayers, that had not been Collected out of some elder Forms by Judicious
Persons. Having thus discovered his corrupting the Text of this Canon, it will
easily appear a good Evidence for the use of Liturgies: For here is an Office
consisting of all those Prayers which ought to be used at the Altar; and
particularly, Prayers for the Catechumens, Penitents, etc. and then Prefaces
about Lifting up the Heart, etc. among the Faithful: Intercession for all
Estates of Men, which is here called Commendations; and the Prayer of
Consecration when the Bishop laid his Hands on the Bread and Wine, and blessed
them; which (I think) is here meant by Imposition of Hands. These primitive and
essential Parts were long before written down, or else how could they have been
read or approved in a former Council? And these ancient and approved Forms are
now again enjoined to all that Officiate at the Altar. The rest of the Canon
seems to respect those Forms which were used in other Assemblies, and not at
the Eucharist, that is, at the several Hours of Prayer, in the Morning early,
in the Afternoon, and late at Night. And as to these, the Council orders, that
no Person at no time do bring in any Forms contrary to the Faith; to prevent
which unavoidable Consequence of Extempore Prayers, and leaving Men at liberty
to collect their own Forms, this Council decrees, That those Prayers only shall
be said in the Church (I suppose at the Hours of Prayer) which had formerly
been collected out of ancient Forms, by such as could judge whether they were
Orthodox, and fit for Public use. And the Canon of Milevis, rightly Translated
(being a Confirmation of this Canon in the beginning of the next Century)
justifies this clear and plain Exposition: The Words are these; It also seems
good, that the Prayers, Supplications and Masses, which have been approved in
Council, whether Prefaces, Commendations, or Impositions of Hands, shall be
celebrated by all; and that no other Prayers shall be said in the Church, but
such as have been Composed by the Judicious, or Approved in the Council, lest
by this means, through Ignorance or Negligence, any thing be Composed contrary
to the Faith Council. Milev. An. 416. Can. 1^. Bin. Tom. 1. par. 1. page 705.
: Where we see the Parts of Liturgy are reckoned up more particularly; Prayers,
that is, Collects; Supplications, that is, Litanies; or Masses, that is, the
Eucharistical Office, consisting of Prefaces, Commendations, and Impositions of
Hands: The Forms of every one of these, having been formerly approved by a
Council, are now enjoined to all, who are ordered to use these and no others.
And for all other Prayers in the Church, they were to be such as either had
been approved in a Council, or at least were Composed by Judicious and Orthodox
Persons: So that the Main Liturgy was formerly established, and is now enjoined
again, and care also taken, that none should pray at any other time in Public,
but by Forms, and by such Forms as had passed the Test of a Synod, or had been
formerly collected by the Judicious. And the Reason given will ever hold good
against Extempore Prayers, or private Men's arbitrary Composures, which is, that
this may easily bring Heresy into the Church: Therefore Smectymnuus freely
grant, That the Milevitan Canon would have no other Forms used, but those that
were approved in the Synod Senectymnuns Answ. to Remonstr. page ^.
. But my Adversary is not so ingenuous; yet his Objections are so manifestly
Mistakes, that to Repeat them, is enough to Answer them Discourse of Litu g.
page 49, etc.
: First, he says, The African Canon left them at liberty to use any Prayers
that were allowed by some Prudent Brethren, or Synod; and (he adds) they desire
no more liberty than this. I Answer, The Canon enjoins the Eucharistical Forms,
as having been established before; and allows no Prayers, but Forms in any
other Office; and there is nothing in the true Reading, concerning the
allowance of prudent Men, that is his own Corruption. And if his Brethren are
content to use Forms, composed by prudent Men in former time, and approved by a
Synod; the Common Prayer is such a Form, and therefore they must conform to it.
Secondly, He says, No Prayers are forbid, but such as are against the Faith
Disc. of Liturg. page 50.
. I answer, all Prayers but those which had been approved formerly in a
Council, are forbid in the Eucharist, which was then daily Administered; and so
this was the only Solemn Office of Prayers. And even at other times, to prevent
Heretical Prayers, they forbid all new Forms from being brought into the
Church; Therefore if any then had pretended to the Gift of Prayer, and had made
new Forms for the Eucharist, or the hours of Prayer, though they were not
against the Faith, yet these Canons forbid them. Thirdly, He fills his Margen,
to show in how many Offices, imposition of hands were used Disc. of Liturg. p.
51.
; and then pretends that his feigned liberty was allowed in the Prayers, used
in all these several Offices. I answer, The imposition of Hands in this Canon,
must signify some part of the Eucharistical Office; something done at the Altar
in the Administration; and it is expressly ordered, that no Prayers shall be
used in this laying on of Hands, (which I take to be the consecrating the
Elements) but such as had before been confirmed by a Synod. Wherefore in this
point, there was no liberty at all left, but every one was confined to the old
established Form. Fourthly, He raises diverse other scruples, but they all rely
upon his own false Translating of the Canon Disc. of Liturg. p. 53. 54
, and may be here passed by, because they are answered before. Lastly, He
represents Chemnitius, as falsely as he had done the Council, saying, that he
cites these two Canons to prove, the Order of Celebrating among the Ancients
was Arbitrary Disc. of Liturg. p. 55.
. I answer, Chemnitius is confuting the Roman Churches imposing her Canon of
the Mass, upon all Churches, under pretense that no Consecration can be without
it. And he shows that in the ancient Church, there was not one certain Form of
Words, which all the Churches in the World were bound to use, under the peril
of mortal Sin, it being free for them to use any Form that agreed to the Faith;
which he proves by these two Canons, and by this Argument, because the Greeks
had one Form in Dionysius his Church, another in Basils, and another in
Chrysostoms. In the West also S. Ambrose used one Form, Isidore another, and
Gregory another, who yet would not impose the Roman Form upon England; from
whence he concludes, that the Papists now, are unjust in imposing their Mass on
all Churches, and also in blaming the Lutherans, who use Forms agreeing to the
Ancients and the Analogy of Faith, and tending to edification Chemnitij exam.
Council. Trident. par. 2. page 191.
. Therefore if this Author be a good Evidence, he owns Liturgies in the
Primitive Church, and justifies the use of them in the Reformed Churches; he
condemns nothing but imposing one Liturgy upon all the Churches in the World;
to conceal which my Adversary in citing Chemenitius, draws a line -- where
these Words come in. -- To which all Churches in the World were bound under the
peril of mortal Sin: Which words show Chemnitius disliked mainly the binding
all Churches, to use one Churches Form. But as to these two Canons Bellarmine
justly reproves Chemnitius for applying those parts of them which forbid such
Prayers as are against the Faith, to the Eucharistical Prayers; because they
belong (as we have showed) to Prayers used in the Church at other times
Bellarm. de Missa lib. 2. cap. 18.
. And I dare say Chemnitius did not think, That the public Prayers were
Arbitrary in the Primitive Church, in my Adversaries Sense; that is, that
private Ministers were allowed to Pray Extempore, or to make Forms of their
own; nor did he think, it would be allowed to the inferior Clergy, to use
(suppose) Dionysius his Form in S. Basils Church; it is plain from his
Argument, and the Lutheran Churches practice, that the Clergy of every Province
were bound to use the Forms, prescribed by that Church whereof they were
Members. And this is the obligation, which our Church puts upon all her Clergy,
which our Dissenters most unjustly complain of; since we see it has been
always done by all the Regular, and well settled national Churches in the World.

I have now done with this eminent Century, and proved, That as Christianity
was first settled and established by Law in this Age, so were Liturgies also: So
that we shall conclude this Period with our Adversaries Character of this Time,
Many there were (says he) excellently accomplished in the Fourth Age, and some
till about the middle of the Fifth; it may therefore seem something for the
Credit of Liturgies, if they can be found in the Church, while there was any
thing of such Eminency in it Disc. of Liturg. p. 55.
. Wherefore having made it appear, that Liturgies were used even in the Three
first Ages, which he pretends so much to admire; and being settled by Law and
custom so firmly in this Age, which abounded with more and more learned Fathers
than all the Ages before it, we may conclude, That to Pray by a prescribed
Liturgy, is to pray according to the usage of the best Times of the Church, and
to pray agreeably to the Opinion, and practice of the most Learned Pious and
Eminent Fathers; whose judgment if our Adversaries had any Reverence for, they
would certainly comply with so pure and Primitive a Liturgy, as that which is
prescribed by the Reformed Church of England, the undoubtted Bulwark of the
True Protestant Religion.

The End of the Fourth Century.
BOOKS newly Printed for, and Published by Robert Clavell, at the Peacock at
the West End of S. Paul's.
ROman Forgeries in the Councils during the first Four Centuries: Together with
an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius. By
Thomas Comber, D.D. Precentor of York.

Concio ad Synodum ab Episcopis and Clero Provinciae Cantuariensis celebratam;
Habita in Aede Westmonasteriensi XII. Kal. Decembr. An. Dom. 1689. Per
Guilielmum Beveregium, Archidiaconum Colcestriensem. Jussu Episcoporum.

A Sermon Preached to the Protestants of Ireland in and about the City of
London, at S. Mary le Bow in Cheapside, October. 23. 1689. being the Day
appointed by Act of Parliament in Ireland for an Anniversary Thanksgiving for
the Deliverance of the Protestants of that Kingdom from the Bloody Massacre and
Rebellion, begun by the Irish Papists on the 23d of October 1641. By his Grace
the Archbishop of Tuam.

A Sermon Preached before Their Majesty's at Whitehall on the 5th Day of
November, 1689. being the Anniversary Day of Thanksgiving for the great
Deliverance from the Gunpowder-Treason, and also the Day of His Majesty's happy
Landing in England. By the Bishop of S. Asaph, Lord Almoner to their Majesty's.

Seasonable Reflections on a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A History of Perfect
Obedience since the Reformation; wherein the true Notion of Passive Obedience
is settled and secured from the malicious Interpretations of Ill designing Men.

FINIS.

