The Examiner Examined: BEING A VINDICATION OF THE HISTORY OF LITURGIES.

By T. C. D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock at the West End of S.
Paul's, 1691.

Imprimatur,

Jan. 29. 1690/1. C. Alston,
R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
The Examiner Examined.
CHAP. I.
Of the Title and Preface.

. 1. AFter my Second Part of the History of Liturgies had been Public near Six
Months, comes out An Examination of Dr. C's Scholastical History of Liturgies,
by S. B. Which Title was designed, to make the Book look like and pass for an
Answer to both Parts, which consist of 600 Pages; whereas the Examination
reaches no further than to 76 Pages of the First Part, and in that compass, 23
whole Pages, and a great part of 10 more, pass Unexamined; so that there is an
odd Synechdoche in this General Title. I will not enquire whether Mr. S. B. be
so Eminent, that all Men know him by that Cipher, or so obscure, that he may be
concealed under those two Letters: Only I wish, when he designed to garnish his
Title Page with Causabon's Sense of (...), he had not fixed upon his account of
the remote and general meaning of that word, and purposely omitted the only
sense of that word which is proper to our Question, which he might have found
in the same Page of Causabon, That Liturgy signifies a description of the Order
for celebrating Divine Offices, as in the Liturgies of Peter and James.
Exercit. page 384.

. 2. If the Preface were writ by Mr. S. B. it was politicly done to give us his
own Character under another Name; if it were writ by the Publisher, it is
strange that his Friend, who tells us, His Sayings, his Judgment, his Wishes,
yea, his very Thoughts; should so hastily put out this inconsiderable part of
the Controversy without the Authors knowledge. But his Zeal to serve a Party
in a Critical Juncture, and the rare Character he gives of Mr. S. B. will
expiate for that seeming Rudeness. He tells us, Mr. S. B. is a Conformist; and
it is well the Preface says so, otherwise nothing in the Book discovers it;
probably he is one of those Mr. Clarkson calls, Prudential Conformists; who
comply to avoid the Lash of the Law, but care no more for the Liturgy, than the
Philosophers of old did for the Vulgars Notions about the Gods. Disc. of Lit.
page 19. But the Preface says, He Conforms upon Principles he thinks he can
justify. It seems he can Dispute probably of all sides, for he justifies
Nonconformity in this Tract. It Is said, He uses the Liturgy as fully as the Law
requires in his public Administrations; I wonder how he can justify that,
since his Book declares, he thinks he can pray better by his own Expressions,
and there is a Curse upon the Deceiver, who has in his Flock a Male, yet
offers to the Lord a corrupt thing, Malach. I. 14. He has tied himself up to
an invariable use of the Common Prayer, yet counts them, not only Pious, but
Judicious, who will not be so tied up; therefore he must now doubt the piety
and the prudence of his Subscription. I perceive he joins with Dissenters in
their public Worship: And I would gladly know, how many of them this open
allowance of their way, has brought over to join with him in the Liturgy. He
accounts the Established Church, a Party, and is not wedded to it neither:
Probably he gave Her his Hand against his Will, and thinks the Contract null ab
initio. He thinks there is something to be rectified in every Party; but in this
Book he finds no faults with one Party, and complains of none but the Churches
Friends. It is not he alone, but all Men think, that which is good in every
Party, should be approved; and what is not so, laid aside, or amended. But who
must be the indifferent Judge over all Parties? Mr. S. B. (whatever his Friend
thinks) will never be chosen to this Office: The real Conformists will not like
a man who writes against Liturgies; and the Dissenters will never trust one
that reads Common Prayer. It Is pretended, He is sorry to see such an aversion
to the general Union of Protestants, and that old Animosities are awakned: Yet
he widens the Breach, by increasing the Dissenters ill Opinion of all
prescribed Forms, which no well ordered Church can want; and he defends Mr.
Clarkson's Book, which first awakned this Controversy after it had slept for
many years. Perhaps, in his Opinion, none prejudice the Church of England so
much, as those who seem most zealous for Her: But others see, she is far more
prejudiced by such as are so indifferent what become of Her, that they expose
her Constitutions; and while they enjoy her Revenues, combine with those that
are for removing her very Foundations. He that states Matters so falsely, is no
fit Judge how others state their Questions; and I shall neither value the
Censures or Reflections of one so manifestly partial, that he never speaks ill
of the Dissenters, nor well of the Church. He told the Prefacer (it seems) his
Thoughts, That in a History of Liturgies, notice should have been taken of the
various use of the Word, and the time it came first to be used in the strict
Modern sense, as Mr. Cl. has rightly done. This aims at me, whom he supposes
to have omitted this; but I spent Five Pages together, from page 121 -- to page
125. (Part I.) in considering the use of (...), and showing, Mr. Carkson had
stated the time of its being taken in the Modern sense, very falsely. Now, if he
read my First Book over, why does he not confute this? If he never read so far,
Solomon will tell him, He that answers a Matter before he hears it, it is
folly and shame to him, Prove. XVIII. 13. However, Mr. S. B. conceives, this is
not the signification of a Liturgy, as used and enjoined by the Church of
England. Right! for no Man ever said, that [Liturgy,] without some Epithet,
signified, a Liturgy enjoined by this or that Church: But it has from some of
the earliest Ages, signified a Public Form of Prayer, and we have now such an
one enjoined. But he thinks (that is proof enough) instead of proving the
Antiquity of Liturgies in that Sense, we should rectify the Mistakes that have
arisen concerning a Liturgy, as used and enjoined in our Church. He forgets,
that Mr. Cl. was the first who gave occasion to prove their Antiquity, and the
first who questioned it; Smectymnuus, and all that Party formerly, owned them
to be 1300 year old; and must we let so new, so false, and so singular an
Opinion pass without control? As to rectifying Mistakes, Mr. Cl. and Mr. S. B.
do not charge the Dissenters with any, both of them justify their way; so that
it seems the Church alone is mistaken either in using or enjoining her Liturgy,
and they would have her give it up for their sakes, who would never make one
step toward her for the sake of Peace. But Men so woefully mistaken as Mr. Cl.
and Mr. S. B. are very unfit to rectify the practice of this and all other
regular Churches, since they cannot make out any mistake in this Matter. The
mistakes lie on the Dissenters side, which also had been long since removed; if
their own Pastors, and some of ours, had not flattered and supported them in
their Errors. That false representation of the state of the Question, with
which the Preface concludes, must be charged upon Mr. S. B. who misled his
Friend, and therefore it shall be considered in the Discourse. I have now done
with the Armor-bearer, and proceed to the Champion, who fights against that
side under which ('it is said) he takes double Pay.

CHAP. II.
Of the grounds for Liturgies in Scripture.

. 1. Page 1. MAster S. B. begins with an assurance, He has read my Book, and a
promise, that he will forbear Reflections. I have given a Reason already why I
doubt the First, and his whole Book confutes the Second; for it abounds with
Reflections, not only on my Cause, but on my Person, my Office, my
Qualifications, etc. but they are so groundless, I can easily forgive them.

Page 2. But I cannot excuse him for telling his Prefacer and the World, that I
undertook to prove Liturgies were only and invariably used in the first Three
Centuries. For this was not needful for me to undertake, either to Answer Mr.
Cl. who gave me the liberty of the first Five or Six Centuries to prove this:
Or to carry on my main design, which was (as I declared in my Introduction) to
collect in every Century such Testimonies of the Original, Use, and Antiquity
of Liturgies, as the Argument needed. Now every proof of a Form frequently or
constantly used in the Three first Centuries, the Ages of Inspiration, before
the Church was settled, tends to illustrate the History of Liturgies, which
began first by the voluntary use of Forms, and by degrees, as the Church drew
nearer to a Settlement, to the constant and invariable use of many Forms, even
to the use of a whole Liturgy, before these Three Centuries were ended: Which
had so few Writers, and those say so little of the Forms themselves, that I
declared beforehand, this Evidence must be made up of particular and probable
Proofs; all which put together would amount to these Conclusions; That Forms
were used from the beginning, and so were ancient and lawful (which some
Dissenters deny); and that it is very probable, whole Liturgies were both
prescribed and used before the end of this Period: Which is a sufficient
foundation for the Evidence in the Fourth Century, That (when the Church was
settled) Liturgies were then enjoined, and invariably used. I am forced to be
the larger in the discovery of this Fallacy, because nothing he has said would
look like an Answer, if he did not every where repeat this piece of Sophistry,
and set aside my Proofs, only because they did not reach his Point, as he had
falsely stated it.

Again, He supposes I was only to Answer Mr. Cl. and on that occasion
determines what I was to prove, and what not. He says, Mr. Cl. does not assert
Forms to be intrinsically Evil; but some Dissenters do, (tho this Opinion
reflect upon Jesus, who taught a Form to his Disciples) and Forms being the
parts of Liturgy, to confute those who condemn all Forms, and justify the
foundation of Liturgies, in a History of them it is not improper to prove Forms
lawful. 2ly, Mr. Cl. denies not, that there were arbitrary and particular Forms
of old: And did not I disprove all his particular Instances of arbitrary Forms,
and show they were constantly used and fixed in every Eminent Church? 3dly, Mr.
Cl. owns the Lords Prayer was used anciently, though far otherwise than of
late. This I considered also, proving the use of it as a Form, and the annexing
it to all solemn Offices, as it is used now. 4ly, He grants diverse Churches
agreed in a certain Order, to administer the several parts of Worship. And I
proved, this Order could be nothing but a prescribed Liturgy, Par. II. Chap. 4.
page 201. Now, if he will be answering a Book before he have read it over, I
cannot help that. 5ly, Mr. Cl. says, They prayed for the same things, but not
in the same words. But I showed, his Instances were mistaken, and that in the
same Church many parts of Service were in the same words. 6ly, Mr. Cl.
declares, he meant by prescribed Forms, such as are imposed on the Minister, so
as those and no-other must be used, without adding, detracting, or transposing.
This is indeed the strictest Notion of an enjoined Liturgy; yet I agreed with
Mr. Cl. as to this definition, only we differed about the time when Forms began
to be thus enjoined; he affirmed it was not sooner than the end of the Fifth
Century; I proved, many Forms were invariably used in the first Three
Centuries, and enjoined in the Fourth and beginning of the Fifth Centuries,
which sufficed to confute Mr. Cl. So that Mr. S. B. calls on me to do that
which I had done before; and though he meddle with nothing but the first Three
Centuries, where I was only to show what steps were made toward enjoined Forms
in this strict Sense, he most disingenuously brags, That my Quotations reach
not my Point, unless they prove Forms enjoined in the strictest Sense, in these
Centuries; which were Ages of Inspiration, and before the Church was settled.
Now this barefaced Fallacy takes away two whole Centuries which Mr. Cl. had
freely given me to prove such enjoined Forms, and starts a New Question, being
designed merely to prepossess his Reader against all my probable Proofs, and
all my Instances of the constant use of Forms of all kinds, yea, against the
invariable use of a whole Liturgy, under the false pretense, That I undertook
to prove (by every particular Quotation) that Forms, yea, Liturgies were
strictly enjoined throughout these Ages. But I appeal to my Introduction, to
Par. I. page 77. and to all my Inferences, whether I undertook to do this in
this Period, or no? and the Candid Reader shall judge, whether it was necessary
for me to do all this, to confute Mr. Cl. who said such enjoined Forms came not
in till 200 years after Mr. S. B's Period was ended; though after all, to
complete my History, I have found diverse Proofs, that show enjoined Forms in
the strictest sense in these Ages.

Before I proceed to examine his Particulars, I shall requite these general
Observations of his, by some general Remarks on the proceedings of both my
Adversaries:

First, Neither of them has produced one positive Evidence, so much as of the
use of arbitrary or extempore Prayer; they offer nothing but remote Conjectures
and very slender Probabilities for it, in this Period. Now, I have brought
express proof of the use of Forms, in this time; and more (as well as clearer)
Probabilities of the invariable use of Forms: So that doubtless the advantage
is on my side, and it is not fair to demand such Evidence as the Times do not
afford, and such as they cannot bring either against my Opinion, or for their
own.

Secondly, Though there be not many Proofs of a Whole Liturgy prescribed before
the 4th Century, yet then diverse Liturgies were written down, and at that time
claimed an Original much elder, either from the Apostles or very ancient
Tradition; And the Authors who speak of them, or any parts of them, suppose
them to have been in use long before this time. Wherefore (according to S.
Augustine) That which is observed by the whole Church, and was not instituted
by Councils, but has been always kept; this is accounted to be of Apostolical
Institution. De Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 4. c. 23. which being applied to
Liturgies, will go a great way to prove their Original was from the Apostles;
however, they must be elder than this Fourth Century.

Thirdly, When Mr. Cl. and my Examiner have granted Forms ancient and lawful,
it seems to me very needless to enquire when the Church first enjoined them:
For if the Church have power to enjoin any thing in Gods Service, it cannot be
in things unlawful; so that whatever is in it self lawful, especially if it be
Primitive, and (in her Opinion) useful, she may enjoin to her own Members, and
then it becomes necessary to them; and if they forsake her Communion for this,
they are Schismatics: So that they should have denied the lawfulness of Forms,
if they designed to quarrel at the enjoining them.

Fourthly, Since Mr. S. B. sets up for an Examiner, he should have enquired
into all those Pages where my probable Proofs and Inferences are strengthened
with explicatory and collateral Evidence: To let all these pass by unanswered,
and tell us, He thinks the Author meant otherwise, without confuting my Reasons
and Instances, or confirming his own Thoughts, is something too assuming.

Fifthly, He often appeals to his Friend (whom he knew to be of his side) or to
the Reader, to judge between Mr. Cl. and me, upon his bare Insinuation, that I
am in the wrong, referring them to both our Books: Out of which, no doubt, the
indifferent Reader would have judged more impartially, if no Examiner had
appeared. But if they must have this trouble still, especially in the most
difficult Cases, I would fain know, to what purpose did Mr. S. B. write his
Examination?

Sixthly,. He boasts as if the Cause were lost, when he thinks he has run down
but one of my particular Instances, or probable Proofs. But there are so many
Evidences, and such variety of this kind of Proofs, which being put together,
make out the general Conclusion, That the Cause cannot suffer much, though some
particular Instance should fail.

Lastly, He rejects all my clear Proofs, That Hymns and Praises were in
prescribed Forms, as wholly impertinent to the Question, accusing me of
needless Tautologies for urging them: Whereas the greatest part of Liturgies
are Praises; and whatever proves the Praises were prescribed Forms, undeniably
proves at least, one half of the Public Service was prescribed; and makes it
probable the petitionary part of the same Service was so also (as I showed
before, Par. I. page 24, 25.) Nor can he evade this consequence till he give a
substantial Reason, why the Laudatory part of a Liturgy should be in Forms
prescribed, and the Prayers left arbitrary; Which will be very hard to do,
because Prayers and Praises are so intermixed, as to be inseparable. Daniel's
Devotions were Prayers and Thanksgivings, Dan. vi. 10. The Apostles praying,
sang a Hymn, Acts xvi. 25. Our Lord joined a Doxology to his Prayer, Math. vi.
13. S. Paul often puts Prayer and Praise together, 1 Cor. xiv. 15. Philip. iv.
6. 1 Thessalonians. v. 17, 18. 1 Timothy ii. 1. The most ancient Forms of Prayer (like the
Lords Prayer) end with a Doxology, and the most famous Hymns, the Te Deum
Gloria in excelsis, the Trisagion, and those in Prudentius, etc. And the Psalms
of David are so mixed of Prayers and Praises, that none can sing or say them,
but they bless God and pray to him by the same Form: So that Praises and
Prayers being essential parts of the same Worship, so like each other, so often
inseparably mixed together, and so constantly united, What reason can be given,
why the Hymns and Praises being certainly prescribed, the Prayers should not be
so also? And to reject all that proves the Praises were prescribed Forms, as
impertinent to a History of Liturgy, shows much Ignorance or Inconsideration,
unless it be a politic invention to cover his inability, to answer so much and
so clear Evidence as there is on that subject. These general Remarks will help
to shorten my Answer, and so I hope may obtain the Readers pardon, though they
look like a digression.

. 2. Page 3. My aim from Scripture was to prove, Forms were not only used, but
also enjoined as an acceptable way of praising God, and praying to him. And I
produced three Forms, one of Praise, Exodus xv. 1. another of Blessing, Numb.
vi. 23. a third of Prayer, Deuteronomy. xxvi. 5, etc. and ver. 13. Mr. S. B. objects
nothing to any of the particulars; but says, I should prove, they did not, or
might not use any Prayers or Praises, but those very Forms. And surely this
appears sufficiently as to the occasions upon which these words were
prescribed, because they were all composed by Moses, upon the several occasions
mentioned in the Text, and that by Gods direction: Now can we suppose that any
private Priest durst make another Form of Blessing, or any Jew offer his Tithes
and First Fruits with a new Form of his own Composing? Fagius says, They were
so strict as to the Blessing, that in after-Ages they kept the very Hebrew
Original words. Vid. Crit. Sacr. in Numb. 6. And when God by his inspired
Prophet (Hos. xiv. 2, 3.) not only directs the penitent Jews, what sort of
words to use, but sets down the Form it self; No doubt if any of them had
presumed to alter those words, his presumption would have caused him to be
rejected. Wherefore Forms (which no private Man may vary) are a way of serving
God, justified by the Scriptures of the Old Testament.

Page 4. The same appears by the Psalms, indicted by the Spirit of God for the
public service of the Temple, which I proved by Scripture; and Mr. S. B. denies
it not, only he says, From Gods enjoining these, we cannot infer, that Men may
devise Prayers, and oblige the Church to use them and no other. But can Men
find out a better way of serving God, than that which God himself chose, that
is, by Forms enjoined? It Is true, they had Inspired men to compose those Forms
then; but though the Authors of ours were not Inspired, yet if their Composures
do agree in all things with Holy Scripture, and contradict it in nothing, they
cannot offend (supposing the Forms unexceptionable) by imitating that Method
which God and inspired Ages have set them, which is, enjoining Forms taken out
of the Psalms, and other places of Holy Scripture, and out of such ancient
Composures as are no way repugnant to it. But further, I cited six learned
Authors in the Margen, and two in the Text, to prove the Jews anciently had a
Liturgy. Mr. S. B. knew the thing could not be denied, wherefore he politickly
pretends, It would be too great a diversion to enquire whether their proofs are
solid; and intimates, he could show, that two of my Authors build their proof
for some things upon unjustifiable Authorities. This is to evade, not to
answer. Surely it was the business of an Examiner to enquire; and to say he can
do that which he does not, when there was a just occasion for it, is an
intimation he cannot answer their proofs: So that I shall take it for granted,
the Jews had a Liturgy (till the contrary be better made out) and refer the
Reader to the consequences deduced from that Truth, Hist. of Lit. page 4. and
at last Mr. S. B. supposes, that Forms might have been of general use among the
Jews: And then the next question is, Whether this way of serving God was
abrogated in the New Testament? I I gave diverse Reasons why such an abrogation
was necessary, if Christ had disliked that way to which the Jews had been
generally and long accustomed, and intended to set up a new one. He answers,
that he sees no necessity of such an abrogation, to warrant People to address
themselves to God in another way; for he supposes both ways lawful. Now if he
grant that, First; Then the way of stinted Forms is not unlawful nor unsuitable
to Gospel Worship: Secondly, This way was never disliked by Christ, nor has he
brought any proof, that he instituted any other way: Thirdly, Therefore it is
most likely the Jewish Converts would keep to their old way of stinted Forms,
and that implies them to be very ancient: Fourthly, If both ways were now
equally lawful, yet the Church having chosen and enjoined the Liturgick way, as
the most ancient, universal and profitable way, and rejected the other; Her
determination makes this way (which was only lawful before) to become necessary
to us, till that determination be revoked.

Page 5. But Mr. S. B. foresees a dreadful consequence (which he hopes I never
thought of) from my arguing, That the Jews worshipped God acceptably by set
Forms, and that Christ and his Apostles joined in that way, and never reproved
it; Ergo, Christians now must use none but the Jewish Forms. This gives
occasion to his pity for those, who by Reading learned Books, entertain Notions
destructive of Christianity. I wish this Examiner had read more, or writ less;
for then the World had not been troubled with long Harangues upon his own
imaginations. He cannot deny the Antecedent, all learned Men assert it; but
this Consequence is a Mormo of his own dressing up, which vanishes by
considering, That when Christ and his Apostles joined in the Jewish Forms, the
Temple and Synagogue-worship was the lawful established way of serving God: But
when the Levitical part of their Religion was altered, that part of their
Liturgy which related to it, became unpracticable to Christians, and fell of it
self; yet still the Psalms and the Moral part of the Jewish Forms, suited the
Christian Doctrine, and our Lord had approved of that way; therefore these Forms
might be, and were retained and imitated by the Primitive Church; and they did
this the rather to win the Jews, who (as I noted) never objected, that Christ,
or his Apostles, or the first Christians, had set up a new way of praying and
praising God: Wherefore to make so many spiteful Reflections upon those great
men, from whom I borrowed the Antecedent, for the shadow of a sham Consequence,
that no Logic can infer from the premises, discovers neither a Christian
spirit, nor common Ingenuity: For no man who considers, will think that Christ
and his Apostles joining in the Jewish worship before it was fully abrogated,
can oblige us to copy out their whole Service after the Ceremonial Law is dead
and long since buried.

Page 6. That Christ did collect his Prayer out of the Jewish Forms, and order
his Disciples to add it to their other prayers, as a badge of their relation to
him, is too so true and so well proved by variety of learned Men, that Mr. S.
B. instead of disproving the premises, terrifies us with another dangerous
consequence; which is, that this is a reflection on the infinite wisdom of the
Son of God. This makes me think of him David speaks of, Psalm. L. 21. who
thought wickedly God was even such an one as himself. Some men fancy, it is a
reflection on their gifts and great parts, not to be at liberty to show them in
Extempore Composures, and will needs apply this to the Blessed Jesus, who
indeed had the Spirit without measure, and was infinitely able to make what new
Prayer he pleased Extempore. But our Dear Lord designed not on all occasions to
show his infinite ability; he came to teach us humility and submission to
innocent Establishments, and so might judge it more expedient for his Disciples
to collect a Prayer out of the practical part of the Jewish Liturgy (endited at
first by men who had the Spirit of God) than to make a new one: And if they
were really endued with his Spirit, who pretend to it, they would follow his
Example herein, and not for ostentation of their imaginary abilities, reject
our lawful enjoined Forms, disturb our peace, and leave our Communion. However,
since it is certain our Lord did collect his Prayer out of the Jewish Forms, it
is they who make frivolous consequences from hence who reflect upon him, not
they who relate the Matter of Fact, for which doubtless our Savior had
excellent Reasons, and far better perhaps than we are able to assign. Like to
this is his laft frightful consequence, That this would prove our Savior would
have his Followers compose Forms, only out of the Liturgy of the Jews. If he
means this of the Ceremonial part of it, it is evidently false, for Christ did
not collect one Petition from thence; if he means from the Moral part of it, I
see no harm in the consequence at all; and it is certain the Primitive
Christians did use the Psalms, the Hosannah, Hallelujah, Holy, Holy, Holy, etc.
and other Old Testament-Forms in their Service, which were parts of the Jewish
Liturgy: But it could never be the intent of Christ to oblige us to collect our
whole Liturgy from thence, because he taught New Doctrins, and instituted new
Rites, and gave his Apostles a miraculous Gift on purpose to suit new
Administrations, to that which was New in the Christian Religion; and the early
agreement of those distant Churches which they planted, in these
Administrations, not only as to the method, but the main words of them, is a
good evidence, That the same Spirit directed them all to appoint Forms, from
the very beginning.

. 3. page 7. His own loose consequences do not discourage him from censuring me
as discoursing too loosly. Wherefore having passed by our Saviors Hymn, and
his Prayer in the Garden, clear instances of his choosing, allowing and using
Forms both of Prayer and Praise. He gives our Saviors Prayer on the Cross
(which (I said) was probably taken out of Psalm. xxii.) as an instance of my
loose discoursing; asking me, Who put the petitions in Form for Christ, and
obliged him to use no other words? I reply to his Insinuation, That if my
Conjecture be too loose, he should and might have confuted it; but his not
attempting that, shows it was close enough. To his Question I answer, David by
the Spirit of Prophecy long before composed this Prayer for Christ, as appears
by his voluntary choosing of this Form, when he could have made a New prayer;
and if my Examiner will allow, he prayed by the Spirit when he used this Form,
then it is no loose inference, to say, We may pray by the Spirit in using
Forms; and to affirm, It is no hardship to enjoin men to serve God in that way
which Jesus chose as the best, when he was free from all constraint, and
infinitely more able than any of us to have prayed otherwise.

In my 8th page, I proved by S. Austin and Beza, That the Apostles both used
and settled Forms; and from others, that prescribed Forms had been used from the
Apostolical times. Mr. S. B. (I doubt) thought this too close, and so never
offers to answer it. But when I had granted the Lords Prayer to be both a Form
and a Direction to draw other Forms by; And, That Liturgies are other words
indeed, but such as are agreeable to it (i. e. to the Lords Prayer) both as to
the Form and Matter of them: The Examiner first adds [No] to my words, and
cites them thus, Liturgies are No other words, etc. and then insinuates they
are Nonsense, and an odd Expression to fall from a learned Doctor: But I am
sure, it is an odd Trick of a Nonconforming Conformist to put [No] into the
midst of a Sentence, to be so greedy of making reflections (after his promise
to the contrary) that he falfies my words, to get an opportunity. The adding
[No] to Scripture it self, may make it nonsense or blasphemy; and if I should
add it to his Preface, and say, He is no Conformist, he uses not the Liturgy;
some think I had not done him much wrong, though he would no doubt have
resented it. Well, leave out [No] then here, and my sense is plain, That
Liturgies are other words, different in syllables from the Lords Prayer, but
agreeing to it, both as to the Form or method of the Petitions, and as to the
Subject matter of them, which I proved by an induction of particulars, page 10.
to which he does not vouchsafe any answer: But upon my granting, the Lords
Prayer was a Direction as well as a Form, he asks a notable Question, and
repeats it again, page 9. viz. Why may not a Minister keeping to the words of
the Lords Prayer, use other words than those in the Liturgy, as well as the
Liturgy-men use other words than those in the Lords Prayer? this had been
close, if he had not forgot our Ministers circumstances. The Church has drawn
up a Liturgy very carefully, following the direction of the Lords Prayer, and
(for such Reasons as he may find in my 2d Part, page 325) enjoined all
Ministers to use it constantly, and they have (sincerely I hope) consented
thereto. Now to ask his Question in our case, is to ask, why every Captain, who
thinks himself wiser than his superior Officer, may not cross the Orders given
by his General, or a Council of War, and give new ones to his own Company. He
must find out some Reason as New as an Extempore prayer, to prove that private
Ministers in a settled Church, ought to have liberty to do all those Acts which
their Governors may do, before his Question can concern us, or be worth
answering.

To go on, Mr. Cl. brought many Authorities to show, that the ancient
Christians used the Lords prayer not out of any apprehension that it was
enjoined, Math. vi. These Quotations I examined particularly, and showed they
were not sufficient for his purpose. Mr. S. B. who loves not to meddle with
reading, instead of examining my Answers, refers the Reader to examine them
himself; only among eight Authors he picks out Maldonat, whose sense (without
citing his very words) I said was only, That we are not always bound to use the
very words of the Lords Prayer: And Maldonat does not only say, Non his
necessario verbis --, but ut quotiescunque oramus -- omnia, aut aliqua, aut
nihil certe his contrarium peteremus. However Mr. S. B. conceives his Sense to
be, That we are not absolutely bound to use those very words at any time: Which
not only contradicts Maldonat's words, but shows my Examiner did not know this
Author was a Jesuit, and a rigid Papist, bound by the Rules of his Church and
Order to say so many Paternosters every Day; otherwise he could not have
asserted this Jesuit so openly turned Fanatic, as to affirm in a Book which
was to pass the Censors, That no man is bound at any time to say a
Paternoster: He follows this with a notable Question (which Examiners and some
others claim a privilege to ask) viz. If we be not always bound to use the
Lords words, how we came to be bound to use always other peoples words? I
reply, We of this Church are bound to use the Lords Prayer as often as we use
the Liturgy in public; and sincere Conformists deliberately bound themselves to
use the Lords words and the Churches too in all their public Administrations,
believing them to be fitter for those occasions than any they can invent. How
Mr. S. B. came to be bound, he knows best, perhaps Advantage drew him to do
that which he now dislikes; but he should have asked this Question before, and
then he had escaped the Snare of making enquiry after Vows, Prove. xx. 25.

. 4. page 8. I had owned there was an extraordinary Gift of Prayer in the
Apostles times and long after, which I observed, none could claim by Scripture
in this Age, and answered all the places produced by some for this claim, in
four or five Pages: To which Mr. S. B. gives no Answer, but is very large in
giving us his own Notion of the Gift of Prayer, which he defines, An ability to
represent the sentiments of a Soul duly affected with the general and
particular matter of prayer in suitable Expressions, proper to beget and
improve such affections and resentments in those, who shall hear and join in
the use of them to that purpose. A Logician can no more reduce this definition
to his Rules of Art, than he can give a regular Analysis of an Extempore
prayer; yet, if I admit it for a description, my Cause is not hurt, since
(according to this Character) he that reads the Liturgy does exercise the Gift
of prayer, as well or better than the Extempore man. For our Clergy and well
instructed People, upon rational grounds believe, the Expressions of the
Liturgy to be more proper, than they or any can invent or utter on the sudden,
without the extraordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost: So that every pious
Minister of our Church has his Soul duly affected with the general and
particular matter of Prayer, and an ability to represent the sentiments of his
Soul in expressions, suitable and proper to beget and improve such affections
and resentments in all the true lovers of Common Prayer, who hear and join with
him. Wherefore by his account the Dissenters have no monopoly of this Gift of
Prayer; and if our hearts be duly affected we have more title to it than they;
for our Expressions have been all duly weighed by Admirable men, and we may
know the general and particular matter of them beforehand, by meditating
whereon our Souls may be more affected than any can rationally be supposed to
be, by an Expression that flies by like a flash of Lightning. It Is true, Mr. S.
B. denies, that such as pray Extempore, expect the assistance of the Spirit
only to teach them new words and phrases for their daily prayers: But (as he
states the point) the only difference between their exercise of this Gift and
ours, is this, They frequently or daily vary the phrases, and we use the same:
As to the propriety of expressions, affections, and resentments, we and our
people have the advantage: And say what he will, he lays great weight upon new
phrases, for he affirms, The exercise of this Gift cannot well consist with an
obligation constantly to use the same words. The absurdity of which appears;
First, By the censure this passes upon him, who (if this be true) when he
subscribed and declared, renounced the use of one of Gods gifts: Secondly, By
the sentence it passes upon all sincere Conformists, who (by this account) do
never pray by the Spirit, merely for want of new expressions, though their
expressions be never so proper, their Souls never so much affected and their
People never so devout: So that I may refer it to the Reader, whether he has
abused himself or his Brethren more by this rash expression.

Now when he had made new phrases the distinguishing Character of the Gift of
prayer, he did well to say, It is no extraordinary Gift: For it is a mere
natural faculty, depending on men's parts and temper, attained by confidence and
use, like the Art of making Speeches An easy Observer may see, that the
fluency, the variety, and the style, follow the complexion and disposition of
the Speaker; the Sanguin are brisk and aerie in these prayers, the Flegmatic,
slow and flat; the Choleric, bold and fierce; the Melancholy, sad and dismal;
yea, the same man is quicker or slower, as his Body or Mind is well or
ill-disposed: So that no considering person will ascribe such a Quality as this
to the Spirit of God; There being no promise, that God will assist us in public
Prayer with new phrases; and it is a great presumption to expect that which God
never promised, and a greater, to ascribe the effects of men's natural tempers,
to the operation of the Holy Ghost. What he adds, That Men have ordinarily a
readiness to express their Sense in proper words, is not true in the case of
public Prayer; for many pious and learned Ministers, who have a very
affectionate sense of the matter of Prayer, cannot express themselves suitably
to their inward resentments, (as he calls it) yet many Ignorants or Hypocrites,
who have no sense of him they speak to, or that they pray for, can express
themselves fluently on any occasion.

Page 9. It is a Paradox to me, when there are very pertinent words, how other
words, only equally pertinent, should contribute more to the ends of public
Worship: His instance of the Lords Prayer and Liturgies will not make it out;
the Lords Prayer is more pertinent for those occasions for which Christ made
it, than any human Composure can be: But our Lord designed not this short
Prayer for the whole Service, but to be added to our other Prayers, and to
direct the Church to frame other Prayers by it; and our Church has observed
both these orders. He has been told already, why every private Minister cannot
have the same liberty, that the Governors of a settled Church have: As for his
supposing these Ministers would vary no more from the Lords Prayer (if they had
liberty) than the Liturgy does; first this is very unlikely, because some of
those who take this liberty, neither use the Lords Prayer as a Form, nor mind
it as a direction for their Extempore prayers: And secondly, the project is
impracticable among 10000 Clergymen; for some are unwilling to have a liberty
of varying, others are unfit to be trusted with it, in which number are many
who (through a conceit of their own abilities) desire it; and there are but
very few who are fit to be allowed such a liberty, that do press for it.
Wherefore since this liberty cannot be granted to all, the distinguishing would
be so difficult, and the denying it to some so exasperating, that it is better
to restrain a few from the exercise of their needless gifts, (where we have
already properer Expressions than any of them can invent) than to bring all
those mischiefs on a settled Church, which either a general allowance, or a
distinguishing dispensation must create.

His second illustration of the aforesaid Paradox, is by my Paraphrases on the
Common Prayer, by which I thought to further devotion: And if they be of real
use (he asks) why may not other variations be in their measure useful too? I
reply, That Commentaries and Paraphrases on Scripture (for private use) are
very advantageous. But if Dr. Hammond, or the Assembly, had drawn up their
Paraphrases and Notes on purpose to be read in Churches, to exclude the reading
of Scripture there, out of a conceit, they were more useful than reading
Chapters of the Bible, they would have been ridiculous, and deserved a severe
Censure: So in Human Composures, Durandus and Cabisila's explications of the
Liturgies, and the exposition of the Canons by Balsamon and Zonaras are useful
in private. But if these Authors had designed to have their Expositions
publicly used, so as to justle out the old Liturgies and Canons, they would
have been despised for their insolence, as much as they are now commended for
their industry. Now his Extempore men would have their variations only and
always used in public instead of the Liturgy, so as utterly to exclude it,
which utterly spoils the parallel: This he perceived, and therefore owns, That
my Variations are not to be used publicly, page 10. I ask, why then did he
instance in them, since he himself affirms, page 11. The matter now in dispute
is only about him that officiates? But my Paraphrases being not at all intended
for the use of Ministers, or others in public, therefore they are nothing to
the purpose of Variations designed for public use, exclusive of the Liturgy.
His next Question is, Whether my Paraphrases be ever the better for being only
for private use? I answer, This makes his alleging them in an Argument about
public Variations, appear frivolous and impertinent: But if he delight in
Comparisons, a private Minister, who makes Variations for private use, to
promote Uniformity and Devotion, and to beget in all a just esteem of the
established way of Worship, does much better than he, who to show his ability
to vary; uses his faculty in public, to exclude the established way, and
thereby breeds a contempt of it, and promotes separation from it.

Page 10. I granted (page 16.) That every good man might pray, by the ordinary
assistance of the Spirit, devoutly and fervently even by a Form: Mr. S. B.
leaves out the main words [even by a Form] and falls to make Inferences from
half my Sentence, asking, If Men may be so enlightened and affected, etc. why
they may not by the ordinary assistance of the Spirit express their resentments
in proper Expressions? If he mean, in private, perhaps they may; but that is
nothing to our Question, which is only about public Prayer; if he mean in
public, I have already given him diverse Reasons why this cannot be permitted,
much less established in a settled Church: But in short, I will give him here
three Reasons; First, This liberty is needless, because there are more proper
Expressions already composed by Holy men (who had the ordinary assistance of
the Spirit) than any of us can invent on the sudden. Secondly, This liberty
would be pernicious, occasioning Envy among the Clergy, and Factions among the
People; some of the most learned and pious would be despised only for their
modesty; and others of the most ignorant and profane, admired for their fluency
and confidence. Thirdly, Supposing both ways of praying by enjoined Forms and
Extempore were equal; yet when our Church (being guided by antiquity, reason,
and the practice of other modern Churches) has prohibited that way, and
prescribed Forms, they are certainly the better way for us.

Page 11. He yields at last, That the frame and actings of the Soul, the
exercise of Faith, Repentance, Love, etc. are the principal thing in Prayer.
Now when I had proved, that a Minister may do all this, and so pray by the
Spirit in a Form; why may he not be obliged always to use a Form in public? Mr.
S. B. can object nothing but this, If the enjoined Form do not so well express
that sense, which he and others have of the Matter of Prayer, as other words
which occur to him, then he cannot be said to pray in or by the Spirit, in the
full import of the phrase. Now this Supposition shows, first, That these men
have a high opinion of their own Invention, who think they can devise better
words Extempore, than our Reverend makers of the Liturg^ could frame by much
study: Secondly, It Is plain, That using these new Phrases is (by his account)
the full and only import of Praying by the Spirit; for he makes varying the
phrase necessary to the exercise of it, and his Extempore man is singular in
nothing else. But he should consider, this is a Scripture Phrase, and the
import of it is to be learned from thence; wherefore he should have brought
some Text, where Praying by the Spirit, signifies, Inventing new Phrases, but
that he can never do; and reason is against his Exposition, as well as
Scripture; for since he owns new Words not to be the principal thing in Prayer,
no man will believe the Spirits assistance is necessary for the less principal;
yea, (where we have proper Phrases already) for a needless thing. Wherefore
when in the use of our Forms our Soul is in good frame, and we exercise all
proper Graces, by the assistance of the Spirit; we Pray by the Spirit, in all
Senses that the phrase is capable of, but Two, which are of Mr. S. B's own
devising; first, that we do not daily invent new Words; nor secondly, do we
vainly imagine we can invent more proper Words, than the Church has provided.

After this he runs back to my 15th Page, where I had showed, That if Praying
by the Spirit signify, making new Words and Phrases, then none but the
Minister, in public, prays by the Spirit, since the people never invent new
Words, but the Ministers words are a Form to them. The Examiner tugs hard to
get off from this Rock, and says first, The dispute is only about him that
officiates. But had he read over the place he pretends to confute, he must have
seen I was answering Mr. Clarkson, who (Disc. of Lit. page 128, 129.) makes
Praying by the Spirit, a gift common to all Christians; and yet afterward
says, He that was able to conceive a Prayer himself, yet made use of prayers
formed by others; he did not pray as he was able; which he makes to be all one
with praying by the Spirit. The absurdity of which Assertion I proved by this
scandalous Consequence of it, that then the People (whom he affirms to have
this Gift in all Ages) did never pray by the Spirit, because they make use of
Forms made by others; so that here our dispute was about the People. For by
this I made it appear, how falsely they expounded the phrase of praying by the
Spirit, by inventing new Words; which excludes the People from ever praying by
the Spirit at all. Secondly, Mr. S. B. says, The Ministers prayer is not a
Form to the Congregation in the Sense we are discoursing of. I answer, It is a
prayer framed by another, and that is Mr. Clarkson's sense of a Form, and (I
think) Mr. S. B's too, who says in this very Page, if a man restrain himself
to the words and phrases put together by others, which express not their sense
so well as some that occur to them, etc. Here a Form is defined, Words and
Phrases put together by others, and the using it, restraining ones self to
those words. Now the people are restrained to words and phrases put together by
the Minister, therefore his Prayer is a Form to them: And if one of the
Congregation conceive, he can express his sense better than his Minister does,
and yet sits by silent, and uses the Ministers words to express his sense;
according to Mr. Cl. this man does not pray as well as he is able; and
according to Mr. S. B. he prays not by the Spirit in the full import of the
phrase; which natural, yet odious Consequence, should make them ashamed of
their explaining this phrase of Praying by the Spirit, by inventing new
Expressions. Thirdly, Mr. S. B. says, The Congregation may join in the
spiritual performance of the duty, acting Graces suitable to the occasions, and
improving others abilities to further their Devotion. This, he designs to
prove, That the Ministers prayer is not a Form to the People; but I affirm, the
Congregation (who join in the Common Prayer) do, or may do all this; yet I hope
Mr. S. B. will not affirm, that their joining in the Spiritual performance,
acting Graces, and using the abilities of the Liturgy-makers to further their
Devotion, proves the Common Prayer is no Form to our People. Lastly, he
affirms, That the Congregation are not called to express vocally their inward
resentments in the fittest words they are able. I reply, They are commanded to
pray by the Spirit in public, as well as in private; and if they may not use
their own Expressions there, then they may pray by the Spirit, without using
their own words; and praying fervently is the main import of that phrase.
Besides, he runs from the point, to tell us what is the duty of Ministers, and
what the Peoples: For our Question here is, Whether their being tied to their
Ministers Prayer, do not make it a Form to them? not, Whether they should be
tied to his words, or no? If I grant, they ought to be tied to his words, that
makes them not less a Form to them; but I may note, that he cannot produce one
place of Scripture where (as he phrases it) Ministers are called to speak all
the Office alone, or to express their sense in new phrases daily, or where the
People are forbid to say any part of the Prayers: If he cannot show Scripture
for these ways of the Dissenters, he is highly to blame to apply the
Canting-phrase of, A Call (which implies, a Divine Command) to mere human
devices. It Is apparent from the best antiquity since the Apostles, and from the
Jewish Custom, that the people joined both in Praises and Prayers by Responses,
Repetitions, etc. contrary to which the Dissenters now confine the People
wholly to the Ministers words throughout their Extempore Prayers; and then by a
wrong exposition of the praying by the Spirit, abuse their own Congregations,
as much as they do those who use the Liturgy, and exclude them as well as us
from Praying by the Spirit.

Page 12. I granted there was an extraordinary Gift of Prayer, in and after the
Apostles days, the Spirit furnishing some then both with words and matter: This
I proved by S. Chrysostom, who notes it was ceased long before his time; and I
made it probable that the Original of Liturgies, was from Prayers endited at
first by these Inspired men, and preserved in writing by some for the benefit
of after-Ages, (Hist. Lit. page 17.) Mr. S. B. objects, That I have none but S.
Chrysostom to vouch for this Gift. And, is not he a good Evidence for a matter
of Fact so near his own time, when Mr. S. B. has not one Father nor Argument
to disprove him? But he startles at a dreadful Consequence of his own dressing
up, viz. That this would make Liturgies, to be Divine Revelations, which he
represents as little less than Blasphemy. Now to put him out of his affright,
he must consider; First, That there is great difference between Holy Scripture,
written by Inspired men on purpose to be a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners,
and certainly delivered to us as the very Word of God; and Forms occasionally
used or composed by some Inspired man, accidentally preserved, as some
Liturgick Forms, and some Sayings of the Apostles (not Recorded in the New
Testament) were: So that the affirming the Primitive part of Liturgy was made
at first by Inspired men, does not equal it to Scripture. Secondly, This
Primitive part of Liturgy, is either the very words of Scripture, or so pious,
pure, pertinent, and agreeable to it, that it is no reflection on the Spirit of
God to say, this was derived from the Prayers of Inspired men. Thirdly, The
agreement of distant Churches so early in the same Forms, cannot well be made
out, unless we allow these Forms were made at first by that one Spirit, which
inspired all the planters of these several Churches. Lastly, It is far more
arrogant, and nearer Blasphemy, to ascribe modern, extempore Prayers to
Inspiration, (as the People are taught to do); to charge the Holy Spirit with
the blunders, tautologies, nonsense, and impertinencies of this way, must
provoke God with a witness. I might also here show, that two Popish Impostors
first brought up this way of Extempore prayer in England, and that many who
were great admirers of it, have fallen off to Quakerism, etc. but that is done
by other hands See Foxes and Firebr. page 7, and 17. Continuat of Friendly
debate, page 113.
. I return therefore to the Examiner, who adds, That some of our latest
Liturgies, have some Prayers in them, whose very frame shows they were not
composed by Inspiration. If he say this of the modern corrupt Additions to old
Liturgies, it is nothing to the purpose, because we consider nothing here but
the Primitive part of these Liturgies: If he mean it of our Common Prayer (one
of the best and latest Liturgies) I affirm, the meanest Collect there is fitter
to be ascribed to Inspiration, than the best Extempore Prayer I ever heard; yet
we do not equal them to Holy Scripture. And now I hope it is plain, my Examiner
has said nothing to lessen the value of Liturgies, or raise the credit of the
Extempore way. I will next consider, whether he has any better skill of
success in examining Authors, than in refuting Scripture Arguments.

The First Century.
. 1. page 13. TO avoid all Cavil, and prevent Fallacies, I will first show what
I undertook to prove in this Century; which was, That the Christians had Forms
of Prayer and Praise, page 21. and a Liturgy or Order at least, page 22. That
their Hymns were certainly in prescribed Forms, page 25. Their Prayer and
Supplication one, and approved by the Bishop; their Singing alternate, page 27.
This was all I undertook to prove in an Age so full of inspired Pastors, and so
deficient in Writers, wherein (as I noted, page 19) much evidence for Liturgies
cannot be expected: And if we find some steps made toward a Liturgy invariably
used thus early, we may be sure, as Gifts decreased, the use of Forms in every
Age must proportionably increase.

My first proof is from Josephus, who says, The Essenes used early in the
Morning, Prayers delivered them from their Forefathers, De bell. Jud. l. 2. c.
7. now these must be Forms: Philo adds, They sang Hymns alternately; De vit,
contemp. which must be known Forms also; and Eusebius (who from Philo's
description, took them to be Christians converted by S. Mark) observes, their
Hymns were the same with those sung in the Church in his time. All this the
Examiner grants, and this is enough for my purpose, because it proves, That
such as were taken to be Christians by their agreement with the Primitive
Rites, certainly had and used Forms both of Prayer and Praise. He only cavils
about Eusebius's not mentioning their Forms of Prayer: Suppose he do not,
Josephus (who knew the Essenes better) affirms, they had Forms of Prayer; so
that the thing is certainly true and sufficiently proved. And Philo adds, They
were wont every day to pray Morning and Evening. De vit contemp page 893. which
Eusebius leaves out, as he also does many other things about the Essenes in
Philo, contenting himself to tell us, That this Book of Philo's, which
describes their practices, contains all the Rules and Canons of the Church in
his time, and refers the Reader to the Book it self for fuller satisfaction. So
that the most he can make of this Objection is, That Eusebius does not expressly
mention their Prayers in Forms; but he mentions their Hymns in Forms, which are
so near of kin to Prayers, and generally contain Petitions as well as Praises,
that the one makes it probable both were Forms; however Josephus puts it past
all doubt, and therefore my Point is gained, which is, That the first we read
of, who were taken to be Christians, had and used Forms both of Prayer and
Praise.

. 2. page 14. Clemens Romanus is my next Author, who uses the word [(...)] for
an Order or Form of Divine Offices, and speaks of a determined Rule of
Ministration. Mr. S. B. pretends I mistook the sense of this word, which (he
says) signifies a business, office, or work, and in his false and forced
Paraphrase of this place applies it to the work of Laymens ordinary Calling.
To confute which designed mistake, I shall give this brief account of the
Author, and submit it to their Judgment who can read the Original: There was a
Schism at Corinth, some of the Pastors despising the People, and some of the
People intruding into the Pastors Office, which gave occasion to this Epistle,
wherein Clemens advises them, to leave Divine Administrations to the Clergy,
and to submit to them as Soldiers to their Captain, and the Members to their
Head: He orders the Inferiors to be submissive, and the Superiors not to be
proud; and then comes in the first place cited, (...) Let all things be done in
Order, whatever the Lord has commanded us to perform; and let the Oblations
and Liturgies be celebrated at the certain or appointed Times. Clemens imitates
S. Paul (1 Cor. xiv. 40.) and speaks of Divine Offices as well as he, advising,
that in them all things should be done in order; for these are the things about
which our Lord has given commands, and appointed the set-times for Oblations;
that is, either the Eucharist in general, which is often so called; or the Alms
then offered up, appointed at Corinth, on the First day of the Week, 1 Cor.
xvi. 2. and then also they Celebrated Liturgies; that is, the solemn Offices of
Prayer and Praise. But Mr. S. B's Paraphrase of this place (which he durst not
cite at large) is this, God has provided for every man, an office and work to
which he must attend, and do every part of his work or Liturgy, in the manner.
God has prescribed, and at the Season he has appointed, etc. he leaves the
word [Oblations] wholly out, because he could not well wrest that word to his
feigned Sense of ordinary business, which the whole Period contradicts, for
where did Christ require Laymen to do all their business in order? Where has
he prescribed the manner and set-time for Laymens Work? And the next Sentence
in Clemens baffles this pretense also, for he goes on thus, -- The Lord has
not only determined the seasons for these, but also where and by whom they must
be performed; (Is this true of men's ordinary Callings?) -- So that they who
make their Oblations at the set-time, are accepted and blessed, and cannot err,
since they obey God -- Even as the Chief-Priest had his proper Liturgy,
appointed the Priests and Levites theirs, and the Laity were obliged to
Lay-duties, ('it is not (...) there.) We see he compares the Order of the
Christian Church to that of the Jews, where there was a prescribed Rule for the
High Priest, Priests and Levites to officiate by, which he calls a Liturgy, as
he had named the Rule for Christian Priests performance of Divine Offices
before; and the comparison shows as well the same word, That the Christians
were prescribed as well as the Jews; as also he supposes, Laymen might not
meddle with these Offices now (having duties of their own) as well as under the
Law. And from this Order, in the Mosaic Economy, Clemens infers, That the
Christian Clergy were every one of them in his proper place to offer up the
Eucharist to God, keeping a good Conscience, and with all gravity keeping close
to ((...)) the determined Rule of his Liturgy: Which refers to those various
parts of the Offices which were performed, some by the Bishop, others by the
Priests or Deacons; and every ones part was allotted by the Liturgy, which
therefore must at least be (as I noted before) a fixed Rule or Order for Divine
Administrations: And if they needed such a prescribed Order then, and had one
as well as the Sons of Levi in this Inspired Age, we need a complete Liturgy
enjoined now, when Inspiration is ceased. Clemens goes on to show, what Christ
had determined about the place where, and the persons by whom Divine Offices
were to be performed, page 95, 97. And the whole Discourse shows, the shameful
prevarication of Mr. S. B. in explaining these passages of all Christian
People, and ((...)) of Ordinary work, when in one Page, viz. page 92. it is
thrice used, For the Rule for celebrating Divine Offices, which was fixed and
prescribed, and that was a good step toward an enjoined Liturgy invariably to
be used, if it were not the very thing it self.

. 3: page 15. Pliny relates, That the Christians said an Hymn [carmen]
alternately to Christ, as God, early in the Morning: My Examiner says, this
only relates to Psalms or Hymns, and I would draw in Prayers with them, which
Pliny speaks not of. But he should not have said this, till he answered the
proof I brought in my 23d Page; that [Carmen] among the Romans signified, any
solemn Form, and is often used for a Prayer; and till he had confuted the
Observation I made, that Pliny does not express it, that they sang, but said
this [Carmen], which makes it probable it might be a Prayer; and we know the
Christians used Prayers as well as Hymns to Christ. Moreover Pliny evidently
describes all the Service by this word, and whatever it notes (Prayers or
Praises) it is certain they were in Forms, because they said them alternately.
And finally, if it do signify Hymns, I gave many Reasons why the Prayers and
the Hymns might be alike; All which to page 25. (though fit enough to be
examined) Mr. S. B. wholly passes by, which is to me a Confession, that he
could give no reason why this testimony should not be evidence for the use of
Forms, both in their Prayers and Praises: He only catches at one Expression,
page 24. and says, Pliny' s account of the Christians does not exactly agree
with that of Eusebius, concerning the Essenes. He singles out Eusebius only to
cavil, whereas I did not name Eusebius here, but referred to the whole account
given before of the Essenes (by Josephus, Philo, and Eusebius) page 20. Where
it appears, that those Essenes exactly agreed with Pliny's Christians, first,
in the use of Forms; secondly, in using them alternately; and, thirdly, in
using them early in the morning: This is all the agreement I mentioned, and all
my Question obliged me to consider; for this still confirms the early use of
Forms, and makes it probable those Essenes were Christians, who had used them
even from the time of S. Mark.

. 4. page 16. Ignatius testifies, that the Christians in their Assemblies had
One Prayer, and one Supplication. Mr. S. B. says, I take this for a solid
proof of a fixed Liturgy: But I infer no more from this and another place, page
26. than, that it is probable from hence, there was then one Form of prayer and
administering the Sacraments, approved by the Bishop. And this Consequence will
be plain, if we consider, that Ignatius is speaking of public Prayer; and in
that, would have the Magnesians do nothing without the Bishop and Presbyters,
and not to make trial of all things agreeing to their own fancy; (this Passage
Mr. S. B. leaves out, because it censures Extempore Prayers) But when they met
to pray, they must have all one Prayer, and one Supplication in common (so Mr.
S. B's Edition reads it). Now then, The Prayer they were to use was allowed by
the Bishop, and not such as agreed to private Ministers fancies; it was One
Prayer and Supplication used by all in common; all which is the proper
description of a Liturgy: Whereas an Extempore Prayer is so various, it cannot
be approved; that agrees to private and single Ministers fancies; it is daily
varied, and so not one; spoken by the Minister alone, and so not repeated by
all in common: But a Form is properly one and the same Prayer. And so S.
Chrysostom, when he describes the Priest and People vocally repeating the Form
of Confession, uses this very phrase, (...) Hom. 18 in 2 Cor. They all repeat
One Prayer. As to the Bishops approbation, the second Quotation makes that
necessary to every Authentic celebration of the Eucharist and Baptism; and I
know not how a Bishop can tell, whether he shall approve or disapprove of any
Form of celebration made Extempore; he must see it written down before he can
judge of it: So that here we have very fair evidence of Prayers, Litanies, and
Sacramental Administrations, in Forms approved by the Bishop. Mr. S. B. would
evade this by saying, One Prayer implies no more, than a Prayer in which all
joined: But if that were true, it might be a Form still, because the most
apparent method for all to join in One prayer, is for all to pray by one Form;
and they who come together daily to say a different prayer, rather join in
several prayers, than in One; besides, Ignatius his One Prayer was not the
product of private Fancies, it was some Fixed known thing, capable of being
considered and approved by the Bishop; and the constant use of it, is made the
mark of one who was in communion with his Bishop; that is, (in S. Chrysostom's
sense) One Form repeated in common between the Bishop or Priest, and the
People. I only add, that when Mr. S. B. took notice, that Ignatius would have
all that live under an Orthodox and Sound Bishop, join in Communion with him,
in the use of that Prayer and way of Administration which he approved, he had a
fair occasion to have seen some Faults on the Dissenters side; who now cannot
deny, but their Bishops are Orthodox, and yet separate from their Communion.

Page 17. I proved both by Socrates and Photius, that Ignatius first brought
the way of singing Hymns by way of Antiphone into the Church of Antioch:
Valesius's Notes on this passage enable Mr. S. B. to quarrel at this, and say,
That the Learned generally count this Relation of Socrates to be fabulous; and
that Theodoret is positive, that Flavianus and Diodorus first brought in this
way there. I reply, He despises the Opinion of Learned men, when it is not on
his side, See page 37. and here he appeals to it, but mistakes it; for it is
the Vision of Angels (who taught Ignatius thus to sing, as Socrates says)
which some of the Learned count Fabulous; but diverse Learned men think it very
probable, that Ignatius might set up this way of Singing at Antioch: For Moses,
by the Spirit of God, taught the Israelites to sing thus in the Wilderness,
Exodus xv. Thus they sang in the Temple-service: The Choir of Angels in the
Vision of Isaiah, sang by way of Antiphone, Isai. vi. So did the Essenes in
Philo, and the Asian* Christians in Pliny, before Ignatius's time; and can it
be unlikely he should set up this way at Antioch? especially since Flavianus
and Diodorus (as Mr. S. B. grants) had it from the Syrians, the old Inhabitants
of that Country where Antioch stood. As for Theodoret, he speaks not of Hymns,
but says, Flavianus and Diodorus first brought in the alternate singing of
David's Psalms at Antioch; which may be true, though Ignatius had begun to sing
Hymns there by way of Antiphone long before: Nor am I so concerned for this
proof, as my Examiner thinks; because, he may see I have sufficient Evidence
without it, to show, That Hymns were prescribed Forms, and sung alternately in
this first Century. And he passes over in silence a plain Testimony of mine,
page 28. proving, That Hymns were prescribed in Forms almost from the beginning
of Christianity, and were so known as to be cited for good Authority in points
of Faith in the next Century. Wherefore I have showed, That in this Age wherein
there were so many extraordinarily Inspired, they chose to use Forms both of
Prayer and Praise; and if they who needed not Forms, used them of choice, as
the best way of Worship; Our Age which needs them, may well enjoin them.

The Second Century.
. 1. FRom that Prayer which began with the Father, and ended with the Hymn of
many Names, in Lucian, where he describes and derides a Christian Assembly; I
inferred, That the Christians then had Prayers and Hymns known by their proper
Titles; which implies, they used Forms in public. Mr. S. B. first questions,
whether this were a Christian Assembly; and perhaps he is the first and only
man that ever did question it. Mr. Mede cites this very place, to prove the
Christians had Churches in Lucian's time; See his Disc. of Churches, Tom. l.
page 22. and the learned Notes of Wooverus and Heraldus on Minutius Foelix,
cite this Dialogue of Lucian, to prove the Christians of that Age were pale
with Fasting; Not. in Min. Foel. page 109. Lugd. Bat. 1672. Secondly, The
Examiner thinks Lucian here designed to ridicule Pagan as well as Christian
Religion. I reply, He begins the Dialogue with a Jocular representation of the
Arguments used by Christians, against Swearing by the Heathen gods, with design
only to render Christianity odious to the Pagans; but the latter part, (whence
this passage is cited) is wholly taken up in a direct exposing of Christianity;
witness his Jeer upon the Name of Christ, his mention of Catechumens, his
Scoffing at the Doctrins of the Trinity, Providence, and a Future-state, with
his intimating the Christians were a sort of Magicians: Yea, at last Mr. S. B.
grants, He might design this as a reflection on their way of praying to one
person first, and then concluding as if they prayed to many; he should have
said, praised many: For the end was, an Hymn of many Names. And if this be
Lucian's sense, That they had a Prayer beginning with the Father, and a Hymn in
the conclusion, called the Hymn of many Names; then Christians used some
certain Forms both of Prayer and Praise, which had certain beginnings and
proper Titles, so as such as heard them might give them the Names by which they
were commonly known: The Prayer had a certain beginning, and the Hymn (if it
were not the Trisagion) must be in Form, as all Hymns generally were. As for
his wonder, how a Jeering Pagan could be admitted to hear the prayers, which
were then concealed from Heathens: It may be News to him, what Suidas and
others say of Lucian, That he was a Christian, yea, a Preacher at Antioch
before his Apostasy; and that enabled him to know all the Doctrine and Worship
of the Christians. Thought it is not improbable, that the Blasphemy and Railing
of this and other Apostates, contributed to make them still more cautious to
conceal their Mysteries, of which the next Age affords store of Evidence.

. 2. page 19. I observed Justin Martyr shows some inclination this way; for
though he write of the Christian Worship, yet he gives no account of the
particular words used in celebrating it. The Examiner says, He does not so
much as say they had Forms. I reply, I have proved by other Evidence they had
Forms, and both Jews and Gentiles then worshipped God by Forms; so that his
silence argues the Christians had not altered that point, whereas a new way
would have needed some Apology. But he finds me in a great mistake about
Baptism, the words of which (he says) Justin Martyr relates, viz. In the Name
of the Father of all things, the Lord God, and of our Savior Christ, and of
the Holy Ghost. But the mistake will prove on his side, for I saw these words;
but I affirm they are not the very words by which they did Baptize, but a
paraphrase on them (as the learned Vossius declares; See Hist. Lit. par. 2. chapter
4. page 252.) So that this description, as well as that cautious Expression, of
regenerating new Converts, as we were regenerated; are intended to disguise the
mysterious Form, which no sober man can imagine the Christians of this early
and pure Age should alter so much from that which Jesus prescribed. And to
confirm my Opinion, that Justin Martyr was for concealing the words of their
worship, I observe that he says, The Catechumens were taught to pray. Now they
could not pray without a Form we may be sure, yet Justin does not tell us what
this Form was, though the practice of the next Ages assure us, it was the Lords
Prayer, which the Catechumens learned just before Baptism. Again, he does not
mention diverse Ceremonies of the Eucharist and Baptism; such as the Kiss of
Charity, repeating the Creed, renouncing the Devil, etc. though learned Men
believe these were in use in his time; but he writ to Heathens, and would not
give them an account of the particular Rites in Christian worship: And though
his general Expressions and former Evidence make it out they used Forms then,
yet I said I would not insist upon that general account he gives of their
Supplications, though these Phrases are found in ancient Litanies. The modesty
of this seems to offend him (who is very rarely guilty of offending on that
side) and he asks, Whether such things cannot be prayed for, but in prescribed
words? and, how it-appears Justin M. borrowed this from any Litany? A man would
think he could expressly prove, these things were then prayed for extempore,
because he will not allow this for a probable Evidence: But impartial men will
consider, there are other evidences of Forms in this Age, and One Supplication
in Ignatius; as also that there were Litanies soon after, which were so old in
the Fourth Century, as to pretend to be composed by the Apostles: Also in them,
these very things are prayed for in Forms; viz. The Conversion of the Jews, and
the Deliverance of the Gentiles from their Errors, etc. almost in Justins very
words, who cites them here for a proof of the Christians Charity, in a dispute
with a learned Jew, who would scarce have taken arbitrary, uncertain, or
extempore Expressions for a solid proof of Christian usages: All this, I hope
will pass with most men for a probable Evidence, That Justin did refer to a
Form of Supplication.

Page 20. Again I expounded Justin Martyr's phrase of [(...)] Common-Forms in
which all might join, proving it by S. Cyprians stiling the Lords Prayer, in
which all the Congregation vocally joined, a Common Prayer; and this I showed
agreed to Ignatius his One Prayer and Supplication in common. And to justify
my Exposition, I now add, That Justin M. himself seems thus to explain it in
the next page, where he says, (...) Apol. 2. page 98. We all rise, and in
common send up our Prayers. And S. Chrysostom acurately explains the Phrase,
where he says, (...) Hom. 18. in 2 Cor. Common Prayers are made between the
Priest and People. Mr. S. B. without any Evidence to support him, rejects this
sense, and will have them called, Common Prayers, because (as the next words
import) they extended to all Mankind: But the very Reason he gives for his
Explication, confutes it. The next words say, They were made for all men; and
if Common Prayer had signified the same thing, here had been a plain tautology,
and Justin (as he expounds) must say, They made Prayers for all men, praying
for all men: Wherefore as the latter words imply the subject of them was
general; so the former [(...)] show, they were common both to Priest and
People, each having their known share, which can only be in the use of Forms;
and this is the true sense of [(...)] which the Critics derive from [(...)]
and say it is, (...) that which lies before all, and every one shares in. Hence
the Ancients Common Meal, of which all their Friends there assembled had a
portion, was called [Coena]; wherefore this Phrase applied to Prayers,
signifies, that the Congregation had a share in the Service, and shows they
were Forms, for themselves, and for all others: And Justin would rather have
called them, General or Universal, than Common Prayers, if he had meant by that
Epithet to signify, they were made for all Men.

Page 21. But the most famous passage in Justin M. is that of the Presidents
offering up Prayers, and in like manner Thanksgivings [(...)] as well as he is
able. Mr. Clarkson first produced this place to prove, that they used Extempore
prayers then at the Eucharist, and spent near Ten pages in Quotations, to make
out that to be the import of this Phrase. To this I made two general Replies;
First, If this were the sense of (...), it would not follow from the Clergies
praying so in the Inspired Ages, that we must pray so now. Secondly, That Mr.
Cl. was hard put to it for proofs, when he laid so much stress on a Phrase that
at least is very ambiguous. These two Replies Mr. S. B. takes no notice of.
Thirdly, I answered all Mr. Cl's pertinent Quotations, and brought others to
show, that this Phrase signifies no more than praying and praising God with all
possible fervency; the Examiner interposes to judge between us, and without
enquiring into either of our Quotations, gives sentence against me, and his
pretended Reasons for it are these: First, Because Justin M. for the
understanding this Phrase, refers us (not to (...), as I affirmed, but) to
(...), a little before, where he says, The President offers up prayers and
praises to God, etc. and gives thanks for the benefits vouchsafed in the Lords
Supper (...), which (for any thing he yet knows) signifies, distinctly and with
variety of Expression. I reply, This passage where [(...)] is found, speaks
only of giving thinks, he has added [Prayers] of his own head. Secondly, (...)
signifies, for a long time, and not (as he fancies) distinctly or with variety
of Expression, as appears by Acts xxviii. 6. where, when the Viper hung on
Paul's Hand, the Barbarians expected [(...)] for a long time, that he should
have fallen down dead; but surely they did not expect this distinctly or with
variety of Expression: So that (...) cannot explain (...), in his Sense. But,
Thirdly, (...), is used of the prayers after Baptism, which no doubt were
agreeable to those at the Eucharist, and (as I showed) it signifies, they were
made, earnestly, devoutly, and affectionately, which is the import of (...) in
the prayers and praises at the Communion. So that still it appears, Justin M.
by both these phrases intended to express the fervency of him that officiated,
not his using new and various words.

Page 22. Again, Secondly, Mr. S. B. understands not, why its signifying
fervently should exclude the other sense, of the Presidents using his ability,
as to Expressions. It seems there are many things he does not, and some he will
not understand; I doubt the latter is the case here; for there is an obvious
Reason, why this one phrase cannot signify both in this place, viz. because it
is not usual for an Author in the same place, to use the same phrase in two so
different senses; and I have showed the most usual and probable sense is,
fervently; and therefore Mr. Cl. must not build a new Notion, upon his new and
false Exposition. As to the Examiner, he would make that sense necessary by a
Case which he refers to me to decide, viz. Whether a Minister using a
prescribed Form with all the fervency he can, may be said to pray as well as he
is able, if he think he can represent his Resentments better by his own
Expressions? Which Case I thus resolve; If the Form he use be our Liturgy, and
he goes on still to use it, notwithstanding the spirit of Pride suggests to him
great things of his own abilities, He prays better than he is able to do on the
sudden, in his own Expressions: And I cannot believe any considering man of
tolerable modesty, will say, that he is able to express the wants of a public
Congregation better (especially without study) than they are expressed in our
acurate Forms, drawn up by so many learned and pious Men, with great care and
judgment, wherein all ordinary cases are provided for, and to which (when
public Affairs require it) New occasional Forms are added in better
Expressions, than most of us can put together by study and our utmost care: He
therefore who prays fervently by such Forms, certainly prays as well as he is
able.

Thirdly, He advises me, to look over my Quotations again, and see whether
they mean no more than vigorous affections: Which is a fine way of covering his
ill success in examining them. He never slips any advantage; and from his
silence I may conclude, he found none here; wherefore my proofs for this Sense
stand good, till he offer something to invalidate them.

Page 23. A further proof, that (...) relates only to the Affections, is,
because it is frequently applied to praises, which I have proved, generally
were in Forms. And I justly taxed Mr. Cl. for applying the phrase only to
Prayers, since in this and another place of Justin, it chiefly, if not only
relates to the Hymns, etc. Mr. S. B. falsely cites my words, as if I said, It
only related to the Hymns, etc. whereas I do think it relates to Prayers, but
not only nor chiefly to them; because in the former place of Justin M. p. 60.
it is joined to (...), praising God as well as we are able, and in the latter
place, page 98. it immediately follows (...), offering praises as well as we
are able: And so it does also in three of those four places which I produced,
page 36, 37. Wherefore (...), being so often applied to Praises, and chiefly
relating to them, in these two places of Justin M. and they being for the most
part in prescribed Forms, it must signify something which is proper to those
who praise God by a Form, that is (not making new Expressions, but) fervency:
But if he will have it in Justin M. equally relate to Prayers, it is certain
the Prayers and Praises were both alike, for he says, (...), etc. page 98. He
offers up Prayers, and in like manner Thanksgivings, etc. So that if the
Praises were Forms, the Prayers were so also. Now the Hymns at the Eucharist
were one sort of praises, instituted by Christ, and surely not omitted by this
pure Age, so near their first appointment; and these must be Forms; yet these
among other Praises were offered up ((...)) Fervently, but not with new
Expressions. He objects, There are other ways of praising God besides Hymns: I
grant it; but still the Hymns, which were not invented by the President, were
offered up according to his ability, that is, as fervently as he was able. I
grant also, there was a large Thanksgiving used at the Eucharist, but this was
reduced to a written Form, when the Apostolical Constitutions were writ; and
the Form was so old then, that it was pretended to be made by the Apostles, and
so might be a Form in Justin's time. As to his Objection, That Justin speaks of
no audible concurrence of the people in these Offices, but only by saying,
Amen. I reply, Suppose he did not, yet a Negative Argument from the silence of
one Author, is like an induction of one particular, it proves nothing; since
other Writers of this Age do testify, that the Praises were made by Forms: And
yet I have showed from the former place of Justin Martyr, page 60. (in my 35th
page) That the whole Congregation of Christian people did praise God in their
Oblations ((...)) as well as they were able: Therefore that Phrase does
signify something that the People can do as well as the Priest, which is
praising God fervently, and not by new Expressions.

Page 24. And this leads me to my next Argument, why this Phrase must not be
interpreted of new Expressions, but Fervency: because in the parallel place of
Justin, in Ecclesiasticus xliii. 30. in two places of Origin, and one of
Nazianzen, ((...)) or something of the same import is applied to the People,
who (as my Adversaries grant) are not allowed in public to pray or praise God
in expressions of their own. Mr. S. B. drops all the proofs of this (according
to his usual way) and not being able solidly to answer the Argument, he runs
out into his old excursion, That the dispute is about him that officiates, and
to talk of the Ministers and Peoples distinct Duties in public. This I answered
before, upon page 11th, and am not at leisure to repeat so often as he sees fit
to say the same things; therefore I will only say here, That Mr. Cl. and S. B.
expound (...) in a sense which makes it impossible to be applied to the People,
and which makes it improper to be said of any but him that officiates, that is,
they make it signify making the best new Expressions he was able; which
signification I do sufficiently disprove, when I show that in Justin and other
Authors, this phrase is attributed to the whole Congregation, and therefore it
must signify something which the people do, as well as the Priest, that is, it
must signify Fervency, and refer to the affections, not to the invention of
new words and phrases. As for Mr. Cl's numerous Quotations I answered all that
related to Prayers and Praises in public; but did not think fit to trouble the
Reader or my self, to answer his Instances, where this or a like Phrase was
applied to other Subjects, such as Writing, Preaching, or private Devotion, as
those of S. Chrysostom, p. 119. and S. Basil, p. 120. And I think it not very
modest in him (who has scarce answered one of my collateral proofs) to triumph
over me for omitting such Quotations as were not to the purpose; in the mean
time, I hope I have satisfied all that are unprejudiced, that (...), when it is
applied to public Offices, signifies Fervently, and that it can be no
foundation for arbitrary, and extempore praying and praising God, especially
when they have nothing in this Age, but this and another phrase to support so
odd an Exposition.

. 3. page 25. I cited (...). World without end, out of Irenaeus, to prove they
had Hymns then in Form, and supposed this was the conclusion of the Gloria
Patri. Mr. S. B. understands not how this was a stinted Liturgy. Very right!
But he knows I brought it not to prove a whole Liturgy, but limited it for a
proof of one Hymn; and therefore he is unjust, to put in more into the
Conclusion than I did, and from thence to invalidate my Argument. Upon which
occasion I would ask three Questions: First, Whether he or Mr. Cl. have brought
so express a proof as this, that any single part of the Service was Extempore?
Secondly, Whether the proof of any one Primitive Form, known and used so early
(as this which is mentioned also in Clem. ep. ad Cor. page 98, and 104.) does
not prove it ancient and lawful to use prescribed Words in public Worship?
Thirdly, What reason can be given, why other parts of the Service might not be
in Form, as well as this? But still Mr. S. B. cannot apprehend how this proves
the Gloria Patri, unless no Doxology but that can end with these words. His
Apprehension would have been quicker, if this had been a seeming proof of Mr.
Cl's side; but let it be considered by unbiassed persons, That if these words
be the conclusion of any other Form, it serves my purpose as well, as if they
concluded the Gloria Patri: And it is evident they were the certain and
constant Conclusion of some Form, because the Heretics urge them, and the
Orthodox own them as usually said in their Eucharist. They could not have
charged, nor would these have confessed an uncertain arbitrary phrase; nor
could Clemens, Irenaeus, and Tertullian have agreed in it, if some of them
sometimes only had used it? And since we can prove, the Gloria Patri to be an
Hymn as early as this Age, and Tertullian notes, that these words, World
without end, were then (as they also are now) repeated by the People; I hope it
is probable at least, that this was a part of the Gloria Patri. To conclude,
This way of Arguing is further from an imitation of the Heretics in Irenaeus,
(as he suggests) than his pretending my Evidence for one Form was intended to
prove a whole Liturgy is from mean Sophistry.

. 4. Page 26. When Clemens of Alexandria says, The Christians prayed as having
one common Voice, and one mind; Strom. 7. he plainly alludes to that of the
Apostle, Romans xv. 6. of Glorifying God with one mind and one mouth: Wherefore I
expounded Clemens, as Grotius does the Apostle, That One common Voice,
intimates, their joining Voices in responsory Forms; Mr. Cl. and Mr. S. B. will
have this One common Voice, to be that of the Minister, who speaks instead of
all the People; they mean in their New-fashioned Assemblies, where (contrary to
the Ancients) the Congregation is wholly silent, and make no Responses. But my
account is not only agreeable to Antiquity, where I have proved both by
Scripture and Fathers, alternate and responsory praises and prayers were used:
But also this very Phrase proves, That the People joined vocally in the public
Worship, which could not be without Forms. Thus the Isralites Promise, to keep
Gods Law, is expressed (Exodus xix. 3.) by their Saying this all together; and
Exodus xxiv. 3. They answered it with one voice. Baals Prophets did not choose
one Foreman to speak for them, when they all with one mouth prophesied good to
Ahab, 1 King. xxii. 35. Nor had the mutinous Ephesians one Spokesman, when they
cried out so long together with one voice, Act. xix. 34. but each man vocally
joined with the rest. Thus when the Singers, and those who played on Musical
Instruments, united their Notes to praise God, they are said to make One sound,
2 Chronicles. v. 13. or as the LXX read it, (...), They made one Voice -- (...),
etc. while they answered each other in singing, with one voice, their
confession and praise to God: And S. Basil expressly uses the phrase in this
Sense, where he says, (...). Basil. Epist. 63. They all in common, as with one
mouth and one heart, offer up the Psalm of Confession; every one making these
penitential Words to be his own. This Psalm probably was the LI, however
certainly it was a Form repeated vocally by Priest and People; and this is the
true Notion of a Common Prayer, and a Prayer with one Mouth. Having thus
justified my Exposition, I need not stand upon his petty Objections, viz. 1st
If the People answered, there would not be one, but two Voices. I Will grant, if
he please, sometimes there were Two thousand Voices; yet if they all repeated
the same Form, or all joined by Turns to carry on the same Commonservice (as in
responsory Prayers and alternate Hymns) it is very proper to say, All these
have one Voice, and glorify God with one Mouth. 2ly, He notes, That S. Paul
says expressly, With one Mouth, Romans xv. but Clemens' s words are, As it were
with one mouth or voice. I reply, The Father only designs to soften the
Apostles Expression, because when many vocally join in public Forms, they have
not strictly one Voice, but as it were one Voice. Yet we see the phrase of One
voice, is properly and often applied, to many joining in the same words: But
Clemens phrase, and S. Basils, As it were with one mouth, can never be properly
applied to the Extempore man, who is absolutely, and throughout, the only Mouth
of his silent Auditors.

Page 28. It is no fault in Mr. Cl. to have nothing but Conjectures for his
Opinion, in this and the following Ages; but he wonders I should insist upon
Conjectures. I gave diverse Reasons, why we must expect little more than
probable Proofs in this time; and supported my Conjectures with Arguments. Mr.
S. B. touches not either the Reasons or Arguments, but censures my way of
proceeding: He does not deny that the Christians imitated the Jews in the Hours
of Prayer; and I have proved by many Authors, that they imitated them in
alternate Singing and Praying by Forms; so that though it be but a Conjecture
from Clemens attesting they used the Jewish Hours of Prayer, to infer a
probability of their imitating them in Forms; yet the thing is plainly proved
elsewhere, and so he ought not to expose this Notion, as all over Conjecture,
and one Doctor's Opinion, especially since he cannot confute it, but by saying,
If the Christians of that Age were of another Opinion, what becomes of my
Argument? I am sure this is mere Conjecture: Let him bring as many Proofs, that
these early Christians were for Extempore prayers and praises, as I have done
for Forms, and then he shall have leave sometimes to suppose it; till then his
[if] is an evasion, no answer. As to the place I alleged out of Clemens, which
shows the Method of the Christians Prayers, and the main things they prayed
for; He is right as to the Quotation, but mistaken in saying, I applied it to
public Prayer; neither I nor Clemens limited it either to public or private
Prayer: If he please, I will suppose this place refers to private Prayers; and
then I must ask, how Clemens could know so well, and so exactly describe the
method and matter of men's private Prayers, if they were not in Forms? and if
they used Forms in private, it is more than probable they used them in public
also. Mr. S. B. concludes with diverting his Friend, By my dextrous device (as
he calls it) of men's looking up to Heaven, while they use the Common Prayer.
Now in this there is no device at all, it is plain matter of Fact, which I have
done and seen a Thousand times, it being as common for such as prayed by our
Liturgy, to look frequently up to Heaven in imitation of the primitive
Christians, as it is for Mr. S. B's Friends to wink, when they pray Extempore;
and if he could prove they looked up to Heaven, while their Eyes were shut,
that would be a dextrous device indeed.

. 5. Page 30. Tertullian is my next Witness; and he first, speaking of the
Lords Prayer, calls it, A new Form of Prayer which Christ had given his
Disciples; which Mr. Cl. did not deny: But the Conformist (to show himself a
greater Enemy to Forms than Mr. Cl.) boldly asserts, that Tertullian means by
Novam formam, only A new direction how to perform the Duty of Prayer: But his
manifest perverting that Fathers Sense, appears by considering, That in this
Tract Tertullian is expounding the very words of Christ's Form; and immediately
after he had described it by the new Form he gave to his Disciples, he
parallels it with, and prefers it before the Form which John taught his
Scholars: And does he think, John's was only a Directory? Did not Christ and S.
John both teach their Disciples a Form? yea, does not Tertullian there observe,
that the very words of our Saviors Prayer were extant, but John's were not?
Nothing can be plainer, than that he means the Lords Prayer by this New Form,
and that the Christians then used it as a Form; for he introduces the words to
be expounded thus, We say, Our Father, etc. we request, his Name may be
hallowed -- not saying, let it be hallowed in us (they varied not a word): Then
he also says, We add, Let thy Will be done, etc. And after his Comment is
finished, which so fully declares they used those very words, he is as clear,
that they joined it to their other Prayers; for he observes, Christ allows us
to ask other things, after he had premised the legal and ordinary Prayer as a
foundation: This is the Lords Prayer, which Christ's Law enjoins, and Christians
ordinarily or daily used, making that the Foundation on which they built up
their other Requests in their Liturgies, and it is most likely the
Superstructure was suitable to the Foundation, that is, a Form at least. I
confess, Tertullian does by way of Preface, before he expounds the Form, and as
a conclusion after it, touch upon some Passages in Math. VI concerning the
manner of using this Form; but the new Form, the legitimate and ordinary
Prayer, which they said daily, signify the Lords Prayer it self; and so may
those phrases also, viz. Orandi disciplina, and ordinata religio Orationis; yet
if he will expound them of the Directions about Prayer, it will not hurt my
Cause, since there is sufficient evidence, that the Lords Prayer was called a
Form, and used as such in Tertullian's time.

Page 31. I next observed Tertullian's Saying, The Christians set upon God in
prayer with a grateful violence (quasi manu facta), as if they were drawn up to
battle; and inferred from thence, That it seems to intimate their use of Forms.
Mr. S. B. is confident the phrase implies no more, than joining in heart with
him that officiates. I reply, Manus conserere in Ovid, is to join battle,
wherein all hands are employed; and if the phrase be applied to Prayer, it
notes every ones bearing a part in his own rank. No man can properly say, the
two Armies of Israelites and Philistines joined battle, when they stood looking
on their Champions, David and Goliath though they joined in heart with them, and
each party wished success to their own Friend: And when Tertullian describes
the Christians going in a Body to their Persecutors, and every one of them
declaring he would die for his Religion, they are said to go, quasi manu facta;
ad Scap. cap. ult. Wherefore this phrase imports vocal joining in prayers.
Again, it may pass as a probable proof of an African Litany, that Tertullian
appeals to the Petitions usually made for the Emperors safety, and the good of
the State, to prove the Christians Loyalty: For various and arbitrary
Expressions, daily differing, are no good evidence: And though Tertullian
writing to Infidels, might not use the very words, yet he comes so near the
Petitions on the like occasion, found in ancient Liturgies (one of which was so
old, An. 360. (viz. that in the Constitutions) as to challenge an Apostolical
Original) that it is probable enough there was an African Form in this Age, to
which Tertullian alludes.

Page 32. The passage out of Tert. de anima, cap. 9. was that, where he calls
the celebration of the Eucharist, Dominica Solennia; Mr. Cl. denies that these
words intimate the Office was performed by a Form. I thought I had sufficiently
answered him, by proving that the Latins used, Solennes preces, for invariable
Forms, as Brissonius tells us, whose learned Commentary of the Romans solemn
Forms, declare he was a very fit Judge of the import of this word. Mr. S. B.
gives no reply to this, but falsely asserts; That I said not one word to Mr. Cl'
s vindication of this place; whereas I said more to it page 44. than he can
answer; yet I shall now add, that though Scripture was read, Psalms sung,
Sermons made, and Petitions delegated, in the Assembly where the Christians
met, yet the Virgin spoke of in Tertullian, only took the matter of her Visions
from thence; but her Raptures were after these were done, inter Dominica
solennia, At the Feast of our Lord, the Eucharist, the last of all the public
Offices, after which always followed, the dismission of the People, as
Tertullian here tells us, Transacta solennia dimissa plebe: So that Mr. Cl. is
mistaken in applying Dominica solennia to the Reading, Singing, and other
Offices which went before: For these words only denote the Eucharist, as they
do also in S. Cyprian, who uses Solennibus adimpletis, for the Solemn prayer
of Consecration. And I must note further, that Tertullian often uses Solennia,
for Festivals of all sorts; Pagan, Apol. c. 35. ad ux. l. 2. c. 6. Jewish, ad
ux. cap. 4. and Christian, de Idol. cap. 14. and so it is properly enough
applied to the great Christian Feast of the Lords Supper: But the reason why
Solennia is used for Festivals; seems to be, because the time and solemn Rites
of them were all prescribed, and from thence Solemn prayers, or Verses, came to
signify, stated, fixed, and prescribed Forms, according to Brissonius:
Wherefore Solennia, both in Tertullian and S. Cyprian do import the use of
solemn and prescribed words in the solemn Feast of the Lords Supper: And it is
plain from Tertullian, they used the Form prescribed by Christ himself in
Baptism, the other Sacrament, as appears by Mr. Cl. who cites these words of
Tertullian, de Bap. cap. 13. in his Disc. of Lit. page 94. to prove the
ancients thought, the Form of Baptizing was prescribed by Divine Authority; but
Mr. S. B. outfaces Tertullian, and Mr. Cl. as well as me, and affirms, that
forma praescripta does not signify a prescribed Form, but only the manner in
which Baptism is to be administered. Let the Reader consult the place, and he
will be amazed to see this Father so wilfully perverted to serve a Turn: For
Tertullian sets down the words of the Form, viz. In the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, cites the Gospel and says, this Form is prescribed
there. Yet his Exposition is not more false, than his Inference is
disingenuous: He knows I brought this only to prove, one part of the Liturgy
was a Form; yet he bids his Friend try his faculty, if he can draw a conclusion
from hence, for the use of such a Liturgy as we are discoursing of. This is the
old Cramben bis coctam, the dull Fallacy so often used before: It Is plain,
Liturgies consist of diverse parts, and some of my Proofs show the Prayers, some
the Praises, some the Sacramental Administrations were in Forms; every one of
these Proofs are fit to be inserted in a History of Liturgy, although the
general conclusion does not arise from that single proof, but from an induction
of all the particulars: So that if he, or his Friend, will be trying their
Faculties, they may do it by showing, That all my Proofs put together, do not
make out a prescribed Liturgy; or, that a proof brought for one part, does not
make out that part was a Form.

Page 33. I cannot wonder that he who can deny, that Forma praescripta, is a
prescribed Form, should say, that my Instance out of Tert. ad ux. l. 2. is not
to our present purpose, because it only concerns Singing: But are not Psalms
and Hymns which are sung, one main part of Liturgy? he may as well affirm, that
to discourse of the Veins and Arteries, is nothing to the purpose of an
Anatomy-Lecture: The laudatory part was at least one half of the Service, and
that being alternate, was certainly in Forms; and the Prayers, will be thought
Forms also, till he can give a good reason, why one part of their Offices
should be different from the other, or why they might not pray as well as sing
by Forms: But he says, This passage relates to Singing in the Family. Suppose
it do, yet if the Husband and Wife sang alternately, that is, by a Form; it is
very likely they did sing by Forms in public, where so many were to join in the
same Psalm or Hymn, that the words must be known before. He is in too much
haste for an Examiner, otherwise he would not have asked, how ((...)) comes to
be a proof of Liturgies, (he should have said, of one Form of Praise) If he
will stay for my answer, I will tell him: Tertullian proves, That Christians
must not go to Pagan shows, because of the indecency of using the same words
and actions, in a vain Theater, and at the Church; to clap those hands to a
Stage Player, which had been lifted up to God in prayer; to give testimony to a
Gladiator with that mouth, which had pronounced Amen in the Sacrament; to say
World without end [(...), so it is in the best Copies] de spect. p. 83. Here is
a plain comparison between Words and Actions to be used in the Church, and in
the Theater, by persons who went to both places; they clapped and lifted up the
same hands, they shouted and said Amen with the same mouth, to very different
objects, and on occasions that did no way agree. In the Theater they said, in a
solemn Form of acclamation, World without end, to a mortal, yea, to a wicked
man, that is, to Commodus the Emperor; (for Xiphiline notes, the Romans a
little before this had used those words in a solemn Exclamation to Commodus,
Epist. Dion. in Com. p. 383.) But in the Church, these very words were in a
Form of praise to God and Christ (as out of Irenaeus and Clemens Romanus I
noted before) wherefore it would be little less than Blasphemy, to apply the
words of a Christian Hymn, proper to an Eternal Being, unto a lewd mortal Man.
Thus Tertullian argues, and if his Comparison be truly made, as it was a Form
used by all the people at the Theater; so it must be in some Form which the
People repeated at Church, that is, probably in the Gloria Patri, because it
still stands in that part of this Hymn which the People say; but it serves my
purpose as well (since it must be a Form said by the People) as if it were the
end of any other Hymn. But he wonders that the Africans, who belonged to the
Latin Church, should say the Gloria Patri in Greek: Whereas it does not follow
from Tertullian, that they said it in Greek; his Argument is as good if they
had said it in Latin: Only the Romans used many solemn Forms in Greek both in
their Theaters and their Temples, and Xiphiline sets down this in Greek; so
that probably Tertullian refers to that passage in the Historian, and only
means it was used in Greek in the Theater. He might also read it in Greek in
Clemens Romanus, and in Irenaeus, and so cite it in Greek; but that will no
more prove the African Service was in Greek, than that the Roman or Gallican
Churches used to say it in Greek, in Clemens or Irenaeus times. Only from this
and many other Greek words left uninterpreted in Tertullian, and other African
Fathers, we may be sure the African People knew some Greek, especially short
and common Forms and Phrases.

Page 34. Mr. Cl. had produced three places of Tertullian, to justify the
Extempore way; all which I answered. For the two first, Mr. S. B. refers the
Reader to Mr. Cl. because I said so little concerning them; though I said so
much indeed, that he is not able to answer it; nor clear Mr. Cl. who is
evidently mistaken in referring, that Singing, which was used after the
Love-feast, to the Christians public Devotions. It Is known, that they were
always fasting till after their Morning solemn Service, of which this Singing
could be no part, because it was after the Common Meal: Secondly, I showed
there is nothing in Tertullian which hinders us from believing, that the Hymns
made de proprio ingenio, were composed at home; and if so, then they were
Forms, as well as those taken out of Scripture: Thirdly, The use of private
Composures in an Inspired Age, will not justify the use of them now. As to the
second place, I proved expressly out of Tertullian and S. Cyprian, that the
Christians did often look down in Prayer, and so showed Mr. Cl. was mistaken,
when from their constant looking up to Heaven in prayer, he argued they used no
Books to pray by: Which I think is as full an Answer to Mr. Cl. as can be
desired; And the true Reason why Mr. S. B. does examine nothing of all this,
is, because he could find no evasion.

Page 35. But Mr. Cl's main proof for Extempore Prayer, is, Thirdly, from
Tertullian's saying, they prayed de pectore; which phrase I showed in four
pages, was capable of several more proper Interpretations. Mr. S. B. replies
not to any of these Proofs; but diverts his Reader, by telling him what he
conceives and apprehends to be Tertullian's meaning: First, He resets to a
place of S. Paul, 1 Timothy ii. 8. where though the Apostles first words, Lifting
up holy hands, may explain Manibus expansis, etc. yet how, without wrath and
doubting, should expound Tertullian's praying, Bare-head, and without a
Monitor, I cannot imagine. Secondly, He would explain this place, by another in
the same Author a few Lines after, which speaks of a Prayer proceeding from a
chaste Body, an innocent Soal, and from the Holy Spirit: Yet here again, a
chaste Body and an innocent Soul, does not explain praying with Lifted-up
hands, and a Bare-head; and none but the worst of Enthusiasts will pretend,
that a Prayer out of our own Breast, is the same with one proceeding from the
Holy Spirit. Besides, if his bad Edition do not mislead him, he is much to
blame in reading and pointing this place; -- majorem hostiam, quam ipse
mandavit, orationem de carne pudica, etc. which makes the sense or nonsense to
lie, that the good Christian offers a greater Sacrifice than God has commanded
-- But the true reading is, Ei offero opimam and majorem hostiam, quam ipse
mandavit orationem, de carne pudica, de anima innocenti, de Spiritu Sancto
profectam, Apol c. 30. He speaks here of the Lords Prayer, the very same Prayer
which Christ commanded, which was a greater and better Sacrifice than any that
the Heathen offered, when it was offered up with a chaste Body, a holy Soul,
and those devout affections which are excited by the holy Ghost. Now let him
try his faculty, how the purity, innocence, and devotion of Christians saying
the Lords Prayer (a Form, commanded by Christ) can prove, that praying out of
the breast (in praying for the Emperors in the former place) signifies Praying
extempore, as he and Mr. Cl. pretend. I will only add to my former Exposition
(that the Breast signifies the Memory) these Notes: A Monitor is properly to
help memory, but the Christians who could say their Forms by heart, or out of
their breast, needed no Monitor, as the Pagans did in reciting their Forms: So
of a person fixed in the Memory, Persius, Sat. 5. says -- sinuoso in pectore
fixi; And Socrates clearly uses Tertullian's Phrase in this sense, where he
says, Theodosius could repeat the Holy Scriptures [(...)] out of his Breast;
or as the Latin Version has it, Memoriter pronunciavit, He could repeat them
by Heart, or out of his Memory. When Mr. S. B. can bring so good Evidence, that
de pectore signifies Extempore, it will then be time enough, to say more to
that feigned Exposition; in the mean while I shall conclude, that this Phrase
is no ground for Extempore Prayer; no, not in this Second Century, wherein
there were miraculous Gifts, and probably that of Prayer.

The Third Century.
. 1. page 36. I Entered on this Age with the Reasons, why we could not expect
any full Evidence, of the very words used in their Liturgies during this
Period, Hist. Lit. p. 51, etc. Mr. S. B. passes by these three pages, because
it was not easy to confute this Account, and because the bare mention of my
declaring this, had spoiled his main Fallacy, of my undertaking to produce
express proof of a perfect Liturgy, invariably used in these early Times.

My first Author, Hippolitus, he confesses, he has never read; yet he
attempts to correct my Exposition of those words of the Martyr, When Antichrist
shall come, Liturgy shall be extinguished, Singing of Psalms shall cease, and
reading of Scripture shall not be heard; which he expounds as importing no more
than, that Antichrist would suppress the public pure Worship of God. But it
might have been more probable that was celebrated by a common Form, if I had
produced any proof before that (...) had born this sense I reply, I have proved
out of Clemens Romanus, that Liturgy is put for a prescribed Form of Divine
Service. Yet if this were the first Author who used the word in this sense, his
Testimony is not to be rejected, especially since there are good Reasons to
convince us, that (...) here does signify a Form of public Prayer: For though
this word sometime signify the whole Service, yet here it is put for one
essential part of it. S. Aug. rightly divides the public Worship into three
parts, Prayer, Praise, and Reading Holy Scripture; de Civ. Dei, l. 2 c. 28. and
when Liturgy is joined with Psams and Readings it can signify nothing but
Prayer; and the use of the word, before and since, shows that Prayers were by a
prescribed Form, and the word (Extinguished) confirms this Sense; for written
Forms may be, and actually were extinguished by Persecutors, as I showed, Par.
2. page 217, etc. Mr. S. B. says, Antichrist may suppress the public exercise
of Ministers gifts, as well as the use of Forms. I reply, the word is not
[Suppress] but [Extinguish] which cannot be applied to Ministers gifts, for
they are not extinguished by a prohibition to use them; the Extempore man
retains his faculty, and for all the Prohibition, is ready on the sudden to
exercise it in any place: He adds, That he does not remember Antichrist has
showed any dislike of Forms. Now this it is to expound an Author he never fead:
Hippolitus's Notion of Antichrist is, That it should be a Jewish Deceiver, who
should labor to extinguish Christian Liturgy: But Mr. S. B. dreams all this
while of the Pope, who he thinks the only Antichrist, and so, poor man, guesses
at random and quite mistakes this Fathers meaning. Yet I can tell him of two
Emissaries of his Roman Antichrist, Comin and Heath, who first set up the
Extempore way in England, and were as professed Enemies to Forms, and to our
Liturgy, as any of our Dissenters are at this day; See Foxes and Firebrands,
page 7, and 17.

. 2. page 37. My first proof out of Origin is so plain, that it convinced the
learned Centuriators, That set-Forms were certainly used in his time: The
Examiner intimates, That the Conviction of these Learned men is nothing to the
matter in debate, but whether it be a substantial proof. Very modest! But I
pray, whether are these Historians, who had read and digested all the Records
of that Age, or Mr. S. B. and his Friend, fitter Judges what is a substantial
proof? And what have Mr. Cl. and the Examiner, to prove it no solid Proof? They
both suggest (without any Evidence) That this Passage might be added by
Origen's Translators, because these Homilies are in Latin only. But still this
is but a possibility, and the contrary (as I showed) is more probable, because
the Matter of the Prayer is pure and grounded on Scripture, being more suitable
to Origen's own Time and Notions, than to the Age and Opinions of his
Translators, one of the latest of which (as I noted) was ^uifinus, and if he
had put in this Form of Prayer, it had proved the use of Forms long before Mr.
Cl's fixed Period. And here I must note the disingenuity of Mr. Clarkson, who
frequently cites places out of these Latin Homilies as good Evidence on his
side, Disc. of Lit. p. 56, 105, 121, and 140; but when we cite them against
him, he flies to this poor refuge, of Supposing this might be added by the
Translators: But it will be always a rule in Equity, That the Witness we
produce for us, is good Evidence against us, and Mr. S. B. will get no credit
by vamping up this baffled Objection; nor by Mr. Cl's other weak pretense, That
this Passage imports no more, than the preferring one or two Petitions in the
same words, which is common with them that pray Extempore: For Origen's words
are not, We do ordinarily pray (as he falsely translates them, page 39.) nor, We
say sometimes, or to this effect; but, We frequently say in the Prayer (which
is Origen's phrase when he cites any thing out of the Liturgy, as I shall show
on page 41.) and then he sets down the very Form, O Almighty God, grant us a
part with the Prophets, etc. wherefore this was a known Form of prayer
frequently used by the People, and that made it so necessary for Origin to
expound it to them. Besides, Mr. S. B. p. 39. says, The People used frequently
to say, Lord, give us a part, etc. Now, I would know, Whether they prayed
Extempore in public? He formerly affirms they were not called to this; yet here
being pinched, he contradicts himself, and will have these words which the
People used, to imply no more than what may be done by those who pray
Extempore. As for his pretense, That the People said these words in the time of
the Discourses or Homily, that contradicts Origin, who affirms, It was said in
the Prayer -- therefore not in the Sermon. Finally, Mr. S. B. says, If the
matter be well enquired into, Origen's Explication is a reproof of the Prayer
it self, and it may be questioned, whether we may pray for what he says those
Petitions import. And why did not the Examiner ex officio enquire well into it,
especially since I had proved the Prayer was Orthodox? Again, If Origin reprove
the Prayer it self, then it was a Prayer in Origen's time, and not added by his
Translators: But if Mr. S. B. dislike Origen's Explication of this Prayer,
because he thinks it imports a desire to suffer as the Prophets did; it is a
sign he knows little of Origin, who thirsted earnestly after Martyrdom, and so
was likely enough to give it this Sense; and it is nothing to my purpose,
whether that be the true sense or no, since I have sufficiently proved it was a
known Form of Prayer.

Page 40. I had proved by Scripture, and other Authors, that [(...)] in Origin,
lib 6. in Cells. signifies, Prescribed Forms of Prayer. Mr. S. B. without
examining my Evidence pronounces Sentence, viz. that it means no more than
praying according to the Rules God has given for performing this Duty; for
that is to be the meaning (right or wrong) of any Phrase that seems to
countenance Forms: But he runs into that mistake which I had noted in Mr. Cl.
that is, he considers not, that Origin is not speaking of the manner of
praying, but of the Prayers themselves, They used prescribed or enjoined
Prayers. At last he dreams of a Directory in Origen's days, which he calls, an
Order for the method of performing Prayer without prescribing the words; but if
he impartially examine my Instances, he will find they signify more than so;
and I add now, that (...), (a word of the same import) Luke I. 1. signifies to
write down an History, and not barely to contrive a method by which others
might compose it, in their own words. As to the last words of this Quotation,
That such as use these enjoined Prayers, cannot be overcome by Magicians or
Devils, Mr. Cl. left them out as well as I (Disc. of Lit. p. 140.) both of us
judging them nothing to our Question, which is not about the effect of these
Prayers, but about their being Forms: And now, how scandalous is Mr. S. B's
partiality? If it be a fault to omit them, why are we not both blamed; if it be
none, why does he blame me? I perceive he fancies, the Devil is more afraid of
an Extempore Prayer, than a Form: But he forgets that Christ put, Lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil, into his Form, to secure us against
the Devil and his Instruments. The Devil has often been afraid of our Lords
Form; but that he dreads not an Extempore Prayer, appears from Conjurers and
Witches, who actually dealt with the Devil, and yet were admired for this kind
of praying (Hist. Lit. par. 2. page 278.) Finally, He that is so unhappy in
expounding Origen's Writings, is very unfit to tell us what he thought; he
himself admires Extempore Prayer, and thence concludes, Origin doted on it
also; but the Centuriaters (who knew Origen's Sense better than he or Mr. Cl.)
declare expressly, there were Forms in Origen's time.

Lastly, The full proof I brought, that Mr. Cl. was grossly mistaken in
pretending, that Origin cited those passages out of the Psalter, which he
brings in with this Preface, We find -- we say -- in the Prayer (as he did the
Collect, page 37.) would have silenced any man but Mr. S. B. who takes no
notice, that I proved Origin cited many other passages out of the Psalms
directly, without this Preface; that these were Sentences proper for Liturgies;
and that the Offices at Alexandria (well known to Origin) were taken chiefly
out of the Psalms: And though he can make no reply to this Evidence, that he
may not seem wholly silent, he First flies to his old shift, and calls for an
antecedent proof of Liturgies. Now, had I brought none before, the citing whole
Sentences as known and certain parts of a Liturgy commonly used, is a good
proof if it were the first: But I have brought diverse before, which want
nothing to make them authentic, but his allowance, which he resolves never to
grant, and then hopes he is safe. Secondly, When he had stated the case wrong,
and kept all that makes for me, secret; he appeals to his partial and
misinformed Friend: But if that Friend will consider, that Origin does cite
many passages out of the Psalter, and other places (which are also in the
Psalter) expressly out of the Prayer, and refers to known words said and used in
Prayer; he shall then have liberty to judge, whether there were not diverse
Forms taken out of the Psalms, and used in the Prayers, to which Origin does
refer in plain words. There is another clear confutation of Mr. Cl's Exposition
of Origen's Homily on Numb. xi. and a further confirmation of my Opinion, that
(...) signifies no more than Fervently, page 63, and 64. both which Mr. S. B.
passes over in silence.

. 3. page 41, etc. That there were Forms of Prayer used in S. Cyprian's time, I
inferred first from his allowing the use of the Lords Prayer as a Form, and his
owning the repeating of the very words of it. The Examiner first says, If this
be supposed, it will not amount to a proof of Liturgies in our Sense. I answer,
If he grant this, it proves praying by a Form lawful and ancient, instituted by
Christ, and continued to be used in public; yea, repeated by the People among
the primitive Christians; it proves one main part of the public Service was an
invariable Form, and such a part as was to be the pattern of all other prayers,
which must be Forms also, if they exactly imitated this Divine Exemplar; the
prospect of which Consequences make Mr. S. B. fly off again from his
concession, and labor for two whole pages to prove, that S. Cyprian does not
intimate the use of those words, but only, our following the directions which
Christ had given for the manner of performing the duty of Prayer. But the bare
reading the Father, not only confutes, but exposes this poor Evasion: He is
about to explain this Form, and first says, Christ gave us a Form of Prayer --
and explains himself presently thus -- ut dum prece and oratione quam filius
docuit apud patrem Loquimur, facilius audiamur. Where we see the Form, is those
very words which Christ taught, and which we speak to his Father; and Mr. S. B.
fallaciously leaves out [loquimur] the main word in the Sentence, importing our
repeating the very words, on purpose to impose upon his Reader -- S. Cyprian
adds -- This is the most spiritual and true Prayer, which was pronounced by his
mouth -- for when Christ's Prayer ascends to Gods ears, the Father will own the
Sons words -- He says also, When we ask forgiveness we pronounce the words of
our Advocate, and not only ask in his Name, but by his own Prayer. Can any man
now doubt that Forma orandi, here signifies the words of our Lords Prayer? or
deny Cyprian's commending the use of that Form? Let us apply the aforesaid
passages to his Notion of Directions and Instructions, and see how ridiculous
it will appear; Do we speak or say over Christ's directions about the manner of
praying to the Father, that we may be heard more easily? are those
Instructions, that spiritual and true Prayer pronounced by Christ's mouth? are
they Christ's prayer which ascends to his Fathers ears, and are owned by him as
his Sons words when we pray? is our following his Instructions asking
forgiveness in his own words, and by his own Prayer? Alas! to what absurdities
has his Resolution, to defend an ill cause, reduced him! It Is true, S. Cyprian
digresseth a little (as Tertullian had done) to explain the directions which
our Lord gave about the manner of praying; but he soon returns to the Form it
self, repeating it verbatim; and as he explains every single Petition,
affirming, that the Christians said so and so in their Prayers. And it is clear
from him, that they both used this Prayer, and others formed by this pattern;
wherefore aliter orare, praying otherwise (in S. Cyprian) which he so severely
censures, cannot be designed to condemn those Churches who framed other Forms
by this pattern, and always used this Form for one, as our Church has done; it
is levelled at those who either wholly omit the Lords Prayer, or in their
arbitrary Composures take no care to suit them to this Heavenly pattern, of
both which some Dissenters are guilty: He concludes with observing, that I
noted Origen's phrase of using Prayers, imported, they were composed by others;
and he wonders what I would note upon Cyprian's phrase of making Prayers: And I
have a Note upon that which will not please him, viz. That S. Cyprian says, a
Man makes his Prayer, when he uses the very words of the Lords Prayer, the Form
of Christ's making: And if Mr. S. B. would infer from hence, That they prayed
extempore or arbitrarily, he cannot draw that conclusion from S. Cyprian, where
he that prays by a Form, is said precem facere, to make a Prayer: So that using
Prayers in Origin, plainly supposes them made. beforehand; but making Prayers,
here, do not at all suppose them to be Extempore, nor can they infer that from
the words of S. Paul who would have prayers, etc. to be made for all men, 1 Timothy ii. 1.

Page 44. I brought that passage in S. Cyprian, Publica est nobis, and communis
oration, to prove, that the Congregation vocally joined with the Priest in
prayers, which does suppose a Set Form. Mr. S. B. says, Common Prayer
signifies no more, than that we must pray for all People. Now S. Cyprian indeed
does make this one sense of Common Prayer, as appears by the words he cites;
but then the Father goes on to show, that the Lords Prayer (for it is of that
he speaks) is a Common prayer, because it is said, as that of the Three
Children was, Who (says he) all agreed in their prayer, in voices as well as
in hearts, and sung their Hymn as it were with one mouth -- (note here the
meaning of that phrase) And so (says he) did the Apostles, who are said to
pray with one accord. Thus far S. Cyprian. Mr. S. B. wholly omits this sense of
a Common Prayer, and which is worse, denies that this is any meaning of it: But
let it be considered, that the people then vocally repeated the Lords Prayer
(the Common Prayer here spoken of) and let it be remembered what I said about
(...), upon page 20. and then I hope it will be granted this is one sense of a
Common Prayer, that is, a Form in which Priest and People may vocally join.
Yea, this seems the only sense in the second Quotation which I cited, Cypr. ad
Cler. and Pleb. ep. 8. We must pray for all -- as the Lord taught there where
he enjoined, not every one a single Prayer, but commanded us to pray for all
men with a Common Prayer in which all agree. For here S. Cyprian says, The
Lords Prayer was a Prayer for all Men; and then adds, it was a Common Prayer.
Now this would be a tautology, If the only sense of a Common Prayer, were a
Prayer for all Men; this had been as if he had said, We must pray for all men,
in a Prayer for all men; if that were all, S. Cyprian might have left out Orare
pro omnibus, or communi prece; but his using both these phrases shows not only,
that the subject of the Lords Prayer was general for all men; but the way of
using it, was by the peoples joining with the Priest, and reciting it in
common. And if S. Cyprian believed Christ taught us to pray thus by vocal
joining in one common Form, then they who will have the Minister alone make all
the prayers Extempore, while the people silently sit by and hear, teach another
manner of praying than Christ taught.

Page 45. The Preface, Lift up your hearts, with the Response, We lift them up
unto the Lord, in Cypr. de orat.. 22. I still take to be a firm proof of the
use of alternate Forms in the public Service, and think it probable, he cited
them out of the Liturgy: A Versicle and Response is an alternate Form, and S.
Cyprian mentions it, as a thing known and daily used in public. The
Centuriators infer hence, That there were Forms in his time; and Goulartius (a
learned Protestant) in his Notes on the place, Owns it was a Form used of old
at the Eucharist, where it continued to be used in S. Augustin' s days; Goular.
not. in Cypr. p. 322. I might produce innumerable eminent Authors, who are of
the same Opinion; but Mr. S. B. says, He is not to enquire into the Inferences
which others make form this place, yea, he threatens me with Reflections, for
my observing them: Which minds me of that Saying of old Fabius, related by S.
Hierom, ad Pammach. ep. 26. It were happy for Arts, if none but Artists might
judge of them. However, his Reflections could not have hurt me in so good
Company; if he had vented them, they must have returned on his own head, for he
that despises such Evidence, brings both his learning and modesty into
question. Again, he retires to his old Fallacy, That I should first have proved
there was then a Liturgy, before I had supposed this passage was cited out of
it. I hope I have proved this to every body but Mr. S. B. who will not allow
any proof to be the first, and by that politic Supposition, hopes to persuade
such as take his word, there can be no second proof; but whatever become of my
former Evidence in his Opinion, I am sure there was one in this place which he
could not answer, viz. That this very Preface in so many words, is found in all
Liturgies of the African, Eastern, and Western Churches. To which I add now,
that S. Aug. says, All Mankind as with one voice used these words; de ver.
Rel. c. 3. And the Liturgies wherein these words are prescribed, must be elder
than S. Cyprian's time; for S. Aug. believed this Form came from the
Apostolical Age. S. Cyril (who explained this Form in S. James's Liturgy, not
above 70 year (according to S. Hierom) after Cyprian's time) tells us so early,
that he had this and other mystical Forms, from the Tradition of his Fathers.
The Author of the Constitutions (who writ, as I have showed in the middle of
the next Century) has also this Preface in the Eucharistical Office, which was
so old then, that it challenged an Apostolical Original. And since the Form was
so ancient, and not only in these Churches, but in those which followed the
Liturgies of S. Basil and S. Chrysostom; and in the West, the same words were
used, it is evident the Form must be so very old, that none presumed to alter
it: Let Mr. S. B. (before he despise this Evidence) give an instance of some
Extempore or arbitrary Prayer or Exhortation, wherein so many distant Churches
did so universally, or could so exactly agree; till then his Harangues about a
possibility of exhorting or praying in various words, is nothing to the
purpose: Nor is his Objection material, that Cyprian does not speak of it as
being used in the Eucharist: For he speaks of it; as used so often as the Priest
and people met at solemn Prayer, that is, daily; and he says,. 13. that they
then received the Eucharist every day; wherefore this Preface was used daily in
the Eucharist, where all the Liturgies, and where all the Fathers, Cyril,
Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, etc. expressly say it was used; yea, S.
Chrysostom reckons it up as one eminent part of the Liturgy, in Coloss. hom. 3.
Tom. 4. page 106. So that this Preface (which also gives name to the Lauds that
follow it) was a part of the Communion Office in Form, as early at least as S.
Cyprian's time, and we have proved the Lords Prayer was so also, which is a
good step toward a prescribed Liturgy, both these being always and invariably
used.

Page 46. The next Quotation, was not produced for a more evident proof of
Liturgies than the Preface, Lift up your hearts, etc. (as he fuggests) but to
show the agreement of the African and Greek Churches, in another Form, Give
holy things to the holy. The Examiner alters the main word on which my
Observation was grounded, and cites this place, Sanctum quoque jubeamur, etc.
but my Edition [(...)lart. Genev. 1593.] reads it, Sanctum quotidie jubeamur,
etc. which implies, there was a daily charge given to the Christians (who then
daily received the Eucharist) to give holy things only to the holy: And S.
Cyprian does not cite the Gospel (Math. vii. 6.) for the charge it self; but
only he shows, it was grounded on that piece of the Gospel, Give not that which
is holy to the Dogs: And I hope Mr. S. B. does not think this piece of the
Gospel was every day read to them; therefore S. Cyprian refers to a daily
charge in the Eucharistical Office in Africa, and there being the same charge
found in all the ancient Eastern Liturgies (as I showed) it shows an agreement
between the Greek and African Offices, which was the only thing to be proved,
and which proves Forms usedin both these ancient Churches.

Page 47. Again, I did not pretend to find a Christian Litany in the same
Tract, but the general heads of one, the words of which (as I noted) they
concealed from Pagans; but the resemblance between Tertullian's and Cyprian's
heads, and those in the Litanies, whose Original is so ancient, we cannot
positively assign it: This (I say) is at least a probable proof they were then
in Litanick Forms, especially if with S. Chrysostom we believe these Forms were
made at first by Inspired persons, preserved by some and imitated by following
Ages, with no more variation than must be occasioned by the difference of time
and distance of places. I grant, this is but probable Evidence; but in these
early times we must be content with such; and though Mr. S. B. can see no
strength in this way of arguing for Liturgies, yet he discerns a mighty
strength in Mr. Cl's most remote Conjectures for extempore Prayer. So he does
in that of Cyprian's Epistle to P. Lucius, wherein there is an account, that
they at Carthage prayed for Pope Lucius in his banishment, and this in their
Prayers and Sacrifices; whence Mr. Cl. infers, they were at liberty to put
up-any occasional Petition in the Eucharist, and so could not be confined to a
set Form. The weakness of which Inference I showed, by observing, 1st, That
these are not the Petitions put up for us by Lucius, but the general purport of
them described in a Letter. 2ly, That a constant liberty for inferior Ministers
in this Age when Inspiration is ceased (which is that Mr. Cl. would have) can
by no means follow from the Chief Primate of Africa's making a new Petition or
two, in the times while Inspiration continued. 3dly, Nor a daily liberty in
ordinary cases, be inferred from some variety on so extraordinary occasion, as
the exile of the chief Patriarch of the West: For if one of the most eminent
Bishops at Liberty in the late Reign, had put up one or two new Petitions for
his Seven Brethren in the Tower, none could infer from thence, that all our
Clergy were always at liberty to pray in what words they pleafed. As to Mr.
Cl's Note, That if this had been the African. Form for Confessors, Cyprian need
not have told Lucius of it: I replied, The distance between Rome and Africa was
so great, that Lucius might probably be ignorant of that Churches Forms; but
however this Letter is rather to acquaint Lucius they did pray for him, than to
give him an account of the very words. Mr. S. B. says very little to all this;
but with respect to my 2d Answer, he scoffingly reflects upon my supposing, a
Primate had more liberty than an inferior Clergyman, as if this liberty were
to be exercised only by such as could climb up to the top of Ecclesiastical
Dignity, and not in proportion to men's Gift. To which I shall only say, That
though there be some such as Mr. S. B. who have extraordinary Abilities, and
are not advanced (according to their merit) to be Governors of the Church; the
public Peace requires these Persons to forbear exercising these Abilities,
unless their Superiors command them; for even in the very Apostles Age God
himself ordered the spirit of the Prophets, to be subject to the Prophets, to
prevent confusion in the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. xiv. 32, 33. The like
proof for Extempore Prayer, is that our of Cypr. epist. ad Mos. and Max. which
is only the general account Cyprian gives these Confessors in a Letter of
prayers made for them; but there is no intimation the Petitions were Extempore:
So that they must either refer to the common Form for Confessors, or some Form
made by this great Primate on this great occasion; but a daily liberty for the
inferior Priests to vary then, does not follow from this place; and if all the
Priests in Cyprian's Diocese had made their own Forms for Moses and Maximus, or
had daily prayed for them in various phrases, it had been impossible for
Cyprian to pretend to set down in a Letter, what was the substance of those
many various prayers: So that whether it were the old Form, or a new one (such
as our Bishops make and send us on extraordinary occasions) it was a Form, and
that sufficiently confutes Mr. Cl. and secures the point in question. Indeed
Mr. Cl. had not cited this place at large in his Disc. of Lit. page 68. and I
thought he had referred to the beginning of that Epistle, where S. Cyprian
desires the prayers of Moses and Maximus; but Mr. S. B. has obliged me by
citing the true place at large, by which I perceive I was mistaken before; and
I shall freely own it, wishing he may follow my Example so often as I convince
him he was in an Error, and then our Controversy will soon be at end; and he
may see by this Reply now, that it was more difficult for me to find Mr. Cl's
Quotation than to answer it.

Page 50. Instead of repeating Mr. S. B's partial account of the dispute
between Mr. Cl. and me, about the liberty the ancients took to alter Christ's
own Form of Baptizing, I shall refer the Reader to my Hist. Lit. par. 2. page
247. where that matter is fully considered, and all Mr. Cl's pretended Evidence
disproved. As to the last place out of Cypr. ep. 73. ad Jub. Both Mr. Cl. and
Mr. S. B. cite it falsely and fraudulently: Mr. Cl. has it, Quomodo ergo quidam
dicunt -- modo in nomine Jesu Christi; etc. Mr. S. B. adds nothing but these
words -- foris extra Ecclesiam -- But the true reading (in Pamelius, in a later
Paris Edition, in Goulartius and the Oxford Edition) is, Quomodo ergo quidam
dicunt, for is extra Ecclesiam, ims contra Ecclesiam, modo in nomine Jesu
Christi, etc. So that Mr. Cl. leaves out all, and Mr. S. B. half the Character
of those persons, who said Baptism was valid if it were administered only in the
Name of Jesus Christ; they were such as were out of the Church, and against the
Church, that is, Schismatics and Heretics. Which being evident, I beg the
liberty to examine, First, Whether it were not fraudulent in both my
Adversaries to omit the Character of those men, by whose opinion and practice
they would prove an usage of the Church? 2ly, Whether they might not as well
prove the antiquity and lawfulness of Extempore Prayers, from the notions and
practice of Montanus and the Messalians? 3ly, Whether they believe the present
Church is obliged now to follow their Examples, who were out of the ancient
Church, and Enemies to it? When Mr. S. B. has considered well of these
Questions, I hope he will be satisfied that this place does not prove, that the
true Church then took liberty to vary Christ's Form, nor can any thing be
inferred from it, to justify the granting such liberty now.

. 4. Page 51. That clear instance of a Liturgy left to them of Naeocaesarea, by
Greg. Thaumaturgus, from which for a long time after they would not vary in a
Ceremony, a word, or a mystical Form, looks so like a proof of Forms invariably
used, that Mr. S. B. labors by all means to evade it; and, 1st, He pretends
this passage of not varying, etc. relates only to Doctrine. 2dly, He says, S.
Basil mentions not Gregory' s appointing a Form of Prayer for that Church. Both
which I shall disprove: For first this passage cannot refer to Gregory's
Doctrine (any further than that must be supposed agreeable to the Forms of
Worship he left behind him) because the things they would not vary from, nor
add to, were Actions, Words, and Mystical Forms. It Is true, if [(...)] had
stood single (as it does Ep. 75.) it might have been applied to Doctrins; but
what Actions or Mystical Forms are there in Articles of Faith? these can relate
to nothing but Divine Worship. Again, S. Basil says, Many things [(...)] in
their Administrations were now become defective by the antiquity of their
Institution; and yet they would not vary from them. Now let Mr. S. B. consider,
whether Gregory could institute any new Orthodox Doctrins? or whether true
Doctrins can ever become defective by their antiquity? and then he must confess
this Answer was a mere shuffle to cover a bad Cause; Doctrins can be instituted
by none but Christ and his Apostles, and are the better for being old; but a
Liturgy is capable of growing obsolete, and it is that of which S. Basil here
evidently and undeniably speaks, which answers his second Objection: For though
he do not use the very words, Liturgy, or Form of Prayer, yet he mentions
Administrations, and declares they would not add to them [(...)] not an Action,
a Word, nor a mystical Form: These are the main parts of a Liturgy, which
consists of Rubrics for Ceremonies, the words of ordinary Prayers and Praises,
and the mystical Forms of Administering the Holy Sacraments. Now if they added
nothing in any of these particulars to the Administrations he left them,
doubtless they made no new Extempore Prayers, nor varied at any time; therefore
they confined themselves invariably to what he had prescribed them, in
Ceremonies, Words, and mystical Forms; and these words of S. Basil evidently
suppose, he left them a Liturgy consisting of all these particulars prescribed.
Besides, (...) (had it stood alone) signifies a Form for the Mysteries, so very
clearly, that it would suffice to have proved the Sacraments were administered
by such a prescribed Form. When S. Luke writes down the very words of a Letter,
he says, it contained (...), Acts xxiii. 25. so Nazianzen (S. Basil's Friend)
calls Divine Offices [(...)] the prescribed Forms of the Church, which were
preserved; and Julian imitated these by making [(...)] a Form of Prayers; Naz.
orat. 3. p. 101, 102. Cedrenus, in the Life of the Emperor Zeno, calls the
Imperial Edict sent to Alexandria [(...)] a Form: And Zonaras informs us, that
the Fathers assembled in the Council of Trullo, call the Emperors Edicts
[(...)] the public, or political Forms; Can. 38. vid. Beveridg. Council. Tom. I.
p. 201, 202. In the Euchologion, the Priest is directed to do all things as he
is directed [(...)] in the Formularies; Euch. p. 11. And the learned Dr.
Duport, in his Greek Version of our Common Prayer, uses (...) in his
Title Page, and elsewhere, for our prescribed invariable Forms, of Ordination,
of Administering the Communion, of solemnizing Matrimony, etc. So that if these
Authors understood Greek, (...) signifies a prescribed Form for the Sacrament;
and S. Basil implies they had such an one, and would not make a new one, to be
added to their Liturgy. But further, Mr. S. B. does in effect grant they had
such a Liturgy; for he conceives (p. 52.) they strictly kept to that way and
method for their ordinary worship, and administering the Sacraments which were
in use in Gregory's time; and he owns, That S. Basil is here proving three
words of his Doxology (viz. with the Holy Spirit) by that which Gregory taught
them. Therefore that which S. Basil refers to, must be something more than an
arbitrary way and method, it must be something fixed and invariable, the words
of which, as well as the method, had never been altered since Gregory's time,
otherwise he could never have proved three words by appealing to this way of
Administration which Gregory left them. It was also a part of public Worship,
he would prove Orthodox, viz. a Doxology; and S. Basil says, Gregory and he
had the same manner of Doxology, as any man who would enquire, might easily be
satisfied out of the Traditions kept in that Church. Baside Sp. Sanct. cap. 29.
p. 221. So that, in that Church there were some known Traditions, which
preserved the very Form and words of Gregory's Doxology, to which he appeals;
and no doubt these Traditions were written Records, because they might so
easily be found upon search, and it is probable he means they were preserved in
their Liturgy: And it is certain, he could never have appealed thus, if at
Naecaesarea, they had only kept Gregory's method in their Administration, but
varied the words every day. Mr. S. B's last refuge, is to make S. Basil
contradict himself in another place of his Works, where he says, He gives a
very different account of these Naeocaesareans (viz. in his 63. Ep.) for when
they objected the difference between his way of Singing and Gregory's, he asks
them, By what testimonies they will make this difference evident, since they
had preserved nothing of Gregory' s until that time. But first, It will not
easily be believed that Mr. S. B. expounds S. Basil aright, when he makes one
place of his Works directly contradict another; Mr. S. B. will sooner be
suspected of a misrepresentation, than this excellent Father of a
contradiction. And 2dly, These two places may fairly be reconciled: The former
Quotation [lib. de Sp. Sanct. refers to a whole Liturgy; the latter [Ep. 63.]
relates only the different manner of Singing, which consisting chiefly in
sounds, could not properly be set down in any Rubric, but must be conveyed by
constant and invariable practice down from Gregory's Age; their Rubric might
direct the use of the Psalms, but not the particular manner of singing them. If
they allege, They sung them now exactly, as their Forefathers did in Gregory'
s time; he asks, How they can prove a practical thing (wherein their Rubric was
silent) to be the same it was so many years before? Doubtless no way, but by
making it appear they had varied from Gregory's practice in nothing; and here
S. Basil takes occasion to mind them (who were so zealous for their way of
singing) in how much greater matters of Piety and Morality, they had varied
from Gregory's practice: For he used reverent gestures in prayer; he would not
Swear, nor call his Brother Fool, etc. and these are things enjoined by Holy
Scripture: And while nothing of Gregory's Manners (in these considerable
Instances) was to be found among them, it was unreasonable in them to contend
with him for a mode of singing (not determined it seems in Gregory's Liturgy,
and so) only to be proved by their fancy, that it was in use in Gregory's days.
So that by this Rhetorical phrase, that nothing of Gregory' s was preserved, S.
Basil did not mean, nothing of his Doctrine, nor of his Liturgy; but of his
Usages and Manners in the greatest and best things, viz. his Practices,
grounded on Holy Scripture; and since the Manner of Singing was a practice
also, their failing in greater matters made it very suspicious, they had varied
in that which was less. As for Mr. S. B's Objection, That S. Basil cites not
Gregory's Rubric or Liturgy, but Scripture for these Observances; it is easily
answered, because those acts of Piety and Morality are not the proper Subject
for a Rubric, but are expressly enjoined in Gods Word; and that makes his
Argument the stronger, and their tenaciousness the more unreasonable. For S.
Basil at most differed from S. Gregory but in a supposed rite or mode of
Singing; but they differed from that holy Bishop in material duties, positively
required by Holy Scripture; and till they corrected these Variations in their
practices, it was very undecent for them to quarrel at him for a slighter
difference. And now I hope I have rescued this holy Father from the pretended
contradiction, and sufficiently proved there was a Liturgy left by Gregory, and
invariably used till S. Basil's time.

. 5. Page 55. From the prescribed Hymns writ at least as early as the beginning
of this Century, and rejected by Paulus Samosatenus (mentioned by Eusebius. lib.
7. cap. 24.) it is certain they used Forms of Praise in their public Worship,
and from parity of Reason I argued the probability of their praying by Forms
also. Mr. S. B. instead of giving a solid Reason (as he has often been
desired) why they might not pray to God, as well as praise him by Forms: 1st,
Pretends he is not sensible this way of arguing is cogent. But I think that
Argument to which he can give no solid Answer, and which puts him into a fit of
Railing, is very cogent: For, 2dly, He rudely falls upon my Character and
Qualifications, and exposes me for conceiting my Tautologies to be graceful
Flights. I might in return to this enquire into his Qualifications for that
Office he once assumed, of going about with the vile Regulators of
Corporations, in the last Reign, to procure the choice of such Members as would
take away the Penal Laws and Test, and level the way for Popery to come in
under the mask of Toleration. But I will be content to vindicate my self, and
must tell him, I have so much skill both in Liturgies and Singing, that I know
Hymns, Psalms, and Praises are a large and essential part of all Liturgies, and
so mixed with Prayers, that it is impossible to separate them; and I am so far
from knowing any difference between Praying and Singing, that I can sing a
Petition as well as a Thanksgiving; and so can Mr. S. B's Friends at their
Meetings, where they sing Psalms of Prayer as well as Praise. The Lutheran
Protestants sing all their Prayers, some of our Anthems also are Collects, and
we have musical Notes adapted to the Litany, as well as to the Te Deum: We read
many of our Praises, and sing some of our Prayers. And many of the Dissenting
Pastors use such variety of Tone in their Prayer, that if it did not want
regularity it might be called Singing; and if a skilful man heard their
inartificial Modulation and odd Cadencies, he would think they did not scruple
singing their Prayers, but chose to do it with Discord rather than Harmony. But
still it appears, that Singing is one way of performing the duty of Prayer
among all sorts of Christians, and he can find no more difference between
singing and praying, than between singing and saying a Prayer; that is one way
of praying, and singing is another; only we may sing a Form, according to art,
but an Extempore Prayer cannot be sang harmoniously.

. 6. Page 56. My last Instance in this Period was to show, That the People used
the Form of saying, Amen, upon receiving the Eucharist. Now this matter of Fact
is undeniably true: I proved it before out of Justin M. and Tertullian; and
here Eusebius confirms it by the Epistle of Dionysius, B. of Alexandria (which
should have been figured thus; Lib. 7. cap. 8. page 188.) and my Examiner makes
the same thing plain from an Epistle of Cornelius B. of Rome, recorded also by
Eusebius: wherefore, since so many distant Churches did so exactly agree in the
use of this Response at the very time of Receiving; no doubt it was enjoined by
some prescribed Rule (grounded at first upon that of S. Paul, How shall he --
say Amen, at thy Eucharist, 1. Cor. xiv. 16.) For had it been arbitrary, it
would have been varied, and neither the same word, nor the same time of saying
it, could have been found in different Churches and distant Ages: The
consequence of which is, that there were prescribed Forms directing a certain
Response in one certain part of the Service, for the People. Mr. S. B. passes
by this Inference very wisely, and pretends I went about to prove here, That
the Form of Administering the Sacrament was prescribed: Now this can be nothing
but a wilful mistake, because I said expressly, This was a Form in which all
Christians agreed at one certain time and place: But the Christian People never
repeated the words of Administration: That Form indeed is very ancient,
grounded on Scripture, and alluded to by both these Authors; but I was not
speaking of the Form of Administration, but of the universal Custom of saying
Amen, just when they received; which clears the use of prescribed Forms.

. 7. Page 59. I shall conclude with a brief review of the Particulars, whereby
I have made out either the ancient use of a Liturgy in general, or of the
several parts of it. 1st, The Prayers delivered from their Forefathers, in
Josephus; the word Liturgy in Clemens Romanus and Hippolitus; the One Prayer
allowed by the Bishop, in Ignatius; the Common Prayers, in Justin M. The
Prayers made as with one common Voice, in Cl. Alexandrinus; The solemn Rites
and praying by Memory, in Tertullian; the Christians using Prescribed or
enjoined Prayers and Forms taken out of the Psalms, in Origin; The Public and
Common Prayer, in Cyprian: And that Liturgy left by Gregory Thaumaturgus, used
without adding or altering a word, for an hundred years after; do prove a
Liturgy in general: And, 2dly, for the parts of it, I have proved the Hymns
were prescribed Forms, sung alternately, by Philo, Pliny, Ignatius, and so very
many others, that I am censured for Tautology; The Gloria Patria, I have showed
to be as ancient as Irenaeus and Tertullian; The Litany is plainly alluded to
by Justin M. Tertullian, and S. Cyprian; There is a Collect in Form clearly
proved from Origin; The Lords Prayer was repeated by all the People in public,
in the time of Tertullian and S. Cyprian, who also has the Preface and
Responses used at the Eucharist, in a Form; the answering Amen at the
Receiving, is a Form in Justin M. Tertullian, and many others; and S. Cyprian
shows, they did not vary Christ's Form of Baptizing. Now these Proofs in a dark
Age (wherein there were few Writers, and those only accidentally and cautiously
mention these things) are sufficient to show, that Forms of Prayer and Praise
are very ancient, chosen as the best way of serving God in public, even when
many did not need them (because diverse were Inspired.) Now if this pure and
early Age, had, and used Forms invariably, then a settled Church after
Inspiration is ceased, who imitates their Example, and uses Forms, because she
believes them ancient and lawful; and enjoins them strictly, because she needs
them and finds them expedient; doubtless she does well, and they who can find
nothing sinful in the Forms, but refuse to Communicate with the Church, merely
because she uses and enjoins Forms; these not only were wont to be called
Dissenters, (as Mr. S. B. flatters them) but ought now to be called Dissenters
and Schismatics also, being guilty of an inexcusable Separation.

As to his Conclusion, he first owns the Lawfulness of Liturgies, but is
afraid, I design to make them thought necessary; and it seems that made him
labor so much to baffle my Proofs of them from the Three first Centuries: Upon
which I must assure him, that I do not think every thing to be necessary, which
I can prove to have been used in the first Three Centuries; I think Liturgies
ten times more necessary now than they were then, and my Proofs in this Period
were chiefly designed to show the Lawfulness and Antiquity of Forms in public
Worship; but that which makes the use of them necessary to us, is the Churches
Authority: He adds, Their Lawfulness may be argued from more rational Topics
than human Authority; their Expediency must be judged upon a just weighing of
Circumstances; their Necessity cannot be proved by any Topic. I reply, Mr.
Clarkson forced me to argue for Liturgies from human Authority, because he
first denied them to be Ancient; and I hope, if he argued falsely from that
Topic, I might argue truly; especially since I urged also Scripture and other
Topics in that History, which Mr. S. B. has not answered. 2dly, As to their
Expediency, the Church (the proper Judge of that) has already upon weighty
Reasons determined that point; and I see no Reason why Mr. S. B. should desire
to have this weighed over again, unless he hope to hold the Seals. The Church
has proved their Expediency many and many times, and over and again confuted
all the Dissenters Objections; and I considered this Point, as often as Mr. Cl.
gave me occasion, as he will see when he has read my whole Book, For the
necessity of Liturgies; that follows, from their being expedient, and as such
enjoined by the Church: For an ancient Lawful expedient way of public Worship
enjoined by lawful Authority, becomes necessary: And if there were any Men in
the Communion of this Church, who call one another, Judicious, Learned, and
Moderate, and yet are so intent upon altering our Foundations, as to count my
defending the Established Way of Worship, The managing a Design against them,
it would be more necessary than ever to keep close to our Ancient Way of
Worship. But I hope this is only a Dream of Mr. S. B's, and believe there is
really never a learned, judicious, moderate Man in our Communion, but himself,
who thinks, I had any design against them in writing my History of Liturgies.
As for Mr. S. B. he has too visibly declared his aversation to the
Establishment to make me value his Censure; his Friend Mr. Cl. could pick up
but two Phrases, which he perverted, (as I showed) and that was all the
Grey-Beard he had to fasten to the Juvenile Chin of Extempore praying, (without
extraordinary Inspiration) yet Mr. S. B. admires and defends him. I have
brought many Phrases, and justified my exposition of them, so that the durst
not attack them; besides some express proofs: Yet all this is despised in his
scurrilous Conclusion; which is so clear a discovery of the Man, and the Party
he favors, that till he come to examine more closely, and judge more
indifferently; till he perform more and brag less, I will neither trouble the
world nor my self with any further Reply to him; being assured, that by this
loose way of writing, he will neither do my Cause any harm, nor his any good,
among those that are truly learned, moderate and judicious, of what Communion
soever they be.

FINIS.

