THE Right of Tithes ASSERTED and PROVED, FROM Divine Institution, Primitive
Practice, Voluntary Donations, and Positive Laws.

WITH A JUST VINDICATION OF THAT SACRED MAINTENANCE From the Cavils of THOMAS
ELWOOD, In his Pretended Answer to the FRIENDLY CONFERENCE.

LONDON, Printed for E. Croft at the Three Golden Lions in the Poultry, over
against the Stocks-Market, 1677.

To the Worthy AUTHOR OF THE Friendly Conference.
SIR,
IF I had not perused your Adversaries Book, I should have thought it
impossible for the most implacable Malice to have so basely misrepresented the
Pious Design and Modest Expressions of your Friendly Conference. But now I see
that Quakers, as well as Jesuits, can make use of Equivocation and positive
Untruths, when they dispute only to uphold a Faction. His mangling your
Sentences, and mistaking your Sense; his forcing of Consequences from your
misconstrued Words, and taking his own wild Suppositions for acknowledged
Truths; are so obvious to an observing Reader, that the Man is generally
believed to have more of Confidence and crafty Wit, than either of solid
Learning, or sincere Honesty. And though in a Letter of his to a Quaker at
York, he brags that he has showed some little Learning in this Piece; I dare
affirm, he has but little to show; being only happy in this, that he writes
to please an illiterate Sect. He may gull his unlearned Quakers into the belief
that he has read all those Fathers whose Names he cites; but the Priests (whom
he reproaches) are wise enough to discover, he gleaned his Quotations up at the
second hand, out of Fisher against Bishop Gauden, and some other obscure
English VVriters: which he has also done with so little skill, that when the
Printer in Fisher had mistaken Fimicus for Firmicus, this poor Retailer calls
him Fimicus also, page 115. And what he read in the same Fisher of one Basil,
his gross ignorance applies to Basil the Great, involving himself thereby in
the absurdity of asserting this monstrous and ridiculous untruth, That Basil
the Great refused to swear at a Council, which was called above threescore
years after he was dead, page 165. But I will not anticipate your discoveries
of his Ignorance by any more Instances, because I doubt not but you will
sufficiently convince the world, that there is no reason why T. Elwood should
pass for a Scholar among his own Party, but only because (as himself says, p.
355.) Asinus Asino, Sus sui pulcher. And when you have pulled off his Vizard,
his very Friends doubtless will begin to blush, that they have adored so mean a
Creature, while he was covered with a Lions skin. And I hope the discovery may
tend to reduce them to the Protestant Church, where they will find more
ingenuous, more honest, and more able Guides. I confess I once thought the
justest return to his Ignorance and Malice, his unjust Accusations and
notorious Falacies, was to answer them with silence: But when I consider how
easily so plausible a Discourse might seduce some well-meaning Men out of the
right way, or harden them in the wrong, I judge it necessary to lay aside all
consideration of the meanness of the Adversary; and will not only encourage
you to publish the Answer which I hear you have prepared against this bold
Antagonist, but shall venture to cast in my Symbol also, upon his last Chapter
of Tithes. Not that I delight to put my Sickle into another Harvest, nor that
I esteem you will need any Second against so easy and obnoxious an Opponent:
Your own Skill is so great, your Cause so good, and your fair Advantages
against this Man are so very many; that I make no doubt but you have already
prepared a solid and judicious Confutation of all his Pretenses, as well in
this, as the other Chapters. Yet I deem it not unfit to add these Papers, for
the following Reasons.

First, Because I think this Subject of Tithes deserves a fuller and more
particular Consideration, than the brevity of your general Answer will allow.

Secondly, Because the Argument of this Chapter is T. E's main device to
alienate Men's minds from the Church of England, and so to heighten our
unfortunate Divisions; wherein therefore he ought to be prevented by all just
means.

Thirdly, The obstinacy which the unhappy Quakers contract from such false
Insinuations as these of T. E. in this Case of Tithes, exposes them to more
Sufferings than all their other Errors: So that in pity to these ill-instructed
Persons, I would attempt their full satisfaction in this matter.

Lastly, I think it not inconvenient to try whether it be not possible, by
variety of Methods and Arguments, for us both to advance the same Charitable
End, viz. to rescue all mistaken Dissenters from their Prejudices against so
pious a Donation, for so necessary an End.

These were my Motives to this Undertaking. And the Method by which I have
proceeded therein, is this.

First, I have deduced the History of Tithes through Three eminent Periods of
Time, viz. Before the Law, Under the Law, and The Times of the Gospel: wherein
I have made it evident, That Tithes were paid, among the Patriarchs by
Revelation; among the Gentiles by Tradition, and the Light of Nature; among the
Jews by a written Command from God the Father; among the Primitive Christians
by the Establishment of Christ and his Apostles. I have showed also, That the
most Ancient Fathers assert them to be Due to Christian Ministers: That many
Councils do suppose them, and others enjoin them to be Paid: and, That the Laws
of diverse Christian Princes did of old Confirm them.

Secondly, I have vindicated the Donations and Confirmations of Tithes in this
Kingdom; proving that the Donors of them (our pious Saxon Ancestors) were
neither Papists, nor Idolaters; but that they were Given long before Popery
came in, Confirmed by diverse Princes and Parliaments in every Age, and secured
by good Laws after Popery was cast out: So that they were as freely and rightly
Granted, as frequently and fully Confirmed, and have been as long and as
quietly Enjoyed, as any Possessions in the whole Nation.

Thirdly, I have considered all the particular Objections urged by T. E.
against the Reasonableness and Lawfulness of Tithes; and have made it appear,
that he has blasphemed Almighty God, reviled our Lawgivers, perverted our
Laws, slandred the whole Nation, and contradicted himself; and that he is
mistaken in Scripture, History, Matter of Fact, and every thing he meddles
with. So far is he from proving Tithes to be Jewish or Popish, unreasonable or
ridiculous, a horrible Oppression or a foul Abuse, as he insolently brags; that
he has proved nothing but his own Ignorance and Dishonesty. The serious
consideration of which Particulars, may convince all that are not blinded with
wilful prejudice, That Tithes are a pious, just, and reasonable Payment, which
were Religiously settled upon, are Rightfully to be claimed by, and ought
Conscienciously to be paid unto the Ministers of the Gospel. But I will not
detain you longer in this general Account, nor divert you from the perusal of
the Observations themselves, where all these Things are more fully made out.

THE RIGHT OF TITHES Asserted and Proved.
. 1. WHEN I first cast my eyes upon Thomas Elwood's Chapter concerning Tithes,
I could not but take notice, that the Subject did so raise his Passion, that he
throws off the usual Formality of that Patience and Meekness which those of his
Party generally pretend to, and flies out into ill Language at the entrance
into his Discourse upon them: for he calls them, The Priests Delilah,;the very
Darling and Minion of the Clergy. Now since Railing is not Reasoning, I will
not meddle with his Scurrility, but rather inquire into the Causes why he and
his Party are so bitter against Tithes. The ruder sort (it may be) are acted by
mere Covetousness, pretending Conscience to save their Purses, supposing this
kind of Godliness is great Gain: But T. E. and the more Politic Managers of
this Sect, have higher Designs: And as King Philip of Macedon, perceiving the
Athenian Orators obstructed his Projects to get the Dominion over that City,
persuaded that People to banish those needless Members (as he called them); so
the leading Quakers perceiving the Clergy of England so able and industrious to
discover all their evil Designs, use their utmost Art to enrage the People
against them; railing at their Profession, slandering their Persons,
undervaluing their Sacred Administrations, disputing against their Learning,
and especially seeking to deprive them of their Maintenance, which they take to
be one main part of their Support. They know, while the Clergy have these
Provisions, they will have Books, and leisure to Study, and Learning enough to
baffle all their silly Pretenses, which can gain no ground as long as a
Priesthood stands. And therefore it is one part of Conversion, in the Quakers
account, to make Men hate their Ministers Persons, and withhold their Dues;
Railing at Tithes, being the Quakers Delilah, the very Darling and Minion of
that Sect. They see they cannot quench the Lamp, and therefore they would stop
the Oil that nourishes it; and because they dare not engage this Army, they
attempt to force them to disband for want of Pay. Hezekiah commanded his People
to give the portion of the Priests and Levit^s, that they might be encouraged
in the Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. xxxi. 4. And the Jews have a Proverb, Sine
farina non est lex. But our Adversaries finding our Study of the Law so
destructive of their inspired Nonsense, they would gladly stir up the People to
take away our Books and Subsistence from us, that we might be starved into
Ignorance, and by our sad Necessities be brought down to their scantling of
Understanding; and then they hope their Speakers would be an equal Match for
us. And truly our Quakers find their Harangues against Tithes are very taking
with the Covetous and Atheistical, with those who care not much for any
Religion, and therefore like the cheapest best. They please such as do not
understand the Clergies Right to them, nor discern the ground of the Quakers
spite against them: But wise and pious Men, who know what Benefit both Church
and State receive by this disposal of Tithes, do despise such Railers, and look
upon them as designing to disturb the Kingdom, destroy Learning, and ruin the
most famous of all Protestant Churches. It Is a Policy of Secular Rebels to
complain of Tributes and Public Payments; not so much in pity to the People,
as malice to the King; that his Treasury being empty, he may be exposed to
their Fury, and unable to resist their Force: And these Rebels in Religion take
the same Method. But what Tacitus says of the State, may be applied to the
Church in this Case; There can be no Quiet to the Nations without Soldiers, no
Soldiers without Pay, nor no Pay without Tribute, on which therefore the
Common Safety does depend. Even so, No Peace in the Church without Ministers,
no Ministers without Maintenance, nor no Maintenance without these public
Contributions, on which therefore the Safety of Religion does depend. So that
our Changers of Religion mainly seek to overthrow these things, and to that end
have sent out T. E. as their Champion: But I doubt not to show, he is armed
with more Malice than Reason; and that his Arguments are as weak, as his
Designs are base.

. 2. And first, Dear Sir, I perceive our strutting Quaker looks on you with a
scornful eye, and says, p. 277. Tithes were wont to be claimed as of Divine
Right, but he finds this Priest is not hardy enough to adventure his Cause upon
that Title. Sure he takes himself to be very terrible, for he believes none but
a hardy Man dare set upon him: yea, he persuades his Quakers, that they who
were wont to claim Tithes de jure Divino, were more bold than wise. Let us
therefore see who and what they were whom T. E. thus censures: Truly no less
than Origin, Hom. 11. in Number. 18. Cyprian de Vnitate Eccles. S. Hierom. in
Malac. 3. S. Augustine Hom. 48. diverse Christian Councils of old, Justinian, and
the Imperial Roman Laws, Charles the Great, and the French Capitulars; the
Saxon Kings and Councils of this Nation, and all Monarchs and Parliaments of
later times; particularly, King Henry VIII. and Edward VI. (as T. E. confesses,
p. 333, 334, 335.) together with the most famous Common Lawyers, agreeing, That
Dismes sont chooses spiritual, and due de Jure Divino. Le Evesq. de Winch. Case.
L. Cook's Reports, part 2. page 45. as also the unconcerned and incomparably
Learned Sir Henry Spelman, with diverse other excellent Writers, too many to
recite. All these were so hardy as to adventure this Cause of Tithes on that
Title: And when this obscure and empty Quaker has confuted all these, he may
then have some pretense to boasting; but till then, he has no reason to
triumph over you, who did not decline this Argument wholly, but only said, you
would not insist upon it, page 142. So that it is evident, you laid aside this
Weapon (of the Divine Right) not out of any distrust of the Argument, nor out
of any great Opinion of your Adversaries Skill; but in very truth, you seem to
have been loath to cast Pearls before Swine, who understand not the value of
them; and you were hardy enough to have insisted on it, if you had been to deal
with nobler Antagonists. But to treat of things done three or four thousand
Years ago, to those who know not the History of the last Century; to discourse
of the difference between Natural and Instituted Religion; to inquire how far
the Acts of inspired Patriarchs, approved by God the Father, and not
disapproved by God the Son, together with the Suffrages of Christians, and the
Consent of the wisest Gentiles; the general Rules of Scripture, expounded by
the Practice of all Ages; How far (I say) all these will extend to the
Constitution of a Jus Divinum, I suppose you thought things a little too high
for the Quakers capacity; and therefore you wisely chose to insist upon plain
matters of fact, as more apt to instruct and convince this kind of Men. Yet
since T. E. provokes the Priests to the taking up this Argument again, I hope
to demonstrate, That they need not be ashamed of the Weapon, nor afraid of this
daring Adversary.

. 3. To make out the Divine Right of Tithes, there are three Periods to be
considered: 1. Before the Law. 2. Under the Law. 3. The Times of the Gospel.


Concerning the first Period, Before the Law, you said very little in your
Conference, as not designing to manage this Argument; only I perceive you had
mentioned, That the Divine Right of Tithes was derived from Melchisedec, not
from Levi. Which Passage being single, and not guarded with any Proofs or
Reasons, this sculking Adversary falls upon very fiercely, fancying, if he can
run down this one Sentence, which stood naked, he shall then confute the Divine
Right of Tithes. Here (thinks the Quaker) is an open place; he is driving at
the Humane Right, and I find no Arguments to grieve me in my opposing the
Divine Right: I will therefore triumph over this little occasional touch, and
then proclaim, I have confuted the Jus Divinum; and upon that Supposition, I
shall more easily find out an Answer to his Arguments de Jure Humano, by
asserting, That all his Humane Laws rely on a false Foundation. But if T. E.
had been a noble Enemy, he should first have disproved the Jus Humanum, which
was the Argument you managed; and not from a transient Speech have boasted, he
had disproved clearly the Divine Right of Tithes; which he is so far from being
able to confute, that his first words do declare, he does not understand the
Question: For this Quaker thus begins; It is then inquirable, Whether or no
Tithes were ever due to Melchisedec? That which should make them due, must be a
Command -- but we do not find any Command in Scripture that they should be paid
to Melchisedec. The Assertors of the Divine Right of Tithes do not make them
originally due either to Melchisedec, or Levi; but to God himself, whose Right
to them is founded primarily upon the Law of Nature, antecedent to any positive
Constitution: For since the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm.
xxiv. 1. and that all we enjoy is derived from his Bounty and Blessing, Natural
Reason teaches us to give God some part of his Gifts back again, as a token of
our gratitude; which is but the giving him of his own, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 14. And
this Natural Law we have transcribed into the Scripture: Honor the Lord with
thy substance, Prove. iii. 9. which Rule obliges Christians, as well as Jews.
Some part of our Substance being therefore due to God, and Abraham and Jacob
(before any positive Law) having by their Examples declared, that the Tenth was
that Part; there was a claim made of this Tenth part, as being originally due
to God long before. All the Tithe of the land is the Lords, Levit. xxvii. 30.
And the first time they are mentioned, Exodus xxii. 29. they are not directly
enjoined, but supposed due, and forbid to be withheld. And hence those who
paid not this Homage and Service, are said (not to rob the Priests, but) to rob
God, Mal. iii. 8. And when our Savior says, we must give unto God the things
that are Gods, S. Hierom reckons Tithes among the things which are Gods Hieron.
in Mat. 22.
. The Lord, says S. Augustine, claims the Tenth to himself, permitting to us
all the rest August. de Tempore, sermon. 219.
. The like say many others: even Plutarch, a Heathen, calls the Tenth part
(...), Gods Tribute. But now though God have a right to the Tenth part of our
Substance, yet he cannot be his own Receiver; for he needs not our Goods
himself, Psalm. xvi. 2. So that we are to inquire, who must be Gods Receiver;
and for that, even Reason will teach us, That what is due to the Master, ought
to be paid to his next and immediate Servants, that is, to his Priests. And
Abraham, in paying his Tithes (which were Gods part) unto Melchisedec the
Priest of the most High God, did confirm this Dictate of Reason, That the
Priests should be Gods Receivers: and God himself gave more full proof of it in
the Mosaical Law, when he made so plain an Assignation of Tithes to those who
were his Ministers then; Behold, I have given the Children of Levi all the
Tenth in Israel, Numb. xviii. 21. Yea, the Light of Nature taught the Gentiles
to bestow that upon their Priests, which they had vowed to their Gods: And
Origin gives us the Christians sense of this matter; That is said to be offered
to God (says he) which is given to his Priests Orig. Hom. 11. in Number.
. We see then how Abraham might know that part of his Substance was due to God,
and that Melchisedec was to be the Receiver thereof, without any express
written Rule to direct him. And inde^d T. E. is very impertinent in inquiring,
What Command there is in Scripture to Abraham to pay his Tithes to Melchisedec:
For, there was not any Scripture at all in Abraham's time, nor was he directed
(as we are) by a written Word, but by the Light of Nature, by the Tradition of
the preceding Patriarchs, by Inspiration of the Spirit, and sometimes by
special Revelation. Moses indeed did write a brief History of those Times 400
years after: but since he comprises the space of 2300 years in one Book of
Genesis, it cannot be expected he should set down all Particulars, nor in all
the Actions of the Patriarchs show what Reason they had for, or how they were
directed in such an Action. We know from the Light of Nature, that part of our
Substance is due to God; and we gather from the Act of Abraham (an inspired
Patriarch) that the Tenth is that part, and the Priest the Receiver thereof.
Yet if any would be satisfied how Abraham came to know, that the Tenth part,
and no other, was that which should be given to God, I answer, That in all
reason we ought to believe it was at first revealed by Almighty God to him, or
to some of the first Patriarchs, who were directed by the Divine Spirit to
pitch upon this Part, which the Patriarchs are recorded to have fixed upon:
For, if it had been a mere Humane Invention, it is unlikely God should have
imitated them, in choosing the same Part: And by this after-Act the Divine
Majesty did approve that Number, and declare the Patriarchs were at first
guided by his Spirit in the choice thereof. And if the Quakers (now that there
is a Written Rule) pretend to be guided by the Spirit of God, at least in their
Solemn Actions; how much more ought we to believe, that the holy Patriarchs
were so guided, before there was any Written Word to manifest Gods Will? Thus
the way of honoring God by Oblation of Sacrifice, is believed to have been
first revealed to Adam, although the particular Command for it be not recorded.
The like we may believe also concerning this of Dedicating a Tenth part,
especially if we consider how it was propagated by Tradition among the
Heathens, of whose Practices we have any Histories to inform us. The Tyrians
gave the Tenth Part to their Gods: And by their Example the Carthaginians ( a
Colony of Tyrians) sent their Tithes yearly to Hercules Tyrius; and finding
themselves unfortunate when they for a while had omitted it, they restored the
Tithes as before Diodor. Sicul.
. Dydimus the Grammarian says, It was the custom of the Greeks to consecrate
the Tenth of their Gains to the Gods. And the Inhabitants of the Island Syphnus
are remembered by Pausanias to have had their Mines swallowed up by the Sea,
upon their neglect of paying the Tithes to them, as formerly to Apollo
Pausanias Histor. Graec.
. For the Romans, it is well known, they vowed the Tenth of their Fruits to
Hercules: And Lucullus was believed to grow rich by his punctual payment of
these Dues Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 3. cap. 22.
. And that this was not done only by them of extraordinary Devotion, we learn
from Plutarch, who says, The careful Father of a Family divides his Years
Profits into Ten parts; Six to be spent on his Household, Two to be laid up, One
for the Seed of the next Year, and the Tenth is the Tribute of the Gods Apud
Episc. Winton. Theol. Determ.
. And Paulus Diaconus speaks generally of all Heathens, Of old they offered all
the Tenth to their Gods. And Alexander ab Alexandro, The Tenth part of the
Fruits were every where vowed to Hercules Alex. ab Alexand. lib. 3. cap. 22.
. There are more Proofs of this kind in Sir Henry Spelman's larger Work of
Tithes: But these may suffice to show, that the most distant Nations did
consent in giving this Tenth part to their Gods; which therefore we must
believe they had by Tradition from the first Patriarchs, who received it by
Revelation from God. This is a sufficient account by what Authority Abraham
might proceed in the choice of the Tenth part: And it is not necessary (since
the Scripture is silent) I should determine, whether Abraham was immediately
directed to it, or whether he learned it from Melchisedec, (who, St. Paul
says, Tythed Abraham) or whether they did not both learn it from the first
Patriarchs, which is most likely; it being sufficient, that God has Recorded
it with approbation, and afterward Ratified it by following this Example. Even
as in the Case of putting an Adulteress to death, Judah proceeds upon that, as
being a just Punishment: And though we read of no Command before to enact it
into a Law, yet we believe Judah received that Law by Tradition from the
Patriarchs, who were taught it by God, Genesis xxxviii. 35. And we are the more
confirmed this Law came from God at first, because he approved it, and writ it
down afterward, Levit. xx. 10. And when T. E. shows me a Command before
Judah's time to put an Adulteress to death, I may show him a Command for Tithes
before Abraham.

. 4. But our Quaker goes on, page 278. Moses says expressly, he gave him
Tithes, he does not say he paid him Tithes: And the Apostle says, Abraham gave
the Tenth, Heb. vii. 4. To give is one thing, to pay another. I answer, To give
and to pay is all one in this case, or else the Apostle was overseen, who not
only says he gave the Tenth, ver. 4. but (which T. E. concealed) ver. 9. Levi
paid Tithes in Abraham: the Greek word (...) intimating, that Melchisedec
Tythed him. Nor will the Quakers critical distinction between to give and to
pay, hold in other cases; for it is very proper to say, we give a Man that
which is his due. I hope he will not accuse David of improper speaking, when he
says, Give unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name, Psalm. xxxix. 2. But
however T. E. will grant Tithes were due to be paid under the Law; and yet we
read, Hezekiah commanded the People to give the Priests their Portion, etc. 2 Chronicles. xxxi. 4. So that the word give in Genesis xiv. does no more prove Tithes
were not due to Melchisedec Jure Divino, than the same in Chron. proves they
were not due to the Levites Jure Divino. Yet if the Quakers like this Criticism
of T. E. I hope it will persuade them to give us our Tithes, though they will
not pay them.

. 5. His next Objection, page 279. is, If they were due to Melchisedec, then
Abraham must have paid him Tithes of all his Substance, and not only of the
Spoils, Hebr. vii. 4. This was an extraordinary Occasion, wherein Abraham
having got a Victory by Gods Blessing, did give to God the Tenth of all he had
now gotten; as in all probability he was wont ordinarily to do, of all that he
got by Gods ordinary Blessing; only this (as more especially remarkable) is
recorded in this short History. So that T. E's saying he does not read in
Genesis that Abraham paid his Tithes constantly, is no Argument, unless all
that Abraham ordinarily did were recorded there. And I may ask him where he
reads there, that Abraham did not pay them. His Negative arguing is of no more
force, than it would be if he should say, Those Ante-diluvian Patriarchs did
nothing else while they lived but beget Sons and Daughters, because no more is
recorded of many of them, Genesis v. T. E. therefore cannot prove Abraham did not
pay Tithes ordinarily; and I can make it appear very probable he did: For,
first, It is very probable Melchisedec was the same with Sem, the Son of Noah:
so the ancient Hebrew Traditions said Hieron. ad Evagrium Epist. 126. and
Quest. Hebr. in Genesis
; and so Lyra, Tostatus, and others do prove. Epiphanius indeed thought Sem
must be dead before; but he was led into this mistake by following the
Chronology of the LXX. And S. Hierom computing according to the Hebrew Account,
makes it appear, that Sem did live 35 years after Abraham's death Id. Epist. ad
Evagr.
. And concerning the Occasion of his coming to Salem, there is a very notable
Account in Saidas Batricides, (who yet makes Melchisedec not Sem himself, but
one of his Family, and allied to Abraham's Ancestors) viz. That Noah being
about to die, commanded his Son Sem to take Adam's Body (which his Father
Lamech had ordered him to bury in the middle of the Earth), and to take with
him Bread and Wine for his Journey, and also to take Melchisedec the Son of
Phaleg along with him, and go to the place where that Body was to be buried,
which the Angel (says Noah) will show you; and command Melchisedec that he
shall place his Seat there, and that he shall not marry, but lead a Religious
Life, because God had chosen him to minister before him; for from that place
shall come the Savior of Adam Vid. Seldom de Jure not. Haebraeorum, lib. 3.
cap. 2.
. But the Targum of Jerusalem In Genesis xiv.
says expressly, Melchisedec, that is, Sem the Son of Noah. Yet whether he were
Sem or no, this is agreed by all, taht he was the Priest of the True God: and
being the eldest of the Family living (if he were Sem), or being elder than
Abraham however, he had good reason to be his Priest in Ordinary. Yea, there
are ancient Authors, and probable Reasons to induce us to believe, that Abraham
was called out from amongst his Idolatrous Countrymen, by God, on purpose to
send him into Canaan, to be instructed by Melchisedec in the Worship of the
True God. And hence he chose his Habitation near unto Salem, viz. in the Plain
of Mamre, which is Hebron, being (as S. Hierom computeth) but 22 Miles distant
from Jerusalem, whither he might easily repair with his Oblations and Tithes,
to the more Solemn Worship of God. And the Jews think, that Melchisedec did
continue to be the Priest of Abraham's Family long after: For when the Twins
strugled in the Womb of Rebecca, it is said, She went to inquire of the Lord,
Genesis xxv. 22. that is, by Sem, say the Hebrews Lyra.
, or by Melchisedec, as others Jun. and Tremel. in loc.
. We cannot be positive in a matter of so great Antiquity: but I hope these
things may suffice to make it very probable, that Melchisedec was Abraham's
Priest in Ordinary. And doubtless Abraham and he were acquainted before, yea,
in League together, as appears from his being so glad of Abraham's Victory,
presenting him with Bread and Wine for his Refreshment, or (as some have
thought) offering a Sacrifice of Praise to God, in thankfulness for the same.
And since all Abraham's Increase came as much by Gods Blessing, as these
Spoils, why should he not pay Tithes of his ordinary Gains, as well as of his
extraordinary? And it is very likely Jacob had seen this Custom in his Fathers
House, because he vows to give unto God the Tenth of all the Goods that God
should give him, even in that strange Land to which he was then going, Genesis
xxviii. 22. And when T. E. can bring as great Authorities, and as good
Probabilities to the contrary, it will then be time enough for him to say, that
Abraham paid not Tithes of any thing but the Spoils.

. 6. Another bolder pretense of T. E. is, page 280. viz. That Tithes could not
be due to Melchisedec upon a Right founded in Natural Justice and Equity, since
there was not in those days any settled Public Worship, wherein he could
perform any Priestly Office, for which Tithes could be due to him. This poor
Quaker is as bold, as he is blind; and has exposed himself to the scorn of all
knowing Men by this absurd Position, which I might confute from that place of
Genesis iv. 26. Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord: which must be
meant in public, for in private they did it before; unless T. E. will assert,
they were all Atheists before Enos time. I might also show his mistake from
other Instances: but I will keep my self to Melchisedec. Does not Moses say
expressly, He was the Priest of the most high God? Genesis xiv. 18. And does not S.
Paul make him a Type of Christ's Priesthood? And had he not a fixed place of
Residence at Salem? Now what is a Priest fixed in a City for? Not for private
Worship, that every man may perform at home: It was then for performing public
Worship that he resided there. And we cannot suspect so holy a man as
Melchisedec would be negligent in his Office: wherefore we ought to believe, he
did perform Gods public Worship solemnly at Salem, and constantly also. And by
that he had a Right founded in Natural Justice and Equity, to receive Tithes
from all within his Jurisdiction. It is very likely the Tyrians, who were of
the ancient Phoenician Inhabitants of Canaan, learned to pay Tithes to their
Priests (which they are observed to have done) from the Tithes paid to
Melchisedec, when he was a Priest here among the Phoenicians. And as to this
occasion, it is apparent, that he did perform the Office of a Priest now to
Abraham, in blessing the most High God for his Victory, with suitable Hymns
(says Josephus); and in blessing Abraham himself at this time: And so he
deserved those extraordinary Tithes, as justly as he did his ordinary Tithes
for his daily Administrations.

He proceeds in his gross mistakes, saying, ibid. I find not one Instance (this
single gift of Abraham's excepted) of giving or receiving Tithes, in all that
400 years between Abraham's time and the Levitical Priesthood. If this were
true, that the Scripture did not mention any more Instances of paying Tithes,
it does not at all prove, they were never paid at other times: For an Argument
from Scripture-silence in matters of Fact is not valid, as we noted before. But
alas! this inspired Man's Reading and Revelation both fail him in this matter;
for there is a plain Instance in holy Jacob, Genesis xxviii. 22. who made a solemn
Vow to give unto God the Tenth of all his Gains: And Josephus tells us Joseph.
Antiq. li. 1. cap. 18.
, he did perform it. Now if Jacob did perform this Vow, then there is another
Instance of giving Tithes: And if T. E. say Jacob did not perform his Vow, then
he charges that blessed Patriarch with Perjury and Ingratitude. It is true, the
Book of Genesis does not tell us who was Gods Receiver then; but no doubt there
were some performed that Office, though it be not expressed who. However, if
Jacob gave them immediately to God by way of Sacrifice (which is all that T. E.
can pretend), yet still he gave the Tithes; and so this is another Instance of
giving Tithes before the Levitical Priesthood. Therefore the Quaker has not a
Repetition of all Revelations, or not a good Memory to retain them.

. 7. He has yet another fetch more, page 281. That if Tithes were due to
Melchisedec, yet could not the Clergy of this Age derive any Right from him to
them, inasmuch as they are not of his Priesthood. I hope T. E. will grant, that
Christ was of his Priesthood; or else he contradicts the Scripture, Psalm. cx.
4. And if he grant this, we must ask, Whether or no his Apostles were not his
Successors? and then, Whether we do not derive our Succession from them?
Besides, Aaron's Priesthood was only Temporal; but Melchisedec's was to
continue to the end of the World. And indeed all the Fathers note, That
Melchisedec had the same Priesthood with the Ministers of the Gospel: He was
not derived from Levi, nor admitted to his Office by the Catalogue of his
Parents, (whence he is called, without father and mother, that is, of such a
certain Tribe): His Worship was altogether Spiritual, Praising God, Praying for
Abraham; offering no bloody Sacrifices, but only bringing forth Bread and
Wine, which some have thought to be the Types of the great Gospel-Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. And hence it is plain, That we are Priests after
Melchisedec's Order. And if Authority of Fathers be of as much credit, as the
single Testimony of T. E. I can produce the plain words of S. Hierom, S.
Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Epiphanius, Theophylact, and many more, affirming,
That the present Ministers of the Christian Church are of Melchisedec's
Priesthood: And none (that ever I heard of) before, did deny it, but the Jews,
and this Quaker. But his Assertion is not more strange, than his Reason is
ridiculous: For if we ask him, why he denies us to be of Melchisedec's
Priesthood, he answers, Every one knows, that these men are made Priests after
the Law of a Carnal Commandment; whereas Melchisedec was made a Priest after
the Law of an endless Life. Does every one know this? No sure: for every one
knows not the meaning of this Phrase, [ To be made a Priest after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, Hebr. vii. 16.] no not this Quaker himself, who has
learned to cant in this Language; which if he had known the meaning of, he
would not have misapplied so grossly: For the Apostle speaking of the Jewish
Priests in that place, says, They were made Priests after the Law of a Carnal
Commandment; that is, according to Moses Law, which consisted of outward and
weak Commandments, reaching only to the purifying of the Flesh. Now what an
idle and impertinent man is this, to say, we are made Priest, according to
Moses Law, and that every one knows this! O impudent Slander! Are we bound to
all the Sacrificings, Washings, and other Levitical Rites and Ceremonies, at
our Ordination? Every one will know by this, that T. E. can prattle in
Scripture Phrase, without any knowledge of its meaning. It Is evident we are not
Priests according to that carnal, outward, changeable, Levitical Law; but
according to the Law of the Gospel, whose Eternal Duties have in them the power
of an Endless Life. And as this Law must never change, so neither must our
Priesthood; but, like that of Melchisedec, shall endure for ever. And as we
bear the same Office with him, and do the like Work, we deserve the same
Reward, and may expect Tithes as well as he. And now whereas the boasting
Quaker says, He thinks he need not stick to say, he has proved Tithes were
not due to Melchisedec; the sober Reader will believe his only Reason is,
because he will not stick to say any thing, be it never so false and
unreasonable.

. 8. Concerning the Second Period or Time, Under the Law, you had affirmed two
things in the Conference. 1. That we did not claim Tithes now by virtue of the
Levitical Law. 2. That they were not purely Ceremonial. In your first
Concession, That Tithes are not now claimed by virtue of the Levitical Law, T.
E. rejoices, saying, page 282. That you have saved him the pains of proving the
Levitical Law for Tithes was abrogated by Christ. But let not the Quaker so far
mistake, as to think that the abrogation of the Levitical Law concerning
Tithes, was an abrogation of Tithes themselves. Our Lord abrogated the
Levitical Law concerning the Modes of Gods Worship; but he did not abrogate
Gods Worship. The Worship of God was founded upon the Law of Nature, and Divine
Revelation; and was performed by the Patriarchs before there was any written
Law about it. The Levitical Law enjoined many Modes and Circumstances proper to
that Dispensation, and relating to Christ to come; all which fell with that
Polity, and were abrogated by Christ: But the main Duty of Worshipping God
continued in force still. Even so in the Case of Tithes, they had not their
Foundation upon, nor their Original from the Levitical Law: God had a Right to
them before; and in his Right (jure Divino) they had been paid to his Receiver.
The Law of Nature, assisted by particular Inspiration, had so fully declared
the Divine Right of Tithes, that holy Men had recognized Gods due to them; and
the Father of the Israelites had made a special Vow to pay this Divine Tribute.
So that there was no need for God to Institute Tithes anew; and accordingly he
claims them, and supposes them to be his Due by a Right antecedent to the
Levitical Law, Exodus xxii. 29. Levit. xxvii. 30. And having chosen the Jews for
his peculiar People, and established a Polity among them proper to that
Dispensation; as his Church was confined to that one Nation, so his Priests
were fixed to one Tribe; and on that Tribe he settles his own Demesnes, Tithes,
by a plain Assignation of them to the Levites, as his Receivers, Numb. xviii.
21. and so they were to continue so long as that Polity stood. Now the
restraining these Tithes to the Tribe of Levi, and all the Circumstances of
Tything which related to the Ceremonial Worship, such as the bringing the first
or Levites Tithe in specie to Jerusalem, or to some of the Levites Cities; and
likewise the second Tithe, (which only might be changed into Money, and laid
out in a Feast at Jerusalem Vide Deuteronomy. xiv. 22, 23. Tob. l. 7. and Scal. de
Decimis in Crit. sacr. Deuteronomy. xxvi.
, and not the first Tithe, as T. E. mistakes); as also the Tything of the
Levites Tithe for the Priests, Numb. xviii. 26. the Redemption of the
Firstborn of all Men, and unclean Beasts: These, with some other
Circumstances, were wholly Ceremonial, Appendixes to the Original Right of
Tithes, and proper to that Ministry and Dispensation. Now when Christ did
abrogate that Ministry, these Appendixes must needs be abrogated with it; but
the main Duty (which was so before the Ceremonial Law) remains still. The
putting on a new Suit, does not make one a new Man; nor does the pulling it off
again kill him: And there may be many alterations in Circumstances, the
Essentials still remaining the same. But some may say, Is the Levitical Law of
no use to prove Tithes to be of Divine Right now? I answer, Though we do not
claim by it, yet we may learn something from it, to clear that Title which we
have from other Laws. For, First, This shows how God continued his Claim to
those Tithes which were his due before: And this shows his approbation of the
Payment of them by the Patriarchs. This also confirms the disposal of them to
those that bear the Office of Gods Ministers, and makes good the Prescription
against those who are not Gods Ministers. Secondly, This was a Pattern for
Christ to imitate, in his Provision for Gospel Ministers, as S. Paul teaches
us, where he says, Know ye not, that they which minister about holy things,
[i. e. the Levites] live of the things of the Temple, [i. e Tythes]? and they
which wait at the Altar, [i. e. the Jewish Priests] are partakers with the
Altar [i. e. in the Sacrifices and Oblations]? Even so has the Lord ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. ix. 13, 14.
Which words [Even so] do manifest, that Christ has in the main, and for the
essential part, made like Provision for Gospel Ministers, as God the Father did
for the Jewish Priesthood. Thirdly, This was also a Pattern for the Devout
Christians of old, and did intimate to them, that they should not do less for
their Ministers than would afford them an honorable Maintenance: Wherein
Origin speaks my sense fully Orig. in Number. Hom. 2.
; Our Lord says in the Gospel, (speaking of Tything Mint, etc.) These things
ought ye to have done. If you reply, He said this to the Pharisees, not to his
Disciples; then hear what he says to his Disciples, Except your Righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. v. Therefore that which he would have done by the
Pharisees, more abundantly would he have it done by his Disciples. -- Now how
does my Righteousness exceed that of the Pharisees, if they durst not taste of
the Fruits of the Earth, before they had separated the Priests and Levites
parts; and I do devour the Fruits of the Earth, so that the Priest knows not of
it, the Levite is a stranger to it, and Gods Altar receives nothing. Fourthly,
The Substance of that which was required then, is due still; not by virtue of
that Law, but because there is an inherent Equity in the thing. And this is
Origen's meaning in the aforesaid place, when he says, Therefore I think it
necessary that this Law [of Paying Tithes of the Fruits of the Earth] and some
others, should stand in force according to the Letter. And so we must interpret
S. Hierom, when he says, That which we have said of Tithes and First Fruits,
which were once given by the People to the Priests and Levites, you must
understand also of the Christian People, to whom it is commanded not only to
give Tithes, but to sell all Hieron. in Mal. 3.
: That is, so much of the Command as was moral, so much as was grounded upon
Eternal Reason, ought to stand. God is eternally Lord of the World, and must
always be worshipped, and always have Ministers, and these must always be
maintained out of their Masters Portion. When the Levitical Priesthood failed,
there must be another and a better; and therefore we may claim Tithes as God's
Due, and as his Ministers Portion, (as they were declared to be both before the
Levitical Law, and under it,) and yet need not claim them by the Levitical Law,
as it is Ceremonial.

And now I hope T. E. must confess, that your second Position, viz. [That
Tithes are not purely Ceremonial] is made good also; since I have showed they
were grounded on the Law of Nature, and Primitive Revelation, relying on an
Internal Rectitude in the thing it self, and an Eternal Reason of it; and were
paid by those Patriarchs who lived long before the Ceremonial Law, by virtue of
the preceding Declarations of the Divine Right unto them. It Is true, all things
done by the Patriarchs were not Eternal Duties, because all things they did
relied not on these Principles, which the Payment of Thythes rely upon.
Circumcision was not grounded on the Law of Nature, nor imposed for any Eternal
Reason or Internal Rectitude in the thing. Bloody Sacrifices were also purely
Types of Christ to come; and therefore these were purely Ceremonial, and cease
when that Law cease: But Tithes as to the main, were not such, and therefore
remain in force still. I might add, That the Prophets (who are not wont to
reprove the People for omission of things purely Ceremonial) declaim against
the Jews for detaining their Tithes; see Mal. iii. 10. And Nehemiah calls his
care in this, a Good Deed, desiring God to remember him for it, Nehem. xiii.
14. Nor are Tithes in all the New Testament reckoned up among things purely
Ceremonial, or declared to be repealed, as Circumcision, Sacrifices, Washing,
Jewish Difference of Meats, and Jewish Feasts, etc. are. These are repealed by
Name, but so are not Tithes, as being a thing that never were purely
Ceremonial. I conclude, that part of our Substance being due to God, by the
Natural and Divine Law; and the Inspired Patriarchs being taught by Revelation,
That the Tenth was this part, and the Priests of God were his Receivers: God
himself having approved also this payment by a renewed claim, and an express
Assignation of his Right under the Levitical Law to the Priests for the time
being: and the same God having the same Right still to his part, and the same
occasion to use it, for the maintenance of his Ministers at this Day: Hence I
suppose it will follow, That (unless an express repeal can be showed) the
Gospel Ministers in God's Name may justly claim Tithes as due to God and them
still, and that by a Divine Right too, which I will now more fully prove.

. 9. Having found sure footing for the Divine Right of Tithes thus far; we will
now go on with T. E. to consider the third Period of time, viz. Under the
Gospel. And first, we will begin with what the Quaker grants page 284. viz.
That a Maintenance in general to the Ministers of the Gospel is Just,
Reasonable, and established by a Divine Authority. Let him but stand to this
Grant, and then it will follow, That the Ministers of the Gospel may claim a
Maintenance in general Jure Divino: For, that Maintenance which is established
by Divine Authority is due Jure Divino. And why then should not that
Maintenance still be so Due, which God directed before the Law, approved under
the Law, and never repealed after the Law? If the Divine Authority has
established a Maintenance, that supposes it was such a Maintenance as was due
before (according to T. E. p. 318.) Now before the Gospel times, the
Maintenance paid to Gods Ministers before the Law and under it, was Tithes. The
Priesthood of Melchisedec, and of Levi, both were so maintained. And therefore
if a new maintenance was (as T. E. speaks) created, it might be somewhat else;
But if a Maintenance be establisted, methinks it should be Tithes. But to
proceed: The places which you produced out of the New Testament for this
Establishment were 1 Cor. ix. and Gal. vi. 6. Now our Quaker, (as if he did
already repent of his Concession) strives to pervert these Texts by two
Limitations. First, The Apostle speaks not so much (says he) what the
Maintenance is, as who they are from whom it is to be received, viz. Such as
receive their Ministry, such as believe them to be true Ministers, such as are
taught by them. This is a notorious falsehood; for in the former place, viz. 1
Cor. ix. S. Paul is all along speaking of the Ministers Right to be maintained.
And he shows what Maintenance was due to the Jewish Ministers, affirming, that
Christ had ordained [even so] that we should live of the Gospel; that is, the
Rights of God under the Gospel, and the acknowledgments made to him for the
mercy therein revealed. The things of the Christian Temple and Altar were to be
our Maintenance. And is not this to say, What the Maintenance is? not a word in
all this who should pay it. And for the Instances of the Ox, the Soldier, the
Shepherd, and Vine-dresser, Can these (as S. Paul brings them in) belong to
those who pay the Maintenance? Does the Ox pay his Master Maintenance? or the
Soldier give his Prince a Stipend? It is the Ministers whom S. Paul compares
to the Ox for profitableness, to the Soldier for hazards to be undergon, to
the Vinedresser and Shepherd for pains and care. And all the Instances do show
the contrary to what this Abuser of Scripture would squeeze out of them. The Ox
must not be starved, who is willing to work, though he be not actually employed
by him that feeds him: and so of the rest. As for the latter place, Gal. vi. S.
Paul tells them, they must give the Ministers a part of all their good things;
And is not that a declaring what the Maintenance is? The Apostle says indeed,
He that is taught in the Work must give this; But that is to distinguish
Christians from Heathens, of which the World was then full. The Heathen was not
bound to maintain the Gospel Ministers, but (...), the Catechumen, the
Christian who was or might be taught, if his own laziness, or pride, or
obstinacy hindered not: He was to give the Catechist or Minister, a part of all
his goods. So that still this proves not T. E's foolish Inference, That none
must contribute to a Ministers Maintenance, but those that are taught by him
actually; for these Places say nothing against a Gospel Ministers receiving
Maintenance from all professed Christians; so that unless the Quakers will own
themselves Heathens, they cannot be excused from paying Tithes. And because T.
E. puts in this device merely to excuse his Fellow- Quakers from paying our
Dues, I will let him see the fallacy of this Arguing: First, considering the
state of things then; and secondly, with respect to the condition they are in
now. First, According to the Quakers Principles, the Christians of old were all
immediately taught by inward Revelation; And if so, what need any Gospel
Ministry at all? what need of outward Means? what need had they to have any
Teachers of the Word? Or with what equity could this Teacher require
maintenance of them, that had no occasion for his Teaching at all? The Quaker
forgot himself, when he granted a Gospel Ministry, and a general Maintenance
for such; since being taught without Means, overthrows all this. And the
Christians to whom S. Paul writ, might (upon these Principles) have pleaded an
exemption from giving any Maintenance at all. Secondly, But now that there is
(according to T. E.) a General Maintenance established by Divine Authority; and
that pious Men have given a certain part of the profits of their own Lands for
this maintenance; How unjust a thing is it for the Quakers to withold this
Maintenance upon pretense they are not ( that is, They will not) be taught? Let
this exact Parallel Case show their dishonesty herein: Suppose a Pious Man an
hundred Years ago, did endow a Free School with twenty pounds per Annum, to be
raised out of the Profits of a parcel of Ground, worth two hundred pounds per
Annum; (that is, the Tenth part of the Profits) on condition that all the Boys
in such a Town should be taught gratis. Now suppose there be a Master legally
invested in this School, resident at it, and ready to teach all the Boys of
that Town, if they will come; it being the same trouble to him to teach ten as
twenty: But it may be not above ten of twenty Boys within that Town will come
to be taught, the rest are Truants, and do not come. If T. E. himself were the
Heir or Tenant to this two hundred pounds per Annum, would he think it just or
reasonable to stop ten pounds of the twenty, because half the Boys do not come
to be taught? Does not the Masters legal Title, and willingness to teach, give
him a just right to the whole stipend? And will not all Men say, the Occupier
of the two hundred pounds per Annum is a Knave to withhold any part of it on
this pretense? And yet this is the very case between the present Clergy and the
Quakers; and surely none will think Christ or his Apostles would countenance
the unjust detaining of other Men's Dues upon such weak pretenses.

. 10. T. E's second device to take off his former Grant of a General
Maintenance established by Divine Authority, is page 286. That Christ has
expressly set down what this Gospel Maintenance is, viz. only meat and drink,
Matthew. x. 10. Luke x. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. ix. 4. Truly this seems somewhat strange,
that T. E. should first say, Divine Authority had only established a
Maintenance in general, and in the next page but one, affirm, That the same
Authority has particularly expressed what this maintenance must be. If Christ
have allotted the particular Maintenance, then he has not left it to generals;
If he have established it only in general, then has he not expressed the
particulars. One of these must be false, for indeed there is a manifest
contradiction. But moreover, this unfortunate Interpreter never meddles with
any place of Scripture without abusing it, and betraying the folly of that
Spirit which is in him: For these places of S. Matthew and S. Luke were spoken
upon a particular occasion, of sending Disciples into the Neighboring Cities
of Judea, and Christ gave them special Rules appropriate to that Mesiage only;
and to apply these Rules to all Ministers, or to the general Commission he gave
them afterward, is the most ridiculous and absurd thing imaginable. When the
Apostles went to the prejudiced and unbelieving Jews with the first news of the
Gospel, Meat and Drink was as much as they could expect; and Christ bids them
to take that and be contented. But he does no where forbid them to receive
more, if good Men freely gave it to them. And if Christ (according to T. E's
fancy) had determined Meat and Drink for the only Gospel Maintenance, then
the Apostles had been great Sinners in receiving the price of Possessions sold
and dedicated, Acts iv. and Chap. v. If they had been taught by T. E's Spirit,
they must have returned them back again; and so must S. Paul have done the
wages he took of other Churches, 2 Cor. xi. 9. and those liberal Presents he
received from the Philippians, Phil. iv. 18. Yea, and our Quaker must needs
exclaim against S. Paul for daring to be so bold, that when his Master had
expressly set down Meat and Drink for the Gospel Maintenance, He should ordain
that Believers should give their Teachers part of all their Goods or good
things, Gal. vi. 6. But we shall rather believe T. E. contradicts himself, than
that the Apostles contradicted their Master; and therefore shall conclude, That
the Quaker abuses our Lords words, in apylying them to be a determination of
the only Gospel Maintenance; and especially if he would make them a standing
Rule for the succeeding Ministry, after the Church was settled; the folly
whereof I shall show more fully. 27.

. 11. And now having removed his vain exceptions, I shall go on to show, That
our Lord Jesus and his Apostles have sufficiently established Tithes for the
maintenance of the the Gospel Ministers; and that they may be proved also out
of the Now Testament to be due Jure Divino. First, in regard there is no repeal
of Tithes in all the New Testament, which shows that our Lord left these in the
same state as he found them, (excepting only so far as concerned that
Priestood which was to be abolished) so far as they were Gods Right, and an
acknowledgement of his Supremacy and Bounty; so far as they were Moral, and a
necessary Provision for his Ministers; so far as they were founded on the Law
of Nature, and Primitive Revelation, and grounded on an Eternal Reason, our
Savior did not revoke them; no, nor any thing else so established: And if
Tithes had been the only thing of this kind to be abolished, it seems necessary
there should have been an express Revocation of them; which we are sure, there
is not; and therefore expressa nocent, non expressa non nocent Reg. Jur. 195.
. And we may reasonably believe, That Jesus intended they should remain of
Divine Right as they had been reputed always before. Secondly, But this is not
all, for there are positive Laws which do fairly intimate, that Tithes were to
be the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, when the Church was settled. For
besides our Savior's affirming Tithes ought to be paid, Math. xxiii. 23. The
Double Honor, or the Elder Brothers Portion due to the Presbyters, 1 Timothy v.
17. The Order for a Bishop to be given to Hospitality, which cannot be
maintained without a large Income, 1 Timothy iii. 2. The remark of Melchisedec's
receiving Thythes, of whose Order Christ and the Gospel Ministers are, Hebr.
vii. I say, besides these (which plead only a probability) there are two plain
places; first, that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. ix. 14. affirming, That like as the
Jewish Priests and Levites lived of the Tithes and Oblations under the Law,
even so there was a special Ordinance of Christ, (...), (either by word of
mouth, or Revelation) That they who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel: that is, of those good things which should be dedicated and offered in
gratitude for the Gospel. For this word (...) signifies not only a Good
Message, but the Reward given for it, as well in LXX. 2 Samuel iv. 10. as in
other Authors, as Mr. Mede has fully proved Med. Diatr. in loc.
. And the Blessed JESUS who ordained this, did incline the hearts of Pious
Christians to dedicate Tithes and other Oblations, made in gratitude for the
Gospel. And now that such Dedications are made, we enjoy them as well by the
Ordinance, as the Grace and Providence of Christ, and therefore Jure Divino.
What was given in acknowledgment for the love of Jesus showed in the Gospel,
was Jesus his Part; and he (who has now all power given him in Heaven and
Earth) has here assigned his and his Fathers Part to the Ministers of the
Gospel; and this Assignation gives them a Right thereunto Jure Divino. But
secondly, Lest any should say, This Text supposes something will be given, but
does not enjoin the Christians to give, We have another Law directed to the
People, containing both their Duty and the Ministers Right, Gal. vi. 6. Let him
that is taught in the Word communicate unto him that teaches in all Good
things. Gr. (...). that is, Let the Christians make the Ministers of the Gospel
partakers or sharers with them in all their Goods. For [(...)] signifies to
distribute or give some part to another, so that he may participate with us.
Romans xii. 13. Phil. iv. 15. and [(...)] signifies Earthly goods Luke xvi. 25.
Yea, the Fruits of the Earth are called [(...)] Luke xii. 18. and hence Beza
interprets it [Ex omnibus bonis]. Now surely T. E. will not say, We have no
other Goods or good things but Meat and Drink: If we be so poor, some excuse
may be made; but if we have any other Good things, Corn, Hay, Wool, increase of
Flocks and Herds, etc. we must not appropriate them all to our own use, but we
are enjoined [(...)] to distribute some part of all these Good things or Goods,
to God's Ministers. Some part he must have of all our Goods, and in all reason
that part ought to be the Tenth. For a Tenth was given by the Patriarchs before
the Law: a Tenth (at least) by the Jews under the Law: This was the Part which
God made known to be his by Revelation; the part which the Heathens had learned
by Primitive tradition to dedicate to their Gods: The Part which God approved
in the Jewish Polity, and which Christ never disapproved. The Tenth was a part
so reasonable and so known, so acceptable to God, so acknowledged by Men, and
so certainly due to God before, that there is no reason to doubt but that this
is the share or portion of Gospel Ministers. And so good Men of old understood
it to be, and therefore communicated this Tenth Part to God and his Ministers;
and therein both expounded and obeyed this Apostolical Injunction. The People
must Communicate, and that to the Gospel Ministers; and they may claim Jure
Divino to have a part of all their Good things; even the same part which was
always known to be God's Part, and so need not be particularly expressed here.
There is but one Objection against this, viz. That Tithes are not mentioned in
the Gospel or Epistles to be the very Part: To this therefore I reply, thirdly,
There are very good Reasons why Tithes are not mentioned in the New Testament
by Name; viz. First, To avoid all occasion of scandal to the Jews, whose
Priests were then in possession of them; and though the Synagogue was dead, yet
it was to be decently buried; whereupon many things were suffered a while to
run in their old Channel, till the whole Jewish Polity was destroyed. And it
would have been used as a prejudice to the young beginnings of the Gospel, if
the Preachers had presently claimed the Maintenance, which others were legally
instated in. And we see in S. Paul, 1 Cor. ix. that even where they had a right
and authority, in the first and unsettled times of Christianity, they did
forbear to use it, that they might avoid offense. Secondly, Nor was there any
need for JESUS to make any new Law for Tithes, since they were sufficiently
declared to be due to God before, by Revelation, and Example, by Reason and
Gods own choice; by the grounds on which they were given, and the ends for
which they were employed. The World knew there was a Jus Divinum to the tenth
part; so that our Lord was only to declare what Priests it was to be paid
unto, and who were to be his Receivers. And this he does, 1 Cor. ix. and Gal.
vi. And thus it was in the case of Gods part of our Time under the Gospel, as
well as of his part of our Estate: One day in seven being sufficiently declared
to be Gods part, Jesus made no new Law about that at all; but left it on those
firm foundations upon which he found it settled. For, all which our Lord was to
alter, was not in the proportion, (for a seventh part is still required) but in
the Assignation of the day; and even for that he made no express Law, but it is
likely privately instructed his Disciples herein; who brought in the Sunday
Sabbath into the Church, by Example rather than Constitution: And by degrees
they did establish it, carrying in the mean time so fair a respect to the
Jewish-Sabbath, that for many years they observed both the Saturday and Sunday
also. Thirdly, Our Lord and his Apostles did not make a new Determination of
the Tenth part by Name, because the Devotion of the Christians in those days
was so great, that they gave more than a Tenth freely, selling all and
following Christ, and bestowing on the Apostles more than they were in a
condition to receive. And as it were impertinent to make a Law for that Man to
spend one day in seven religiously, who spends all his very Week days in
Devotion and Religion; so it was in this case, our Lord JESUS might expect that
the joyful Message of his Gospel should be so thankful received, that those to
whom it was sent, should do as much freely to the gratifying his Messengers, as
the servile Jews did by the compulsion of a positive Law. And he foresaw that
his Grace would open the hearts of Kings and Princes, and other devout Persons,
to give more than a Tenth part of their good things, to those in his Name, and
for his sake, who were sent to preach the Gospel, Isa. lx. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
And this accordingly came to pass: for though our narrow-spirited Quakers think
the smallest matters too much to be contributed to God's Service; those Noble
and large Souls thought the greatest gifts too little in acknowledgement for
the Mercies of the Gospel. And since such times were coming, our Lord might
probably on purpose decline determining the proportion too expressly, that
Christians might have the opportunity of a voluntary Charity, and as S. Paul
speaks, might not do it grudgingly or of necessity; because God loves a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor. ix. 7. And this was more agreeable to the freedom and
ingenuity of Sons, which Christians are compared to. And positive Laws were
likely to be made when the decays of Piety and Charity did require them.
Fourthly, I add, That the state of the Church in those days was such, that
Believers, though they were willing, could not have opportunity to pay Tithes
regularly; nor could the Gospel Ministers receive them. And as it was no
prejudice to the Jewish-Priests, that there was little or no Tithes paid during
their Forefathers wandering in the Wilderness; no more is it to us, that they
were not paid regularly in the times of Persecution. Finally, our Lord JESUS
and the Apostles said so much in the New Testament, that the Primitive
Christians understood them to intend Tithes for the Gospel-maintenance; and
they said enough to show, that the Ancient Divine Right to the Tenth part
should be continued, and the Gospel Ministers should be the Receivers of it:
And it was neither necessary nor convenient they should speak more plainly in
this matter: This being sufficient to establish the Divine Right of Tithes
under the Gospel, and to teach us that Tithes being originally due to God, and
by Christ assigned to the Gospel Ministers, are now due to them Jure Divino.

. 12. Now this Divine Right is much confirmed by the Voluntary dedication of
the Tenth part to God by the Christians afterward. For what a Man dedicates to
God and his Service, God has a Right to it by that Dedication, though it were
a thing which was no way appropriate to God before, Acts v. 3, 4. Number. xxx. 2.
As you do very well say in the Conference: That if Tithes were not due by
Divine appointment, this Dedication will make them due. Which the Quaker
fancies to be a Relinquishing of the Divine Right, most maliciously inferring,
page 287. That he perceives, though Christ deny them, yet if Men will grant
them, it is enough to serve our turns. I know you never said nor thought that
Christ denied Tithes, and since the Quaker affirms, that Christ does deny them,
let him produce the place of Scripture where Christ does deny Tithes to be
given or granted to Gospel Ministers, or else he is a manifest Slanderer of
Christ in this suggestion. But to proceed: You did prove this Voluntary
dedication (with respect to this Nation) by King Ethelwolph's Charter. Not
because that was the first or oldest Donation of Tithes (as T. E. foolishly and
falsely suggests p. 299.) for there were elder Dedications of Tithes than this,
as well in this Nation as in other parts of Christendom, as you intimated in
the Conference, when you said, That as to this matter there was abundant
satisfaction to be had, by consulting Antiquaries and Church-Histories, but
especially by King Ethelwolph's Charter, etc. It Is plain you knew there were
other evidences, but you instanced in this as the fullest, (to this purpose,
and for this Nation,) which remains at large upon Record. And because the
Quaker, dreading all higher Antiquity, and omitting all Inquiry into preceding
Church History, does cunningly suppose Tithes no older among Christians than
this Charter, or however to have arisen from Popery, and accordingly bends all
his force to evacuate this Charter, and prove those times Popish; I shall crave
leave to lay open his weakness and lamentable mistakes in this following
Method, which will continue the account of Tithes I have begun, baffle the
Adversary I have undertaken, and free you my worthy Friend from his aspersions.

First, I will look back into the Ages before K. Ethelwolph, and show by what
Authorities and Presidents he made this Donation. Secondly, I will consider the
Donation it self, and the state of those times in which it was made. Thirdly, I
will note how it has been confirmed since. And then fourthly, wipe off T.E.'s
particular Blots thrown upon this Sacred Maintenance.

. 13. First, To look back into the Primitive Times: The Apostles having given a
general Rule for the Faithful to communicate unto their Teachers in all good
things; the Primitive Christians did always make liberal Oblations to their
Pastors, not only of Houses and Lands as we read in Holy Scripture, but also of
Money and other things; which being collected every Lords day was delivered to
the Bishop, says Justin Martyr Just. Mart. Apol. 2. An. 150.
. But not to expatiate into the whole Maintenance of the Christian Bishops and
Priests in the first Ages, which was so plentiful that they had enough for
themselves, and also for entertainment of Strangers, Relief of the Poor and
suffering Brethren, and for furnishing God's Worship with all things necessary,
even then when the Christians were so harrassed with Persecutions: I will come
to inquire whether they had nothing in that Maintenance answering to Tithes;
yea, whether they had not Tithes given them, by a Voluntary Devotion. I will
begin with the Testimony of Irenaeus, S. Polycarp's Disciple, who was the
Scholar of S. John, and lived An. 170. We ought (says he) to offer to God the
First Fruits of his Creatures, as Moses says, Thou shall not appear before the
Lord empty: for not all kind of Oblations are abrogated; there were Oblations
among them, and there are Oblations among us Irenaeus advers. Haer. lib. 5. c.
34.
. And a little after he says, That as the the Jews gave their Tenths, so the
Christians gave all they had freely and cheerfully to the Lords uses, not
giving less than they, as having a greater hope. And here we must note, That
these First Fruits which we find often mentioned in the Ancients as paid to the
Christian Priests, were one sort of Voluntary Tithe, prescribed by Moses Law,
being the first and best part of the Fruits of the Earth, offered solemny to
God by the owner: And if Tithes had been unlawful because they were spoken of
in Moses Law, First Fruits must have been so also. But we shall see the very
first Christians dedicated their First Fruits of all the Earths productions to
God: And what was this but a Voluntary Tithe? Yea, I find the Names
First Fruits and Tithes frequently joined, as signifying the same thing; only
the Greek Churches call these parts of the Earths productions (...), which the
Latins more usually term Decimae. And it will be more evident that First Fruits
among the Christians were but another Name for Tithes, when we hear what
follows. The Apostolical Canons (which were the Decrees of diverse Christian
Synods, made in the times of Persecution, and of great Authority in the
Christian Church) take notice of the Christians in those times, to bring their
First Fruits to the place of Assembly, and by the Priest to offer them at the
Altar; which looking somewhat like a Sacrifice, it was ordered, That neither
Honey, Milk, strong Liquors, Birds, nor living Creatures, nor any other sorts
of Pulse, but only some of the first ripe ears of of Corn, and Grapes, should
be offered at the Altar Apostol. Can. 3.
. But all other Fruits should be sent to the Bishop's house, as First Fruits
for the Bishop and Presbyters Can. 4.
. From whence it is plain, That those Christians did dedicate a part of all
their Profits to God and his Ministers. And the ancient Greek Church has an
excellent Prayer, which the Priest said for those who thus offered their Tithes
or Firstfruits Eucholo. page 655.
And S. Gregory's Sacramentary has another. In these times of Persecution also
lived Origin, Anno 210. whose opinion concerning these Dedications of Tithes
and First Fruits we heard before. 8. And out of the same Homily Origin. in
Numer. Hom. 11.
we have transcribed these words, It is an undecent, unworthy and wicked thing,
for one that worships God and enters into the Church, and knowing that the
Priests and Ministers wait at the Altar, serving either to the Word of God, or
the Ministeries of the Church, does not offer to the Priests the First part of
those Fruits of the Earth, which God gives by making his Sun to shine, and his
Rain to fall. Such a Soul seems to me neither to remember God nor think of him,
nor yet to believe that God gave those Fruits, which he takes and lays up, as
if God had nothing to do with them. And hence (as is noted before,) he
concludes, the Law of Tithes and First Fruits ought to stand in force among
Christians. To him we may add S. Cyprian, who lived about 40 Years after, who
commending the Nobleness of the first Christians, blames those who did not give
the Tithes out of their Inheritance Cypri. de Unit. Eccle.
Which he would not have done, but that he believed Christ intented Tithes for
the maintenance of a Gospel Ministry. To this we madd the Testimony of that
ancient Book which bears the name of Clement's Constitutions Lib. 8.30.
: Let all the First Fruits be delivered to the Bishop, and to the Presbyters
and the Deacons. So that we see Tithes and First Fruits were paid and thought
lawful even in the times of Persecution; and since no Humane Law enjoined them,
they must needs be moved hereunto by esteeming them due by God's Law. But we
proceed to consider the Opinion of the succeeding Times; and (to omit the less
considerable) S. Ambrose is very plain: It is not (says he) sufficient for us
to bear the name of Christians, if we do not the works of Christians; now the
Lord commands us to pay our Tithes yearly of all our Fruits and Cattle S. Ambr.
Sermon. 33. in Quadrag.
. And again, says he, Id. Ser. 34. An. 380.
What is it faithfully to give Tithes? but that we never give the worst or
least parts to God of our Grain, our Wine, of the Fruits of our Trees, of our
Flocks, our Garden, our Merchandise; yea, of our very Hunting, because of all
the Substance which God gives a Man, he has reserved the Tenth part to
himself: and therefore it is not lawful for a Man to retain that which God has
reserved to himself. Epiphanius, his contemporary, a Bishop in Cyprus, says:
The Scripture exhorts the People, that out of their just labors they shall
give to the Priests for their maintenance, First Fruits, Oblations, and other
things Epiphan. Panar. lib. 3. to. 2. haer. 80.
. Note still the Greek Fathers call the same thing First Fruits which the Latin
call Tithes. Only in S. Chrysostom we find both words: for this great Patriarch
(who is a zealous opposer of all Jewish Ceremonies, yet) affirms, It is lawful
and fitting for Christian to pay Tithes Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 35. and in Ep. ad
Hebr. Hom. 12.
. Yea, he says Melchisedec was our Tutor in this matter. S. Hierom also in
many places declares they were generally paid in his time. He tells us, That
as a Priest or Levite, he himself lived upon Tithes and Oblations Hieron.
Epist. 2.
. And again, under the name of First Fruits, The First Fruits, says he, in
Ezekiel. 45.
of all our Provisions are offered to the Priests, so that we taste nothing of
New-fruits till the Priest has first tasted thereof; and this we do, that the
Priest may lay up our bounty and Oblation in his house, so that through his
prayers God may bless our houses. Hence he affirms the Law for Tithes does
oblige Christians as to the Substance, as was noted before. And he calls
Tithes, the things that be God's Id. in Matthew. 22.
. Yea, he advises the Clergy that are in the Towns, to send part of their
Tithes to those who served God in desert places: which plainly proves they
were paid to the Priests in his days. S. Augustine (who next follows) is full
in many places of his Works for the proof of this: And he intimates, it was no
new Custom nor Opinion to to pay Tithes as God's due. For our Forefathers
(says he) therefore abounded in all plenty, because they gave God his Tithes
and Caesar his Tribute August. Hom. 48.
. And again: Tithes are required as due debt, and he that will not give them
invades another Man's Right -- Whatsoever Art sustaineth thee, it is God's: and
he requires Tithes out of whatsoever thou live by: May not God say, The Man
that I made is mine, the Seed that thou sowest is mine, the Cattle that thou
weariest in thy work are mine, the Showers, the Rain and the gentle Winds are
mine, the heat of the Sun is mine -- and thou that lendest thy hand deservest
only the tenth part, -- but God gives us a liberal reward for our pains,
reserving only the Tenth part to himself Aug. de Temp. Ser. 219.
. The whole Sermon is most worthy to be read. and is translated into English,
in Sir Henry Spelman de non Temerandis Ecclesiis: being an evident Proof of the
Ancients opinion that Tithes were of Divine Right; which I might further prove
by many more Instances: But I will end these Testimonies of single Eminent
Fathers, with that of Prosper of Aquitain, who speaking to the Clergy of his
days, says, We do willingly receive the daily Oblations and Tithes of the
Faithful, and shall we lay aside the care of the Flock Prosp. de Vit. Contempl.
lib. 1. c. 21.
? Now I hope the Quaker will not say all these were Papists; or that the Church
was Popish as early as Irenaeus and Origin: and if not, then he must recant his
false Assertion, That Tithes came in with Popery. But to go on: In the next
place we will show, That the Decrees of Councils did confirm our Assertion,
That Tithes are due jure Divino. And first, let it be noted, That though it be
certain Tithes were paid from the earliest days of Christianity; yet it was
not for a long time directly enjoined by any Humane Law, either Ecclesiastical
or Civil: which shows the first Christians believed they were obliged to pay
them by the Law of God. And according to S. Augustin's Rule, viz. [ That such
things as were universally observed, and owed not their beginning to any
Council, were to be thought to have been ordained by the Apostles] Tithes and
First Fruits must at least be of Apostolical Institution. I find indeed many
Ancient Councils suppose them to have been paid, and ordering how they should
be distributed by the Bishops: as Can. Apostolic. 38, and 41. Council. Gangrens.
Can. 7 and 8. An. 324. where they are called [(...)] Ecclesiastical Tribute of
Fruits: And Council. Antiochen. Can. 24, 25. An. 341. where we read of [(...)]
the Profits of the Church, or the Fruits of the Fields. And also in the
Canonical Epistle of S. Cyril of Alexandr. to Domnus, where we find mention
[(...)] of Ecclesiastical Revenues, etc. Among all these Instances, that of the
forementioned Council of Gangra deserves more largely to be described, as
containing a full proof of the Ancient Donation of this Tribute of Fruits to
the Church. For, this Synod complaining of the several mischiefs wrought by the
Schismatics of Eustathius his party, mention these among the rest: That they
left the Houses of God, and contemned the Church, holding private Conventicles,
and teaching strange Doctrines there, as well against the Church, as those
things that were done in it: and despising the usual Garments, did put on new
and strange Habits: And then they add, The Ecclesiastical Tribute also of
Fruits, which of old time was given to the Church, they challenge to
themselves, and those with them, as being Saints Bevereg. Council. To. 1. p.
416. Conc. Gangrens. Bin. ibid. p. 376.
. For which, and other Quaker-like practices, the Synod pronounces them to be
accursed. In this and the forecited places it appears, That Tithes and
First Fruits were given to the Church long before the Year of Christ 324. and
paid by the People without any Laws to compel them so to do: And the first Law
which directly enjoins them, is the Decree of a Roman Council, Anno 374.
commanding, That Tithes and First Fruits should be paid by the Christians, and
they which withheld them should be anathematized. But there is some question
whether that Council be genuine or no; I shall therefore omit this, and all
those other Councils Council. Tarracon. Ann. 516. Cone. Aurel. 1. An. 520. Conc.
Brita. sub S. Patricio, etc.
which suppose them, but do not enjoin them; and take notice, that the first
positive Ecclesiastical Law was made in the Council of Matiscon, almost 300
years before K. Ethelwolph's Donation, Anno 560. whose words do fully prove our
Assertion, of their having been paid from the beginning jure Divino. For thus
that Council speaks Council. Matisc. Can. 5.
: The Divine Laws taking care of the Priests and Ministers of the Churches, for
their Inheritance, have enjoined all the People to pay the Tithes of their
Fruits to Holy Places; that being hindered by no labor, they may more duly
attend Spiritual Ministeries: which Laws the whole Company of Christians have
for a long time kept inviolate: wherefore we decree and ordain, That the
Ancient Custom be observed still among the Faithful, and that all the People
bring in the Tithes, which maintain the Worship of God. And the like Decree was
made in Spain about thirty years after, in the first Council of Hispalis, An.
590. under the Famous Bishop Leander, (the Reformer of that Nation from
Arrianism), We ordain, say they Council. Hispal. ap. Ivon. p. 2. c. 174.
, That all the Fruits and Tithes as well of Cattle as of Fruits, be rightly
offered to their several Churches, by Rich and Poor, according to the saying of
the Lord by the Prophet, Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, etc. --
For as God has given us all, so of all he requires Tithe, of the profits of
the Field, and all Provisions, of Bees and Honey, Lambs, etc. And he that pays
not Tithes of all these, is a Thief to God himself. On which we may note, they
all declare Tithes to be due jure Divino. It would be too tedious to add the
numerous confirmation of these Canons, which were made afterward in the
Councils of Toledo, Bracara, Mentz, Colen, etc. besides our English Councils,
of which more hereafter. Now we will briefly observe what the Laws of other
Kings and Emperors had done, as to this matter, before King Ethelwolph's Time.
The Famous Constantine the Great, being settled in his Empire; In the Lands
under his Dominion, out of every City, he gave a certain Tribute, to be
distributed among the Churches and Clergy of the Provinces, and confirmed this
Donation to stand for ever Hist. Trip. l. 1. c. 10.
* It were endless to relate all the Constitutions of Pious Emperors, either to
enlarge the Revenues of the Church, to preserve its Liberties, or to secure the
Donations made by others. Let that one Law which is so full for the Divine
Right of Tithes, serve instead of many Instances. The Tithes by God's Command
are separated for the Priests, that they which are of God's Famtly may be
sustained by his Portion, and therefore they cannot by any Humane Privilege be
given to Laymen; lest the Supreme Authority should therein prejudice the
Divine Commandment Cod. l. 7. Tit. de Praescrip.
. A parallel Law to this we find in Authenticis, tit. eod. But to come still
nearer to King Ethelwolph, he might know how the Religious King Riccaredus had
confirmed the Decrees of the first Council of Hispalis about paying Tithes, An.
590. Nor could he be ignorant what (that most glorious Prince of his times)
Charles the Great, (Emperor of the West,) had done in settling Tithes on the
Church about 100 years before King Ethelwolph's Donation. This Emperor was so
far from Idolatry, that he called a Council to condemn the use of Images, and
writ against them himself: And yet he in an Assembly of all his People offered
and gave all his Tithes to God and his Ministers in a most solemn manner, and
obliged all his People to do the like. And the form of the Dedication, with the
Curses against the Infringers thereof, is set down at large in the Capitulars
of Charles the Great Wormat. l. 6. p. 285.
. And indeed before the time of King Ethelwolph, Tithes were settled on the
Church in most parts of the Christian World, even by Civil and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, as well as Voluntary Donation, and all grounded on this
Principle, That Tithes were due jure Divino. But it may be our Quaker's
ignorance may persuade him that Ethelwolph was the first who gave Tithes in
this Nation; and I perceive all along he dates the very Birth of Tithes in the
year 855. Wherefore I will show him that he is miserably mistaken in that also.
Our Famous Lawyer Fleta expounding the word [Church-esset,] says Lib. 1. cap.
17.
, It signifies a certain Measure of Corn which every one of old gave to the
Holy Church, about the time of S. Martin 's Feast, as well in the time of the
Britains as the English. Adding, that it was after called First Fruits. So that
by this Account, there was a kind of Tithes paid by the Britains before the
coming of Austin: For the Saxon word Ciric-sceat signifies the Tribute of the
Church. Or else Ciric-set or sat, that is, The Churchseed, as Mr. Lambert
expounds it. And also Malmsbury Lib. 2. de gest. Reg. c. 11.
, calls it The First Fruits of the Seed. Another old MSS. in Spelman, The
First Fruits of the Seed belonging to the Church of that place where a Man
dwells. And Lindenbrogius calls it, A Tribute of Corn out of the Fields. I give
the larger Account of this, because that above 160 years before King
Ethelwolph's time, one of his Predecessors, King Ina, had made a strict Law
about this matter: Let the Caeric-sceat be paid on the Feast of S. Martin,
(says he) and if any Man neglects it, he shall for feit sixty Shillings, and
restore his Caeric-sceat twelve times over Spelm. p. 192.
, Anno 692. It seems that here in England, as well as in other Christian
Countries, the People had paid it voluntarily before: And it was some decays of
Piety, that occasioned these Laws. Now if T. E. desire to have the Name of
Tithes, as well as the thing, among the Ancient Saxons, he may find in the
Epistle of Boniface to Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury Apud Spelm. T. 1. p.
240.
, Ann. 745. That the English Priests in those days were maintained by the
taking the Daily Oblations and Tithes of the Faithful. Moreover, about the year
750. Egbert Archbishop of York, of the Saxon Blood Royal, made a Collection of
all Canons that were made in the Councils before his time, and which were in
force in England And these Collections seem to have been a Compendium of the
Canon Law among the Saxons. Now among these Canons there is frequent mention of
Tithes: viz. That the People be instructed in the right manner of Offering them
to God's Church, Can. 4. That the Priest shall take them, and set down the
Names of those who gave them, Can. 5. That the People should not change that
which fell out to be the Tenth, Can. 99. That the Lord requires Tithes out of
that which we get our living by, Can. 100. Again, in the Council of Chalcuth,
A. 787. All Men are strictly charged to give Tithes of all that they possess:
Because it is the Propriety of the Lord God, or the Part that specially belongs
to him, Canon 17. If it be inquired what Laws our Princes made in this matter:
Not to mention all those Charters which from the first beginning of
Christianity, do confirm all the Liberties, and all the Revenues of the Church
(among which were Tithes) we will only note, that Ethelbald King of Mercia, An.
794. confirms to all the Clergy of his Kingdom, the Liberty which they had out
of the Woods, the Fruit of the Ground, and the taking of Fish. And this (being
after that Epistle of the German Boniface, which assured us Tithes were then
enjoyed by the Clergy) must be meant of Tithes. Again, K. Offa, (who had with
all his Clergy condemned the Adoration of Images, and so was no Idolater,) An.
793. did give the Tenth of all that he had to the Church. By all which it
appears, That from the time of the first general Conversion of the Saxons,
Tithes were generally paid by the People, and received by the Clergy, even
before any special Laws were made about them. And when Councils or Princes did
make any Laws about them, they always do suppose them paid before. So that King
Ethelwolph in this Donation does rather confirm the Right of Tithes, than
originally make them due. And it is to be noted, that till this time, the
Saxons being divided into so many petty Kingdoms, were in continual broiles;
and there was no one King who had power to collect all the scattered Laws about
Tithes, and confirm them for the whole Kingdom of England, till he, who was the
first Hereditary Monarch of the Saxon Blood. He therefore, guided by these
foreign Authorities and Examples, and led by the Custom, Canons and Laws of
the several petty Kingdoms and Kings, does now make this most famous Charter,
to oblige the whole Kingdom to this Religious Payment, whose rise and original
we have thus far seen.

. 14. 2ly, As to the Donation it self, the immediate occasion of it was the
Compassion of this Religious and mild Prince toward his Subjects, sorely
infested and harrased with the Danish Invasions. Whereupon he summons a General
Council of all England, at Winchester, Anno 855. wherein were present Beorred
King of Mercia, and Edmund King of the East Angles (his Tributaries) with the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and all the Bishops, and the Nobles of
England: with whom King Ethelwolph consulted by what means they might best
avert the anger of God, and obtain a removal of the sore Judgments with which
the Nation was scourged at that time. Whereupon it was by general consent there
determined, That the Tithes throughout all England should be granted to God and
the Church; as this Charter of K. Ethelwolph, yet extant in Ancient Historians,
does testify: which was subscribed by the two Tributary Kings, the Bishops,
Abbots, Dukes, Earls and Noblemen: and consented unto by an infinite
Multitude of other faithful People, says Ingulphus.

. 15. 3ly, But lest there should be any defect in this Charter, we will show
how it has been confirmed since in all Ages. First, it was confirmed in that
famous League between the Danes and Saxons, by Alfred or Alured the Great, Son
of Ethelwolph, and Guthum the first Baptized King of the Danes, An. 887. and a
Penalty added for such as should detain their Tithes Leg: Eccles. Alured and
Guth. c. 9.
. And again, by Edward the Elder, who was Son of Alured, An. 906. And again, by
Athelstan, (Son of the said Edward,) in the Council of Gratelane, An. 928.
Tithes also, by the Name of [Decimas seminum Primitias], are again enjoined by
Edmund Brother of Athelstane, in a great Council of the Clergy and Laity at
London, An. 944. King Edgar in open Senate renewed the Law for Tithes; and made
it a forfeiture of Nine parts to detain the Tenth, An. 967. And in his Canons
he calls Tithes, [Things which by Right are to be paid to God] As they are also
by Ethelred [The Rights due to God] when he confirmed the Donation of Tithes in
the General Council at Aenham, An. 1009. The same ratified also by Canutus, and
King Edgar's Penalty revived, An. 1032. And lastly, by King Edward the
Confessor, in those Laws of his which were collected and confirmed by King
William the Conqueror at his Entering upon the English Crown; as all other Kings
of England since have done. The particulars are too many to mention, and the
Thing is sufficiently known. Wherefore we will only add, that the very first
words of Magna Charta, (the foundation of the English Liberties,) confirms all
that had been given to the Church. And Sir Hen. Spelman affirms, these Grants
had been ratified in thirty nine several great Councils and Parliaments before
the Reformation. And we all know, that our Protestant Princes have confirmed
the Right of Tithes as fully as any of their Predecessors; and with their
Protestant Parliaments have given greater strength and security to the Clergy
in possession of them, than ever they had before; and made better Laws for
punishing those who do detain them. Now if all this, added to the antecedent
Divine Right, will not amount to make a valid Deed of Gift, then no Man can
secure any thing to his Posterity. For this Donation has been advised by
Fathers, enjoined by Councils, practiced by foreign Princes, solemny made by
the general Consent of the three Estates with the King, frequently confirmed by
as general Consent in every Age, and the benefit thereof enjoyed for 800 Years
by those to whom the Donation was made. And thus the Clergy have a second Title
to the Tithes: They were originally due to God, and afterward freely given by
the right Owners, and that Gift confirmed by their Posterity. Due by the Laws
of God, due by the Gift of the Owners, and allowed by the Laws of Man: which
being thus far proved, I hope our Quaker's trifling Objections will now easily
be dispelled.

. 16. Three general Exceptions T. E. takes at this Charter. First, In respect
of the Author of it, page 289. And here he affirms King Ethelwolph was a
Papist. If T. E. had known what gives a Man the just denomination of a Papist,
he would not have discoursed so absurdly: For it is not every one that agrees
in some opinions with the Roman Church, who is a Papist; since then all
Christians in the World would be Papists: but he is a Papist, who professes
himself a Member of the Roman Church, and acknowledges the Pope's Supremacy,
believing all the Articles of the Roman Churches Faith: Now K. Ethelwolph did
never profess himself a Member of the Roman Church, but he and his Successors
were Vicarios Christi Leg. Hydens. cap. 8.
, owning no Supreme in their Kingdoms but Christ, as is learnedly made out
against the Papists, in Dr. Basire's Liberty of the Britain Church, and Sir
Roger Twisden's Histor. Vindication: and we shall fully prove on page 300. that
he did not hold all the opinions of the Church of Rome, and therefore was no
Papist. But if we should grant so much to the Quaker, That Ethelwolph was a
Papist; yet neither would that make his Donation of Tithes void: For an
erroneous Opinion in the Person who does a thing good in it self (as we have
proved Tithes to be) does not make the Act void. And if all the good Acts of
Papists (in the true sense) and all their Charters and Donations be void,
merely because made and done by Papists; then all the Charters of our Kings,
all the Endowments of Hospitals and Schools, Magna Charta, and all Public Acts
for some hundreds of years before K. Henry VIII. would be void: Which Principle
would destroy the Maintenance of the Poor, the Privileges of Cities, and the
Freedom of all English Subjects. But this Quaker must be more wary than thus to
unhinge all Establishments; and let him note, That if Ethelwolph had been a
Papist in other things, yet in this Act he was none, unless Abraham were a
Papist before Christ's time, and Origin with the Fathers afterward; yea,
unless our Protestant Princes and Parliaments be Papists also.

. 17. Secondly, he objects, p. 290. That Tithes were given to maintain the
Popish Clergy]. This is a mistake also; for Ingulphus says, Vniversam
dotaverat Ecclesiam Anglicanam: it was for the Maintenance of the English
Clergy, who had a Patriarch of their own in those days, and were a Church of
themselves, not holding all the opinions of the Roman Church, nor professing
any Canonical obedience to the Pope (which was first done by Ralph Archbishop
of Canterbury, Anno 1115.) and therefore they cannot justly be called a Popish
Clergy. But suppose again, the Saxon Priests had been Papists; that would not
have made a Donation of Tithes invalid: because Tithes are God's Right, and the
Grant was intended to God Ad serviendum Deo soli, Ingulph. Deo contulit. Math.
West.
. The Clergy of that Age were God's only public Ministers (and the Quaker's
private Teaching was not then invented); the Donors supposed them a good
Ministry, and as such endowed them, for they esteemed them to be God's
Receivers: and since there is no fault in God, if there had been a fault in the
Servant, that could not prejudice the Master's Title. Besides, Almighty God
has now provided himself of Ministers that are no Papists, but the most
considerable Enemies to Popery in all the World; so that if they had been a
Popish Clergy, and forfeited their own Right, they could not forfeit ours; and
yet it is from a Protestant Clergy that the Quakers would take the Tithes.
Again, T. E. must know, that erroneous opinions in the Clergy do not make void
the Rights which they have by the Laws of God or Man: For the Jewish Priests in
Christ's time were very erroneous in judgment, and yet Christ pronounces they
had a Right to Tithes, even to those small Tithes not expressed in God's Law,
but Dedicated by the Pharisees; for, says he, These things ye ought have done,
Matthew. xxiii. 23. so doubtless we may say, Though that Clergy were erroneous,
yet Ethelwolph ought to have given them God's due, and the People ought to have
paid it to them: If they were erroneous, neither Prince nor People knew it, and
they did not give these to maintain their Errors (as T. E. maliciously
insinuates) but to maintain that which they believed to be a good Ministry, and
the true Worship of God: and therefore the Donation remains good. If I give
alms to a poor Turk, Papist or Quaker, he is malicious who says I do it to
maintain his Errors, when I do it to relieve his wants Misericordia solet
juvare paup^rem, non examinare justitiam. Ambros. de Nabeth.
. However, will any plead, if I endow an Almshouse, and suppose the Beads-men
to be good Men, but am mistaken, and after my decease it appears the Persons
which were chosen were of evil Principles or wicked Life; that this makes my
Donation to be wholly void? We may say, such evil Persons ought to be put out,
and better put in; but be the Persons good or bad, the Gift given to God stands
good and is irrevocable.

. 18. Thirdly, The Quaker objects, ibid. That he did it upon evil motives. For
the good of our Souls, and the forgiveness of our sins (are the words of the
Charter); which shows it to be an effect of that Popish Doctrine of meriting
Salvation by Good works, and that he gave this as an expiation for his sins.]
It Is somewhat strange that T. E. should reckon both these for evil motives; and
it is the first time that I ever heard it called an evil motive, to be moved to
do a good work, For the good of our Souls. Again, the desire of Remission of
his sins was a good motive in it self, only he took an ill course to obtain
it, if he sought Expiation by Good works; to merit pardon and salvation by good
works, is now a Doctrine of the grosser Romanists, and I fear of some Quakers
also, who (slighting the merit and necessity of Christ's death) ascribe
Salvation to the following the Light within; yea, T. E. himself pleads, that
there is no Salvation unless we have a sinless perfection, and (as if Christ
had never died) positively affirms, Wheresoever there is sin, there is also
condemnation, p. 97. Now he that looks for Salvation by his perfection, does
hold that Popish Doctrine of meriting Salvation by Good works; and he that
proudly says, he has no sin to be remitted, renders Christ's death as useless,
as he that believes he shall obtain remission by his Good works. And therefore
I doubt the Quaker will be found to be more a Papist than K. Ethelwolph: For
this Popish Doctrine of Merit and Expiation by Good works is not so old as that
Age; yea, the learned Bishop Usher proves, that this Doctrine was not received
here in Alselm's days; for in his Directions to those who visited the Sick are
these Questions and Answers, A. Brother, do thou believe thou can not be
saved but by the death of Christ? B. Yes. A. Give him thanks for this with all
thine heart. B. I do. A. If the Lord would judge thee, say, O Lord, I set the
death of my Lord JESUS between me and thy Judgment, otherwise I cannot stand
before thee Usher. de Succes. Eccles. c. 7.. 21.
. Yea, Pope Adrian our Countryman calls Merits a broken Reed, on which if we
lean, it will pierce our hand Adrian. in 4. Sent.
. And it is evident from S. Bernard, Durandus, and others, that the Church of
Rome it self was not for Merits in this gross sense, of 300 or 400 years after
Ethelwolph's time: And for his words in this Charter, and some such like as are
to be found among the most Orthodox Fathers, they mean no more, than that they
hoped these good fruits meet for Repentance would be acceptable to God, so that
he perceiving their purposes of welldoing, might of his great mercy bestow that
pardon on them, which Christ alone merited: And hence the good King adds, that
they gave these also, That the Priests might so much the more fervently pour
out their Prayers to God without ceasing for them: So that we may perceive,
they did not think this good work alone could expiate their sins, or merit
Salvation, without God's mercy; and to that end, they desired the daily and
importunate Prayers of the Church for them, since they had learned from S.
James, That the Prayers of God's Ministers were a good means to obtain
Remission, James v. 14, 15. But let us here also suppose they were led by those
evil motives which T. E's malice falsely lays to their charge; will he say, that
all the Donations of Papists (who really are led by these Motives) are invalid
to those to whom they are made? If so, then all the Schools, Hospitals, and
other charitable Gifts of Popish Donation are void; which is a ridiculous
Assertion. The giving any thing to a pious use upon evil motives, may endanger
the Giver's losing his Reward in Heaven, but it will not deprive the Receivers
of the benefit of such a Gift on Earth; and if we might not lawfully enjoy a
Gift, unless the Giver were moved by just and good motives to give it, we could
scarce enjoy any Donation of Papist or Protestant; since we cannot certainly
know whether they were induced to it by good or bad motives. We conclude
therefore, That the Quaker falsely accuses our Ancestors, in calling them
Papists, and their Clergy Popish, and in affirming they were acted by evil
motives. And yet if all these had been as true as they are false, it had been
hurtful only to themselves, but does not at all make their pious Donations of
Tithes to God and his Ministers to be void.

Some slighter Cavils he has, p. 292, 293. As first, his calling the Clergy of
that Age Apostates and corrupt, for being so grateful to their Benefactors, as
to engage to sing David's Psalms, and to make Prayers twice a Week for them,
that God would reward their bounty, and pardon their sins. It Is true, they
called these Prayers [Missas] a name used very innocently and anciently by the
Latin Fathers; but these Prayers were far different from the Missal of the
Church of Rome, whose Offices were first brought in here by Osmund Bishop of
Salisbury, An. 1096. there being great variety before. Again, he quarrels with
the Charter, for the Names of the Saints annexed to it, in whose honor it is
said to have been made: But T.E. may note, that there is not one of the three
Mentioners of this Clause that agree in it; so that it is very probable, the
Historians living some Ages after, might (as their manner is) put in this less
material passage in the Phrase of their own Times, of which dealing in other
cases I could give many Instances: however, it was given to God in the first
place, and no mention of the Saints in all the body of the Charter; and it is
certain they did not worship the Saints in those days: and sure it is no great
crime in the second place to give a respect and honor to them, even the same
we do to such as are alive: But our Quakers despise all the old Saints, and
think no Saints deserve so much honor as themselves. In the next place, he
quarrels at you, for that you will not grant They gave Tithes in a blind and
superstitious zeal;] whereas we have learned from S. Paul, It is good to be
zealous always in a good thing, Gal. iv. Now I have made it evident, It is a
good thing to grant Tithes to God's Service; and therefore though our Ancestors
were blind and superstitious in other things, yet not in this Donation, herein
their zeal was commendable. Again, whereas you had said, Tithes were given to
God for the maintenance of his Ministry, T. E. interprets this to be A calling
the Idolatrous Priesthood of the Church of Rome God's Ministers;] which is a
malicious and false inference, since the Priesthood to whose maintenance these
Tithes were given, was neither Idolatrous, nor the Priesthood of the Church of
Rome; but it is certain the Donors intended them to the right Ministers of God;
and I make no doubt they were such to whom they gave them: and if there were
some errors among them, that takes not away the Character of their Office, nor
their Title to Tithes, since Christ himself declared, Tithes ought to be paid
to the Jewish Priests, Matthew. xxiii. 23. and sent Judas out to preach the
Gospel.

1.9. The Quaker proceeds p. 294, 295. to give us some proofs of his
dishonesty, as he has done of his ignorance before; for whereas you affirmed,
That Tithes being given to God for the maintenance of his Ministry, no blemish
in the Dedication of them could alter their property:] This being spoken
particularly of Tithes, T. E. thus descants upon it, His Assertion is so
general [no blemish, etc.] that nothing once dedicated, by whomsoever, would
seem to come amiss to him, not the offerings of the Gentiles to their
Heathenish Deities, not the Turks endowments to their Mahumetan Priests, nor
Judas his 30 pieces of silver]. Were these given to the true God? or were these
Offerings Tithes? If they were not both of these, why does this Quaker mention
them here? or with what face can he say your Assertion was general, when you
were speaking of a good thing [Tythes] given to the [True God] and that for a
good end [the maintenance of his Ministry?] Here are three limitations, and yet
he has the impudence to call this a general Assertion, and parallel it with
evil things, or things given to false gods: But your words I will stand to, and
make it appear, That such things as Tithes are, being given to the True God for
a good end, no blemish in the Dedication can alter their property: Which I
might prove by the Jews receiving the Donations, Charters and Oblations of the
Heathen Princes of Persia, as we read in Ezra and Nehemiah, as also the Gifts
and Presents which Augustus Caesar made to the Temple at Jerusalem Joseph.
Bell. Jud.
. But I will stick to your first Instance of the Censers offered by Korah's
company, Number. xvi. These were by God's special order declared holy, and
forbidden to be used to any common use afterward. The Quaker replies to this,
That you have found out a pretty parallel, and matched your Case well, in
bringing this rebellious Consecration, attended with a damnable sin, to
parallel the Dedication of Tithes.] Methinks if T. E. have not so much Logic,
he might have so much common sense to discern, that it is the difference
between these two Cases that makes your Argument good; for you are arguing a
majori ad minus, That if a Dedication, though made in so wicked a manner, by
such damnable sinners, does make the thing offered sacred, and not to be
alienated; then no blemish in the Dedication of a good thing to the true God,
can make the thing become unconsecrate: And if the Censers might not be
alienated, much less should Tithes: Yea, and T. E. saw this well enough; for
you had said expressly, There was a vast difference between that Dedication, and
this of Tithes: but this he over-lookt wilfully, that he might take an occasion
to make the Reader believe, that you had made these two Cases to be alike in
all respects.

Well, but T. E. will give you an account why the Censers of Korah might not be
used to common uses, p. 296. The Censers were to be kept (says he) for a
particular Reason, viz. to be a sign and memorial that no stranger should come
near to offer Incense.] If we dare believe Almighty God, rather than this
ignorant Quaker, this was not the reason why they were to be kept; for God
gives another reason of that, ver. 37. Because they are hallowed, and ver. 38.
For they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed: Where we
see it was the Dedication that made them incapable of being used to any common
use afterward; but the Quaker's Reason was not a Reason why they were kept,
but why they were put to that particular holy use, and to no other: And would
God the Quaking Speakers would remember these Censers at this day, when they
usurp the Priest's Office. Another ingenious note of T. E's is this, That The
Censers were not permitted to be used as Censers, but being made into broad
plates for the covering of the Altar, the property of them was altered before
they were allowed to be used.] The property altered! has not his immediate
Teaching learned him to speak sense? the form of the Censers was altered
indeed, but the property was not altered at all. The Lord had the property of
them when they were Censers, and he had the same property in them when they are
made into Plates. The property of a a thing is not altered, unless it change
its Master. If I have a property in a piece of Gold by a Friend's Gift, and
after see fit to melt it into a Ring for my own use; the form is changed, but
the property is the same. But to the Case before us: As the Censers being once
given to God, must remain to be his still; and though they might be used to
another holy use, yet they could not be alienated to a profane or common use;
so we may learn, it ought to be in other sacred Dedications: If the things were
offered to maintain an evil way of Worship, they may be applied to maintain a
right way of Worship; but still they must remain sacred, God's property in them
should not be altered.

. 20. The poor Quaker finding his Arguments will not be able to wrest Tithes
out of the Clergys hands, attempts to get more forces on his side, and page
297. makes a fine Speech to exasperate the Impropriators against the Priests,
persuading them that we are about to take their Estates from them; but I shall
make it evident very shortly. 37. That this very flattering Quaker, that seems
so tender of their Rights here, does labor to his utmost skill to prove, they
neither have, nor can have any

Right to, or Estate in Tithes at all; and that it is ridiculous, unjust and
unreasonable in them to pretend to have any such Estate; so that I hope the
Impropriators, and all others, will see the falseness of his dealing, and
observe that he will say any thing to serve a present turn, and make the
Priests odious: For our parts, we do not (like the Quakers) take upon us to
censure the Actions of our Princes and Parliaments, nor yet (where Priests have
temporal Estates, the Tithes whereof belong to Lay-Impropriators) do we refuse
to pay those Tithes, as the Laws of the Land appoint; we do not pretend
Conscience to save Charges, as the Quakers manner is: Whatever opinions
therefore the Priests hold in this matter, they do not oppose the Laws, nor go
about to persuade any to take away the Impropriators Estates from them. There
are some indeed, not only of the Clergy but the Laity also, who have been of
opinion, That in point of Conscience, and as far as concerns the Divine Laws,
these Alienations were not allowable; and they have persuaded such as can spare
them, freely to return them to pious uses, or however to make provision for a
Minister out of them, sufficient to instruct the People where the profits do
arise; but none of us ever used the Impropriators as the Quakers have done us:
we know the present Laws give them a legal Title to them, and where we are
liable we pay cheerfully to them; if their own Consciences be satisfied to keep
them, we do not molest them; but if we do say, It is more pious and more
Christian freely to restore them, I hope this is no just cause of offense: But
for this matter, see Dr. Basier's Sacrilege arraigned, and that excellent Book
called The larger Work about Tithes, written by Sir Henry Spelman, whose
Example answered his Instructions; for he gave an Impropriation back to the
Church out of his own Estate, and persuaded diverse Great Men to do the like;
and many other excellent Men since that time have followed the same Pattern.

. 21. T.E. is page 300. again harping upon the old string of Popery; and now he
falls to work for the Jesuits in good earnest, laboring to make out the Pope's
Title to England, by a Prescription of eight or nine hundred years, and all
this merely to persuade the World, that the Saxons were Papists when Tithes
were given, and consequently that they are Popish, and ought to be abolished:
But how impertinent and untrue all this is, I will examine.] For first, if the
Saxons in K. Ethelwolph's time were Papists, it will not follow that all their
Donations are void; so that if he could make this out, it would not prove his
Position, viz. That this Donation of Tithes is invalid. Secondly, and suppose
they were Papists in some things, yet it follows not that giving Tithes was a
Popish Act; for all the Acts of Papists are not Popish. The Saxons of those
days observed the Lords Day, and made good Laws for its observation, enjoined
all Persons to learn the Creed and the Lords Prayer; they gave Alms to the
poor, protested against Adoration of Images, etc. and in these they were no
Papists; yea, those of the present Roman Church do many Acts of Piety and
Charity, but sure those Acts are not Popish: The Protestants have disputed as
much and as well for Tithes, as ever the Papists did; and T. E. must know, it
is a Popish opinion, That the Bishop of Rome can exempt Men from paying Tithes.
And therefore if our Ancestors who gave Tithes had been Papists, in this Act
they had been good Christians, and differed not from the opinion of the
Reformed Church. Thirdly, he begins too low by far; for if Popery came not into
the Church till about seven hundred years after Christ (according to T.E.'s
proofs) then Tithes were much ancienter than Popery; for they were paid and
declared to be due to the Christian Church at least five hundred years before:
and T. E. must prove Origin, Cyprian, S. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hierome and
Augustine to have been Papists, if he will make out, that Tithes came into the
Church with Popery: Or if he pretend he meant it only of this Church of
England, we have showed Tithes were paid generally, and specially granted in
some parts of this Kingdom, long before Ethelwolph's time; so that he may
twattle thus to please his ignorant Quakers, but we discern the emptiness and
impertinence of these Allegations, which are so nothing to the purpose, that
they deserve not to be considered at all. Yet because the poor Man has taken
so much pains, we will give him the hearing: But it is rather to clear our
Pious Ancestors from the Reproaches of this ungracious Cham, than out of any
necessity in order to the Case of Tithes. First therefore let us note, That
most of those Doctrines which are properly called Popery, and which first
caused and still justify the Protestants Separation from Rome, were not
maintained as Articles of Faith, no not in the Church of Rome it self, at the
time of this Donation, Anno 855. The Marriage of Priests was not forbidden till
the time of Greg. VII. above 200 years after Polyd. Virgil derer. invent. l. 5.
c. 4.
. The number of the Seven Sacraments was not defined till Peter Lombard's
days, Anno 1140 Cassand. de Sacram.
. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation was not received for a point of Faith till
the Lateran Council, above 1200 years after Christ Scotus in 4. Sent. did. 11.
q. 3.
. Purgatory it self was but a private Opinion, and affirmed only by some, An.
1146 Otto Frising. l. 8. Chr. c. 26.
. And Indulgences can be no older Polyd. Virgil. l. 8. cap. 8. and Fish.
Roffens. contra Luther. Ar. 18.
: Yea, their Application to Souls in Purgatory was first brought in by Boniface
VIII. Agrip. de Vanit. Scien. c. 61.
. The Half Communion began but a little before the Council of Constance, and
was never decreed till then Gregor. de Valent. de Legit. usu Eucha. c. 10. An.
1415.
. Yea, the putting the Apocrypha into the Canon of Scripture, and diverse other
Points, were never decreed till the Council of Trent, about 110 years ago: And
if it were not to avoid prolixity, I could make it evident, That the Pope's
Universal Supremacy and Infallibility, Justification by the merit of Good
works, Auricular Confession, Formal Invocation of Saints, and other corruptions
of the modern Papists, were not determined as Articles of Faith, no not in Rome
it self, in Ethelwolph's time: and then how can he be called a Papist,
supposing he had agreed with the then Roman Church in all points? But I must
not lanch out into this Ocean, wherefore I will content my self to reply to the
Quaker's Instances. 1. For those page 301. the Quaker lays not much stress upon
them, and there are some of them allowed by the best Protestants, and all Men
that understand Antiquity know those Decretal Epistles to be forged, which
first attributed these Constitutions to those early Popes. Proceed we therefore
to his more material Instances: And first, concerning Deposing of Kings, T. E.
says, Pope Zachary I. took upon him to depose King Chilperic, and absolved his
Subjects from their Allegiance.] This is a Forgery invented by the Champions of
the Pope's Supremacy, but denied by the French, who do assure us, That the
deposing of King Chilperic was done by Pepin himself, by the consent of the
whole Kingdom of France, before any notice was given to the Pope about it, who
did not pretend to any such Authority over the French King (nor is he allowed
it at this day,) but only approved of the deed after it was done, and advised
to put him into a Monastery Centur. Magdeburg.
; and the ancient Historians words thus describing this matter, may be seen in
Widrington Apol. pro jure Princip. And to let T. E. see how unlikely this
feigned Deposition of Chilperic by the Pope's Authority is, I will set down the
Reply of Hinc-marus Arch Bishop of Rhemes to Pope Adrian the Second, who had
written to him to Excommunicate the King of France, Anno 870. (which was less
than deposing) There was never (says Hinc marus) any such precept before sent
from Rome, to any of my Predecessors -- And going on, he tells the Pope, That
the French assembled in Council, did desire his Holiness, according to the
Example of his Predecessors, to meddle with Ecclesiastical matters which
belonged to him, and not with the Commonwealth, which was the Kings part to
dispose of -- And let him not (say they) command us Franks to serve him that we
will not serve, for his Predecessors did never put this yoke upon our
Predecessors, neither can we endure it Hincmar. ap. L. Boch. Decret. Ecc. Gal.
l. 2. Tit. 2. p. 317.
. I cite this the more largely, because our Ethelwolph married the Daughter of
this very King of France, whom the Pope could not so much as Excommunicate,
much less Depose; and no doubt Ethelwolph was as free from the Pope's Authority
in this matter, as the King of France his Father-in-law. Secondly, There is as
little truth in Gregory the Third's Deposing of Leo Isaurus about Images: which
Deposition Onuphrius, a judicious Historian, calls a mere Fable Onuphr. in Vit.
Greg. VII.
. Indeed no Bishop did ever depose a King or Emperor till Hildebrand's time,
An. 1074. which is confirmed by the best Historians of that Age Chron. Hirsaug.
Otto Frising. l. 6. c.(...) Godfr. Viter. part. 17. Trithemius, etc.
. Let Onuphrius speak for all: Gregory the Seventh did first of all the Popes
of Rome -- despising the Imperial Authority and power -- not only
Excommunicate, but presume to deprive the Emperor of his Kingdom and Empire; a
thing never heard of in the World before Onuphr. Vit. Gregor. VII.
. And Sigebertus, Chr. An. 1088. calls it A Novelty and a Heresy: Yea, the
whole Church of Liege, in their Epistle to Paschal II. tell him to his face,
That no Pope, before this Gregory, did ever use the Temporal Sword Epist.
Leodens. Eccles. ad Paschal. 2.
. So that this piece of Popery was not crept into any part of the Christian
Church, much less into England, when Tithes were given to the Church; nor was
the Pope's Supremacy or Infallibility owned here in those days, as I will
undertake to prove against this Quaker, and the Jesuits, whose part he takes in
this matter: So that I will only note, That if T. E. refer the first Original
of Tithes to Ethelwolph's Donation in this Kingdom, then he should have
produced an Example of the Pope's power to depose the Kings of England, which
if he can show to have then been a Doctrine received here, it will make
somewhat to his purpose; but these foreign Instances, if they were as true as
they are false, do not prove the Saxons were Papists in this point. Secondly,
The Quaker Instances in the Worship of Images, and upon presumption that our
Saxon-Ancestors worshipped them, he frequently call them Idolaters;] which is
another manifest slander: For though the Saxons had some few Images and
Pictures for ornament and memory, yet they did not worship them in this Age,
nor long after; and though the second Council of Nice did attempt to establish
Image Worship, we may see in Dr. Stillingfleet's last Book of the Idolatry of
the Roman Church, That the greatest part of the Christian World rejected that
Council, and detested the practice thereof; yea, that Council was almost by all
so much contemned, that it was scarce counted worth the Reading by him that
translated it Anastas. Bibliothec. Praef. ad 7. Synod.
. But to show what was the opinion of the Saxons and Gallican Churches
(generally agreeing in their opinions) where the most famous Tythe-givers of
this Age lived; let it be noted, that Sir Henry Spelman proves, That the Saxons
from Augustin's time had Images only for ornament, memory, reverence and
example, but not for worship Council. tom. 1. not. ad Council. Land. An. 712.
. And about 60 years before K. Ethelwolph's Donation, we read a full Account of
the English Churches opinion about Images, Anno 792. For Charles the Great of
France (says the Historian) sent the Constitutions of a Synod which he had
received from Constantinople, into Britain, in which, alas, were many
inconvenient things, and contrary to the Catholic Faith, especially that
Images ought to be worshipped, which is altogether accursed by the Church of
God; against which Alcuinus writ an Epistle, wonderfully proved by the
Authority of Divine Scripture, which in the name of our Princes and Bishops he
carried with the Constitutions back to the King of France Hoveden Annal. p. 232
Sim. Dunel. Col. 111. Math. West. An. 793.
. And upon this a Synod was called at Frankfort, wherein by the Gallican,
English and German Churches, the worship of Images was condemned, and a Book
written in the Name of Charles the Great against the second Council of Nice
Vid. Eiginharti Annal. An. 794.
: and that this opinion continued long after, may be seen in Dr. Stillingfleet,
page 832. who instances in Famous Authors, that in the name of the Gallican
Church opposed all Image Worship; such as Jonas Aurelianensis, Anno 842. and
Agobardus Bishop of Lyens, An. 850. Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes, An. 880. etc.
And that the English remained free from this Idolatry a long time after, is
showed by Sir Roger Twysden Histor. Vindic. c. 9. p. 184.
. Thirdly, He instances in Miracles and Intercession of Saints, taxing Bid
with these points of Popery, and the Saxons of his time.] I reply, That if the
belief of Miracles make Men Papists, then T. E. and his Quakers are all
Papists; for they believe they are immediately taught, which is a stranger and
greater Miracle than any they can find in all Bede's History: Again, It is not
unlikely but some extraordinary Miracles might be wrought at the first
Conversion of the Saxons, the more easily to convince that rugged People; and
the want of Humane Learning in that Age, might occasion the credulous reception
of more than was true; and yet we must not condemn them presently for Papists:
they might be credulous and apt to be imposed upon, but that was their
infirmity, and amounts but to Superstition, not to Popery. I add, That in
Eusebius, and other old Church-Histories, there are many Miracles recorded;
which yet does not prove either the Authors relating them, or the People
believing them, to be Papists. As for Intercession of Saints, if he mean, that
the Saxons prayed to the Saints as their Intercessors with God, he does
egregiously wrong them; for the old Saxon Psalters, in which are their Private
Devotions, have no mention of any Saints at all; as is attested by Spelman and
Twysden, who had perused several Originals; and Bishop Usher affirms the like
of a Prayer Book which he had seen, as old as K. Athelstan's time, An. 940. Nor
were the Saints Names added in their Litanies with [Ora pro nobis] till about
the time of K. Canutus almost 200 years after K. Ethelwolph's time: So that
neither in this matter were our Tythegivers Idolaters, nor Papists neither.
There is but one thing more wherein the present Church of Rome is charged with
Idolatry, and that is in Adoring the Host, or Body of Christ, (which they say
is transubstantiate) in the Sacrament; but neither in this were the Saxons
guilty, for they did not believe Transubstantiation, no not in King Edgar's
days, An. 975. as appears by the Saxon Paschal Homily, which Aelfricus then
translated into Saxon, being appointed to be publicly read: There is (says
he) much difference between the Body of Christ which suffered for us, and that
which is consecrated in the Eucharist; that was born of the Virgins flesh --
but his Spiritual Body, which we call the Host, is composed of many grains,
without blood or bones, or any member, or any Soul -- This Mystery is a pledge
and sigure, but the Body of Christ is Truth it self Homil^ Pasch. Sax.
. And another Discourse of his to a Saxon Bishop of those Times, says; The
Host is the Body of Christ, not corporally, but spiritually B. Ushe^ de
Success. (...) Eccles. c. (...). 21.
: Which proves they were of the same opinion with Protestants in this main
point, and could be no Idolaters at all. I could give more Instances to prove
that the Saxons were like the Protestants in the most fundamental matters; but
two Instances more shall suffice at present: 1. As to the merit of Good works;
The Lord teaches us (says V. Bid) that no Man is sufficiently able to save
himself, either by his own Free Will, or his own merits Bed. in Psalm. 31.
. And by the Righteousness of his deeds shall no Man be saved, but only by the
Righteousness of Faith Id. in Psalm. 77.
. By the mercy of God in the Name of our Savior, and not by our merits, we
obtain Life, says Alcuinus, An. 800. In Psalm. 142.
And long after, even in Anselm's time, this was the opinion of the Church of
England, as we have proved before; so that in this point the Quakers (with
their Perfection) are more Popish than the Saxons were. I shall conclude with
the Canon of Scripture, which the Saxons kept entire as we have it, rejecting
the Apocrypha from being of Divine Authority, even as the present Protestants
Church does; see of old Beda Comm in Apoc. c. 4.
, Alcuinus Advers. Elipantum.
, Gislebertus Westmonast. Alterc. inter Synag. and Eccl. c. 1. An. 1090.
and since that, Johannes Sarisburiensis Ep. 172. An. 1180.
, and Guliel. Occam Dial. part. 3. tract. 1. l. 3. c. 16. An. 1330.
, to name no more: Finally then, if T. E. have either shame or grace, let him
repent of this foul slander, which he has as falsely as maliciously cast upon
our Forefathers, the pious Saxons, who were more Orthodox in some Points than
Rome it self then was, and differred from the present Papists in all the most
material Articles of Faith, being nearer in opinion to the Protestant Church of
England: And although they were in some lesser matter inclining to
Superstition, yet they were very devout according to their knowledge, and may
shame the present Age, who do not so many good things, though they have more
Understanding: But if T. E. will not recant, I shall leave it to the Reader to
judge of his Ignorance and Impudence, in saying, Tithes were given by Papists
and Idolaters, to Idolaters, for Idolatrous uses, and in supposing the Church
so much corrupted with Popery then, that their very Donations were not fit to
stand good or be enjoyed, no not by a Protestant Ministry.

. 22. To manifest that the Donation of Tithes is not Popery, we have already
proved, they were given to the Church before Popery came in; and now we shall
show they were allowed, received and confirmed after Popery was turned out, and
that (as you noted in the Conference) even by those who were Martyrs for the
Protestant Faith, Cranmer, Hooper, Ridley, Latimer, Tailor and Bradford. The
Quaker's Exceptions to this Argument page 305. are as frivolous as can be; for
first, All truths were not (says he) discovered at once, nor all untruths
neither.] It is strange the Quaker should say so, who before declared himself
to be for Immediate Teaching, and who p. 229. affirms, The very Babes in Christ
by the anointing knew all things: Yea, if the Saints have not the Spirit in
them, so as to teach them all things, they have not the Spirit at all, p. 230.
What then does T. E. make of these Martyrs, not so much as little Children?
were they wholly without the Spirit? or were they taught mediately? since
mediate and carnal Knowledge (as he calls it) comes by degrees; but all that T.
E. allows for Saints, got their Knowledge in an instant, as the Apostles did:
either therefore he must deny these Holy Men were taught immediately (and then
by his Rule they could have no Knowledge in Divine things) or else he must
confess Truths were not revealed to them by degrees. We add, That the Quaker
thought Bradford a very Spiritual and knowing Man, (with some others of that
time) when he fancied he spoke on his side, p. 275. but now when he speaks
against him, he rejects his Testimony, on pretense That he and the rest of his
Fellow-Martyrs lived at the very dawning of the day of Reformation. Very
pleasant! Let me then ask the Quaker what hour of the Morning it was when his
other Martyrs (as he falsely calls them) Thorp, Swinderby, Brute, and Wickliffe
lived? If it was but daybreak in Cranmer's time, it was dark as midnight in
Wickliffe's; if Cranmer and Bradford had but little light, Wickliffe and Thorp
had none at all; and therefore unless they had Cats-eyes they could not see
them; So that it is wonder T. E. should prefer their Judgments before these.
But further, If to reject Tithes had been a Truth, it was discovered (according
to T. E.) long before Cranmer's time, and he with his Associates who lived
nearer Sunrise, and so could see better than Thorpe, etc. were not ignorant of
this Opinion, but esteemed it erroneous; and though they followed Wickliffe in
some things, yet in this they receded from him: so that it cannot be said they
saw not this opinion; but seeing it, they rejected it: And I am sure their
judgment herein is far more considerable than Wickliffe's or his followers,
being both better Men, and of far greater understanding; for these Martyrs were
constant to the death, and sealed our Faith with their Blood; whereas most of
those Opposers of Tithes recanted openly, and proved Apostates, as Mr. Fox
himself confesses: So that the Quaker is a manifest Liar in giving such
Renegado's the Name of Martyrs: and as for Wickliffe himself, he himself
received Tithes, and died quietly Parson of Lutterworth in Leicestershire, and
so was no Martyr: nor did he absolutely reject Tithes as T. E. does, but only
affirmed, they were purae Eleemosynae Vide Spelm. Conc. Tom. 2.
. And as for the Knowledge of T. E.'s Martyrs, we may guess at the size thereof
by that senseless Saying of one of them (which our Quaker cites) viz. That one
of the Ancient Doctors, S. Hierome, (he thought) did affirm, That those Priests
who take Tithes, deny Christ to be come in the flesh. How could S. Hierome say
thus, who professes he received Tithes, and lived on them himself; yea, that
the Law of Tithes obliged the Christian People, as we showed before: nor did
ever any ancient Doctor say so idle a thing as this: Now for Cranmer, Hooper,
Ridley, etc. their vast Learning is sufficiently known to all the World, and
truly they are much disgraced by the Parallel, and all sober Readers will
admire at the pride and vanity of T. E. and his Quakers, who really know
nothing, and yet fancy they are as much above Cranmer, Hooper, etc. in point of
Knowledge, as the noonday light is above the dawning of the day: But if the
Quakers be above them in Knowledge, are they also above all our Protestant
Kings, Bishops, Lawyers, Parliaments, Privy-Councellors, and Writers ever
since? for all these have declared Tithes to be no Popery, and confirmed the
first Donation.

. 23. Having proved God's Original Right to Tithes, and his Assignation of this
Right to his Ministers, and also showed the piety and validity of the Donation,
which dedicated them to God for that end to which he had assigned them; I come,
thirdly, to prove the Clergy have a Temporal Right to Tithes also: For, it
being the duty of a King (as says King Edward the Confessor) to preserve,
cherish, maintain and govern the Churches of their Dominions, according to the
Constitutions of their Fathers and Predecessors Leg. Edv. Confess. cap. 17.
: Therefore our Kings, with the Advice of their Council, their Nobles, and
People, by their Representatives in Parliament, have by many Temporal Laws
estated these possessions on the Clergy; and esteeming them to be as profitable
Members of the Commonwealth as any other Subjects, they have taken the same
care of them, as of other Men, and what they found so rightly conveyed to them,
and in their Actual possession, they have given them a Legal Title to, in foro
Soli; securing the Clergy in the enjoyment of Tithes, by as many and as firm
Laws, as do secure the Laiety in their Estates, and allowing them the like
benefit of the Law and Justice, in case of any injury offered them in these
Rights, as other Subjects have; and thus the Clergies antecedent Jus Divinum is
established and confirmed Jure Humano. Now if the Quaker would fairly have
disproved this Temporal Right, he should have showed there were no Humane Laws
to estate Tithes on the Church, nor no Remedies in the Courts of Justice
against any that detained them; or have made it appear, that our Princes,
Parliaments, Judges and Lawyers had declared against the Clergyes Right to
these, or denied them their protection in the enjoyment of them, which other
Subjects have; this had been to the purpose: And being matter of Fact is the
only just way of arguing, for to contrive by Sophistry and probabilities to
show a thing cannot be, which we see with our Eyes, is, as T.E. calls it, to
nibble, not dispute: yet such Cavils as he has, we will suffer him to produce
against the Clergyes Temporal Right to Tithes: and first, though the whole
Bench of our Reverend Judges will declare it for Law, That a Clergyman has as
good Right in Law to his Tithes, as a Layman has to his Estate: T. E. tells
them page 311. there is a fallacy in that, the Case is far different; For I
enjoy my Estate not only as a Temporal Right (says he) but I claim it in a
Natural and Civil capacity, without Relation to a Ministerial Function; but the
Priest claims in a Spiritual capacity, his claim depends upon a Ministerial
Function.] T. E. does not claim merely in his Natural capacity, nor barely as a
Man (for all his talking) since many wiser and better Men than T. E. have no
Estate at all, nor no Right to any: Every Man has a Natural Capacity, but that
alone gives no Title to an Estate; it is therefore as a Man so Qualified that
T. E. claims, that is, as a Purchaser, or one to whom an Estate has been
given, or as being descended from some so Qualified; or else as invested with
some Civil Office or Employment, to which such an Estate is annexed. Well, the
Priest has a Natural capacity also, as well as T. E. is as much and as good a
Man as he; but this alone gives him no Title to Tithes, he claims them in a
Spiritual capacity, as T. E. claims his Estate in a Civil capacity: And now why
is not a Spiritual capacity as good a ground of claim to an Estate legally
settled upon it, as a Civil capacity: Men in this Spiritual capacity are Men,
and need provisions as much as those in Civil capacities: They are Subjects as
well as the other, and as useful Members of the Commonwealth as any, and so
deserve protection and defense by the Laws as well as others: And all the
Lawgivers under Heaven have believed Men in Spiritual capacity were as capable
of Temporal Rites and Privileges, as those in Civil capacities were; and
accordingly they have been endowed, and their Endowments confirmed by the Laws
of all Nations; so that I wonder what Crotchet came in the Quaker's head, to
fancy a Minister of Christ could not have the benefit of the Temporal Laws, as
well as the Mayor of a Corporation. An Estate in Land, Rentcharge, or Tolls
and Customs, may be settled on the Mayor of such a City, and on his Successors,
for ever; and then, whosoever sustains that Charge, and bears that Office, has as
good a Claim by Law to that Income, as T. E. has to the Estate he is born to.
They claim under different Qualifications; but one has as good a Temporal
Right for his Time, as the other. Now why is not a Minister in as good a
capacity as either of these? Why is not a Religious Office as Endowable as a
Civil Office? Sure his being a Minister of Christ, makes him not incapable of a
Temporal Right; for S. Paul says, the King is (...), Romans xiii. 4. the
Minister of God: And by virtue of that Ministerial Function, His Majesty claims
many Temporal Rights, (besides the ancient Patrimony of His Family): And will
this saucy Quaker say, he has a better Title to his Estate, than the King has
to the Rights and Revenues of His Crown? But as to the Claim of a Priest, it
will be made evident by this Parallel. Suppose some Prince or Great Man did out
of his own Inheritance make a Donation of some certain Lands or Rents to an
Elwood, and entail it on the Family of Elwoods for ever; if T. E. be the Heir
of that Family, he will say he has as good a Right to this, as if he purchased
it. And why may not the Priest claim his Tithes as justly as T. E. claims this
Donative? Was his Estate given by the Right Owners? So were Tithes. Was his
given to the Family of Elwoods? So were Tithes to the Order of Priests. Was his
given for Valuable Considerations? That may be some question; for who knows,
some hundred years after, but it might be for doing some evil deed to please
the gr^^t Donor, such as that Donation to P. de Mawley was Dugd. Baronage of
Engl. vol. 1. p. 733.
. However, the Law finds him in possession, and presumes the Considerations
were good, and so secures his Title: But the Priests can, and have made it
appear, that the Tithes were settled upon them by virtue of the best
Considerations imaginable; and therefore the Priests Claim is better than the
Elwoods, on this account, that we can be sure we came well to our Right at
first. Now the Law finding a Priest and an Elwood both claiming by virtue of
several ancient Donations, and both in possession of their several Estates; and
looking on them as both Subjects, and both Persons whose Rights the Government
and Laws should defend: the Law, I say, confirms both their Estates and Rights
to them and their Successors. Now if T. E. be descended from the Elwoods in a
natural way of sucession, so are we from the Priests in a spiritual succession:
and though this bold Quaker do often say [we are no Priests], I must tell him,
there is more fear he is no Elwood, than we no Priests; and our Ordination is
easier to prove, than T. E's Mothers Honesty: But however, the Law takes him
for an Elwood, and us for Priests, and equally confirms our Claims: So that I
think all rational Men must say, the Priests Claim and Temporal Right is as
good as the Elwoods; it differs not at all as to strength and validity, unless
the Priest have the better Temporal Right of the two.

. 24. He goes on in his folly, and says, page 314. If the Case of the Priest
and of T. E. as to Temporal Right be equal, then the Priest must acknowledge he
is no more a Minister of Christ than T. E. at least, that he does not claim
them as a Minister of Christ, any more than T. E. does his Temporal Estate;
otherwise the Parallel will not hold.] The Maxim on which this Inference is
grounded, is this wretched absurdity, That none can have equal Temporal Rights
by the Laws, unless they be equal in all Capacities: Whenas all the World sees,
the same Laws do give equal Temporal Rights to Persons of all kind of
Capacities; for the same Estate may be enjoyed by a Judge first, then by a
Soldier, then by a Merchant, then by a Woman; and all these in their several
turns may have an equal Temporal right to this Estate, though they be every one
of different Capacities. And if it be several Estates, and the Persons enjoying
them as different as can be in their Capacities, the same Laws may give an
equal Right to them all, without altering their various Capacities. Suppose the
King have by the Law a Temporal Right to one Estate, and some of His Subjects
an equal Right to another Estate; you shall hear T. E's wise way of arguing:
The King claims a Temporal thing; so does the Subject: The King claims by a
Temporal Right; so does the Subject: The King has no need of Scripture to
prove his Right; no more has the Subject: Yet for all this, their Claim is not
one and the same, they must stay there; the King must acknowledge himself no
more a King than the Subject, or else the Cases are not parallel. Thus he takes
his Quakers by the nose, and would cokes them into a conceit, That all Priests
must be Elwoods, or all Elwoods Priests, before they can have equal Temporal
Rights. This is the inspired Oracle of Law and Gospel, who does not know how a
Judge and a Plowman, a Man and a Woman, a Priest and an Elwood, can have equal
Rights and Claims, unless the Judge be no more a Judge than the Plowman, or the
Manno more a Man than the Woman, or the Priest no more a Priest than the
Elwood. This is the rare Logician, who can distinguish so nicely between the
Man and the Capacity, that one would think he had learned of the Jesuits, or
been educated among the Murderers of our late Blessed King, who fought against
the Man, and put him to death, but yet did not oppose the King all the while;
which our Laws call a Traitorous Position. At this rate one might strip T. E.
of his Elwoodship, and require him to divest himself of that Capacity, and to
claim merely as a Man, or else he could have no good Temporal Right; as well as
to strip the Priest of his Spiritual Capacity, whenever he claims a Temporal
Right: And yet for ought I see, the Quakers will not pay us our Dues, neither
as Priests, nor as Men. But why should this Puisne talk of Law? whenas, page
315, and 316. it appears he never heard of a Lay-fee; but twice together (lest
we should think it was the Printers mistake) he talks of holding [in a Laity],
and that Impropriators [hold in a Laity]; which is such a gross piece of
Ignorance, that a Clerk of a weeks standing would hiss at it.

. 25. Ignorance is the Mother of Admiration; and therefore it is not strange to
find T. E. wondering at the following Particulars, page 316. First, Why
Spiritual Preferments should be held by a Temporal Right, unless it be because
we have no Spiritual Right to them?] The Clergy had a Spiritual Right to
Tithes, before any Humane Laws gave them a Temporal Right to them; or else S.
Hierom, and other Primitive Fathers, who lived on Tithes, did live upon that
which they had no Right to at all. Now the Humane Laws finding the Clergy had a
Spiritual Right to Tithes, did confirm that first Title, by adding a second;
for when they give the Clergy a Temporal Right to Tithes, the Lawgivers and
Laws suppose their antecedent Right, which T. E. confesses, page 333. And our
Elwood has an equitable Right to his Estate, antecedent to the Legal Right
which the Laws of the Land give him to it: now the addition of this Legal Right
does suppose and confirm, not deny or destroy his Equitable Right. If he ask,
what moved our Temporal Governors more especially to add this Legal Right to
the Priests antecedent Spiritual and Divine Right; it may be it was on purpose
to prevent the knavery of such who will pay nothing for Conscience Sake, and of
such as would pervert the Scripture by Inspired Expositions, and call the
Fathers, Councils, and Princes, who gave or approved Tithes, Papists and
Idolaters; and the Ministers of God, to whom Tithes were given, Idolatrous,
Popish, etc. merely under this pretense, to defraud them of their Dues. Hence
they made Laws, that Spiritual Donations should be held also by Temporal Right,
that Humane Penalties might compel those to be honest, who neither valued nor
feared other things. And this is the Reason given by Hen. VIII. in T. E. page
333. yea, by S. Paul, when he says, The Law is not made for a Righteous man, 1 Timothy i. 9. To his second Question, Why the Priests are called Spiritual, who
bid such defiance to the Inspiration of the Spirit?] I answer, We do
unfeignedly reverence the true Inspirations of the Spirit; and that very esteem
we have for so divine a thing, makes us bid defiance to such wretched
Pretenders to it as T. E. and his Crew, who boast of a false Gift, and belie
the Holy Ghost. To his third Quaery, Why all Priests are called Spiritual
Persons, when some answer not their Profession?] I reply, He had best examine
the Evangelists why they call all the Twelve by the name of Apostles, when one
of them was a Devil; and ask S. Paul why he styles the Corinthians sanctified
and called Saints, 1 Cor. i. 2. when many of them were carnal. T. E. it seems
has not yet learned, that Names are given according to Men's Profession and
Duty, showing rather what they ought to be, than proving what they are. It is
enough to justify our Name, if not all, or not the most, contradict it: for
Names are so instituted, as to suppose a distance between the Title and the
Qualification. How many are called Philosophers, which fulfill not the Rules of
Philosphy? All may bear Names according to their Professions. So Tertullian
sets out the folly of this Cavil Tertul. l. ad Nation. 1. c. 5.
.

. 26. T. E's Head swiming with repeated Revelations, he fancies all that are
about him reel and stagger; which occasions him to say, page 317. That you reel
from Creating a Right, to Establishing it.] Whenas you never affirmed, that any
Temporal Authority did Create the Original Right of the Priests to Tithes; only
that they did establish that Right which the Clergy had to Tithes before, by
Creating a Temporal Right, and superadding it to their former Title; and thus
by both Claims Tithes are ours, and not his who pays them: Which when you offer
to prove Confer. p. 142.
, the Quaker leaving out all the intermediate Arguments, skips three pages
together, and then bringing in only your Conclusion from those Premises which
he has omitted, Confer. page 145. he most dishonestly insults, Is not this
notably argued, says the Quaker, when he had suppressed all your Arguments,
and not suffered you to argue at all. But when we have observed the injustice
of this dealing, we may proceed to new Instances of his audacious Ignorance.

. 27. Page 319, 320. affords us three notable Passages. First, That Christ who
appointed Maintenance in general, does describe what it shall be in particular,
viz. Meat and Drink, Luke x. 7, 8. Mat. x. 10.] Unless T. E. have some new
Revelation concerning this Commission of Christ to his Disciples, the old words
of Scripture will not bear this sense: For, as we read the place, this was a
particular Direction for that private and particular Message on which the
Apostles were to be sent to the Cities of Judea; and if this Order of taking
Meat and Drink then, were a perpetual and general Rule to all Ministers to the
Worlds end, so must also all the rest of the Rules there mentioned be: and if
so, then it will follow, 1. That Ministers may not preach to any Gentiles or
Samaritans, Mat. x. 5. 2. That they must still heal the Sick, cleanse the
Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils, v. 8. 3. That they must not have two
Coats, nor walk with Staves in their Hands, nor Shoes on their Feet, nor have
any Money in their Purses, ver. 9, 10. which are Rules that the most
superstitious Speakers do scarce now observe: But these are the Consequences of
pretended Inspirations, which make Men expound Scripture at such a rate, as to
make the Apostles break their Masters Rules when they preached to the Gentiles.
We must not think (says Calvin on this place) that there is a standing fixed
Law prescribed to all Ministers of the Word, while the Lord is commanding the
Preachers of his Doctrine what he would have them do for a little time; which
piece of Ignorance has deceived many so far, that they would reduce all
Ministers to this Rule without distinction Calv. Com. in Harm. Evang. p. 218.
. Yet our Quaker is so confident of his absurd Exposition, that, secondly, He
saucily asks Kings and Princes, where Christ gave them power to alter that
Maintenance, and set up another in the room of it? arrogantly telling them in
Corah's phrase (having forgot the Censers already, Numb. xvi.), They take too
much upon them, unless they can show where Christ gave them such Authority.]
But let me ask this bold Questionist, where Christ forbid them to give a better
Maintenance? He bid the Apostles be content with Meat and Drink; but he did not
forbid them to take more, if it were freely given: nor did Christ any where
forbid those to whom the Gospel should be preached, to give them any more. It
seems by T. E. that whatever any gave, more than Meat and Drink, was a
contradicting Christ's Command, if it were but a Coat to cover their nakedness
(which is not mentioned in Christ's Command): No doubt he will ask the Primitive
Believers, who gave them order to sell their Estates, and give them to the
Apostles? He will say, They took too much upon them. Was ever so much Folly and
Impudence conjoined? Is it any affront to Christ to give nobly to his Service?
Or did Solomon do any injury to God, to take away the ambulatory Tabernacle,
fit for the unfixed State of the Church, and build a stately Temple? Such
exchange can be no robbery. But because T. E. so pertly calls for a Command, I
shall tell him, that an Hint is a Command to a Soul that loves God: There is
enough in that Divine Precept to put the forward Charity of a devout Christian
upon giving Tithes at least, Gal. vi. 6. to give their Teachers a share of all
their good things; and it is sure they will not give a little share, who read,
They that sow plentifully shall reap plentifully, 2 Cor. ix. 6. The Tenth part
was given by the Patriarchs, chosen by God the Father, paid by the Jews, and
not repealed by Christ: and why should they give any less or other part? Here
then was their Authority to give Tithes to Gods Ministers. Thirdly, He says,
For any Magistrate to set out Tithes for a Maintenance, is a direct opposition
to Christ; because they were commanded by God in the Levitical Law, and Christ
has taken away Priests, Law, and Tithes all together.] How proves he this? By
Hebr. vii.] The Verse he cunningly leaves out, being conscious to himself he
had fathered a Lie on that Chapter, in which there is not one word of Christ's
taking away Tithes, no nor in any place of the New Testament. Christ took away
that Priesthood; but he left another Priesthood, which needs as much, and
deserves as good a Maintenance as that of Levi; and therefore he never repealed
the Law of Tithes. And since it was so likely, that Christians should pitch
upon this same Tenth part, which Jews and Gentiles had known to be consecrated
to these Uses; if Christ had disallowed this part, it seems necessary there
should have been an express Caution in Scripture against Tithes: but since
there is no such thing, but only a pretended Revelation to T. E. and the rest
of his Quakers, no body will believe Tithes were designed by Christ to be
repealed. And indeed T. E's Revelations will be of as little credit, since it
is likely he will not scruple to belie the Holy Ghost, who has forged Christ's
Hand twice in this Paragraph; first, in saying, He appointed that for a general
and constant Maintenance, which was only on a special occasion: secondly, in
affirming, Christ had taken away Tithes, which he never did repeal. Thus this
insolent Quaker makes our Lord to seal and cancel whatever pleases his Party.

. 28. We noted before, it was his usual way to evade all serious Answers, by
some petty Cavil; of which we have another Instance here: For you having proved
Tithes might be lawfully given, and showed that the Givers were the Right
Owners of them; asked, If they might not do what they would with their own? No,
says T. E. pa 321. they might not spend it upon Harlots, nor waste it
prodigally, nor make an Idol of it.] If the Quaker had been one of the
Laborers in the Vineyard, it is like he might have drolled thus upon the Master
thereof, who (in the Person of God) says, Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with my own? Matthew. xx. 15. T. E. would have answered, No, he might not
put it to an evil use, etc. Whereas it is evident, that as God there is
speaking generally, but is to be understood of Just uses; so is it with your
words here. And this is to be understood in all general Expressions: As if one
promise his Friend, that he will do for him whatever he will; it must not be
extended to oblige him to lie, forswear, steal, or kill at his desire. Those
Deeds (says the Civil Law) which hurt our Piety, Reputation, or Modesty, and
generally all things contrary to good Manners, are to be reckoned
Impossibilities, and it is to be supposed we cannot do them Papin. L. Filius
15. de inst. Cond.
. How wilfully therefore does the Quaker pervert your meaning, which plainly
was, That a Man may do any thing fit or just with his own? Why does he instance
in things manifestly evil, and positively forbidden, to make a Parallel for
Tithes? Can he prove Tithes as evil as Whoredom, as Idolatry or Prodigality,
and as positively forbidden? If so, we will grant the Owners could not give
their Estates to such an Use: But till then, he talks at random, merely to
avoid the force of this Argument, viz. The Owners were legally possessed to
Tithes, and might dispose them to so pious an Use as the Maintenance of God's
Service is: They might put their whole Estate to what just Use they pleased,
and therefore might give Tithes to so just an Use as God's Service.

. 29. On the former Foundation T. E. says, page 322. If Ethelwolph might not
do what he would with his own, much less might he give away other Men's.] It is
affirmed by our most knowing Men, That the Saxon Kings had all the Land in
England in Demesne; and therefore in charging all England with Tithes, they
charged no more than their own: which is the reason of that seeming difference
among the Historians who record this Charter, [Terrae meae] and [Regni mei],
since the whole Kingdom was his own Land in Demesne. But to let that pass: T. E.
must needs be an egregious Dissembler, to pretend here that Ethelwolph did this
alone; since he confessed, page 285. that his Nobles consented to the Gift: and
if he have read the Charter (as he pretends), he must know, that Ingulph says
it was made, All the Archbishops and Bishops of England being present, and
subscribing to it; as also Beorred King of Mercia, and Edmund King of the
East Angles, before the Abbots, Abbesses, Dukes, Earls, and Nobles of the whole
Land, and an infinite multitude of other Faithful People, who all consented to
the Kings Charter, and the Men of Dignity subscribed their Names Ingulph. apud
Spelm. p. 350.
. We have also noted before, how often this Donation has been confirmed by the
whole Nations Representative since that time, which T. E. could not be ignorant
of; but to serve his ends, he conceals all this, merely to get an occasion to
Indite good King Ethelwolph of Invading his Subjects Properties.

. 30. But his Conscience accusing him for this Slander, in page 323. he
supposes that Ethelwolph did it by general consent, and then says, If it were
so, yet neither could he single, nor they all conjoined, give any more than
belonged to themselves, viz the Tenth part of their Land, or of the Yearly
Profits, for their own Lives; but to make a Grant of the Tenth part of the
Profits of the Land for ever, is (to my understanding, says he) utterly
repugnant to Reason.] It may be repugnant to his Understanding, so sadly
corrupted by Prejudice; but it is agreeable enough to the Reason and the
Practice of all other Men, for the Lords in Fee to give what part of the
Profits of their Estate they please for ever. Is it not usual for such as
settle their Estates, to oblige their Heirs for ever to pay out of it a Sixth,
Eighth, or Tenth part of the Rents of that Estate, which the Heirs many hundred
years after are obliged to pay to the Uses appointed by the first Donor? Are
not all perpetual Rent-charges and Grants, with reservation of Free-Rents, with
many Donations of certain yearly Sums to Colleges, Schools, and Hospitals, etc.
are not these Grants of such a part of the Profits of a Man's Estate for ever?
The Lawyers will deride T. E's Understanding in the Law, as much as we do his
skill in the Gospel; and they will inform him, That a Man is not absolute
Master of his Estate, unless he can make such Grants as these. But that which
stumbles T.E. is, That In the Profits of the Land, rightly computed, the
Labor, Sweat, Care, Charge, Skill, Industry, Diligence, etc. of the Husbandman
are included, and that inseparably; for these are the Instrumental Causes of
Production. -- To admit then a Power in any Man to give the Tithes of the
Profit beyond his own Life, were to suppose a Power in that Man to give away
the Labor, Care, Skill, Charge, Diligence, and Industry of another; which
Reason gainsays. -- And a little after, -- It is most ridiculous.] This is his
main Argument, which he glories in much, and repeats often; but there is
nothing at all in it, but Mistake, Falsehood, and Impiety. For, if T. E. will
grant, That it is lawful for a Lord to lay a perpetual Rentcharge upon his
Estate, to be paid in Money, (than which, nothing is more common, or more
legal) he must grant it is as lawful for this Lord to charge his Estate with
paying the Tenth part of the Profits in specie: For, does not the raising the
Sum of Money (settled by Rentcharge), suppose 10 l. or 20 l. per Annum, include
the Labor, Sweat, Care, Charge, Skill, and Industry of the Husbandman, as well
as the preparing the Tithe? Nay, the paying a Rentcharge in Money requires
more Labor, Charge, and Pains, than paying Tithes in specie; for the
Husbandman must not only get his Profits together, but carry (suppose) his
Corn into the Barn, thresh it, winnow it, and carry it out again and sell it;
and after all this, he must pay this Money, for which such a proportion of his
Profits were sold: Whereas Tithe being paid in specie, needs only be got
together, and the Husbandman has no more charge nor trouble with it. And
besides, Tithe is a more equitable Payment by far, than a certain Sum of Money
settled by Rentcharge; for if the Land yield little Profit, the Priest has but
little Tithes: but Rent-charges must be paid in full, even when the worst Years
come, without any Consideration. If the whole Profits of the Land do not yield
twice as much, the utmost Farthing of the Rentcharge must be paid. Now let any
rational Man judge, whether the granting of a perpetual Rentcharge, be not to
give away the Labor, Charge, and Industry of another, as well as the granting
of Tithes: And yet I think T. E. is not so bereft of all sense, that he will
say, such Rent-charges are ridiculous or unreasonable. Besides, we see that all
Landlords who let long Leases, and settle the Rents on their younger Children,
or more distant Relations, do give away the Profits of the Husbandmans Labor,
Charge, and Industry; not only the Tenth, but the Third part of them at least.
But T. E. will reply, A Man may charge his Tenants successively with such a
Payment of the Part of the Profits of their Labor, because he affords them
Land to work upon; but he cannot charge his Heirs successively. I answer, That
the Lord also does afford his Heirs Land to raise this Payment out of. Pray how
came this present Possessor to have any Right to this Land? Does he not derive
his Right from his Forefathers? T. E. grants they might have sold off what part
of the Land they pleased; and since they transmit it entire, may they not leave
a Charge upon it? And if the Heir will not pay the Charge, he must renounce the
Land also: For, it is a Maxim in all Laws, That the Burden discends with the
Inheritance: And he that will not have the Encumbrance, must not have the
Benefit. And in point of Reason, why has not the Father as good Right to
oblige his Posterity, as they have to possess his Lands? Why should not the
Father be obeyed by the Sons, as well as the Sons provided for by the Father?
He might have charged his Posterity with the Tenth part of the best Years
Profits in Money; but now the Charge is only the bare Tenth of the Years
Profits, be it less or more, which all Men (but Quakers) will grant is an easy
Charge. If T. E. shall say, The Land has gone through many Hands since: I
answer, Whoever bought this Land, or howsoever it was conveyed, no following
Owner can sell that part of the Profits which he never had conveyed to him; of
which more hereafter: At present it shall suffice to note, this Argument of the
Quakers is Protestatio contra factum, and so signifies nothing at all: It is an
attempt to prove, That cannot be done, which is done, as well in this, as in
other like Cases; and, That ought not to be done, which has been done a
thousand times, and that by the approbation of all Christian Laws: And the
Quaker, in saying these things are ridiculous and unreasonable, does call all
the Christian World Fools, and pass his Censure upon Kings and Nobles,
Parliaments and Judges, who have allowed such Grants to be just and reasonable,
and either made them, or confirmed and approved them diverse times: It seems all
these were a company of ridiculous and unreasonable Men, or else T. E. is such
an one himself; and whether be the more likely, let the Reader judge. But it is
no great wonder he should call all Men Fools, whenas this blasphemous Argument
flies in the face of God himself, who (even by the Quakers own confession) in
the Levitical Law did assume a Power to enjoin all the Owners of Canaan to pay
to the Priests the Tenth part of those Profits which did arise from their Sweat
and Pains, Charge and Care, and that from one generation to another. God did
make over to his Priests these Tenths of the Profits of many Men's Sweat and
Labor, etc. many hundred years before they were born: Now this (the Quaker
says) is a ridiculous and unreasonable thing. O bold Blasphemer! If he says
the thing be ridiculous and unreasonable in it self, then this Quaker charge
God with Folly and Injustice, who does enjoin it: Nor can he be excused by
saying, God has more power than Men; for in evil, foolish, and unjust things,
God has no power at all: God cannot lie, He cannot do any thing ridiculous or
unjust: And because God once made this Grant, we dare be confident the Act is
lawful, and wise, and just; and that T. E. is a blasphemous Wretch, to censure
it by this wicked and silly way of reasoning, which condemns Almighty God, as
much as it does King Ehtelwolph. I will not insist now upon the Atheistical
denial of Providence which is couched in this Argument also; for I shall
shortly have occasion to show, how the Quaker supposes his Husbandman deserves
all the Profits for his Labor; and as if God contributed nothing, he excludes
him from any share of them when they are produced. But this false and impious
Argument is sufficiently exposed already, to make any Man recant it, that has
any spark of Grace or Understanding in him.

. 31. In the next place he affirms, page 326. The Consideration on which Tithes
were given, is taken away; for Ethelwolph gave them for the Health of his Soul,
and the Remission of his Sins, which he believed might be obtained in that
Church, by the help of that Ministry to whom he gave his Tithes, and the
Mediation of those Saints in honor of whom he granted the Charter.] I have
already proved, That T. E. falsely supposes King Ethelwolph to have held all the
Opinions of the present Church of Rome; and particularly, That he did not
expect Pardon of his Sins by the Merits of his Good Works. Alcuinus gives us
the sense of the English Church in those days, who says, He only can deliver
us from sin, who came without sin, and was made a Sacrifice for sin Alcuin. l.
4. in Joh. 8.
. The Saxons believed that Pardon was merited only by Christ's Death; only
they did esteem Good Works a good evidence of their Repentance, and a Motive to
God to accept them to that Pardon which was merited only by Christ's Death:
which Opinion is much favored by those Scriptures, Prove. xvi. 6. Dan. iv. 27.
Mat. iii. 8. Luke xi. 41. and maintained by the most Orthodox Fathers: For
instance, Lactantius (no Papist for certain, as living An. 310.) says, Great
is the reward of Mercy, to which God has promised the Remission of all sins
Lactant. Inst. l. 6.
. And for obtaining this Remission by the help of that Ministry ( viz. the
Saxon-Ministry) to which he gave his Tithes; no wise Man will deny, but that
there was a True Church in England in those days: and if in that Church, and by
that Ministry, no Pardon could be had from God, then there was no Salvation to
be had in this Nation at all in that Age, no nor in any Nation in Christendom;
which is a strange Assertion. As for the Saints, we have showed, T. E. is
mistaken, in thinking they then did believe the Saints usurped Christ's Office.
Ethelwolph honored the Saints, and so do we now; but neither he nor we worship
them, or expect Pardon by them. But we need not plead thus, since T. E. falsely
makes this a Consideration for which he gave Tithes. Did that good King
covenant with God, or his Priests, that they should give him Remission, or else
this Gift to be of no effect? Was it inserted as a Condition or Proviso? He
hoped indeed Remission of Sins might follow, through Christ's Merits, Gods
Mercy, and the Churches Prayers; but he did not Indent with God for it. And
indeed, the main Consideration was, That the Clergy might pray for the whole
Kingdom, without the hindrances of Want and Worldly Care, as the words of the
Charter show: And this Consideration is not taken away, but observed to this
day. Again, If the King did fail of his Hope, and could not finally get
Remission in that Church (which is a malicious Supposition), this will not make
his Charter void: For, if a Father, in consideration of his affection to his
Son, and for his Provision, settle part of his Estate on him, being inwardly
moved thereto by the hopes he will be dutiful; the Sons undutifulness may
disappoint the fathers hopes, but does not vacate his Settlement, unless it
were expressed and provided, That the Deed should be void upon the Sons
disobedience. Finally, If we suppose Ethelwolph as much a Papist as King
Stephen, mentioned by T. E. page 332. yet his Donations to Pious Uses must
stand good, even though the Opinion of Merit had been the Motive to him to make
them; or else T. E. revokes all the Charters and Donations made in those really
Popish Times, to never so good and pious Uses; which all Men will confess is
most absurd. So that let us grant the Quaker all his own asking, and still his
malicious Conclusions will not follow.

. 32. I hope by this time the Reader will see how little truth is in that
Saying, pa. 327. If Tithes were ever due to any by virtue of this Gift, it must
be to the Popish Priests; for to them they were given.] This we have showed to
be a gross mistake before,. 17. and we will only note, That King Ethelwolph's
Clergy agreed with the Protestant Church of England in more Points, than with
the modern corrupt Church of Rome: And since the Donors gave them not to a
Popish Clergy, but to God and his true Ministers; our Kings and Parliaments,
that took them away from the corrupt Clergy (who were fallen into Popery), and
settled them on the true Protestant Ministry, did observe therein the Intention
of the Donors, and did apply Tithes to the right use for which God intended
them. And since the first Donors did not settle them on the Popish Clergy, and
the present Laws have given them to the Protestant Clergy, I know not what
Title the Popish Priests can justly have to them. And now one would think T. E.
were some great Enemy to the Popish Priests, and one that was concerned for the
Protestant Religion; but he and his Quakers are renounced by all sound
Protestants, and are the very Darlings of the great Agents for Rome: Their
Doctrine of Perfection, despising the Letter of Scripture, pleading for
Ignorance, relying on the Merit of following the Light within them, etc. are
Popery in disguise; they learn their Lesson from the Papists, and are doing
their work for them, while they dig up the very Foundations of the Protestant
Religion, and set Protestants one against another, since this is the way to
give Rome an easy Victory. So that though T. E. use the Name of Popish Priests
to gull the People, yet he is one of their Journey-men, and, with his Party,
are the most desperate Foes of the Protestant Interest, next to their Popish
Masters who set them on. And truly he deserves a Fee from the Popish Priests,
for pleading so earnestly that the Tithes are due to them; but since, like the
rest of his Arguings, it proceeds upon a mistake, it will do us no harm.
Proceed we therefore to his Charge against us.

. 33. However, he will by no means allow the Protestant Clergy have any Right
to them, since page 329. The Clergy now do nothing for the People (nor indeed
have nothing to do) which can deserve such compensation.] The Quaker-Speakers
have nothing to do indeed for their People, because they are all taught of God
immediately: but our People profess they need outward and mediate teaching, so
that we have enough to do; and certainly we do as much for the People, as ever
was done by any Clergy in the World: We pray for them, preach to them,
administer the Sacraments duly among them; we Marry, and Bury; we visit the
Sick, relieve the Poor, comfort the Sad, reprove Sinners, confute Heretics,
and show the folly of Elwoods, etc. We do all that the Laws of God, of the
Church, or of the Land require of us; and (as Foreign Protestants have said)
are generally as laborious a Clergy as ever was in any Age since the
Settlement of Christianity; being always ready to perform any Divine Office
which our People need or require. And if a Quaker say, All this is nothing at
all, or worth nothing to him.] I reply, That the Jewel was worth a great deal
in it self, which yet Aesop's Cock counted worth nothing, and preferred a
Barley-corn before it: And Divine Administrations are not less worth in
themselves, because such Cocks prefer a Tythe-sheaf before them all.

. 34. To revile those things which are established by Law, is to reproach the
Law it self, and accuse as well the Makers as the Executors of that Law:
wherefore T. E. in calling Tithes a great Oppression, and a foul Abuse, page
331. insinuates to his seditious Followers, That our Laws are Oppression, and
our Lawmakers Oppressors and Abusers of the People. And to make it still more
evident that he is one of those Heretics which S. Peter and S. Jude prophecy
of, he that is not afraid to despise Dominions and speak evil of Dignities, in
the very next words shows, he speaks evil of the things he understands not, 2
Pet. ii. 10, 12. Jude ver. 8. and 10. For, being ignorant under what Notion our
Laws do establish Tithes, he asks, ibid. What Laws are they that have made
Tithes a Freehold? Methinks if he does not know the sense of our Laws and
Lawyers in this Point, he is scarce fit to dipute this matter; but the Lawyers
must consider, he is an Inspirado, and knows all things by immediate Teaching,
and therefore thinks his Revelations will enable him to expound the Laws of
Man, as well as the Laws of God; so that he is a Councellor, as well as a
Divine. Yet alas! this unlucky way of Teaching cannot secure him from gross
mistakes; for page 333. he says, The Statute of 27 Hen. 8. is the first
Parliament-Law for Payment of Tithes; whereas the very first Law in the
Statute-Book is a Grant for the Churches enjoying her Rights inviolable; which
Law was repeated and confirmed in very many Parliaments after, as the
Statute-Book declares. Again, He says, That Law of 27 Hen. 8. was made by a
Popish King and Parliament, whenas that very Statute declares the King Supreme
Head of the Church of England, as T. E. may see, if he read it over: And how
they can be Papists that have renounced the Popes Authority, I cannot well
understand. Again, page 333, 334. he mistakes a Statute made in 32 H. 8. cap.
7. for a Statute made in 37 H. 8. and after a while he brings in Protestant
King Edward VI. for a Popish Confirmer of Tithes: But still he knows not, that
our Laws do make Tithes a Freehold. Wherefore I shall first tell him what a
Freehold is in the sense of our Law, and then I shall examine whether Tithes
be not such an Estate. " A Freehold (according to the Definition of our famous
and ancient Lawyer Britton) is a Possession of the Soil, or Services issuing
out of the Soil, which a Freeman holds in Fee to him and his Heirs, or at
least for term of his Life Brit. c. 33.
. Cowel's Interpr. verb. Freehold. Exposition of Law-Terms says the same. Now
Tithes are a Possession of a Service issuing out of the Soil, which a Free man
holds for term of his life: Ergo, Tithes are a Freehold. Again, Another
later Author says, Frank-tenement, or Freehold, is an Estate that a Man has
in Lands or Tenements, or other Profits, to be taken in Fee-simple Tail, for
Term of his own Life, or for Term of another Life in Dower, or by the
Courtesy of England: and under that there is no Freehold; for he that has an
Estate for Years, or holds at will, has no Freehold of those Estates Sheph.
Grand Abridgm. tit. Frank ten.. 1.
. Now Tithes are an Estate that a Man has in certain Profits issuing out of
the Land, to to be taken for term of his own life; and are not an Estate holden
for years, nor at will: Ergo, They are a Freehold. Besides, I shall prove,.
40. That they are an Ecclesiastical Inheritance, collateral to the Estate of
the Land out of which they come. See also Shepheard's Abridgment, tit. Tithes,
page 99. and 100. Now an Inheritance is generally taken for a Freehold: And
that the Practice of our Laws do manifest the same thing, may be seen in that
famous Case in Dyer, fol. 83. n. 77. of 7 Edw. 6. where (upon the Statute of 32
H. 8. c. 7.) an Assise was brought De libero tenemento de quadam portione
deeimarum, of a Freehold for a certain portion of Tithes. And in the very
Statute of 32 H. 8. there is mention made of an Estate of Inheritance or
Freehold in Tithes. And in the Countess of Oxford's Case. 5 Jacob. a Writ of
Dower was brought of Predial Tithes, Cook 2 part, in Priddle and Nappers Case
See Hughs's Abridgment, tit. Dismes,. 1. number. 9.
. But Tenure in Dower is one kind of Freehold, as was showed before. It
appears therefore, that Tithes may be sued for at Law in the same manner as
other Free-holds may; and therefore our Laws do esteem them no other than a
Freehold. And it is a miserable shift of the baffled Quaker, to pretend they
are only a Freehold to the Laity, and not to the Clergy; since it is
evident, that when some of the Tithes were alienated, those very Laws which
made the Alienation, did not give the Laity any other Estate in Tithes than
such as the Clergy had before, and such as the rest of the Clergy had then to
the Tithes remaining in Ecclesiastical hands. And though the Clergy have a
better Right to Tithes in foro Coeli, yet in foro Soli they have not a less
Right to them than the Laity now have, by the Laws of this Land: Nor has a
Layman, who is an Impropriator, any more, better, or other ways to recover his
Tithes, than the Clergy have: So that either the Quaker must grant the Law
makes them both Freeholds, or neither of them, since the same Laws and Method
of Prosecution are concerned in the Security of both these sorts of Free-holds.
We may see therefore what rare Effects Ignorance and Confidence can produce,
since they can inspire a raw Quaker to give his Opinion contrary to the most
famous Oracles of the Law, and to fancy he can confute the whole Bench of
Judges by his empty Falacies. I will only tell this puisne Man of Law, That if
he can prove Tithes to be no Freehold, he will discharge thereby the Clergy
from diverse Public Burdens which they lie under, as other Freeholders do;
from which they have far more reason to be exempted, than the Quakers have from
paying Tithes: yet they quietly submit to the payment of these Impositions for
their Freehold in Tithes, neither do they call these Customs by the odious
Names of Oppression and foul Abuses; by which it may be seen, whether are the
patienter Men of the two, the Priests, or the Quakers; and which are the better
Subjects and juster Persons, those who submit to the Laws and Customs of their
Country, and give unto all their Dues; or those who revile the Laws, and detain
Men's Rights from them. But, Ne suitor ultra crepidam: I must not imitate T. E's
Extravagances, while I do reprove them; nor dare I say any thing in the
Profession of other Men, but with all due submission to such as are better
learned in our Laws than I can pretend to be, to whom I shall freely confess my
Errors, if I have said any thing on this Subject that they shall not approve
for Law and Reason.

. 35. The Quaker, p. 334. thinks to overthrow these Laws and Statutes, by
repeating his old baffled Falsehoods, viz. That they were grounded on this false
Supposition, That Tithes were due to God and Holy Church.] But we have proved
this was a true Supposition, and maintained by the Primitive Orthodox Fathers;
so that nothing is more false than his saying again here, This was a Doctrine
purely Popish, and hatched at Rome. And since these Statutes were grounded on a
Primitive and a Protestant Doctrine, the Statutes are therefore good. Again, He
says, page 335. A Man cannot claim that by a Temporal Law, as a Temporal
Right, which that Law commands to be paid as a Divine Right.] Whereas all the
World knows, two Titles to the same thing, being subordinate to one another, do
strengthen each other. As a Father (having a Maintenance reserved out of the
Profits of his Sons Estate, mentioned in those Deeds which settle the said
Estate on the Son) though he had a Right to be maintained by his Son Jure
Divino, may claim a Maintenance by virtue of these Deeds Jure Humano; and the
second Title strengthens, but does not destroy the first. He goes on to ask,
page 336. Whether the Property be vested in the Person of the Priest, or the
Office?] I reply, An Office is capable of being vested in a Property; and the
present Person who sustains that Office has this Property vested in him during
his Life, with Remainder to his Successors for ever: As the Elwoods Family may
be endowed with an Estate in Tail, the Property of which belongs to that
Family, and is specially vested in the present Heir; but whether in the Man, or
the Elwood, is hard to tell. Again, He makes himself sure of that which none
but a wild Quaker could ever so much as once suppose; viz. To be sure (says
he) the Office of Priesthood was Popish; and the Office it self being now laid
aside, the Property vested in it must be gone along with it.] He must be under
some degree of Frenzy, who can persuade himself, that there are no Priests
now, or that the Reformation laid the Office aside: That had been a Reformation
as wild as a Quaker could project. Does he think that any body will grant these
doting Falsehoods? No Protestants (that ever I knew) held the Office of
Priesthood to be Popish. And truly, T. E. thy Suppositions will not be granted
by any, but those who are as senseless as thy self.

. 36. I should tire the Reader, if I followed him in the examining all his
Mistakes; but one piece of his Skill in Law must not be omitted, p. 337. That
whereas the Law has ordered the Husbandman to set out his own Tithes, before
the Priest take them; This shows (says T. E.) That the Priests Title to Tithes
lies in the Gift of the Owner: And yet he confesses, That the Law enjoins him
to set it out under a Penalty, which Penalty he incurs if he do not so set it
out.] It is an odd kind of Property which we have to a thing, that we may not
keep in our possession; and a strange Gift, which we must give whether we will
or no, and be punished if we do not give it. T. E. might as well have argued,
The Husbandman had a Property in his Tythe-Hay and Corn, because he must mow
and reap it; whenas all these, Moweing, Making, Reaping, Binding, etc. are
only designed by the Law to ease the Ministers of Secular trouble, that they
may have their Tithes made ready to their Hands, and so have more leisure to
attend Sacred things. But we will give him a parallel Case. There are many
Free-Rents and Customary Payments, which the Person charged with them must
bring to such a House, in such a Town, at such a Day, and then and there
disseise himself of the said Money, by a Tender thereof to the Lord or his
Assigns; which Lord need never demand this Money, and yet may take the
Forfeiture, if it be not brought to him, and tendered. Now will the Quaker say,
This shows, That the Lords Title to this Free-Rent lies in the Gift of him that
is bound to pay it, and that the Property of it is vested in him who incurs a
Penalty if he do not make it ready, and come and tender it? T. E. is a rare
Lawyer, and can make the worst Tenures to seem the best, and the Badges of
having no Right at all to a thing, to be the Marks of Property. If I delighted
to talk like T. E. I might pretend it to be a Sign that the Husbandman had no
Property in the Nine parts, but by the Gift of the Parson, because the Law
forbids him to lead away any of the Nine parts, till the Parson have notice to
come and take his Tenth. But I scorn such fooling.

. 37. And now he is forced, page 338. to supply his emptiness of Matter by
repeating his old, silly, and blasphemous Argument, That it is ridiculous and
unreasonable for any to pretend a Power to dispose of those Profits, or any
part of them, which arise from the Labor, Stock, and Care of another,
especially after their own Decease; which I have sufficiently baffled before,.
30. And here I will only remark, how that this Argument, if it were good, does
utterly take away all the Impropriators Right to their Estates in Tithes, how
much soever he flattered them before, page 299. For, are not their Tithes
(granted to their Ancestors long ago, and by them settled on their Children) a
part of the Profits of another Man's Labor, Stock, Care, etc. and do they not
claim a Property in them? And does not Elwood tell them, they are ridiculous
and unreasonable Men, to think any could grant such a Property to them, or that
they have any Right to them at present, or can convey them to their Posterity?
T. E's own words will serve to set out this matter: Let any Impropriators read
his Book, page 225, 335, 336, 338, 339. and then let me bespeak them in T. E's
own phrase, Look to your selves, you whose Ancestors first did buy these Tithes
of the Crown, or into whose Possession they are come now by Descent or
Purchase: Are you satisfied with the Quaker 's Plea, and willing to resign? You
hear what he says: -- And do you not think, if T. E. had Power, you should not
hear of this after another manner? He that tells you, Tithes cannot be granted
or conveyed; if opportunity served, would force you to restore them to his
painful Husbandman. See Elwood, p. 297, 298. And now you may discern the Genius
of this double-tongued and false-hearted Man, who talks backward or forward, as
may best serve his turn; clawing the Impropriators, to engage them to take his
part against the Clergy; and again, laying down Assertions, that make the
Levites of old, the Clergy and Impropriators now, to be a company of
ridiculous and unreasonable Men, to pretend a Right to Tithes, to which none
could ever grant them any Right at all. As for Artificers paying Tithes of
their Gains, it is no more than what they are obliged to by S. Paul's Rule,
Galat. vi. 6. to give their Pastor a share of all good things; and it is
enjoined by S. Augustine, and by S. Ambrose, and by diverse Saxon Laws cited
before. And since they have Souls to save, as well as others, they seem obliged
to it in Reason and Conscience. But this is seldom demanded, except in great
Cities, where the Laws of the Land enjoin it. Finally, We grant to T. E. Tithes
are due out of the Profits only; and therefore if God give no Increase, or the
Husbandman have nothing grow, we expect no Tithe at all: And how is this
unreasonable?

. 38. The Quaker will not grant, that his Arguments for taking away Tithes tend
to destroy Hospitals and Donations to the Poor, for this Reason, sorsooth, page
542. Because in that of the Poor there is (says he) a Settlement of certain
Lands in which the Donor had a Legal Property at the time of the Gift; but in
the Increase of the Occupiers Stock, he that gave Tithes neither had, nor never
could have a Property, and therefore no power to give.] We have noted before,
That by his Rules framed against Tithes, all Donations made by Papists, on
consideration of meriting, and expiating their Sins thereby, are void: And this
will destroy a great many of these Hospitals, and Gifts to the Poor. Again, By
his own confession, all Hospitals endowed out of Tithes, and all Gifts to the
Poor granted out of Tithes for perpetuity, are void: And since in King Henry
the Eighth's time there are several such Instances, and the famous Hospital of
Sutton, called the Charterhouse, has one part of its Revenue in Tithes; now if
T. E's Argument be good, these Hospitals and Gifts also must necessarily be
destroyed, or much impaired. A third sort of these Charitable Donations consist
of perpetual Rent-charges, and certain Sum; of Money to be paid yearly for
ever, out of the Profits of some certain Estate. I my self know an Estate of 40
l. per Annum, the Heirs whereof for ever are charged to pay 10 l. per Annum out
of the Profits of that Estate, to the Poor of three Parishes, by the Grant of a
pious Person deceased: And there are hundreds of such Instances in England. Now
the Occupiers of the Lands thus charged, must sell the Fourth or other part of
the Profits produced by their Labor, Sweat, Stock, Skill, and Industry, and
when it is turned into Money, must pay it entirely to the Poor of those
Parishes and Hospitals, who never did any thing for this Occupant; only
because he inherits or is possessed of the Land formerly thus charged by its
ancient pious Owner, he must pay such a part of the said Profits. Now T. E.
overthrows all these Donations also, in affirming* That no Man can charge his
Heirs for ever with such a part of the Profits arising out of their or their
Tenants Charge, Stock, Care, Skill, many years after the death of the Donor:
The Money for these Payments are raised out of the Increase of the Occupiers
Stock, wherein, according to T. E. no Man (now deceased) ever had or could have
a Property, and therefore no power to give: That these Donations also are made
void by T. E's wicked and sophistical Arguings. So that however, the Quaker
destroys all Charitable Donations, excepting such as are made in Lands given
wholly to the Hospitals, or other Poor. And truly these will not stand long
neither; for all other Men believe the ancient Donors had not more or better
Right to give away the Land it self, than they have to dispose of such a part
of the Profits thereof: T. E. who questions the one, may question the other
also: And thus, that he may starve the Clergy, he attempts to starve all the
Poor in England also in their company.

. 39. His next Position, page 343. is, That Tithes are a greater Burden than
Rents.] It would seem a Paradox, That Two shillings is a greater Burden than
Twenty, but only that Nothing is so easy, but it seems difficult, when it is
done unwillingly, as S. Ambrose speaks Hexam. lib. 5.
. The Quakers pay Tithes grudgingly, and of necessity, and therefore they are a
Burden to them, for the same Reason that Alms are a Burden to the Covetous, and
Tribute to the Disloyal Subject. But T. E. not content to discover his own base
Humor, measures all Men's Corn by his own Bushel; and (as it is the manner of
such as are evil themselves) he fancies all Men pay their Tithes with as ill
will as the Quakers, and impudently slanders the whole Nation, saying, He
doubts not but if every Englishman durst speak his mind, Nine parts of the
Nation would cry, Tithes are a great Oppression.] Wherein common Experience
proclaims him a Liar; there being very few Parishes, where Nineteen parts of
Twenty do not pay their Tithes freely as any other Dues: and those who are
refractory, are only such as this Seditious Libeller and his Party have
stirred up. There are some indeed who cry out against all Public Payments; and
these do call not only Tithes, but the Landlords Rents, and Assessments to the
King, and Relief to the Poor, great Oppressions: But such Persons Clamours are
no Argument, since the best and wisest part of the Nation pay their Tithes
freely. But T. E. alleges, he has Reasons to prove his Assertion by; viz. 1.
The Tenant has the worth of his Rent of the Landlord, but of the Priest he
receives nothing at all.] I answer, The Heir of an Estate charged with a
perpetual Payment to the Poor, receives nothing from the Poor to whom he pays
the Money; yet this is no Oppression. Again, The Tenant receives as much from
God, as he does from his Landlord: for we think, that Land is not more
necessary to the Increase, than God's Blessing; and upon that Consideration our
pious Ancestors obliged their Heirs for ever to give God his part of the
Profits, because both they and their Heirs were yearly to receive all their
Increase from his Blessing. Of all things which God gives (says King Edward
the Confessor) the Tenth part is to be restored to him, who gave us the Nine
parts together with the Tenth Leg. c. 9.
. Now the Priest is but God's Steward and Receiver; and if it were true, that
the Tenant did recive nothing from the Steward of God, yet he might justly pay
him Tithes for his Masters sake, from whom he receives all. The Tenant receives
nothing from his Landlords Steward, and yet he pays his Rent to him, or to any
other whom his Landlord assigns to receive it. But after all this, the Quaker
is a notorious Falsifyer, in saying, The Tenant receives nothing from the
Priest: for he receives his Prayers and his Blessing, his Preaching, and other
Administrations, which in S. Paul's account are worth more than ever can be
compensated for on Earth, 1 Cor. ix. 11.2. But, says T. E. Rent is a voluntary
Contract, and Volenti non fit injuria; but Tithe is not voluntary now, but
taken by force]. Very good! By this Rule then it appears, That Tithes are not
(as he falsely affirmed but now they were) " a general Oppression: for the
generality pay them willingly; and many thousands contract with their Landlord
and their Parson to pay them as voluntarily, as they do to pay their Rents: To
all these therefore Tithes are no Oppression, by T. E's own Rule. Nor are they
indeed any Oppression in themselves; only they seem so to such as pay them
unwillingly, to Quakers, Atheists, and Covetous Persons. Yet all things are not
Oppressions that are paid involuntarily; for some Knaves will pay no just Dues
to any without compulsion, and yet such Payments are just, though we be
necessitated to take them by force. Nor are all Payment Oppressions, which we
do not voluntarily contract for; T. E. must beware of that Assertion: for he
never contracted with the King to pay him Hearth-money, Custom, Tribute, etc.
and yet these are no Oppression. But not to destroy his Rule, Will T. E. be
content with his Quakers to pay Tithes, if I can prove they did voluntarily
contract to pay them? If so, I thus make it appear. Whoever takes a Farm,
either Tithes are mentioned in the Contract, or they are not: If they be
mentioned, then care is taken expressly, that either the Landlord or the Tenant
shall pay them: If Tithes be not mentioned, then the Laws of England suppose
that the Tenant consents to pay them: For Tithes are so known a Charge upon all
Land, the Laws have settled them so firmly, and the Nation paid them so long,
that none can be supposed ignorant there is such a Charge upon the Land he
takes to Farm; and therefore if he take the Land liable to this known Charge,
and does not expressly covenant his Landlord shall pay the Tithes, both Law and
Reason will interpret this a Consent and Contract to pay them; it being to be
presumed, if he had not consented to this Charge, he would have left the Land
and it together. The Quakers therefore must either take no Farms; or if they
voluntarily contract for the Land, they voluntarily make themselves liable to
Tithes; and so they are no Oppression, no not to them who had rather there were
none to be paid: For no doubt the Quakers could wish rather there were no Rent
to be paid neither; and they voluntarily covenant to pay Rent, because they
cannot enjoy the Farm without that Charge: no more can they enjoy it without
this of Tithes neither, which, like the very Rent, is a kind of forced
voluntary Contract also, even to the very Quakers.

. 40. T. E. comes, page 344. to his last Reserve, viz. That Tithes were really
purchased by the Owners of Estates: Which if he can make out, that alone will
do his business: and he thus proves it. They purchased (says he) all that was
not excepted out of the Purchase: but Tithes were not excepted; therefore the
Purchasers bought them, and may sell them again.] This is the Quakers Law; but
if our greatest Lawyers have any skill, this is a notorious falsehood: for they
say, Tithes are an Ecclesiastical Inheritance, collateral to the Estate of the
Lands C. 2. par. 13 b. in Priddle and Napper's Case.
. And more plainly, Tithes are not extinguished by a Feoffment made of the
Lands; by a Demise of the Lands, with all Profits belonging unto, or out of the
same, they will not pass 7 Ed. 6. Die. 84.31 Eliz. in C. B. Parkins case
adjudged.
. Now what insolence is it for this Novice to make his Quakers believe that for
Law, which is contrary to the best Opinions, and to plain adjudged Cases? But
his mistake will more fully appear by this Case. A purchases an Estate in B, of
C, the Tithes whereof are Impropriate, and belong to D: Now will the Quaker
say, That A purchases D's Estate in the Tithes, without his knowledge or
consent, by virtue of the general Words in the Conveyance from C? If so, the
poor Impropriator has an ill Bargain; for then C may sell D's Estate in
Tithes, and A buy it, and he receive nothing for it. Now if the Impropriators
Estate in Tithes do not pass by the general Words in the Conveyance from the
Seller of the Land, no more does the Clergiemans Estate in Tithes so pass. Yea,
T. E. is so far mistaken in thinking general Words include Tithes, that if the
Lord of a Manor, whose Tithes belonged to the Clergy, should expressly declare
in his Deed of Sale, That he did sell the Tithes, such a Clause would not give
the Buyer the least Right to them: For, private Contracts can make no
alteration in things determined by the public Laws: Ex solenni Jure,
privatorum conventione nihil quicquam immutandum est Reg. Jur. 27.
. But this matter is so plain, that the Quaker fraudulently leaves out those
Words of the Conveyance which would have discovered his Knavery in this false
Assertion: for thus he cites the words of the Deed (to prove that the Purchaser
buys the Tithes with the Land). The said A grants, bargains, sells, etc. all
that, etc. with its Appurtenances, and every Part and Parcel thereof, and also
all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim, and Demand whatsoever,
etc. There he stops with an [etc.], because his shallow Reader should not see
what follows in the Deed, viz. [ Estate, Right,] -- which I the said A have or
ought to have in the Premises: Which Words do manifest, that the Purchaser buys
no more Estate or Right than the Seller had to or in the Premises: And indeed
he could purchase no more; for, Nemo plus Juris ad alium transfer potest,
quam ipse haberet Vlp. l. 46. ad Edict.
. The Seller did not purchase the Tithes himself, nor did they descend to him
from his Ancestors, but have been a distinct collateral Estate this many
hundred Years, which never passed between Father and Son, Buyers and Sellers,
but remained in statu quo prius, how many times soever the Land changed its
Owners. They were not capable of being sold nor alienated, no not by the
consent of the Incumbent himself; since they are an Intailed Estate; and, The
Church (says my Lord Coke) is always a Minor, and in the State of one under
Age In Mag. Chart. p. 3.
: And none can alienate a Minors Land. And if T. E. would know the Reason why
they are not excepted in the Purchase by name, as Free-Rents and Rent-charges
sometimes are, I answer, Free-Rents and Rent-charges, etc. are laid upon Land
by private Contracts, and could not be known (unless they were by name
excepted) to be due out of such an Estate: whereas Tithes were a public
Donation, and are sufficiently known to the whole Nation, and confirmed by the
consent of Kings and Parliaments, and so need not be excepted by name, as
private Charges are. And yet T. E. must know, That if an Owner should sell an
Estate in general words, and not except nor mention a Free-Rent or Rent charge,
this would not discharge the Buyer from paying it, nor destroy his Right to
whom the said Rent was due. Caveat Emptor. Much less can the not excepting
Tithes, prejudice the Churches Right. And thus T. E's Law comes to nothing.

. 41. In the next place, he presents us, page 346. with a Demonstration, to
prove, That though the Tenant be abated by his Landlord in consideration of his
Tithe, yet the Abatements (says T. E.) made in the Rents, in respect of
Tithes, are not so great as the Tithes.] I answer, That is none of the Priests
fault, who is not a Party to their Bargain; But if there be not an Abatement
proportionable to so known a Payment, it is either the fault of the Landlord
who will abate no more, or the folly of the Tenant who consents to pay so much.
The Tithes are the known Interest of a third person, so that the Landlord
cannot justly demand any thing for them, nor the Tenant prudently yield to pay
any thing on account of them. But let us hear his Demonstration, or rather
Supposition. Suppose a Farm of the value of 100 l. per Annum, if Tythe-free,
the Landlord abating 10 l. in consideration of the Tithe, lets it for 90 l. per
Annum: Now the whole Profits of this Farm he supposes worth three times 90 l.
that is, 270 l. per Annum, the full Tithe whereof is 27 l. per Annum; so that
the Tenant being only abated 10 l. in consideratton of Tithes, pays 27 l. for
them.] Now all this is a mere Chymaera, as I will show, when I have asked T. E.
two Questions: First, Why did not his wise Tenant (knowing such a Payment as 27
l. must go out of his Farm) expect, and stand upon more Abatement? He should
have yielded to pay only 73 l. per Annum, and then all had been right.
Secondly, If the Landlord abates the Quaker 10 l. per Annum in consideration of
Tithe to be paid, Whether is not the Quaker a Knave, who puts this 10 l. per
Ann. in his own Pocket, and will pay no Tithe at all? I believe all the Parsons
in England would compound with the Quakers after this rate that the Landlord
allows. But to examine his Device; we find three faults with this Supposition
of T. E.'s. First, He supposes the Landlords to be better than usually they
are; for I fear there are few Landlords who will or do let a Farm for 90 l. per
Annum, out of which they know may be made 270 l. Secondly, He supposes the
Tenants to get more Profit than any of them actually gain, or than indeed it is
reasonable they should: For, if the Landlord receive only one 90 l. the Tenant
has another 90 l. to repay him for his Charge, Care, and Pains in Managing,
and a third 90 l. the Tenant has remaining clear Profit to himself; which is
as much Profit as the Landlord himself gets by his own Estate which he
purchased: so that the Tenant has as much benefit by another Man's Estate, as
the right Owner. Thirdly, And both these Suppositions are merely to accuse the
Parson of taking more for Tithe than ever he is likely to receive: for what
Parson did ever receive 27 l. per Annum for a 90 l. Farm? Experience teaches
us, that (considering the small profit of Pasture-grounds, together with
Customs, ill Payments, and Concealment, etc.) we scarce ever get so much as 20
s. for 10 l. Rent, unless where there is very much Corn: but take the
Church Livings one with another, and there is not above 9 l. a Year made of a
Farm upon the improved Rent of 90 l. per Annum. Now if the Landlord abates 10
l. a year in respect of Tithes, and the Tenant pays but 9 l. a year, then
Tithes are so far from being an Oppression, that the Tenant really gains 20 s.
a year by them. But I will not, as T. E. make Suppositions at random, but give
an Instance of my own knowledge. The Parish of A yields in Rents to the
Landlords at least 1000 l. per Annum: Now, by T. E's account, the Tenants clear
Profits (being generally well used) must be 3000 l. per Annum; and the Tithe of
this, according to T. E. comes to 300 l. per Annum: But there are credible
Witnesses to attest it, That in the best Years the Tithes there are not worth
80 l. per Annum, which is 20 l. per Annum less than 2 s. in the Pound Rent:
which 20 l. the Tenants clearly gain of the Priest; for their Landlords
(according to T. E.) allow them 100 l. per Annum out of 1000 l. to pay Tithes:
And yet there is store of Corn and Hay in this Parish, and not many Customs. So
that I dare affirm, this Account will hold throughout England, in all Livings
taken one with another. So little Honesty or Truth is there in this malicious
Slanderer, who cares not what he says, so it may make Tithes seem a Burden, and
the Priests become odious. But from such Religion, Libera nos!

. 42. The like appears from his next Saying, page 347. The Landlords Dealing is
far more merciful than the Priests; for the Landlord allows Two parts to the
Tenant for his Charge and Subsistence; but the Priest takes the full Tenth part
of the Increase of the whole Farm, and leaves the poor Farmer no consideration
for his Toil and Charge.] To which I answer, That there are few Landlords who
take so little Rent as One part of Three, and few Priests get so much as a full
Tenth part of all manner of Profits: so that this Argument is faulty on both
sides, and halts of both Legs. Secondly, If all T. E's Falsehoods were supposed
true, yet the very same thing is done in Annuities, Free-Rents, Rent-charges,
Donations to the Poor, etc. the Money is paid entire, and no satisfaction is
made to the Occupant for his pains in raising it; yet none ever called these
Oppression, till T. E. appeared We labor spiritually for them, who take bodily
pains for us: And indeed the Parishione^s give us nothing at all; but only
this pains they take in making Gods part ready. The Tenth part of the Profits
is ours Jure Divine, Jure Donationis, and Jure Humano, and was given to us long
before these Occupants were born: And if our Ancestors enjoined their
Successors to give the Priest the Tenth part without his taking pains, it was
no more injustice in them, than in King David, who made his part who tarried by
the Stuff, equal to his who went down into the Battle, 1 Samuel xxx. 25. their
Employment being as useful to the Public as the others; though not so full of
Bodily pains. But finally, Will T. E. say, It is Oppression in the Priest to
take his full Tenth, and make the Countryman no satisfaction for his pains? If
this be Oppression, then God was the Author (according to T.E.) and the
Levites the Instruments of Oppression, since they were ordered to take the full
Tenth without any Compensation: He must call the Levites Chaldeans and Sabeans
as well as us; for they fell on (as he calls it) and swept all the Tenth away:
And now the Servant is not above his Master; if he call Al nighty God, the
Master of the House, ridiculous, unreasonable, unjust, and an Oppressor, we
will sit down quietly under the same Reproaches, lamenting to see whither his
rage against us has carried him, even to the height of Blasphemy; so that to
him may be applied that of the Prophet, Surely the spiritual man is mad, Hosea
ix. 7. To let him alone therefore, I will tell more sober Men how the
Countryman is compensated for his pains. S. Augustine says, God gives us all
the Nine parts, in compensation for our pains, in providing the Tenth for him.
But Sir Henry Spelman is more particular, who observe, That Seven is the Sacred
Number, and the part often appropriate to God: wherefore as God has the
Seventh part of our Time in his Sabbaths, so he should have had a full Seventh
part of our Profits also, but only that we contribute our pains toward the
raising these Profits, whereas toward our Time we contribute nothing ( Life and
Time being God's immediate Gift): whereupon God takes his full Seventh part of
our Time, but gives us back Three parts of our Profits in compensation for our
pains, and in stead of a Seventh, he is contented with a Tenth part of our
Estate. I will only add, That the Priests Payment is more merciful than the
Landlords; for the Landlord expects his full Rent, be the Year never so bad, or
the Profits never so few and small; but the Priests part cannot exceed the
Increase; if it be little, he has but little; if God gives much, the
Countryman is able to pay more. And indeed the Priest is hereby obliged to
sympathize with his Neighbors, since he is a Sharer in their Gains and Losses;
and so the Husbandman and the Priest ought to have the same care for one
another.

. 43. If the Quakers were not an ignorant and credulous sort of Men, they would
not believe so gross an Untruth as his next Assertion is, page 348. viz. That
the Charge is much heavier upon the People now, than it was under the Levitical
Priesthood.] For the Learned Seldom computes, That the Tribe of Levi had three
times as much Annual Revenue as the greatest of the Twelve Tribes. And first,
for their Tithes, Scaliger thus computes it: Suppose a Man had 6000 Bushels of
Grain in one year; out of this was to be taken the First Fruits, which must be
100 Bushels at least, and then remains 5900 Bushels; out of which was paid the
First Tithe to the Levites in kind, 590 Bushels: then remained only 5310
Bushels, out of which was taken the Second Tithe for a Feast at Jerusalem, 53^
Bushels: So that the Husbandman had but 4779 Bushels remaining to his own Use,
having paid 1221 Bushels out of 6000, that is, above a Sixth part, and 19
Bushels out of every 100, which is near twice as much as is now paid to the
Christian Priests: which Account T. E. may find in one of his Country Authors,
Godwin. Antiq. lib. 6. cap. 3. which shows his falsehood a^ to Tithes. Secondly,
He objects, The Levites had no share in the Division of the Land; so that the
other Eleven Tribes had all the Land between them, which was some compensation
for their Tithes.] The Levites had not any entire Country set out together, as
the other Tribes had; but for convenience of instructing the People, they were
dispersed so as to have fair Possessions in every Tribe; for God himself
appointed them xlviii Cities, with 2000 Cubits round without the Walls, for
Pasture for their Cattle, Numb. xxxv. of which Six were Cities of Refuge, which
was a better proportion than our Glebe-Land, and in value might be esteemed the
Twelft part of the Land of Canaan: Wherefore T. E. is mistaken again, in
affirming the Levites had no share in the Land. Thirdly, He alleges, That the
present Clergy have Offerings, as well as the Levitical Priests.] And here he
has a large Bill of Names, some of which we never heard of; and yet he ends
with an etc. as he uses to do when he can reckon no more: but after all this,
the Sums paid for some of these are so small, and the others are so occasional,
that the present Clergy get not half so much in one year by these, as the
Levites and Jewish Priests did in a few Months by their Offerings: For, 1. They
had their part of all their Sacrifices and Offerings made in the Temple. 2.
Their share of all the Feasts made there. 3. A part of all Free Will Offerings
and voluntary Oblations, three times a year all the Jews coming up to
Jerusalem, and none coming empty. 4. The Firstborn of Cattle, or the Price; as
also the Price for Redemption of all the Firstborn of Men, at Five Shekels
apiece, i. e. 12 s. 6 d. of our Money, Numbers xviii. 16.5. The Price of
Persons dedicated by Vow, coming sometimes for one Person to Fifty Shekels, i.
e. 6 l. 5 s. of our Money, Levit. xxvii. 2. with other things there mentioned:
So that our Offerings are not valuable in respect of theirs. Fourthly, He
urges, That all the Officers of the Temple were maintained out of these.] Pray'
what [all] was there to be maintained? None besides the Levites, except the
poor Nethinims, who were Gibeonites, and did the drudgery of the Temple: All
other Officers of the Temple were Levites, who had none to keep but these
Nethinims, which were their Servants for all mean Offices. Fifthly, He says,
Out of the Tithes provision was made for the fatherless, the widow, and the
stranger, Deuteronomy. xiv. 28, 29.] This is another mistake, if he mean these were
provided for out of the Levites Tithe. T. E. had need go and read over Godwins
Antiquities Lib. 6. c. 3.
, where he will find this Provision was not made out of the first or Levites
Tithe, but out of the second Tithe, which was to be spent in Feasts at
Jerusalem two years, and the third to be laid up at home for the Levite, the
fatherless, the widow, and the stranger; so that the first Tithe was still paid
entire, and the Maintenance of these indigent Persons went out of the Peoples
Profits: So full of ignorance and mistakes is this Man in every thing he deals
with. We conclude therefore, That the Charge is much easier now to our People,
than it was to the Jews under the Levitical Law.

. 44. In the Conference you had given two Reasons why the Apostles took no
Tithes: 1. Not of the Jews, because their own Priests were in possession of
them: 2. Not of the Gentiles, because of their unfixt Station. To this T. E.
replies, page 351. I pray' who fixed your state of life? who divided Provinces
into Parishes, and set up Parish Priests? Was it not a Pope?] Never did any Man
pretend to write of things he understood so little, as T. E. does of
Ecclesiastical Matters. This all-knowing Quaker does not understand, that the
Apostles themselves fixed Bishops and Pastors in the several Cities they had
converted, Timothy at Ephesus, Titus in Crete; giving them Commission to ordain
and fix others in lesser Cities. He knows not how Eusebius, and other
Historians, reckon up the very Persons in all eminent Churches, ordained and
fixed there by the Apostles. It will be news to him, to tell him, That in the
very beginnings of Christianity, wheresoever the Gospel was once planted, there
were strict Canons made against the Clergy of one Diocese going into another
to Officiate. Let it suffice to tell him, That the General Council of Chalcedon
ordains, That whatever Clergie-man was ordained without a Nomination to some
certain Church wherein he was fixed, his Orders should be null Can. 6.
. And to let him see we had a fixed Clergy in Britain long before Augustine's
coming over, he may read in a Synod held by S. Patrick among the Britains, Anno
456. this Canon: Let there be no wandering Clergie-man among the People Can 3.
ap. Spelm.
. The Britains also had fixed Archbishops, and Bishops, and Priests, long
before the Popes of Rome so much as directed any thing here: And when the Saxon
Heathens (who had disordered all things) were converted to Christianity,
Honorius fifth Archbishop of Canterbury first divided all the Country in his
Province into Parishes, that he might allot to every several Minister a several
Flock to take care of Godwin. de Praesul. Angl. p. 59. circa annum 640.
; though Spelman attribute this to Theodorus, about twenty or thirty years
after: But none can suppose this was the first fixing of Parish Priests, only
the first after the sad Inundation of Saxon Paganism. And now we see T. E. has
neither Learning nor Truth in him, who attributes our fixing to a Pope, when
the Apostles themselves showed the way in this Practice, not intending that any
vagabond Speakers should be allowed, after once the Christian Church was settled.

. 45. I hope when T.E. considers how wonderfully God opened the Hearts of the
first Christians, not only to give the Apostles Meat and Drink, but to sell
all, and give the Price to them, he will upon second thoughts correct that
Passage, page 352. and allow this to be an extraordinary and miraculous
Providence of Gods, to encourage their first Beginnings. And since all those
fervors and excesses of Charity are now ceased, I think we have reason to
admire the Wisdom of our Ancestors, who provided a fixed and certain
Maintenance, because there was no likelihood of such Miracles of Charity to be
found in aftertimes. T. E. says indeed they sold their Estates voluntarily,
page 353. which is most true; and we do not desire any to sell them
involuntarily now: But when our People sell all voluntarily as they did, we
will quit our Claim to Tithes; till then, we desire the Quaker will let us
quietly enjoy our ordinary Maintenance, and we are well content.

. 46. When you soberly advise the Quakers to pay their Tithes for
Conscience Sake, in Obedience to the Kings Command, T. E. replies, page 354. We
must not for Conscience Sake yield an Active Obedience to every Command of a
King.] He misses the Mark again: for the paying of Money, or Money-worth, when
our Lawful Governors impose it, is a piece of Passive Obedience. If the King
should bid the Quaker turn Minister, and take Tithes, his doing that, were
Active Obedience: but to pay them (especially unwillingly, as the Quakers do)
is a piece of Passive Obedience, to which a Man ought to submit quietly for
Conscience Sake, and in point of Obedience to the Authority imposing it, though
it be never so much against his Judgment. Thus our Savior submitted to pay
Tribute, which ought not to have been exacted of him, Mat. xvii. 24. And S.
Paul commands the Christians to pay Tribute and Custom to the Heathen
Emperors, though they used it to Idolatrous and wicked purposes: The
Christians liked not the use they put their Tributes unto, but yet they
submitted to the Payment. Thus the poor Greeks pay great Contributibutions to
the Grand Signior; and, if I mistake not, the Protestants of France pay Tithes
to the Popish Clergy; and the late oppressed Royalists paid Assessments to the
Parliament, and paid Tithes to Men invested in Livings according to the Laws
then in being, though they did not esteem all of them Lawful Ministers. If the
Payment imposed be never so unjust, I do not sin in paying it; he sins that
imposes it: but if he be my Governor, I will submit for Conscience Sake, and
suffer this Payment as I am obliged to do other Penalties and unjust
Impositions laid on by just Authority. So that doubtless the Quakers are in a
great mistake, in fancying they shall sin in the paying Tithes in obedience to
Humane Laws, and choosing rather to go to Prison; since they may as well submit
(I think) to (what they account) an unjust Payment, as to (what they call) an
unjust Imprisonment. If I were in their case, I could pay my Tithes in
obedience to the Laws of the Nation, though I did believe the Law never so
unjust; because this Payment (to one so opinionated) is a Penalty, and his
Obedience therein merely passive. And truly I cannot remember ever to have read
of any sort of People in the World before, who counted it a Sin to pay an
Imposition supposed unjust; which is no more a Sin, than to be Stockt or Whipped,
to be Fined or Imprisoned; all which we may submit to without sin. Which Point
I have been the larger in, because the not understanding of this, has brought
much trouble on these deluded People: This may show them, it is no sin to pay
Tithes, though it were a sin in the Law to command them, and in us to take
them: But I hope I have now sufficiently showed it is none; and I wish I might
rectify their Opinion, and then they might pay them freely.

. 47. The Quaker has nothing to say against the First Fruits and Tenths, which
are a Revenue to the Crown, paid by the Clergy out of the Tithes, but only
that, page 355. This Flower once stuck in the Triple Crown.] But His Majesty
will not so easily be wheadled out of so great a part of His Revenue, and so
clear an Acknowledgment of Hi^ Clergies Subjection to him. And that the Quakers
may know what Injury they do to His Majesty, in attempting to take away the
Maintenance of the Clergy, let them know, That the First Fruits of the
Bishoprics of England, paid to the King, are above 23000 l. and the Tenths of
them, paid yearly, are 2300 l. But the inferior Clergies Tenths (arising
merely out of Tithes) do pay to the Exchequer yearly 1376. l. their Firstfruits
being 137610 l. besides all the Tenths and First Fruits of Prebendaries, and
other Dignities. And though it cannot be exactly told how much this Revenue is
yearly, yet as nigh as we can compute, His Majesty receives near 30000 l. per
Annum out of the Revenues of the Clergy. And supposing all the Livings in
England to be void but once in Twenty years, by that rate His Majesty receives
from the inferior Clergy alone, out of the Tithes, above 20000 l. per Annum.
All which, these inconsiderate Men would deprive His Majesty of; so that they
wound the King through our sides: but no doubt He will defend both us and
Himself from all their Attempts.

. 48. I shall not need now to confute that frequent and unjust reproach of the
Quakers calling Ministers Hirelings, page 356, etc. since I have showed, the
only Revenues they have are no other than what they have a threefold Title
to; first, By the Laws of God and Nature: secondly, By the Donation of the
right Owners: thirdly, By the Laws of this Land. The People do not hire them,
they set them not on work, nor do they, out of their own, give them any Wages:
They are employed by God, and he has provided for them, and will one day
requite all the malicious Slanders that are cast upon them, and particularly
that foul Calumny wherewith T. E. has loaded the Loyal and Suffering Clergy
of the Church of England, who lost their Lives, or their Fortunes, for their
Fidelity to the Church, and Allegiance to their Prince, the Glorious Martyr
King CHARLES I. These noble Sufferers, who attended their Flocks till they were
Sequestered, Imprisoned, Silenced, and by Armed Soldiers violently torn from
their Cures; These he most wickedly accuses of flying, and leaving their Flocks
to the Wolves; and brands them with the name of Hirelings: But this
black-mouthed Slanderer may publish his own venomous Impieties, by blaspheming
God, reviling our Forefathers, speaking evil of Kings, despising Laws, and
reproching the best of Men: but his Dirt will never stick upon such Illustrious
Names; and therefore if he do not repent from a sense of the wickedness of
these Crimes, yet he ought in common Prudence to desist from so vain an
Attempt, considering he does blast his own Name, with unsuccessful endeavors
to reproach those whom all the World admires and venerates.

. 49. T. E. once more attempts to justify the Quakers in detaining Tithes,
although their separation be voluntary; but this is sufficiently confuted
before,. 9. And I desire the Reader only to remember the Instance of the
Truant Boys wilful absence from an Endowed Free School. But, says T. E. page
358. Some Ministers are vicious, and such as the Apostle has exhorted us to
withdraw our selves from.] But do not Quakers separate from good Ministers as
much and as well as from bad? A vicious Minister may be a pretense to them who
resolved to separate however; but his Vice is not the true cause of their
Separation. Besides, He belies S. Paul, in saying he exhorts the People to
withdraw from a bad Minister; he bids them not withdraw from a Father, but a
Brother walking disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6. The People may do that to one
another, which they may not do to their Governors Spiritual or Temporal.
Secondly, He runs again into his old mistake, applying Christ's Directions to
his Disciples on a private Mission to Unbelievers, as if it were a standing
Rule for Ministers among Believers, Mat. x. 14. Thirdly, He compares the
Quakers, in rejecting our Ministry, to the Jews who rejected the Apostles, and
judged themselves unworthy of Eternal Life, Acts xiii. 46. Fourthly, He says,
Christ gave his Apostles no Authorito compel any to hear them.] Yes surely, he
bid them go into the Highways and Hedges, and compel those whom they found
there to come in, Luke xiv. 23. And these among the Highways and Hedges are
such as are in Heresies, and Schismatics, says S. Augustine August. 50 Epist.
ad Bonif. Com.
to Bonifacius, where he observes, the Donatists used this very Objection which
our Quakers now use; and he learnedly proves, That Gentiles were first to be
invited in, but when the Church is settled, whatever straying Sheep wilfully
leave the Fold, these are to be compelled by Laws and moderate Penalties to
return into the Fold; alleging, That to compel Men to that which is good, is
very lawful, and an act of necessary Charity to their Souls, yea a Duty of
Christian Princes, and a means which had brought many to see their Errors, and
repent. Let T. E. read and answer the excellent Arguments in that Epistle, if
he can: And withal, let him observe, it is not the Priests compel them, but the
Laws of the Land. The Priests indeed see them in desperate Heresies and most
wicked Schism, and in pity to their Souls, admonish them, warn them, 1 Thessalonians.
v. 14. and labor to convince them by Arguments; yea, at length they use the
Censures of the Church, and finally, as the last remedy, complain to the
Secular Magistrate, to try if any thing will bring them to a better mind,
knowing, that sometimes the rod and reproof give wisdom: And this is no more
than S. Paul threatened, 2 Cor. x. 6. and acted also, in delivering the
incestuous Corinthian to Satan, punshing his outward Man for the health of his
Soul, 1 Cor. v. 5. It Is no more than a careful Father does to his refractory
Son. Let not them therefore (says S. Augustine) who being in Heresy and
Schism are compelled to come in, reprove us that they are compelled; but
consider whither we would compel them August. Epist. 50. ut supra.
; to Unity and Peace, to a right Faith, and to submission to their Governors;
to the Service of God, and the Salvation of their Souls. Nor does our State use
any Capital Punishments, any Spanish Cruelties, or Popish Fire and Faggot
toward them; but by moderate Penalties labors to reduce them: which is no more
than the first Christian Emperors did to reduce the Heretics of those days,
by Fines, Imprisonment, banishing them out of eminent Cities, burning their
Books, and prohibiting their Assemblies; but still preserving their Lives, in
hopes of their Repentance. And when our Magistrates imitate Holy Constantine
and Theodosius herein, the Quakers most unjustly call it Persecution.

. 50. He adds, page 359. Christ gave us no power to demand a Maintenance from
those who do not receive us.] Nor do we demand of the Quakers to give us one
single Penny more than what was given to us, and settled on us many hundred
years ago: we only ask our own; we only ask that which the Quaker did not
take of his Landlord, that which was or ought to have been abated in his Rent.
If a Tenant be to pay an Annuity to a Lord as Free-Rent, or to an Hospital, or
other Person, will his saying he does not receive him or them, excuse him from
paying the Money? Our Lord JESUS owns us for his Ministers, and the Laws of the
Land own us, and declare we are the Persons to whom this Estate belongs; and
what have the Quakers to do to dispute our Title, any more than they do their
Lords Title to his Estate? The Papists pay us Tithes here in England, and we
should pay them if we lived in France. If the State assign Tithes to a wrong
Order of Men, it is their fault: But I am sure Tithes are not the Country-mans,
he may not keep them, but must pay them as the Laws direct, and is innocent in
so doing. Our Right to Tithes depends not at all upon Men's being willing or
unwilling to come and hear us; and the Quaker is sadly mistaken, to think we
come to sell them our Sermons, or that Tithes are a Price which is the Quakers
own to give. The folly of all these Pretenses was showed before.

. 51. As for Going to Law for Tithes, you have fully proved it lawful in the
Conference, and the Quaker answers not one of your Arguments; so that till he
reply to that, I will only note, That it is much against our will, that we are
forced to sue for our just Dues; and where a Legal Right is demanded, the Sin
lies at the Defendents door, who will maintain an unjust Cause, and force the
Plaintiff to use this uneasy and ungrateful Method. If it would not be too
tedious, I could show him Examples of Primitive Gospel Ministers, upon the
Churches Settlement, requiring Justice of the Emperors against the
Sacrilegious Invaders of the Sacred Revenue: but it is time enough to produce
Examples, when he has answered your Reasons already produced.

. 52. His Conclusion, page 363. admonishes me, that it is time for me to
conclude also, when I have made a Remark or two upon his pleasant Epilogue,
which I dare say would afford you, as it did me, the just occasion for a smile,
to observe what rare effects the happy conjunction of Ignorance and Folly have
produced in your Adversary. You said, That the Quakers were quite different
from the Primitive Christians: which he thinks to avoid, by calling it an old
overworn Objection: And truly, as an Objection, it is as old as the Quakers
first appearance in the World; but the Answer to it, will be an unheard of
Novelty. And indeed the Quakers may be ashamed to let the Objection grow old
and over-worn, before they have either confessed the Truth, or made some
satisfactory Reply thereunto. But the merriest passage is, that T.E. who knows
nothing of Ecclesiastical History and Antiquity, and is a perfect Stranger to
the Judgment and Practice of the Primitive Christians, having scarce heard of
the Names of the most Eminent Fathers, as he has abundantly manifested in this
Book; that he should challenge the poor ignorant Priests, and attempt to
threaten you into silence, by daring you to dispute on this Question, -- Risum
teneatis Amici? Doubtless, if T. E. (without going down to the Philistines of
Rome) should of a sudden become able to dispute well about the Doctrine, and
Discipline, and Rights of the Primitive Church, it would be the most famous
Instance of immediately inspired Teaching that this Age ever saw: And if he can
prove that these Ancient Christians had no distinct Order of Men to Officiate
in Divine things, no Sacrament of the Lords Supper, no Baptism with Water, no
Catechizing, no Oblations at the Altar, no separate Places for Worship, and Set
Forms for Sacred Administrations, no Festival and Fasting Days, no Kneeling at
Prayers, no singing of Praises, nor answering of Amen, etc. he has some rare
Revelations sure about those Times, and is able to confute S. Ignatius, Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, and the rest of those Eldest
Fathers, in Matters done in their own time: A very grand Undertaking! which
none would have boasted of, but T. E. and none but an undiscerning Quaker can
be persuaded it is possible to be effected. And now, finally, he would gladly
render you as odious, as he has made himself ridiculous; by collecting out of
your whole Book all the just Titles you have bestowed upon their Fancies and
enormous Errors: but since you have never used any of these Epithets, without
proving in the same place there was good reason for it, I cannot think they
need any excuse: nor was it possible for you to express a sufficient
detestation of their mischievous Opinions and Practices in any gentler Phrases:
Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit, Pub. Sir. If T. E. had been to act
the part of Porphyrie, or Julian the Apostate, he might have made a notable
Collection of the severe Expressions of our Lord JESUS concerning the Scribes
and Pharisees, and made some Blasphemous Inferences from thence of the Temper
of His Spirit: but no wise and good Christian will think it inconsistent with
Evangelical Meekness, to give Crimes their Right Names, and to bestow upon evil
Persons their deserved Characters. But as for T. E. I have made it evident,
That he has blasphemed God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; charged the
Primitive Fathers, Councils, and Emperors abroad, the Saxon Kings and
Parliaments at home, and all the Patrons of Tithes since the Reformation, with
Judaism, Popery, and Idolatry; representing them all as a company of ridiculous
and unreasonable Men. He has reviled the Laws, and never spoken of the Priests
but with all the contempt imaginable. And now he puts on his Vizor again, and
would gladly go off from the Stage in all the Formalities of a demure Quaker,
pretending he will not return railing for railing; and truly he had done it
sufficiently before, to show he neither fears God nor reverences Man, and to
spoil all the Pretenses he would make to Meekness at his plausible Exit.

And now (Dear Sir) I shall leave these Observations to your disposal, who are
best able to judge whether they are material, and whether they will be useful,
or no. If you (who have so well considered this Subject) think they may be
serviceable to undeceive the unhappy and deluded Quakers, I will not oppose
their Publication: If otherwise, provided you accept them as a Testimony of my
Affection to you and the Truth you defend, I am well pleased with their
remaining Private: For all that I aim at, is to see these miserable and
misguided Men rescued from their Heresy and Schism, and reduced into the ways
of Truth and Soberness: And I am apt to hope, when they shall see how plainly
the Ignorance and Malice, the Hypocrisy and Mistakes of this their bold
Champion are detected, they will begin to perceive, that their Principles are
not to be defended, no not by the most Politic Equivocation and Sophistry; and
therefore they ought to be deserted by all that do not love to be deceived: For
their Delusion is sincerely lamented, and their Conversion will be heartily
congratulated by

(SIR) Your affectionate Brother, and unfeigned Friend.

ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 14. dele to be. p. 26. l. 22. r. Tithes of them. p. 28. l. 15.
r. being a just. p. 29. l. 13. r. (...). p. 45. marg. l. 4. r. Tobit ^. 7. p.
55. l. 9. r. in the Word. p. 79. l. 23. r. may add. p. 86. marg. l. 5. r.
Binius Tom. 1. p. 367. p. 97. l. 8. r. Guthrun. p. 128. l. 17. r. calls them.
p. 130. l. 22. r. of Lions. p. 135. l. 7. r. in all their. p. 138. l. 5. r. not
see then. p. 161. l. 5. dele as. p. 203. l. 26. r. payments. p. 241. l. 17. r.
Rites of the.

ERRATA.
PAge 55. line 9. read Word. p. 79. l. 24. r. may add. p. 82. l. 16. dele to.
p. 89. l. 16. r. Family. p. 99. l. 11. r. solemnly.


