THE GRAND IMPOSTOR DISCOVERED: OR, AN Historical DISPUTE of the Papacy and
Popish Religion: 1. Demonstrating the newness of both; 2. By what artifices
they are maintained? 3. The contradictions of the Roman Doctors in defending
them: Divided in four Parts, 1. Of Bishops; 2. Of Archbishops; 3. Of an
oecumenick Bishop; 4. Of Antichrist.

PART I.

Divided in two Books; In the first is examined, 1. if Peter by divine
Institution was Monarch of the Church? 2. If at the command of Christ he was
Bishop of Rome? In the second is examined, if the Bishop of Rome was
acknowledged Successor to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, before the death
of Cyprim, or anno, 260?

The Negatives of which three Questions are made out, by unanswerable monuments
of Antiquity, and all what is pretended for their affirmatives, is proved to be
either wrested, falsely translated, mutilated or forged.

Cicero, lib. 2. de Orator. Fieri potest ut quod dixit iratus dixerit. Silus
annuit, tum Crassus* fieri potest ut quod dixit non intelligeres: hic quoque
Silus fassus est, tum Crassus, fieri potest ut non omnino audie^is quod te
audisse dicis. Silus tacuit omnes riserunt. By S. C.

Edinburgh, Printed by His Majesty's Printers, for the Author, Anno Dom. 1673.

TO HIS GRACE The DUKE of LAUDERDALE, Marquess of March, Earl of Lauderdail,
Viscount Maitland, Lord Thirlestane, Musselburgh, and Bolton, Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, His Majesty's High Commissioner, President of
His Council, and Sole Secretary of State in His Kingdom of Scotland.
May it please your Grace,
THat the Christian Faith (as it was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and
confirmed by the four first General Councils) is established by His Majesty's
authority; all have reason to be thankful both to God, and to His Majesty.

While we are contending for things of lesser moment at home, Religion is
dangerously assaulted from abroad; their artifices are subtle, their success
is lamented.

By what persuasions they endeavor to gain Proselyts; and how they are
refuted? Your Grace will find affirmed in the Preface, and proved in the Disput
following. The first part whereof I present to your Grace, it being difficult
for me to publish it all at once.

My Lord, some perhaps, as their motive of such an address as this, would fall
a painting out the praises of your Grace, and your Ancestors in your Face; as,
that one or other of your Race, could be no more spared from the State in every
age, then one of the Aeacides from the wars of Greece: which although most
true, yet I forbear, lest I should offer violence, vim facere, to your Graces
Modesty, by unseasonable mentioning things which all know to be undeniable.

Nevertheless, I hope your Grace will pardon me if I affirm, that it is a main
encouragement of my troubling you, that your Grace is a Gentleman of Spirit,
versed in Antiquity, and able to discern if I perform any thing to the purpose,
in this great subject, or process of greatest importance, that ever depended
before the Tribunal of Heaven.

My Lord, I have likewise private obligations to your Grace. I had the honor to
be your Condisciple, at which time it did not obscurely appear, what your Grace
would prove afterward? Also having presented several Trifles to your Grace, at
your two times being in Scotland, you seemed to accept of them, with a
favorable countenance: which encouraged me to trouble your Grace afresh. A
Spaniel, the more he is taken notice of, the more he troubles his Benefactors,
with importunat kindness. Taking all for good coin, whether they be in jest or
in earnest.

If I perform any thing in this great subject worthy of your Graces perusal, I
would be infinitely proud of it: otherwise, the greatest censure I expect from
your Grace, is, that either your Grace would smile at my folly, or else put me
back with a gentle frown; hoping your Grace, will pardon presumption,
proceeding from simplicity and good will.

I will trouble your Grace no more, but being sorry, that I can give no greater
evidence of my propension, to your Graces service, I rest as I am able, most
addicted to it.

Samuel Colvill.

THE PREFACE, DIRECTED TO The Nobility, Gentry, and Buroughs of the Kingdom of
Scotland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
SInce I have contrived the following Discourse, chiefly for your use, (not
presuming to inform those of the Clergy, it being their Profession; and
therefore, having opportunity at will, to go to the woods to gather
Strawberries themselves: whereas your Lordships leisure, by reason of your
other weighty Employments, requires rather to have them presented in a dish)
Curiosity perhaps will move one or other of ^ou to peruse it: Which that you
may do the more commodiously, it is requisite that your minds be prepared, by
considering, 1. What the Subject is I present unto your protection? 2. What I
perform in it? 3. What is my scope and intention? 4. How I answer, as I can, to
all which is objected against me? I am not very eloquent, especially in the
English Tongue (not being much accustomed to read Books in that Language) The
Di^course for the most art, is dogmatick, and therefore Rhetoric is more
hurtful th^n p^ofi^able: If I b^ understood, it is sufficient, in representing
shortly, what others have done prolixly; perspicuously, what others have
obscurely: And yet fully, that is, omitting nothing of moment which is
pretended by either Party, in that great Controversy, of the S^premacy of the
Bishop of Rome.

And first for the Subject; N^ne are ignorant, in what high estimation
searching of Antiquity is amongst those, whose minds are erected above the
ordinar of men? That religious enquiries of that kind, ought to be preferred to
any others, who believe the immortality of the soul, none will deny. Among
those again, that one Controversy of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
deservedly challenges the first place: I presenting to your Lordships in it,
the minute of a Process (if not marred by me) the most noble, the most
profitable, and the most pleasant, which has hitherto depended before the
Tribunal of Heaven. That I affirm no Paradoxes, appears by what follows.

The Nobility of this question is celebrated by the Learned of both sides; Est
Nobilis inter primas Disputatio, the noblest of Disputes, says Chamier: Est
quaestio Prima, and familiam ducens, A prime and leading question, says
Salmasius: That is, upon it depends all the Controversies we have with the
Church of Rome. Bellarmine goes higher, calling it a debate de summa rei
Christianae; That is, Whether the Christian Religion can subsist or not? For,
in his opinion, Who calls in question the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, he
questions the truth of the Christian Religion it self.

By which expression of this Jesuit, appears the immense utility of that
Controversy. If any want ability, if they have not leisure to wade through that
profound Ocean of Antiquity, to be informed of the truth of that Article, added
to the Creed by the Council at Trent, viz. That Communion with the Church of
Rome in all her Tenets, is absolutely necessary to salvation: Let them study
this one Controversy, of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and it will
resolve the question: for, if it be founded upon Scripture and Antiquity,
without all question, Communion with the Church of Rome is necessar unto
salvation, and the Religion of Protestants, is a new sprung up heresy; since
the Bishop of Rome, in Cathedra, (and consequently in their opinion infallible)
pronounces so. On the contrary, if the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome be a
thing unknown to Scripture and Antiquity, it is as certain, that the Faith of
the Modern Roman Church, is a new devised cheat and idolatry. That this
follows of necessity, appears by the confession of Bellarmine himself, in two
expressions in the preface of those Books of his, de pontifice Romano: The
first we now mentioned, in which he calls that Controversy of the Popes
supremacy, a Deb^te de summa rei Christianae, That is, whether the Christian
Religion can subsist or not? By Christian Religion, no question, he means, the
Faith of the modern Church of Rome; and consequently he grants, that they who
call in question the Popes supremacy, they question also, the whole body of the
Popish Religion: And consequently still he must of necessity grant, that if the
Popes supremacy be destitute of Scripture and Antiquity, the faith of the
Modern Church of Rome falls with it, and proves a new devised fiction. His
second expression is, in those similitudes he uses, to illustrat his
assertion, viz. He compares Religion, without the Popes supremacy (which in his
opinion, is that of the Modern Church of Rome) to a House without a Foundation,
a Body without a Head, Moonshine, without the Sun: And since it is notorious,
that a house without a Foundation cannot stand, that a Body without a Head
cannot live, that the Moon without light of the Sun, must be obscured; He must
of necessity grant, that the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, being refuted by
Scripture and Antiquity, the Faith and Religion of the Modern Church of Rome,
is warrantable by neither; and consequently, proves a new devised idolatrous
cheat.

Thirdly, its a most pleasant contest; what can be more pleasing, then to
consider the causes of any prodigious Monster? how i^ subsists? and how it is
destroyed? how any illustrious cheat is contrived? how it is maintained? and
how it is discovered? But such a Monster, such a Cheat as the Bishop of Rome,
none free of prejudice can behold without admiration. The whole world sees a
person, now ignorant, then flagitious, not seldom both, put by two or three
Italians of the same metal, in the Chair of Rome: which Preferment he obtains,
sometimes by blood, sometimes by simonie, sometimes by unlawful stipulations,
as to protect Heresy, and to oppress the Catholic Faith; not seldom by a
paction with the Devil (all which ways of obtaining the Chair of Rome, are
confessed by Popish Writers, such as Platina and Baronius, as shall be proved
in the following Dispute) Which Homuncio is no sooner installed, then he is
metamorphosed to be direct Monarch of the whole World, both in Spirituals and
Temporals. And first for Temporals, it shall be proved in the following
Dispute, that he assumes to himself in his Bulls, power of transferring
Kingdoms at his pleasure, of stirring up Subjects to Arms against their
natural Princes, under the pain of Excommunication. It shall be proved, that he
makes Emperors and Kings lie prostrate till he trade upon their neck; makes
them stand barefooted, with their Wives and Children, in frost and snow,
dancing attendants at his Gates, and yet not not admitted entrance. It shall be
proved, that he makes Laws, (in that Book entitled, Sacred Ceremonies) that
Emperors and Kings should hold his Stirrup, hold water to his Hands, serve
dishes at his Table, carry him on their shoulders: Yea it shall be proved, that
it is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, That all Kings are not only the Popes
Vassals, but which is more, he is not obliged by any mutual ontract, to suffer
them to possess their Kingdoms, but during his pleasure; that is, he may
lawfully depose them, although they miscarry not in the least: In which he does
t^em no wrong, because they hold their Kingdoms ^f him, not as Vassals, but as
depositars; as when any gives to another his Cloak to keep, when he re-demands
it, he does him no wrong.

As for his power, which he assumes to himself in Spirituals, it cannot be
repeated without horror. It shall be proved in the following Dispute, that it
is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, partly in the Canon Law, partly in the
Bulls of Popes themselves, partly in Books printed by the Popes Authority, and
affirmed by his V^sitors to contain nothing contrary to the Catholic Faith;
That the Pope has power to coin Articles of Faith at his pleasure, oblieging
the whole Church, under the pain of damnation, although he command vice, and
forbid virtue. Secondly, although he should lead all the world to hell with
him, yet none should presume to disobey him. Thirdly, that he gives pardon for
sin for money; and not only of sins bypast, but also of those to come: that
is, for a little money, he will give you pardon for a little time; but for a
round sum, he will give you pardon so long as you please. Fourthly, it shall be
proved, that for money, he permits men to sin; that is, permits Clergymen to
keep Whoores: And if any keep not a Whoor, he makes them pay for it in some
places of Italy nevertheless, because they have liberty to keep a Whoor, if
they please. Cornelius Agrippa affirms, he heard such expressions as these
following, in the Popes Court, Habeat aut non habeat Meretricem, Aureum solvat,
quia habet si velit: That is, Whether a Priest keep a Whoor or not, let him pay
the Tribute, since he may keep one if he please, for such a piece of money.
Fifthly, he makes his decretal Epistles of equal authority with the Scripture.
Lastly, as he intended a gigantomachy, he is called in the Canon Law, revised
and authorized by Gregory, 13. Our Lord God the Pope. It is affirmed in the
said Law, that he has power to make injustice justice, and contra that he has
power to command the Angels to carry souls to Heaven at his pleasure; that he
has power to give liberty to men to place the departed Souls of their friends
in paradise for money: that by virtue of his succession to Peter, he is assumed
to the society of the individual Trinity; he not only hears patiently, but also
rewards flatterers, when their blasphemous Pamphlets prefer him to Christ; as
appears in Innocent 10. which passage shall be realated part 1. lib. 1. cap.
11* of this following Treatise.

My Lords and Gentlemen, any would think these horrible passages incredible,
but have patience till ye hear them proved, partly by the Canon Law, partly by
the decretals of Popes, partly by Books authorized by the Popes authority,
partly per res judicatas, or sentences passed in the Popes Court at Rome.
Ignorants of antiquity, (of which our adversaries bragg so much) believe that
the Bishop of Rome had such immense and unlimitated power, in all Ages, by
reason of his succession to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church: What can be
more pleasing, then to consider, from what small beginnings? at what times?
upon what occasions? by what steps? by what artifices he mounted to such a
prodigious hight? and by what practices he maintains himself in it? all which
is to the life delineated, in this following Dispute, and proved by uncorrupted
and unanswerable testimonies of the Ancients: In which also it will appear,
that all what our adversary pretends from antiquity, to maintain the Popes
Kingdom, is either sophistically preverted, falsely translated or cited,
mutilated or forged.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Whereas they make the Bishopric of Peter the only
basis and foundation of the Popes power, in the first place, ye will find, that
the Monarchy of Peter was never dreamed of, by the Ancients of the first sixth
Centuries. As for his particular Bishopric of Rome, although some of the
Fathers affirm he was Bishop of Rome, yet your Lordships will find it proved,
that they call Paul Bishop of Rome in the same sense; and consequently they
take the word Bishop in a large sense, as it comprehends an Apostle, and not
properly, for a Bishop tied to any particular Congregation. That this is their
meaning, will be proved by two invincible reasons; the first is, because these
same Fathers, in their Catalogues of the Bishops of Rome, do not reckon Peter
in that number, making Linus the first Bishop of Rome, Cletus the second,
Clement the third, etc. But if they had believed Peter was Bishop of Rome, they
would have called him the first Bishop, Linus the second, Cletus the third,
Clement the fourth, etc. The second reason is, That it shall be proved by the
testimonies of those very men, who call Peter Bishop of Rome, That first Linus,
and then Cletus, were Bishops of Rome during the Life of Peter: whereby it is
evident, that Peter was never properly Bishop of Rome, but was called Bishop of
Rome by those Fathers, because he founded the Church of Rome jointly with Paul.

In the next place, your Lordships will find it proved, albeit many of the
Ancients unanimously affirmed, that Peter was at Rome, and founded the Church
of Rome; yet, they were deceived, or else the Scripture affirms falsely; since
it shall be proved by Scripture, that Peter was elsewhere in that time, in
which they affirm he was at Rome: yea, it shall be proved by unanswerable
reasons from Scripture, that Peter was never at Rome, and that all those
Fathers who believe he was at Rome, were deceived by the testimony of one
Papias, described by Eusebius to be a man of no spirit, the Author of many
fabulous Traditions, and of the heresy of the Millenarii; That is, of those
maintaining, that Christ before the last day, shall reign a thousand years with
his Saints.

In the third place, your Lordships will find, that the Bishops of Rome, before
the days of Cyprian, were poor, persecuted, pious Martyrs; only two condemned
by the whole church, strove to advance that mystery of iniquity (which Paul
affirmed was working in his own time) viz. Victor usurping autho^ity over the
Bishops of the East, anno, 195. and Stephanus over the Bishops of Africa and
Spain, anno 250. or thereabouts Some Doctors of the Church of Rome, pretends
several monuments of Antiquity, to prove the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in
that interval: but they shall be proved forged, not only by unanswerable
reasons, but also by the confessions of the most learned Doctors of the Church
of Rome, yea of Popes themselves, such as Aeneas Silvius, or Pius 2.

In the fourth place, your Lordships will find the Bishops of Rome made rich,
by the liberality of Constantine the Emperor and others; which occasioned pride
and luxury, the Parents of Antichrist.

In the fifth place, your Lordships will find the conception of this Monster,
growing as an Embrio by degrees in his Mothers belly; the first quarter a
Bishop, the second a Metropolitan, the third a Pat^iarch, between the times of
Cyprian, and anno, 604. In which interval, as the riches of the Bishop of Rome
increased, so pride and corruptions of life grew up with them, and also some
corruption in Doctrine: against which, not only Cyprian, Hieronymus, Sulpitius,
Severus, Nezianzenus, Basilius Magnus, and other Christian Fathers exclaimed,
but also Ammianus Marcellinus, in the opinion of Barron^us a Pagan. In that
interval, Damasus mounted to the Chair of Rome by blood; of which, the said
Amm^anus Marcellinus speaking, after he had related the murders that were
committed, he concludes, It was not to be admired they aimed at the Chair of
Rome by such practices, since having obtained it, they were enriched by the
Gifts of Matrons and other ways, equalling any King in their port of Table,
Clothes, Household Stuff, Attendance and Coatches, or Chariots. In that interval
also, Vigilius Bishop of Rome (as is related by Liberatus, and confessed by
Barronius) obtained the Chair of Rome by promising to the Empress Theodora, to
abrogat the Council of Chalcedon, to establish the Eutichian heresy in the
Church (which he endeavored to do, as appears by his Letters, when he was
Bishop of Rome, written to several Courtiers, in which he approved that
heresy) And likewayes, by promising Gold to Belesarius, General to the
Emperor Justinian, in Italy: By which practices of Vigilius, Silverius, a
pious worthy Bishop of Rome, (to make way for the said Vigilius) was banished
and murdered; and yet the said Vigilius was a great ingeminator of tu es
Petrus, and of the infallibility of the Bishop of Rome. And yet Barronius is
not ashamed, against all the Writers of that time, to praise this Monster as a
Saint; and yet (which is admirable) he confesses the way of his entry to the
Bishopric of Rome, viz. by displacing a pious Bishop, he obtained the Chair by
Simonie, and promising to abrogat the Council o^ Chalcedon, and to establish
the Eutichian heresy. And this much of the conception of this Monster.

In the sixth place, ye have his birth under Phocas, who by an Edict,
christened him universal Bishop: In which, three things are observable, 1* The
Godfather; 2. The God-bairn Gift; 3. The reasons wherefore it was given Phocas.

The Godfather was the Emperor Phocas, described by all Historians, to be a
Monster for a man; who being a Centurion, or Captain of a Foot-company, raised
a mutiny in the Army against the good Emperor Mauritius, and obtained the
Empire himself by murdering his Master, his Empress, his Children and his
Friends, noted by Historians to have been a perfidious, perjured, luxurious,
cruel Monster: and yet, he was the first Emperor who made the Bishop of Rome
oecumenick or universal Bishop. And this much of the Godfather of that
Monster, which is all the Jus Divinum the Bishops of Rome have for their
Monarchy in the Church.

The next thing observable, is the God-bairn gift, or the title of Universal
Bishop, conferred by Phocas upon Bonefacius third Bishop of Rome, in the
beginning of the seventh Age, or about anno, 604. If your Lordships ask what
sort of Title and Office it is? Gregorius Magnus, Bishop of Rome (who died not
two years before Bonifacius 3d was Bishop of Rome, who was first made universal
Bishop by Phocas) And Pelagius second Bishop of Rome, (to hom immediately
Gregorius Magnus succeeded) will inform your Lordships, viz. That the Title,
and Office of universal Bishop, were new* not heard of before that time,
Scelerate, Profane, Sacrilegious, Blasphemous against the Mandates of Christ,
Constitutions of the Apostles, Canons and Liberties of the Church. Who ever
took upon him, that Office or Title, He contaminated those very times in which
he lived, was that Man of Sin, sitting in the Temple of God, exalting himself
above all that are called God; (So Pelagius, in an Epistle to a Council at
Constantinople) that he was like the Devil, exalting himself above the other
Angels, and equalling himself to God; (So Gregorius) which expressions, of
Pelagius and Gregorius, and many others, (too prolix to be inserted here) are
found word for word in their Epistles: Those Testimonies at length, ye will
find in the second Book of the second Part, of this following Treatise.

The third thing observeable by your Lordships is, the reasons wherefore the
Emperor Phocas bestowed that Title of oecumenick Bishop upon Bonifacius third?
They are mentioned by Barronius, ad annum, 604. and others also, as Sabellicus
and Platina, there is not one word of Tu es Petrus, or of the Bishop of Romes
succession to Peter amongst them all; They were all civil respects; As first,
because the Emperor had his Title from Rome, and since Rome was the old
Imperial City, It was reason that the Bishop of Rome should have jurisdiction
over all Bishops. This is the only reason, mentioned in the Edict of Phocas;
Others add there reasons, One of which is this; Mauritius the Emperor,
murdered by Phocas, had bestowed the title of universal Bishop upon John,
called Jejunator, Or the Faster Patriarch of Constantinople: Pelagius and
Gregory Bishops of Rome, thunder both against the Title, and the Function, as
we now mentioned, but to no purpose: John still possesses both the Title and
the Office. In both which, Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople succeeds, which
Cyriacus, protected the Empress, and Children of Mauritius, against Phocas; for
which reason, Phocas takes both the Title and the Office from ^yriacus, and
bestowed them upon Bonifacius third, Bish^p of Rome, his old friend, as is
confessed by Barronius. Others add two other reasons, the first is this, Phocas
having obtained the Empire, by murdering his Master Mauritius, and all his
race, domineered with such tyrrany, that he was abhorred of all: fearing a
revolt in the West, to curry favor with Bonifacius third Bishop of Rome (whose
authority was very great in it) he bestowed the title of universal Bishop upon
him, that by his moyen, he might be established in his Empire, and acknowledged
by the Romans: The second reason related by some is, that the said Bonifacius,
either gave, or did promise to give, to Phocas, a hudge mass of Money, and so
bought the Office from him. However, whatever were the reasons which moved
Phocas, it is most certain, that the Edict, or Gift of Phocas is the oldest
Evident and Charter that the Bishop of Rome can produce, to instruct his
Monarchy in the Church; which will more clearly appear, by what follows.

Seventhly, your Lordships will find, that new born Monster, Christened
universal Bishop, by the Edict of Phocas; shunned every where, in the East, in
Spain, in Britain, in Germany, in France, yea in Italy it self, under the walls
of Rome, the whole Church, refusing to obey the Edict of Phocas, or to
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome universal Bishop: One only Parasite excepted,
the Bishop of Cyprus; who saluted him by that name, out of envy to the Bishop
of Constantinople: So that in the end, (as it was recorded by some) the Bishop
of Rome for very shame, gave over that Title of universal Bishop. The posterior
Emperoures also recalled that Edict of Phocas, as appears by the 36th. Canon of
the sixth general Council, called Trullanum, convocated by Pogonatus, Emperor
of Constantinople, anno, 680. By which 36th. Canon of the said Council, was
confirmed the 28th. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, celebrated anno, 450. By
which, the Bishop of Constantinople, was made equal to the Bishop of Rome, in
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction.

In the Eighth place, your Lordships will find, in the decay of the Grecian
Empire (by the Inundations of barbarous Nations, all enemies to the Empire, and
each of them enemies to one another) that the Bishops of Rome, in these
vicissitudes, sided ever with the Conqueror, being also courted by them, to
countenance them in the establishment of their new and unsettled conquests: By
which practices, that Apocalyptick Monster, (almost blasted in the Budd, and
strangled in the Craddle) revived again, not only re-assuming the Title of
universal Bishop, bestowed on him by Phocas; But also, soaring higher, taking
upon him to excomunicate the Grecian Emperor, to stir up the Longobards, to
bereave him of his possessions in Italy, To destroy the Exharchat of Ravenna,
To bereave him of the Duchy of Rome, which the Pope got to his own share: And
when the Longobards demanded Tribute of him, for the said Duchy of Rome,
(which the Bishops of Rome were acustomed to pay to the Grecian Emperors) Then
he called in the French, by whose means he destroyed the Kingdom of the
Longobards; and to requite the French Services, he made Pipin their General,
King of France, (shutting up the righteous King in a Monastery) And also, in
contempt of the Grecian Emperor, he made Carolus Magnus, (Son of the said
Pipin) Emperor of the West: Since which time, the Empire of the West has been
divided from that of the East, until this day: That is, since the latter end,
of the Eighth Age or Century.

In the ninth place, your Lordships will find a strange Catastrophy: The
Doctors of the Church of Rome brag much of the submissive obedience of Carolus
Magnus to the power of the Bishop of Rome; which in effect he seemed to do at
first, until he obtained his ends: but having accomplished his intentions, he
made it appear to posterity, that both the spiritual and temporal jurisdiction
of the Bishop of Rome, was a Sword in a mad man's hand: he curbed him so, both
in spirituals and temporals, that he left him no more, but the bare Title of
universal Bishop, but as to the power of it, he made him a mere cipher, as
appears by what follows. The History is very pleasant, but much depraved by the
Popish Authors* such as Barronius and others: but if your Lordships will
believe those Historians, (who liv^d in the time of Carolus Magnus, or the
times next following, who questionless are better to be believed then
Barronius, or any other late Popish Writer, known to be abominable depravers of
Antiquity by unanswerable Arguments, as shall be proved in the following
Treatise) The story is this, and twofold; In the first is related, what little
respect Carolus Magnus had to the spiritual authority of the Bishop of Rome,
and is this:

The quarrel of the Bishop of Rome against the Grecian Emperor of
Constantinople, was for Images, or Image Worship: Two Emperors of
Constantinople, Leo, Isaurus and Copronymus his son, had procured Image Worship
to be declared Idolatry, in the seventh general Council of Constantinople,
anno, 760, consisting of 338 Bishops.

Stephanus Bishop of Rome procures of Irene (Daughter-in-law to Copronymus,
Widow of Leo 4. his Son, and Queenregent of the Eastern Empire, during the
minority of her Son Constantinus 7th.) the second Council of Neice, which
Council declared the 7th, general Council of Constantinople heretical, and
established Image Worship; which Decree of the second Council of Neice, was
confirmed and renewed by several Provincial Councils in Italy, under several
Bishops of Rome. Carolus Magnus calls a Council at Franckford, anno, 794. in
which were present most of the Bishops of the West, in number 300. at which
Council were also present the Legates of Hadrianus primus Bishop of Rome, to
solicit the Council to establish Image Worship, to condemn the 7th. general
Council of Constantinople, as heretical; to confirm the 2d. Council of Neice as
Orthodox, and likewayes those Provincial Councils of Italy, which had
established Image Worship. The Council of Franckford (in which Carolus Magnus
presided) was so far from obeying the commands of Hadrianus Bishop of Rome,
that on the contrary it confirmed the 7th. general Council of Constantinople as
Orthodox, condemned the 2d. Council of Neice, three or four Provincial Councils
in Italy, and three or four Bishops of Rome (and amongst them, Hadrianus primus
himself) as impious, heretical Idolaters, because they established
Image Worship. And after the Council was dissolved, a Book was written at the
command of Carolus Magnus, (which Book is yet preserved in several
Bibliothecks) in which at length was declared, by what sophistry, perverting of
Scripture, Image Worship was established by the said 2d. Council of Nice, and
those other Provincial Councils of Italy. Here your Lordships may observe, what
regard Carolus Magnus had to the spiritual Authority of the Bishop of Rome, who
exauctorated the Emperors of Constantinople, for procuring Image Worship to be
declared Idolatry, and renting from them the Empire of the West, conferred it
upon the said Carolus Magnus: and yet, the said Carolus Magnus, in a Council at
Franckford, procures the said Emperor in the East to be declared Orthodox, in
abolishing Image worship, and condemns those very Bishops of Rome, as
heretics, who had deposed the Emperors of Constantinople, for that reason;
and who, for that reason, had given unto himself the Empire of the West:
whereby it appears, that although he seemed pliable to the Bishop of Romes
jurisdiction, to obtain his own ends, yet having obtained them, he cared not
much for him.

If Carolus Magnus acknowledged not the infallibility of the Bishop of Rome in
spirituals, he regarded his temporal jurisdiction far less. We told before,
that the reason wherefore the Bishop of Rome called in the French against the
Lombards, was, because they demanded Tribute of him, for the Territories about
Rome; their Title was conquest, they had conquered these Lands from the Grecian
Emperors: And since the Bishop of Rome was ever accustomed to pay Tribute for
those Lands unto the Grecian Emperor, it was reasonable, that themselves having
conquered the Lands, should also have the Tribute. Whereupon the Bishop of Rome
calls in the French to Italy, to assist him against the Lombards: And first,
Carolus Martellus leads an Army into Italy, in favor of the Bishop of Rome;
next, his Son Pipin (whom the Bishop of Rome made King of France) Lastly,
Carolus Magnus the Son of Pipin, and Emperor of the West, utterly eradicats
the Kingdom of the Lombards: and when he had done, in a Council at Rome, it is
decreed first, That no Bishop (not the Bishop of Rome himself) should be
installed without investiture from the Emperor by Staff and Ring, and likewayes
homage more majorum, which (as Salvianus interprets) was, kissing of the
Emperors foot. 2. That the Emperor and his Successors, should have the
presentation of the Bishop of Rome, and his Successors; that is, should have
the nomination and election of the Bishops of Rome. 3. The Bishop of Rome, as
we said, called in the French against the Lombards, because the said Lombards
required Tribute of him for the Roman Territories: Carolus Magnus having
destroyed the Lombards, makes the Bishop of Rome pay the same Tribute,
pretending the same reasons which the Lombards did, viz. because the Bishops of
Rome were accustomed to pay that Tribute to the Grecian Emperors, to whom he
had succeeded in the Dominion of the West. And thus it appears, what little
regard Carolus Magnus had to the authority of the Bishop of Rome, either
spiritual or temporal? The first appears, the Bishop of Rome had exauctorated
the Grecian Emperors, for being enemies to Image Worship; and for that reason,
gave to Carolus Magnus the Empire of the West, (at least as much as in him lay)
Carolus Magnus takes the Empire, but in the mean time, in the Council of
Franckford, he procures those very Bishops of Rome, who had bestowed upon
himself the Empire, to be declared Idolaters and Heretics, for establishing
Image Worship; and consequently, for deposing the Grecian Emperors, because
they were against Images, and for giving to himself their Empire in the West
for that reason. The second appears thus, the Bishop of Rome calls in the
French against the Lombards, because they demanded Tribute of him, for the
Territories about Rome: Carolus Magnus destroys the Lombards, and when he had
done, makes the Bishop of Rome pay the same Tribute to himself and hi^
Successors; and not so content, ordains they should do him homage, more
majorum; That is (according to Salvianus) by kissing of of his foot.

Tenthly, your Lordships will find this Monster still so bridled, until the
decay of the posterity of Carolus Magnus; and then the Empire was translated to
the Germans, the Kingdom of France to the Family of Hugh Capet. Otho primus
Emperor, son of Henricus Auceps, the first German Emperor, renewed that power
of the Emperor, his nomination and election of the Bishop of Rome, which the
former Bishops of Rome had taken from the Emperors, during the decay and
sloth of the posterity of Carolus Magnus: but a little after that, the mystery
of Iniquity working, foretold by Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. the Bishops of Rome, by the
counsel of one Hildebrand, afterward Pope Gregory seventh, ordained the
College of Cardinals for election of the Pope; which manner of election was
utterly unknown to the Ancients, the first Pope who ordained this College of
Cardinals was Nicolaus 2d. who lived anno, 1060. which manner of Election
continues unto this day.

The said Hildebrand, becoming afterward Pope, took upon him to depose
Emperors: Anno, 1074. he deposed Henry 4th. Emperor, and gave the Empire to
Rodolphus, because Henry would not renunce the investiture of Bishops; this
Hildebrand raised many broils and troubles, and was believed by many learned
men of the Church of Rome (who lived about that time) to be Antichrist; his
Successors especially, after the times of the Jesuits, still augmented that
Doctrine, of deposing Kings by the Pope: and it is now defended, not only in
Books printed by the Popes Authority, and by all the Canonists, but also
assumed by Popes unto themselves in their Bulls, as appears by those Bulls of
Gregory 7th. against Henry 4th. Emperor; of Alexander 3d. against Frederick the
Emperor; of Boniface 8th. against Philip King of France; of Julius second
against Lewis twelfth King of France, and against the King of Navarre; of Paul
third against Henry 8th. King of England; of Pius 4th. against Queen Elizabeth;
of Sixtus 5th. against Henry 3d. and 4th. Kings of France.

When Phocas by Edict, made Bonifacius 3d. Bishop of Rome, universal Bishop;
the thing he gave him was little better then a bare Title. We have showed two
steps, by which the Bishops of Rome advanced; the first is, his freeing himself
from the election of the Emperor; the second, his assuming to himself power of
deposing Kings and Emperors: the third step after Phocas, was assuming to
himself authority of convocating General Councils, of presiding in them, of
confirming and infirming them. We do not read, that any Pope assumed that power
to himself, the first nine hundred years after Christ: It is evident, by
History, that during the time of the first eight general Councils, the Bishops
of Rome had no such power, since it appears, they were all convocated by the
Emperor, that others beside the Bishop of Rome presided in many of them, and
the Emperor confirmed them all. What Pope first assumed to himself that power,
we find not expressly before the time of Innocent 3d. in the Council of Lateran,
anno, 1210. since which time, the succeeding Popes constantly took upon them to
convocat general Councils, to preside in them, and to confirm them.

The fourth step of the Bishop of Rome, after Phocas, is his* Infallibity;
which was first conferred upon him, by the Council of Florence, anno, 1439. and
afterward confirmed and taught by the Jesuits, and Canonists, it being held as
ane article of Faith, in the Church of Rome, that the Pope in Cathedra, or
teaching the whole Church, cannot err: yea, some of them maintain, (as Albertus
Pighius and others) that the Pope cannot be an heretic, which Bellarmine calls
a pious opinion: but your Lordships will find it proved, part third, lib. 2.
that innumerable Popes, have not only been heretics, and so declared by other
Popes, and general Councils, but also, that they have taught heresy, and have
been condemned by general Councils, for teaching heresy, as Pope Honorius was
condemned by three successive general Councils, the sixth, seventh, and eight,
and of late Pope Engenius by the Councills of Basil: By whence it appears,
that this Doctrine of the Popes infallibility, is not only heresy, but
madness, fighting against common sense, reason, and the light of all History.

Any would think, that the Bishop of Rome could mount no higher, since already,
he is Monarch of the whole World, both in Sprituals and Temporals. We have seen
him hitherto, taking upon him power of deposing Kings, and Emperors, of
transferring Kingdoms at his pleasure, of coining Articles of Faith (under the
notion of infallibility) oblieging the whole Church: yet in the last place,
your Lordships will find him in the fourth part of this Disput, sitting in the
temple of God, adorned with all the marks of Antichrist, intending a
gigantomachy, as if the intended to pull God out of the Heavens, taking upon
him, not only to equal his decretal Epistles to holy Scripture, but also to
prefer them unto it; in several of them, decerning against the Law of God,
openly avowing, he has power so to do; injoyning it, to the whole Church to be
believed, under pain of heresy, that he has such power. Your Lordships will
find, that in the Canon Law, he is called Dominus Deus noster Papa, our Lord
God the Pope: that he takes upon him, not only to pardon sins for money, both
bypast, and to come, but also for a piece of money, to suffer the Clergy to
wallow in whoredom; albeit against all pure Antiquity, he expressly inhibits
them marriage. Your Lordships will find it proved, that in the said Canon Law,
he affirms himself, by reason of his succession to Peter, to be assumed, to the
society of the individual Trinity; that for money, he will command the Angels
to take souls out of purgatory, and place them straight in Paradise: And in a
word, your Lordships will find him, that man of sin described by the Apostle,
sitting in the Temple of God, exalting himself above all that are called God,
caling himself God, teaching the doctrine of devils, forbidding meats,
forbidding marriage, making the Kings of the earth drunk with his abominations,
corrupting all the Articles of the Christian Faith, taking from them, adding to
them at his pleasure: and as he grows in power, depravation of Religion
increases with it, following the increments of his authority, as the motion of
the Sea, depends upon the Moon.

In purer Antiquity, when there was no evidence of the supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome at all, there was no corruption in Doctrine, Religion was unspotted:
but when the Bishop of Rome, enriched by the liberality of the Emperors,
became proud, and aimed to usurp over the Church, corruption in Doctrine
increased apace, with their increments of power. Consult History, and your
Lordships will find, at every step of the Popes advancement in power, a
depravation in Doctrine accompanying it: your Lordships will likewayes find it
proved, part fourth, lib. 2. that the Doctrine of the modern Church of Rome, is
nothing else but a mass of depravations, corruptions, heresies, brought in by
Bishops of Rome, as they advanced in authority, the Doctrine of the first six
Centuries being quite extinct. Notwithstanding all the braggings of our
adversaries, of their Antiquity, your Lordships will find, in the first six
hundred years after Christ, that the Doctrine now professed by the modern
Church of Rome, was altogether unknown, and had not a being; or if any of
their modern Tenets were mentioned by the Writers in those times, it was with
detestation, under the notion of Heresy, and opposed by the whole Church. If
your Lordships think this incredible, ye will find it proved, part 4. lib. 2.
Of this treatise, by an induction of all those Tenets, which the Church of Rome
hold contrary to the Doctrine of the reformed Churches.

My Lords and Gentlemen, In the last place, you will find it proved, by what
practices the Bishop of Rome maintains himself in that prodigious greatness,
and his Doctrine? None can but admire how he has been so long undiscovered?
and how so many learned and pious men, brave spirits, can be so bewitched yet,
as to believe, that communion with him, is necessary unto salvation; and that
all who acknowledge not his power and Doctrine, ought to be condemned as
Heretics. But their admiration may cease, since the Spirit of God affirms,
that the Kings of the earth shall be drunk with his abominations; that is,
shall be void of all spiritual understanding, that the glory of God may be
manifested in his impervestigable ways, till at last, that wicked one be
consumed by the breath of his mouth, that is, by the sincere preaching of the
Gospel. The cup of iniquity of that Monster, was not yet full, until he began
so far to forget himself, as to prefer himself to God, and make public sale of
forgiveness of sins for money; that is, by giving pardons unto men, not only
for sins bypast, but also to be committed afterward, giving to this Courtier,
the money obtained for the pardon of sins obtained in one Country, to that of
another. It is reported of Alexander the sixth, that when it was told him, that
his Son Caesar Burgia had lost a hudge sum of money at Dice; he answered, that
his Son had lost nothing but the sins of the Germans; that is, the money which
he had got for the sale of pardons in that Nation. When his impiety came to
such a height, he was at last discovered by Luther, a poor Friar; since which
time, they have left no sort of cruelty and impostures unattempted, to preserve
their Power and their Doctrine.

And first for their cruelty toward those who opposed them, death without
torture was thought a clemency; the ordinar punishment of such was, burning
alive; and if they were so numerous, that it could not be conveniently done,
they trained them into snares, by perfidious Treaties, cutting their throats
when they were asleep, without regard to the public Faith given them; as
appears by the horrible massacre at Paris, and other places of France: and
albeit popish Writers, in those times, detested that perfidious cruelty; yet
the Pope himself, who was the Author, and contriver of it, made Processions of
joy, and Bone-^ires at Rome, for the success of it.

As for their impostures, by which they maintain their Power and Doctrine, they
are so many, that they are scarce numerable: the main are preferring the
corrupt Latin version of the Scripture, to the Greek and Hebrew Fountains,
held authentic by the Primitive Church, and the Church of Rome it self.
Secondly, by adding Books to the Canon of the Scripture, against all the
current of Antiquity, to authorize some of their idolatrous Tenets. 3. They
make the Pope the infallible Interpreter of Scripture, albeit perhaps he had
never read one syllable in it, or at least understood nothing in it; as appears
of late, by that passage of Innocent 10th. (related by Sanct Amor, in his
Journal) who being pressed to determine a Controversy in Religion, between the
Jansenists and Molinists, answered, he was an old man, and had never studied
Divinity, neither did it belong to his profession. 4. They have corrupted all
the Writings of the Ancients, adding to them, taking from them at their
pleasure; as appears by the Edition of the Fathers, set forth by Manutius at
the Popes command, against all the Manuscript Copies, and old printed Copies,
before anno, 1564. neither are they ashamed of it, avowing it in their indices
expurgatorii: and not content with corrupting of Antiquity, they also forge,
not only particular testimonies of Fathers, but also whole Treatices. Aeneas
Silvius, who was afterward Pope himself, under the name of Pius 2d. confessed
ingenuously, that no regard was held to the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
before the Council of Nice, or anno, 325. and yet they produce six and thirty
decretal Epistles of Popes, as so many Knights of the Post, to bear false
witness for it in that interval, acknowledged to be forged, by Cusanus,
Contius, and other great Antiquaries of the Church of Rome, neither are they
much regarded by Bellarmine and Barronius themselves. Again, the most ingenuous
Doctors of the Romish Church, and their greatest Antiquaries confess, that
nothing can be gathered from the Council of Nice, for the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome; Yea, all Antiquity acknowledged only twenty Canons of the said
Council of Nice: Yet the Jesuits of late, have found out two Arabic Editions,
in which, fifty Canons are added to those twenty: so palpably forged, that he
is blind, who does not see it. Yea, they are acknowledged for such, by the most
learned men of the Church of Rome. The main scope of those forged Cannons, is
to prove several principal Tenets, of the Popish Religion, especially the Popes
Supremacy, That they are forged, shall be proved, part 2. lib. 1.

Lastly, the Bishops of Rome maintain their authority, and Doctrine, by false
miracles, Saints and Revelations; but mainly by those two damned cheats,
implicit faith and infallibility; that is, they make their disciples believe
that all is Gospel, what the Pope affirms in Cathedra, and that he cannot
err teaching the whole Church: which is the main cheat by which they lead
innumerable souls to destruction.

My Lords and Gentlemen, This much of the nobility, utility and jucundity of
the Subject which I present unto your protection; in which, I have shortly
shadowed forth the steps of the Bishop of Rome, to his present greatness, and
by what artifices he maintains himself in it? The second thing I desired your
Lordships to observe, is the method I use in the discovery of this ^rand
Impostor. I am informed, some tax me of presumption, for meddling with such a
Subject, after the Labors of so many Learned men, to whose diligence, nothing
could be added.

But I answer, as it were ill manners in me to tax those brave men that went
before me in this Subject, of omission or slackness; So I am confident, none
will blame me with any show of reason, except first he consider what I say. It
is true indeed, many have written before me, but it is as true, that some of
them have written too dogmatically, some too historically; both which ways are
lost labor in this Subject, in which all the probations are testimonies: but
that they can be understood without the k^owledge of History, no man can
persuade me, though never so learned, On the other hand, History without
Disputation, may delight the ear, as any other empty flesh of Rhetoric, but it
will never satisfy the mind ruled by reason. I strive to relate the Histo^y of
the Papacy and Popish Religion, fighting with Disputation at every step:
neither make I use further of History, then to illustrat the Dispute, which is
my chief aim. I resemble most, the way of Du Plesis, whether I be a plagiarian
from him, let the Reader judge; and also, whether my method be the same wi^h
his. He was a brave man, and a great Ornament to the Protestant Religion; but
he has many concise thetorications, to understand which, much knowledge of
Antiquity is requisite; otherwise, these passages of his are so many aenigmata
to beginners of the study of Antiquity, whose utility I principally aim at in
this Work, that sailing about the doors in this little Barge, they may learn by
degrees to sail in the great Ships of others, throughout the immense Ocean of
Antiquity. The method I use, is this following; if any in reason shall not
think it fit, after reasonable instruction of my error, I shall make a
recantation.

My Lords, The whole Treatise is taken up in the examination of these three
Questions; the first is, If Peter was ordained by our Savior Monarch of the
Church, or visible Head of the Church under Himself? The second is, If at the
command of Christ, he took the charge of the Bishopric of Rome? The third is.
If by divine Institution, the Bishop of Rome succeeded to Peter in the Monarchy
of the Church? And whereas our adversaries of the Church of Rome, endeavor to
prove the affirmatives of these three questions by Antiquity, that is,
testimonies of Councils and Fathers; my scope is, to disprove the said three
affirmatives in the same manner, and to prove, that all what they pretend from
Antiquity, is either wrested, perverted, mutilated, falsely translated from the
Originals, or forged downright.

The whole Treatise is divided in four Parts; the first Part is entitled, of
Bishops, and contains the Hierarchy of the Church, unto the death of Cyprian,
which was after the middle of the third Age: In which interval, I endeavor to
prove, there was no ordinar Office in the Church, above that of a Bishop; and
that the Bishop of Rome was in no more Authority then any other Bishop albeit
he was first Bishop in dignity, because Bishop of the old Imperial City. This
first part is divided in two Books, in the first is disputed the Monarchy of
Peter, by his institution, prerogatives and carriage, and testimonies of
Fathers, unto cap. 22. In the rest of that Book is disputed, if ever Peter was
at Rome? and if he were, if he was Bishop of Rome?

In the second Book, is disputed, if the Bishop of Rome was adcnowledged, as
successor to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, before the death of Cyprian?
In which Book, I insist most upon these following particulars; First, I relate
the opinion of Aerius and his followers, concerning the Original Progress, and
universal establishment of Episcopacy; wherein a Bishop differs from a
Presbyter? and for what reasons Episcopacy was brought into the Church? 2. I
prove by the testimonies of Ignatius, Dionysius, and Cyprian himself, that
there was no Office in the Church, in that interval, above that of a Bishop. 3.
I answer several testimonies, pretended by those of the Church of Rome, to
prove the Popes Supremacy in that interval, from Actions of Popes, Appellations
to them, and from testimonies of Greek and Latin Fathers. 4. I examine several
Forgeries and Corruptions of the Fathers, made use of by some Roman Doctors, to
prove the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in that Interval.

The second Part is entitled, of Archbishops; in which I disput the Hierarchy
of the Church, from the death of Cyprian, unto the beginning of the seventh
Century, or to anno, 604. at which time, the Emperor Phocas took the title of
universal Bishop from Cyriacus, Patriarch of Constantinople, and bestowed it
upon Bonifacius third, Bishop of Rome; which is an interval of 344. years. It
is divided in two Books, the first, intitulated, of Metrapolitans; In which I
disput, the Hierarchy of the Church, from Cyprian, anno, 260. unto the Council
of Chalcedon, anno, 453. all which time, no Office was in the Church, above
that of a Metrapolitan: insisting most upon these following particulars, first,
of the original, progress, and universal establishment of Metrapolitans;
wherein a Metrapolitan differ from another Bishop? For what reason,
Metrapolians were brought into the Church? What place the Bishop of Rome had,
amongst Metrapolitans? where I prove, by unanswerable testimonies of Antiquity,
that other Metrapolitans were of alike Jurisdiction with him, and that he was
only, first Metrapolitan in dignity, for the same reason that he was first
Bishop in the interval of Bishops, viz. because he was Bishop in the Chief
Imperial City. 2. Traceing the lives of the Bishops of Rome, in that interval,
I disput pro, and contra, the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in it, by their
actions, usurpations, add^esses made to them, and Acts of general, and
particular Councils, celebrated in each of their times. 3. I examine the
opinions of Greek and Latin Fathers, who lived in that interval, concerning
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in it. 4. I examine some notable forgeries,
pretended by those of the Church of Rome, to prove the Pops supremacy in that
interval.

The second Book is entitled, of Patriarchs, containing the Hierarchy of the
Church, from the Council of Chalcedon, anno, 453. to Phocas and Bonifacius,
anno, 604. In which Interval, Patriarchs obtained the chief place of the
Hierarchy; insisting also upon those five particulars; 1. Of the original,
progress, and universal establishment of Patriarchs, wherein a Patriarch
differs from a Metrapolitan? for what reasons Patriarchs were broug^t in the
Church? what place the Bishop of Rome had amongst Patriarchs? viz. all
Patriarchs were alike to him in Jurisdiction: Yet he was the first Patriarch in
dignity, for the same reason that he was first Bishop in the Interval of
Bishops, and first Metrapolitan in the Interval of Metrapolitans, that is for
civil respects (and not by reason of succession to Peter in the Monarchy of the
Church;) because Rome was the old imperial City, of which he was Patriarch. 2.
Traceing the lives of the Bishops of Rome, of that interval, I disput their
Supremacy from their Actions, Usurpations, Addresses made to them, from general
and particular Councils, celebrated in their time. 3. I examine the opinions of
Greek and Latin Fathers, who lived in that Interval, concerning the Supremacy
of the Bishop of Rome in it. 4. I examine those Forgeries, pretended by those
of the Church of Rome, to prove the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in that
Interval. 5. I minut that notable controversy, betwixt the Bishops of Rome and
^onst^ntinople for the Primacy: showing what was the occasion of that contest?
for what Primacy they strove? by what reason they pleaded? and who carried it
in the end? viz. John (called Jejunator, or the Faster) Patriarch of
Constantinople, who first of all was styled oecumenick Bishop, anno, 580. which
was continued in his successors to anno, 604. at which time, Phocas (before
whom Bonifacius third Bishop of Rome renewed the Process, knowing that Phocas
the Emperor, carried no good will to Cyriacus, Patriarch of Constantinople; he
struck the Iron while it was hot) after much contention, pronounced in his
favor.

The third Part, entitled, of an oecumenick Bishop, contains the History of
that interval, between anno, 600. and the Council of Trent. It is divided in
two Books, in the first, I insist most on those following particulars, 1. What
power was conferred by Phocas, with that title of universal Bishop, upon
Bonifacus third Bishop of Rome? 2. How the edict of Phocas was ob^yed? viz.
resisted every where, till in the end it was recalled by Pogonatus, anno, 680.
in the sixth general Council, as was showed before. 3. How during the
vicissitudes of inundations of Barbarians, the Bishop of Rome reassumed that
title of un^versal Bishop, and usurped power in temporals over the Grecian
Empero^s, as was already declared. 4. How Carolus Magnus curbed him. 5. How,
when the posterity of Carolus Magnus decayed, he renewed and augmented his
power by five steps, as we showed before also.

In the second Book, those steps or increments of the Papacy, between anno,
600. and the ^C^ncel of Trent, are dogmatically disputed, by Scripture,
Fathers, and it is proved, by testimonies of the most learned Antiquaries of
the Church of Rome, that the oldest of those steps, was not before anno, 1000.
It is true indeed, that his power in temporals, was attempted first by
Constantine Bishop of Rome, against Philippicus Emperor of Constantinople,
anno, 720. because the said Philippicus caused pull down those Images of the
Fathers of the sixth general Council, placed in the Church of St. Sophia, at
Constantinople: and a little after, Gregory 2d. and 3d. Bishops of Rome,
excommunicated Leo Isaurus, and his son Copronymus, for the same quarrel of
Images; but their insolence was compes^ed by Carolus Magnus, as we showed
before. Those four steps are, 1. Election by Cardinals. 2. Power of convocating
general Councils, constantly pre^iding in them, of confirming and infirming
them, 3. Power in temporals, 4. In fallibility: as for the last step Divinity,
it is disputed in the fourth Part, lib. 2.

The fourth and last Part of this Treatise, (entitled, of Antichrist) is
divided in two Books; in the first, the demonstrations of Sanderus, Bellarmine,
and Lessius, (three Jesuits) are answered, by which they endeavor to prove,
that the Bishop of Rome is not Antichrist. 2. The Bishop of Rome is proved to
be Antichrist by Scripture, Fathers, Popish Doctors, yea, by the testimonies of
some Popes themselves.

In the second Book, two marks of Antichrist are chiefly insisted upon, the
first is, his defection, 2 Thessalonians. 2. where it is proved, that the Doctrine of
the Modern Church of Rome is that defection* mentioned by the Apostle, and that
in the first six Centuries there was no such thing, as the modern Popish
Religion; which is proved, by an induction of all the contraverted points we
have with the Church of Rome. 2. Because those of the Church of Rome ordinarily
object, that they have not made a defection, because it cannot be instructed at
what time it was made? by whom? and who resisted it? Two things are proved in
the said Book; first, it is proved by Reason, Experience, Scripture, Fathers,
that a defection may be made, and yet it may be unknown by whom it is made? at
what time? and who first resisted it? 2. It is proved by an induction, that
most of the most substantial Tenets of the Church of Rome (such as
transubstantiation, number of the Sacraments, communion under one kind,
sacrifice of the Mass, imperfection of the Scripture, equalling of traditions
to it, adding a Apocrypha Books to it, rejecting the Greek and Hebrew as not
being authentic, as making the corrupt vulgar Latin version authentic,
free will Merits, justification by Works, caelibat of Priests, worshipping of
Images, invocation of Saints, set Fasts, Prayer for the dead, Purgatory,
Indulgences, works of super-erogation, all the steps of the Popes Supremacy,
etc.) were not only not from the beginning, but also it is proved for the most
part (by testimonies of Popish Doctors themselves) at what time? and by whom?
the said Tenets, as innovations, were brought in the Church.

The second mark of Antichrist we insist upon is, that (...), all sort of
deceiving and fraud, 2 These. 2. where it is showed, by what cheats the
authority of the Bishop of Rome and his Doctrine are maintained; such as
perverting, falsely translating and corrupting (by adding and paring of the
indices expurgatorii) all the Writings of the Ancients, Suppositions,
Revelations, Saints, Miracles, etc.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Thus I have represented unto you, what I perform in
this great Subject, and what method I observe in it: By which it will appear to
any reasonable man, what difference there is between this method, and that of
others, if I perform what I promise; of which, let the judicious Reader be
judge. Now follows the third thing, which I desired your Lordships to take to
consideration, viz. what my scope and intention is? which is twofold, the first
is, to refute those marks, (...) which those of the Church of Rome endeavor to
persuade their Disciples, that the said Church of Rome is the true church.

The first mark is, a continual succession of Bishops; which they take great
pains to enumerat, from the days of the Apostles, unto this time: In which
mark shall be proved a fourfold cheat; The first is, they make the world
be^ieve, that all those Bishops were of a like greatness in Power and
Authority; whereas it is proved, that in the first three Centuries, or at least
before the days of Cyp^ian, that every Bishop was of equal authority with the
Bishop of Rome: And that between the times of Cyprian, and the Council of
Chalcedon, every Metropolitan, and from the Council of Chalcedon to anno, 604.
every Patriarch were of equal jurisdiction to him: And when he was made
universal Bishop by Phocas, little more then a bare title was bestowed on him,
and yet that was after revocked, by the sixth general Council. As for those
five steps we mentioned before (in which chiefly the Modern Power of the Pope
consists) viz. Election by Cardinals; 2. Authority of convocating general
Councils; 3. Temporal jurisdiction; 4. Infability; 5. and Divinity, it shall be
proved (as we said before) by the testimonies of Popish Doctors themselves,
that the oldest of them, had not a being in the tenth Age: and that the said
Popish Doctors, acknowledging the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter in
the Monarchy of the Church, nevertheless, some of them doubted not to call the
Bishop of Rome Antichrist, by reason of these steps, which they call tyrannical
Antichristian usurpations.

The second Cheat, in that mark of succession is, that they make ignorants
believe, that all the Bishops of Rome, since the times of the Apostles,
professed the same Doctrine which is now taught in the Church of Rome: whereas
it shall be proved, that the Doctrine of the modern Church of Rome had not a
being the first six hundred years after Christ; that it had some notable
beginning, about that time when Bonifacius 3d. was made first universal Bishop,
and increased afterward, as the power of the Bishop of Rome increased, the one
following the other, as the motion of the Sea follows the Moon; that many of
the most substantial points of the modern Roman Faith, were never generally
established, before the cape-stone of the Popes power was laid at the Councils
of Florence and Trent, at which two Councils, many Tenets were established,
with an anathema, as Articles of Faith, believed to be so many paradoxes by the
most learned men in the Church of Rome, who lived in those times, who spared
not to exclaim against the fraudulent proceeding of the Pope, who carried all
by plurality of voices in these two Councils: 1. By multitude of Italian
Bishops; 2. By titular Bishops, that is, Bishops having imaginary Titles in the
East, as Jerusalem, Antioch, etc. Which Bishops he created purposely, that by
the number of their voices, and of the Italian Bishops, he might bear down in
these two Councils, the voices of the Bishops of Germany, Spain and France.

The third Cheat in that mark of succession is, that they make ignorants
believe, that all those Bishops; were lawfully elected: but it shall be proved
in the following Disput, that some were elected by Blood, others by Simony,
others by unlawful Stipulations, and Pre-contracts to establish Heresy in the
Church, and to condemn the O^thodox Doctrine as heretical; others of them by a
paction with the Devil; yea, it shall be proved, by the most eminent
Antiquaries of the Church of Rome it self, that since Nicolaus secundus, who
lived in the eleventh Century, there has not been one Bishop of Rome elected
according to the Law of God, and Constitutions of the primitive Church: and
that their manner of election, at this day, is so detestable, that none can
hear of it without horror.

The fou^th Cheat in that mark of succession is this, we have redacted that
succession to a number of persons, of unequal power, contrary Doctrine,
unlawfully elected; now rests a bare personal succession, in which there is a
notable Cheat also; because they obtrude for the true Successor, persons* that
are not capable, by their own principles, of the Function; as appears by three
unanswerable reasons: The first is, a woman was Pope for several years
together; and whereas Bellarmine and Baronius, affirms, it was a fiction; it is
answered, since those Historians who relate it for a truth, lived in t^ose very
times, in which it fell out, or at least, very near them; and since those who
call it a fable, lived long after, and are but of yeaster-day, in respect of
those who affirm it to be of a truth, no judicious Reader needs to be puzzled
much, which party to believe; since those who called it a truth, professed
themselves to be as obedient Sons to the Church of Rome, as those who call it a
fable.

The second reason, against the continuity of that personal succession, is
this; the Chair of Rome has been for several years empty, and without a
Bishop: and whereas they affirm, that the power then of the Bishop, is in the
Cardinals; it shall be proved, by their own Learned Antiquaries, that the
modern power of those Cardinals, was a thing unkown to the Ancients; and to be
nothing else, but a new devised Cheat.

The third reason, against that personal succession; is this, it is known to
all who are versed in History, that many Popes have been at one time, and the
subtillest Wits amongst them could never yet decern, which was the true
Successor? and which not? one part of the Church adhering to the one, another
to the other, another to the third Pope: As happened in the time of the Council
of Constance, anno, 1416. at which time there were three Popes. It is certain,
one of them could be only the true Pope, and yet all of them created Cardinals;
some of which not only created other Popes afterward, but also became Popes
themselves: but those Cardinals, who received orders from the false Popes, are
by their own Principles, incapable of electing Popes, much more of being Popes
themselves. It must of necessity follow, that many Popes have been at
innumerable times, Bishops of Rome not lawful; which quite destroys that
personal succession. They are pressed with the same difficulty in the case of
Simony; It is granted by themselves, that many Bishops of Rome have obtained
that Chair by Simony: It is granted also by them, that those are not lawful
Popes, that those ordained by them are incapable of Orders. It is confessed by
them also, that several Popes obtaining the Chair by Simony, have created
Cardinals which elected other Popes, and some of them also became Popes
themselves; which quite destroys that uninterrupted personal succession, as
they cannot deny. And this much of that first mark of the true Church,
pretended by the Romanists, to prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church,
viz. succession of Bishops.

The second mark is Antiquity, of which they brag very much, but have very
little reason. Cicero, lib. 2. de Orator. relates a passage between Crassus,
that famous Orator, and one Silus, who accused another person before the
Senate, for uttering some dangerous expressions; Crassus defends him thus, It
may be, says he, that he spoke these words in passion; Silus granted it might
be: Crassus urges the second time, It may be you understood not what he said;
Silus seemed not averse to that neither: Crassus goes on the third time, It
may be, says he, that ye affirm, that ye heard him utter these speeches,
whereas ye heard no such thing at all: at which Silus was confounded, and
replied nothing at all, then all the company fell a laughing. Those instances
of Crassus against Silus, may fitly be urged against our Adversaries of the
Church of Rome, bragging of the testimonies of Antiquity, that is, of Councils
and Fathers. His first instance was, that the person accused by Silus, perhaps
was in passion, but it is known, and shall be proved, that those of the Church
of Rome are seconded by no testimonies of Antiquity at all, but either they are
of Bishops of Rome themselves, or else of their flatterers. But Aeneas Silvius
(afterward Pope himself, under the name of P^us 2d.) in his Commentaries upon
the Council of Basile, has these following expressions against such
testimonies; his words are, Nec considerant miseri quae tantopere jactant
verba, aut ipsorum summorum pontificum sunt fimbrias suas extendent^um, aut
eorum qui iis adulabantur; that is, Neither do these miserable men consider,
that those testimonies of which they brag, are either of Bishops of Rome
themselves, enlarging their own Authority; or else of those who are their
flatterers. Now to the application; Crassus reasoned, that a testimony spoken
in passion, should not be regarded; but who will deny those testimonies of
Bishops of Rome, and of their vowed slavish flatterers, to be spoken in
passion, to be partial, and to merit no credit?

Crassus second instance was, that perhaps Silus did not understand what the
other said: This is also fitly applied to those of the Church of Rome; for,
knowing that those partial testimonies would not serve the turn, they fly to
fantastic Glosses of testimonies of the Ancients, wearying themselves and
their Readers, by their verbosity, in such Glosses, though never so strained
and wrested against the meaning of the Author, as shall be proved to any
capacity, in the least measure capable of reason: and in effect, all the
shelter they have in Antiquity, is either in wilfully wresting the Fathers, or
else in their strained Allegories, as shall be made manifest in its own place,
part. 4. lib. 2. yea, and almost through the whole Treatise.

The third instance of Crassus; against Silus, was false witnessing: that this
may be applied, to our Adversaries, shall be proved also; that is, when those
testimonies of Popes and their Fathers, and those perverted and wrested
testimonies of others, will not serve the turn, they use a twofold cheat, in
false witnessiing; The first is, they have corrupted, by authority of the Pope,
all the Writings of the Ancients, taking out what made against them. The second
cheat is, by putting in, and forging, what in effect, was never in the writings
of the Ancients, as shall be unanswerably proved in the following Disput: yea,
it shall appear, part. 4. lib. 2. what those forged testimonies being removed,
the primitive Fathers, in the first six Centuries after Christ, prosessed no
other Doctrine, then the Doctrine now professed by the Protestants, especially
by the Church of England; which is the same Religion, with that of the first
four-general Councils, both in Doctrine and Discipline, in the estimation of
Gregorius Magnus Bishop of Rome, of little less authority then the Scripture
it self. One thing is not to be omitted, they object the Protestants speaking
unreverently of Antiquity, which is a notorious untruth, whereas themselves
(when neither wresting falsely, translating, adding and paring, and right-down
forging testimonies of Antiquity will serve the turn) speak most unreverently
of the Ancients, taxing Augustinus, Hieronymus, the second and fourth general
Councils, and consequently, all the first eight general Councils^ (since in the
particulars challenged by them, they all agreed) of ignorance, madness*
heresy, forgery.

The third mark is universality; which is all one with antiquity: universality
is twofold, first of time, that is, the Doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome
was received at all times by the Church. The second is, of place, that is, it
was embraced in all places: but the Antiquity of their Doctrine being related,
universality falls with it, and likewayes visibility; for if we prove, that the
Doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome (in as far as it contradicts that of
Protestants) is devised, and broached by degrees, since the beginning of the
seventh Century; questionless, it was not visible in the first six. Antiquity
also, being refuted, their fifth mark, infallibility also falls with it: for
questionless, if the Doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome, be contrary to the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church in the first six Centuries, they cannot have
the brow to affirm, that their Modern Church of Rome is infallible, since in so
affirming, they will declare all the Ancients, that is, Fathers and geneneral
Councils, in the first six hnndred years after Christ, to be Heretics.
However, it is most strange impudence in them to pretend infallibility in their
Church, which some place in general Councils, others in the Bishop of Rome, in
Cathedra: which ever of the two they affirm, they are entangled. If the first?
in it appears that of late, their general Councils has condemned one another
of Heresy, as the Council of Florence, the Councils of Basil and Constance;
and the Council of Basil, that of Florence: If they affirm in the last? ( viz.
that the Pope has Infallibility in Cathedra) they are also entangled, for it
shall be proved* part. 3 lib. 2. that many Popes in Cathedra have declared
other Popes teaching in Cathedra to be Heretics: but none but a mad man, or an
Impostor will affirm, that the infallibility of Popes in Cathedra, can consist
with such proceedings.

The sixth mark is Unity, of which they brag very much, but with as little
reason, as they did brag of Antiquity. They reason very prettily thus: We of
the Church of Rome (say they) agree amongst our selves, in all substantial
points of Faith: whereas they who are not of our Church, do not so; some of
them being Calvinists, some Lutherians, some Anabaptists, some Quakers, some
this, some that: whence it appears ( say they) that our Church is the true
Church.

But this sophism is very easily retorted: we may as easily reason thus; We,
whom ye call Calvinists, are at unity amongst our selves, in substantial
points, (there is no discord amongst us, but in these two particulars, the
first is, anent Church Government, or the Divine right of Bishops; the second
is in that point, of defensive Arms against Kings; both which differences,
especially the last, are in a far higher strain amongst your selves, as ye
cannot without impudence deny) But ye who are out of our Church, do not agree
amongst your selves, some of you are Papists, some Anabaptists, some Quakers,
etc. Ergo, we are the true Church.

Secondly, to omit such foolish reasoning, there is not greater discord in
hell, then is amongst those of the Church of Rome, in points most substantial,
and upon which, as hinges, the whole edifice of their Doctrine does depend. It
would be prolix to enumerat all their discords; we will only mention some few,
the rest we shall prosecute through the whole body of this Treatise: And first,
they generally brag of the Antiquity of their Doctrine, that it was from the
beginning: but it shall be proved, by testimony of their own Doctors, that most
of their substantial Tenets, which they hold contrary to Protestants, are so
many innovations; such as adding of Apocrypha Books to the Scripture, number of
Sacraments, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, and all those steps of
the Popes Supremacy, after anno, 604. Yea, it shall be proved by some of their
greatest Antiquaries, that the Bishop of Rome was not acknowledged universal
Bishop by the Church, in the first six Centuries; and that Cyprian and
Augustine, and many other of the Ancients, died out of communion with the
Church of Rome, and yet are placed in their Calanders amongst the Saints.

Likewayes, the whole body of the Popish Religion depends upon the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, it again upon the supremacy of Peter, it again upon his
institution, carriage and testimonies of Fathers. Let us hear how they agree in
those three.

And first, his institution is founded upon three passages of Scripture, Mat.
16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. The second
is, verse 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. The
third is, Joh. 21. 15. 16, 17. Feed my sheep, feed my lambs. But Cardinal
Cusanus, lib. 2. concord. Cathol. cap. 13. expressly affirms, that in all those
three places, nothing was given in peculiar to Peter, which was not given to
all the Apostles, which he also proves by the testimony of Hieronymus.

2. The main Basis of the Popes supremacy, is in the exposition of these words,
Tu es Petrus, viz. That Peter is the Rock upon which the Church is built.
Pighius and Baronius and others affirm, that all are ignorants, heretics, mad
men, who acquiesced not in this exposition, That Peter is the Rock: But it
shall be proved, in the first six Chapters of the first Book, not only by
innumerable testimonies of Popish Doctors, but also of a great many Popes
themselves, that not Peter, but the thing confessed by Peter is the Rock, viz.
Christ himself.

3. Another Basis of the Popish Religion is, that Peter had his jurisdiction
immediately from Christ, and the other Apostles theirs from Peter (Bellarmine
and others affirm, that if this be not granted, the supremacy of Peter cannot
be defended, and consequently the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and the
whole body of the Popish Religion falls with it) But Franciscus de victoria
(affirmed by Canus to be the ablest Divine of Spain) exsibilats this
distinction of Peter's immediate jurisdiction, and refutes the gloss on Cyprian,
de unitate Ecclesiae, for exponing a passage in Cyprian, from which they gather
this distinction, proving by the testimonies of Cyprian himself (in that very
place corrupted by the Gloss, which Gloss is approved by the Church of Rome)
that Cyprian in these words, expressly disputs against that immediate
Jurisdiction of Peter, and mediat of the other Apostles; and affirms, that all
the Apostles had, not only their order, but also their Jurisdiction immediately
from Christ.

4. They prove the Supremacy of Peter, by his carriage and prerogatives: but
Salmero the Jesuit, expressly affirms, that nothing can be gathered from the
carriage of Peter, to prove him oecumenick Bishop, but much to the contrary;
Yea, the Council of Basil it self pronounced, that the Legates of the Pope had
no right of presiding in general Councils, because it could neither be proved
by Scripture, nor Antiquity, that ever Peter presided in any Council; or at
that of Jerusalem.

5. They brag much of Cyprian, that he is for the Supremacy of Peter, and also
Augustine and other Fathers: but Barronius himself confesses, that both
Cyprian, and Augustine, died out of communion with the Church of Rome, for
resisting her encroaching upon the Churches of Africa, that is, for admitting
of Appellations, from Africa to Rome: for doing of which, Bonifacius Secundus
Bishop of Rome affirms, that Aurelius, and Augustinus were seduced by the
Devil, and yet both of them are placed in the Roman Callender as Saints: and
notwithstanding all their braggings of Cyprian, (let one speak for all says
Barronius, in time most ancient, in learning most excellent, in martyrdom most
glorious, for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome) yet Stapleton the Jesuit,
expressly affirms, that Cyprian in that subject, utitur verbis errantium, and
mire hereticorum causae patrocinari videtur. And Bellarmine himself confesses,
that we do not read, that ever Cyprian was reconciled to the Church of Rome,
after his resisting of Stephanus the Bishop of Rome, his pretending right of
Appellations from Africa.

And this much of their concord, and unity, in that Cardinal question, of the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: which falling, Bellarmine (as we said) grants,
that the whole body of the Popish Religion falls with it, comparing it, without
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, to a house without a foundation; a man
when his head is stricken off, to starlight without the Sun. We could instance
their discord, in many of their most substantial Tenets; what question is of
greater importance, then that of Transubstantion? It is the general opinion of
the Doctors of the Church of Rome, that it was embraced as an Article of Faith
from the beginning; and yet those two great Popish Doctors, Scotus and
Bonaventur, expressly maintain, that Transubstantiation was never believed as an
Article of Faith, before the Council of Lateran, anno, 1225. Yea, Scotus
expressly affirms, were it not for the authority of that Council, he would not
believe it himself, it has so little ground in Scripture, and Antiquity. The
main ground of which prodigious Article, is those words of our Savior, Hoc est
corpus meum, and other expressions of his, John 6. But it shall be proved, part
4. lib. 2. by the testimonies of many Popish Doctors, that nothing can be
gathered from either place, for proving of it. It were too prolix in this
Preface, to mention all the contradictions of the Doctors of the Church of
Rome, in their most substantial Tenets: Your Lordships may read them at large,
in the following Treatise, almost through the whole body of it, but most
expressly, part. 4. lib. 2 where your Lordships will not only find Doctors
contradicting Doctors, but also Popes accusing Councils, Councils accusing
Popes, Councils accusing Councils, Popes in Cathedra, taxing Popes in Cathedra,
of Heresies, Madness, Ignorance. And this much of the sixth mark of the Church
of Rome, by which they pretend it is proved, to be the true Church, viz. Unity.

The seventh mark is Saints; they object to the Protestants, that they lean too
much on Christ, trusting nothing to their own merits; which occasions so much
profaneness amongst them: but we (say they) the Church of Rome, are adorned
with innumerable Saints, stirred up to holiness, because works are meritorious
in the sight of God: quis tulerit grachos, de seditione quoerentes? Let us
retex this mark of Saints, that we may see what reason they have to brag of it:
And first, they cannot brag of the Sanctity of their Clergy; witness the
exclamations of all Ages, against the corruption of the Clergy of the Church of
Rome, when they got a little breathing from persecution; we need not mention
the complaints, not only of the Ancients, but also of modern Popish Doctors,
against the corruptions of the Clergy of Rome. Cyprian began the complaint in
his time, when the Church was yet under persecution: But when the Emperors
became Christians, the Clergy, by their beneficence, became rich. Hieronymus in
his time, thirteen hundred years ago, was so irritated by the vicious lives of
the Roman Clergy, that ( Damasus Bishop of Rome dying, to whom he was
Secretary) he left Rome, and went to Palestina, to live as a Monk, comparing
Rome to Babylon, and the seat of the Whore. Ammianus Marcellinus, (in the
opinion of Baronius a Pagan) declaimed bitterly against the viciousness of the
Roman Clergy: It were tedious to mention, the complaints of these of the first
six Centuries, against the viciousness of the Roman Clergy, as of Basilius
Magnus, Nazianzenus, Sulpitius, Severus and others: as the greatness of the
Bishop of Rome in power increased, not only corruption in Doctrine, but also in
manners, increased with it; And after the Bishop of Rome was made universal
Bishop, nothing could be added to the wickedness of the Clergy. The complaints
of Bernardus, Picus, Merandula, are notorious, and innumerable others. The
corruptions of the Clergy moved them, not only to call Rome Babylon, but also
consequently, and not obscurely, the Bishop of Rome Antichrist: and yet both of
them professed themselves, obedient Sons to the Church of Rome. In a word,
since the times of Cyprian, no brave man lived in any Age unto this day, who
did not complain of the corruption of the Roman Clergy: and so heir Clergy
cannot be their Saints.

Secondly, if they have little reason to brag of their Clergy, they have far
less reason, to brag of the sanctity of their Popes: Baronius, Platina, and
Onuphrius, ingenuously confess, that the World never produced such Monsters
for murderers, Impoysoners, Adulterers, Symoniacks, Witches, yea, and
Heretics: who but a mad man will affirm, that such persons cannot err
teaching the Church? Surely Pighius was out of his wits, teaching that a Pope
could not be an Heretic; and Bellarmine no less, for calling that opinion of
Pighius, a pious opinion: their fever now is turned to a Frenzy; the Author
of that Book entitled Cardinalismo (conscious to all the Caball of the Roman
Clergy) affirms, that now they begin to teach at Rome, that a Pope cannot be a
reprobat; which at last will turn to an Article of Faith, as well as
infallibility.

But because corruption of lives of the Clergy, does not of necessity infer a
false Church: We do not affirm, that the wickedness of their Clergy, or their
Popes, proves them Idolaters in Doctrine; we only affirm, that they have no
reason to brag of either of them, as Saints, to prove the Church of Rome to be
the true Church. And although they were so, it is no infallible mark; for it
may be affirmed, that the holiest of them all comes short of Novatus, Donatus,
and other ancient Heretics, or of Tertullian; when he was a Montanist. We only
ask of them, where those Saints are to be found, of which they brag so much, if
they be neither their Clergy, nor their Popes? They will answer, they mean
those persons canonized by the Pope, and placed in their Calander. But we
reply, they cheat egregiously; first, it is reported of a certain madman in
Athens, who imagined, that all the Ships which came into the Harbor were his
own; so they, when they hear of any promises made to the Church, they imagine,
they are all made to the modern Church of Rome, and when they hear of any
Saints and Martyrs, they believe, they all professed the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome. In reason they can brag of no Saints, but those who lived after the
beginning of the seventh Century, the Saints of the first six Centuries were
not of their Church at all: for, it shall be proved, part 4. lib. 2. that the
Saints, Fathers and Martyrs of the first six Centuries condemn all the Tenets
of the Church of Rome, (of any moment which they hold contrary to Protestants)
as heretical, and are in right down terms Protestants: yea, it shall be proved,
by testimonies of their own Doctors, that many of these most eminent Saints,
died excommunicated by the Church of Rome, for resisting the pride of that
Church; as Saint Polycarpus, and all the Bishops of Asia in the time of Victor,
anno, 195. Saint Cyprian, and all the Churches of Africa in the time of
Stephanus Bishop of Rome, about anno, 256. Saint Aurelius and Saint Augustine,
and all the Bishops of Africa, in the times of Sozimus, Bonifacius and
Celestinus Bishops of Rome, in the beginning of the fifth Age.

Secondly, as for those Saints, since the beginning of the seventh Century, it
is answered first, that albeit the Clergy of Rome call them Saints, yet they
thought the said Clergy no Saints; such as Saint Bernard and others, who most
bitterly inveigh against the corruption of the Roman Church; Saint Bernard
expressly calls Rome a den of thieves, and Babylon, mentioned by John in the
Apocalypse. 2. How many of these modern Saints have been proved cheats? It shall
be proved, by testimonies of their own Doctors, part 3. lib. 2. that the Pope
has no power to canonize Saints, and that the most part of their Saints are
vile Impostors, devised by Priests to cheat the ignorant people of their money,
and to make them offer oblations at their shrines. It were prolix in this
Preface to insert the particulars, but that Impostur of Saints, in many
examples, shall be made unanswerably appear, part 4. lib. 2. And this much of
Saints, the seventh mark of the Roman Church.

The last mark is Miracles; the Scripture informs us, that Antichrist shall
deceive all the world by false miracles: It shall be proved likewayes, part 4.
lib. 2. by the testimony of the most learned Popish Doctors, that Miracles are
no true marks of the true Church in these last times, but rather marks of the
Antichristian Church. 2. It shall be proved by the testimonies of the same men,
that most of the late miracles pretended by the Church of Rome, and the most
notable ones, are meet Imposturs, which we shall instance in the forementioned
place, And whereas they object, we have no miracles in our Church, it is false,
our Doctrine was confirmed, by the miracles performed, by Christ and his
Apostles; neither need we any other miracles, since we profess the same
Doctrine. And this much of those marks of the true Church, pretended by the
Mannual of Controversies to prove, that the Church of Rome was such; to refute
which, is my first scope and intention in this following Disput.

The second scope of the said Manual of Controversies was, to persuade the
Proselyts of this Nation, that it was not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that the Pope had power to depose Kings, either Popish or Protestant; but only
of some particular persons, whom they called the Popes flatterers: and
therefore, my second intention is to prove, that the said Author is either
ignorant in the Principles of his own Religion, or else he is like Father
Cotton the Jesuit, who being demanded, if he believed the Pope had power to
depose Kings? answered, He did not believe it in France, but if he were at Rome
he would. That this King-deposing doctrine, is the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, is proved by three reasons, which will puzle the said Author very sore to
answer.

The first is this, innumerable Books are printed, asserting so much (the names
of the Authors shall be cited afterward) some of which Books are dedicated to
Cardinals, some to the Pope himself; but those Books are authorized (by those
who have authority from the Pope to peruse Books before they go to the Press)
with an Imprimatur and a Declaration, that they contain nothing contrary to the
Catholic Doctrine: But, who but a mad man, or an Impostor, will affirm, that
any Doctrine conform to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, is not the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome? This is the Doctrine of the Church of the whole
Canonists, unanimously maintained by them, and most of the Theologues, viz.
that the Pope has direct power in Temporals, or is direct Monarch of the whole
world. Some Theologues indeed, as Bellarmine and others, maintain, that the
power of the Pope is only indirect, in ordine ad spiritualia; as when a King is
an Heretic, or otherwise encroacheth upon the Liberties of the Church; or
when he assumes any thing to himself which the Pope says belongs to him: but
this Doctrine is exsibilated now at Rome, as heretical; and Bellarmine himself
is taxed by Carerius of heresy, for maintaining, that the Pope has no direct
power in temporals. Yea, Sixtus 5th with much ado, was hindered from burning
these Books of Bellarmine de pontifice Romano, for denying that direct power of
the Pope in temporals; albeit Bellarmine in the said Books gives power to the
Pope indirectly, or in order to spirituals, to depose Kings, to absolve their
Subjects from all fidelity to them, and that their Subjects are obliged at the
Popes command, to rise up in Arms against them, and consequently to kill them:
but Bellarmines opinion is now thought too little, of the Popes power; all the
Theologues now, are for the direct dominion of the Pope in temporals. And this
much of the first reason, proving, that this King-deposing Doctrine is the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

The second reason is this, That is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, what is
asserted by the Pope in Cathedra, or teaching the whole Church: but the Pope in
Cathedra, assumes that power of deposing of Kings unto himself, as appears by
his Bulls; as that of Gregory the seventh, against Henry the fourth Emperor;
that of Alexander the third, against the Emror Frederick: that of Bonifacius
the eighth, against Philip King of France: that of Paulus the third, against
Henry the eighth King of England: that of Paulus the fourth, against Queen
Elizabeth: that of Sixtus the fifth, against Henry the third and Henry the
fourth Kings of France; in which Bulls they expressly affirm, that Kings reign
by them, and that power is given them from God to establish, plant, build, root
out, cast down, transfer Kingdoms at their pleasure. The tenors of those Bulls,
(too prolix to be inserted here) shall be particularly mentioned and set down,
part 4. lib. 1. And this much of the second reason, that it is the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, that the Pope has power to depose Kings.

The third reason is this; the Popes have procured that power to be conferred
on them, by general Councils: as in the Council of Lateran, under Innocent
third; the Act of which Council, is found in Bzovius, anno, 1215. parag. 3. and
also in Binius and Crab, in their Collection of Councils. It is found likewayes
in Baronius ad annum, 1102. numb. 1, 2, 3. and also ad annum, 1116. numb. 5.
and also ad annum, 1119. Likewayes in the Council of Trent, Sess. 25. Canon.
19. It is ordained, that the Popes have power to depose any Dominum fundi, or
Proprietar of any Land where a Duel is fought; in which Canon, power of
deposing Kings tacitly, and consequentially is attributed to the Pope. The
Council thought it not fit, in express terms, to affirm, that the Pope had
power to deprive a King of his property in that case; and therefore, they made
the Canon in general terms, comprehending a King under Dominus fundi, or
Proprietar in general. That this is the true meaning of that Canon, appears,
because by reason of it mainly, the Kingdom of France did not acknowledge the
Council of Trent. And thus we have proved, by three unanswerable reasons, that
it is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that the Pope has power to depose
Kings; to which may be added a fourth, which is this, which is so evident, that
it takes away all doubt.

The Pope has innumerable times put that power in practice: the first Pope we
read attempted it, was Pope Constantine against Philippicus Emperor of
Constantinople, because the said Philippicus caused pull down the Images of the
Fathers of the sixth general Council, (commonly called T^ullanum) which were
placed in the Temple of St. Sophia: but Pope Constantine did only bark, his
Successors Gregory 2d. and Gregory 3d. did bite, for the same reason of the
Images, stirring up the Lombards against the Emperor, and bereaved them of the
Exarchat of Ravenna; in which broils, the Emperors Governor at Rome being
killed, the Bishops of Rome got the Duchy of Rome to themselves: and when the
Lombards (as we said before) demanded that Tribute of them which they were
accustomed to pay, for these Territories, to the Emperors of Constantinople;
they called in the French, against the Lombards, and in recompense of their
services, authorized their General Pipin, King of France, (shutting up the
righteous King, the last of the race of the Merovingians, in a Monastery) and
afterward they made Carolus Magnus, Son of the said Pipin, Emperor of the
West; which Carolus Magnus made appear, that although he loved the treason of
those Bishops of Rome to their Masters, Li^ge^ Lords, Benefactors and Creators,
the Emperors of Constantinople, (by whose procurement they were made Universal
Bishops) yet he hated the Traitors, as we showed before, making them his
Vassals, both in Spirituals and Temporals, lest they should play such tricks to
him and his Successors, as they had done to the Emperors of Constantinople.

We read no more of the temporal usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, before
Gregory 7th, when (the race of Carolus Magnus being extinct) the Empire was
translated to the Germans. What extremities the said Gregory 7th. did put the
Emperor Henry 4th. to, is notorious. In sum, he was forced to resign the
Empire to his Son Henry 5th. (the Imperial Ornaments being violently plucked
from him by the Bishops of Mentz and Culen, his own Creatures) which Son of his
agreed little better with Paschalis Bishop of Rome: after which time, it was
the continual practices of the Bishops of Rome, to depose Kings and Emperors,
and to stir up their Subjects to Rebellion against them; as appears by those
passages of Alexander, 3. with the Emperor Frederick; of Boniface 8th. with
Philip. le Bell, King of France: of Julius 2. with the King of Navarre: of
Sixtus 5th. with Hen^y 3. and 4. Kings of France: of Paul 3. with Henry 8. and
Paul 4 with Queen Elizabeth of England. The Stories of these two Henry's of
France is most lamentable.

And thus we have proved, that it is both the Doctrine and the Practice of the
Church of Rome, that the Bishop of Rome has power to depose Kings, to absolve
their Subjects from fidelity toward them, to compel them to Arms against
them, and consequently to kill them, and to acknowledge any for their lawful
Prince, whom the Bishop of Rome shall appoint: How this power of the Popes can
consist with Kingly Government, let the Kings of the earth themselves consider.
They make one objection yet, that it is not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that the Pope has power to depose Kings. By the answer of which objection will
appear, that increase of Popery in a Protestant State, tends to the utter
destruction both of King and Subject, and inconsistent with both. The objection
is this.

It is not the Doctrine of the Church of France, say they, that the Pope has
power to depose Kings, being rejected both by its Doctrine, and by its
Practice; since many of the Clergy of France, has written against that
Doctrine, and Books defending that Opinion, (such as that of Mariana the
Spanish Jesuit, and others) have been burnt by public Authority.

But this objection is answered by a twofold distinction; first of Times,
secondly of Causes wherefore Kings ought to be deposed? As for Times when the
Kings of France are low, or high, in the last case, the Clergy of France, ever
partied their King against the Pope, excommunicating them, and deposing them:
as appears, by the passages of Philip le Bell, with ^onifacius; and of Lewis
12th. with Julius second Bishop of Rome. In the first Case, when the Kings of
France are low, the Clergy of France, ever partied the Pope, excommunicating
and deposing their Kings; as appears, by the passages of Henry 3d. and 4th.
Kings of France, with Sixtus 5th. Bishop of Rome. It is notorious, that the
University of Paris, confirmed by a decree, the Bulls of the said Sixtus 5th.
against the said two Henry's Kings of France; in which Bulls they were declared
incapable of the Crown of France, all French men were absolved from alledgeance
to them, and the greatest part of France rose up in arms against them, to
dethrone them, beging of the Pope, that he would name them a King, and they
would acknowledge him for their lawful Prince. And this much of the distinction
of Times.

The second distinction is of Causes, wherefore Kings should be deposed?
although in other causes (besides Heresy) the Subjects of France were not so
unanimous for the Pope against their King; yet in case of Heresy, that is, if
their King were a Protestant, both the Clergy and the Laity of France,
unanimously at the Popes command, renunced alledgeance to their King: And first
for the Clergy, in an Assembly of States or Parliament, Cardinal Perron, their
Speaker commissionat from them as their mouth, in an Oration to the third
Estate, affirmed, That it had ever been the Doctrine of the Clergy of France,
that true French men ought no alledgeance to heretical Kings, excommunicated
and deposed by the Pope. As for the Laity, it is notorious, that after the
murder of Henry 3. they threatened to abandon Henry 4th his Successor, because
he was excommunicated and deposed by the Pope; which forced him (expecting no
security otherwise) to change his Religion.

And thus we have proved, that it is the unanimous Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, that Popish Subjects owe no fidelity to a Protestant King; which
occasioned that saying of that incomparable Bishop Mortoun, viz. That a loyal
popish Subject in a Protestant State, was a white Ethiopian: which I do not
mention, calling in question the Loyalty of the Romanists of this Nation, or
the neighbor Nations of England and Ireland; many of them are known to be
persons of Honor, and as loyal Subjects as the King has: I only mention those
things, to let them see how they are abused by the Popish Emissaries of these
three Nations, who knowing them to be loyal Subjects to the King, seeing it
would be a great difficulty to train them in their snares, and keep them in
them once catched, if they told them all the verity. To train them on, they
make them believe in the beginning, that it is not the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, that the Pope has power to depose Protestant Kings, (much less
others) but only a calumny of Protestants, traducing the Popish Religion: but
afterward, having by degrees confirmed them in the Popish Religion, they would
not fail to persuade them, to cut the throats of all their Contrymen, and
flee like so many mad-dogs upon the Kings face, to pull him from his Throne; as
appears by the constant practice of the Church of Rome against all Protestants
in general, and against Protestant Kings in particular: which practice is so
notorious, that he who denies it, is either a mad man, void of common sense, or
else a notorious Impostor.

And first, that it is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, affirming it
meritorious, to destroy Protestants by open cruelty and perfidy.* appears by
the constant carriage of the said Church toward Protestants, since the
Reformation: What sort of cruelty or perfidy have they not attempted? Death
without torture was thought clemency; burning of them in heaps alive in houses,
might be attributed to a popular fury, but it is notorious, that multitudes of
them were burnt alive in fires, of all Sexes and Qualities, by the sentences of
the Judges; and when they could do no good by open force, they destroyed them
by perfidy, and prostitution of the public Faith, and when they had done, made
public Processions of Joy, Bonefires, and such like, as if they had deserved
Paradise by such meritorious works; maintaining this maxim as unquestionable,
that no public Faith should be regarded or observed toward Heretics. That
this is truth, appears by the proceedings of the Council of Constance, with
John Husse, and Hierom of Prague, which two were burned alive, notwithstanding
they had the safe conduct of the Emperor Sigismundus. It appears also, by those
massacres of Paris, and other parts of France, where, by the public Faith,
they trained them all to one place, and then perfidiously massacred them, to
the horror of several learned Romanists, who in their Histories, detest such
perfidy, such as Thuanus and others: and when they had done, tanquam re been
gesta triumpharunt, they were congratulated by the Pope; who caused Bonefires
and public Processions to be made at Rome, for the happy success of such a
glorious atchievment.

These things are notorious, so that the Popish emissaries themselves, have
neither the brow to deny them, nor the confidence to defend them: But they use
another shift, viz. That the Church of Rome has given over that practice now,
being resolved no more to follow those courses, as they did in the beginning,
prompted to them, by their too violent zeal.

But it is answered, they are greatly mistaken, for now in France, and Germany,
and other places, they practice not such cruelties, because they dare not, but
where they have power, and thinks they may do it without any hazard; they make
it appear, that they believe, it is a meritorious work, to destroy and extirpat
all Protestants, by any cruelty, or perfidy imaginable: as appears of late, not
only abroad, by the proceeding of the Duke of Savoy, at the Popes Instigation,
against these of the Valleys of Piemont, by which innumerable persons, were
destroyed by such cruelty and perfidy, as the like has not been recorded in
any History, which are dicribed at large, in a great Volum, published by an eye
witness of them: But also at home; what cruelties were exercised in Ireland,
none needs to be informed? And this much of the Inclinations of the Church of
Rome, to Protestants in general.

What good will they have to Protestant Kings, they are blind who sees not? All
Protestants are excommunicate at their Jubilees; but it is a meritorious work,
to kill an excommunicated person, though he be a King; when Henry the 3d. and
Henry the 4th. Kings of France, were excommunicated by the Pope Sixtus 5th. the
first of them was murdered by a Monk, for which, Bonefires were made in Paris,
(that of the Popes Nuntio being so great, that it endangered the neighbours^
houses) mutual congratulations passed between those of the League, and the
Consistory at Rome. Pope Sixtus the 5th. triumphs in the Consistory; as appears
by his speech published by the means of Mr. Warmingtoun, Chaplian to Cardinal
^^llen an English Cardinal. The friends and relations of the murderer of the
King, are enriched by contributions, the Effigy of the Assassin was carried in
processions, and with much ado, his Canonization for a Saint was stopped at
Rome; that is, many strove to have him enrolled, as a deserving person, that he
might be after Canonized in due time: Who sees not, that all this was done, to
encourage all to kill any King excommunicated and deposed by the Pope; and in
particular, Henry 4th. King of France, successor to Henry 3d. Neither did the
event, deceive their expectation, for a little after, one Chastel intending to
murder him, wounded him in his own Chamber in the mouth, there being none in
the Room beside, but only an other Nobleman; which he performed so subtly,
that neither the King, nor the Nobleman perceived him in the Action: till at
last the Noble man, for his own vindication, catched him by the arm, affirming,
that either he or himself had wounded the King, and it was fit, they were both
arrested, till it were known, which of them two it was? There were other
innumerable attempts of assassines prompt in by the Jesuits, upon the life of
the said Henry 4th. which were so thick, that they could not all misca^ry, and
so at last, hewas stobbed in the heart in his Coach by Ravillac. That this was
not unpleasant to the Pope, appears, because a little after, the arrest of the
Parliament of Paris against ^hastel ( who attempting to murder the King,
wounded him) was publicly censured at Rome, as unjust.

And this much of France; we have many examples at home, that the Bigots of the
Popish Religion, think it a meritorious work, (encouraged by their Confessors)
to attempt upon the lives of Protestant Princes, excommunicated and deposed by
the Pope: We have many instances in Queen Elizabeth, who all her lifetime was
vexed by the doubled and re-doubled attempts to murder her; and when the
malefactors were apprehended, they were so far from acknowledging their fault,
that they gloried in it, professing it was no sin, but meritorious, to kill an
excommunicated Tyrant, neither were they obliged to acknowledge, for their
lawful Prince, those who were excommunicated by the Pope. King James also was
very near having a share in those popish Practices, in the Powder Plot, if it
had not been discovered by a miraculous providence: Valentia and other Jesuits
abroad, were not ashamed (tacitly and consequentially) to defend it; that is,
they maintained openly in their Writings, that those who violat the Oath of
Supremacy and Alledgeance, were not perjured, because that Oath was never
obligatory. Our present Emissaries persuades their Proselyts, that the said
Powder Plot was but a fiction, devised by Secretary Cecil, to make the popish
Religion odious; by which it appears, of what metal those men are. And this
much of my second scope, viz. to prove in this work, that it was the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, that the Pope had power to depose Kings, and popish
Subjects ought no alledgeance to a Protestant Prince; and that increase of
Popery could not consist in a Protestant State, with the safety of either King
or Subject: and who affirm the contrary, are either deceivers themselves, or
deceived by others.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I have represented unto your Lordships, the excellency
of the Subject which I present unto you, what method I observe in it? what is
my scope in it? now it remains to show unto your Lordships, how I answer, as I
can, to what is objected against me? And first, some perhaps will affirm that I
am malus Patronus bonae Causae, or that I do not disput this great Controversy
so to the purpose, as the importance of it requires: But I answer, whether I
disput well or badly, I d^serve neither the praise nor the blame, since I only
disput it as the greatest Spirits of both sides have done before me. When a
Clerk minutes the disput of Pleaders before a Judge, his part is to do it
faithfully, which if he perform, he cannot in reason be blamed, although the
reasons hinc inde, be never so weak, or not persuasive, otherwise, he is
guilty of forgery. I play the part of a Clerk, not of a Judge; which if I do
unfaithfully, let any put me to it, either in private or in public, and if I do
not vindicat my self, I deserve the character of an Impostor. It is true
indeed, that I mention some testimonies of Fathers, which I did not see in the
Originals; but there is not one of these testimonies, but I can instruct, that
they are cited by popish Authors themselves, or if they be not, I can instruct
by the Originals, that they are falsely cited by the said popish Authors, that
is, that they are either falsely translated out of the Greek (as I instance in
several passages, cited by our Adversaries from the versions of Christopherson
and Trapezuntius) or else they are mutilated, that is, telling that part of the
Tale which makes for them, and suppressing that which makes against them: or
else they are forged, and that the Fathers affirm no such thing as they
pretend. Of their mutilating of testimonies, I will only instance two
particulars, or three at most; The first is, Ambrosius affirms, We use to
follow the Church of Rome in all things; Bellarmine with great pomp concludes,
that from these words, Ambrosius asserts necessar communion with the Church of
Rome: but he forgets to tell, what Ambrosius says immediately after, viz. quia
tamen nos homines sumus si quid alibi rect^us, hoc observamus; that is, albeit
we use to follow the Church of Rome ( it being the prime Church) yet, if
elsewhere we find any thing more Orthodox, since we are men endued with reason,
we use to follow that. The truth is, Ambrosius in that place is expressly
disputing against necessar communion with the Church of Rome, (as shall appear
part 2. lib. 1.) concer^^ng a certain ceremony in Baptism. Likewayes, Gregorius
Magnus is cited by Bellarmine, to prove that Peter was ordained Monarch of the
Church, because he affirms, that the care of the whole Church was committed to
him; in which he plays the sophister egregiously, suppressing what immediately
follows, viz. Petrus tamen non erat universalis Apostolus, Peter was not
universal Apostle nevertheless. The truth is, Gregorius is expressly disputing
in that passage, against any Monarch of the Church, calling that Title
sacrilegious and blasphemous; and amongst other reasons, he has this for one,
if any had reason to be called Monarch of the Church or oecumenick Bishop, it
was Peter, because the care of the whole Church was committed to him; but
notwithstanding of that, he was not oecumenick Bishop, or universal Bishop, or
Apostle. Your Lordships will find many instances of that kind, dispersed
through the following Treatise, and also their false translations: yea, they do
not produce one testimony ( except either of Bishops of Rome, or their
flatterers, which sort of testimonies are rejected by Aeneas Silvius,
afterward Pope himself, as meriting no credit) but either it is mutilated in
the foresaid manner, or falsely translated or forged.

It may be objected secondly against me, that my Style is rude; But I answer, a
key of Iron, if it open the door with facility, is to be preferred to one of
Gold, which does it with difficulty. The Discourse for the most part is
Dogmatick, in which Rhetoric is rather hurtful then profitable; the strained
Rhetoric of the Fathers has set us all by the ears together. Most of the
shelter which our Adversaries have in the Writings of the Fathers, is in their
too high strained Allegories, as will be proved by an induction of all those
Controversies we have with the Church of Rome. We will give an instance or two
in this Preface, of which your Lordships will find innumerable, dispersed
through the whole Disput, especially part 4. lib. 2. where the newness of the
present popish Religion is expressly disputed.

First, to prove necessar communion with the Church of Rome, or the
infallibility of the particular Church of Rome, Bellarmine cites Cyprian,
affirming, that Perfidy can have no access to that Church: which expression of
his, is found in an Epistle of his, written to Cornelius Bishop of Rome. That
this is only Rhetoric, and a Complement, appears by innumerable other
Epistles of Cyprian; in which he taxes Stephanus Bishop of Rome, and the
particular Church of Rome, of Ignorance, Arrogance, and Patronizing of
Heretics; yea it is notorious, and confessed by our Adversaries, that he died
out of communion with the Church of Rome; and yet (as we said) he is a Saint in
the Roman Callander.

Secondly, Bellarmine and others, produce many testimonies of the Fathers, to
prove the Supremacy of Peter, because they call him Head and Prince of the
Apostles, that this is only Rhetoric, is notorious, for two reasons: first, it
shall be proved, that these very Fathers expressly affirm, and prove, that Peter
had no Supremacy over the Church, or other Apostles: but that all the Apostles
were of alike Fellowship, Dignity, and Power with him. 2. Because these very
Fathers, complement others also, with the same title of Head and Prince, as
they do Paul and James, yea, Chrysostom (then whom none calls Peter oftener Head
and Prince) expressly affi^ms, Paul was in every thing equal to Peter; and when
he had so said, he adds, ne dicam amplius; which is as much as to say, that in
his opinion, Paul was to be preferred to Peter. 3. To prove Transubstantiation,
they bring many testimonies of the Fathers, such as these, This Bread which you
see, is not common Bread, but the Flesh of Christ; this Wine which you see, is
not ordinar Wine, but the Blood of Christ; that these ex^ressions are only
strained Allegories, appears, by the testimonies of the same Fathers,
especially of Ambrosius, who speaking of the Water in Baptism, uses the same
phrase of speaking, viz. that Water which ye behold, is not ordinar Water, but
the Blood of Christ; but our Adversaries do not affirm, that the Water in
Baptism is transubstantiat into the blood of Christ. Another reason is
unanswerable, that those expressions are only Allegories, viz. Those very
Fathers, especially Ambrosius, expressly affirm, that after the consecration,
the Bread keeps still the nature of Bread, and the Wine of Wine; many of which
expressions are now taken out by the I^dices expurgatorii, in all the new
printed Copies of the Fathers, by the Popes authority, contrary to the Faith,
not only of all the old Manuscripts, but also of the printed Copies, before
anno, 1564. at which time, that famous Printer Manutius gelded all the Fathers,
(which he does not dissemble himself) at the command of Paulus 4th. Bishop of
Rome.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Thus I have represented unto you, the excellency of
the Subject of which I treat; 2. What method I observe in it? 3. What is my
scope in it? 4. How I answer, as I can, all what is objected against me? If any
have more to object, I entreat them to put me to it, and if I cannot convince
them by an Apology, I shall ingenuously confess my fault, either in private or
in public. No more, but wishing every one of you in your stations, to be
serviceable to God, your King and Country, and steadable to your own Families
and Relations; I rest according to my power, ready to do you service,

SAMUEL COLVIL.

THE GRAND IMPOSTOR DISCOVERED OR AN HISTORICAL DISPVT OF THE Papacy and
Popish Religion.
PART I. BOOK I. Of the Bishopric of Peter.
CHAP. I. That the cheat of the Modern Roman Faith is discovered by these three
Passages of Scripture, By which they endeavor to prove the Institution of
Peter's Monarchy.
IT was proved in the Preface, that the truth or falsehood of the Modern Roman
Faith depended upon that of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: which is the
true reason, why the bravest spirits of both sides rush together with such
animosity in this contest: the one to assert it, the other to assault it: both
parties pretending Scripture, Reason, Councils, Fathers; and each party
upbraiding other with wresting of Scripture, Sophistry, perverting, and forging
testimonies of Antiquity. When I considered these high and mutual reflections
of those not only learned, but pious men of both sides (as cannot be denied)
curiosity moved me to study the Contest, that I might perceive (if I could)
which Party was to blame: and when I had so done, I resolved to minut the
Disput, as a Clerk does those pleadings before a Judge; omitting Grammaticisms,
Criticisms, and Rhetorical digressions, I only mention the most substantial
Arguments, and answers, Hinc inde; doing what I could for the benefit of
Persons of Honor of both Religions, (to whom I am many ways engaged) whose
condition, and abilities or leisure requires rather to catch the Partridge in
the nest in a compendious Treatise, then to hunt her in the Woods, Fields, and
Mountains of vast and volumnious Authors, though never so learned. If any
affirm that I play not the Clerk faithfully in minuting this Disput, let him
put me to it, either in private, or public: and if I do not vindicate my self,
let me be esteemed an Impostor and infamous for forgery: and lest any think I
cheat in citations, I am able to justify, that I make use of no passages, but
those which are acknowledged by both sides: where the Disput is, about the true
meaning of the words, and (which not seldom falls out) whether the testimony be
forged or not?

The whole Disput consists in the examination of those three Questions.

1. Whether the Apostle Peter was ordained by our Savior Visible Head of the
Church under himself, or subordinat Monarch of the Church?

2. If at the command of Christ, the said Apostle Peter fixed the seat of his
particular Bishopric at Rome?

3. If the Bishop of Rome by Divine institution succeeds to Peter, in the
Monarchy of the Church?

If the affirmitives of those three questions be true, without all question,
Communion with the Church of Rome is necessar unto Salvation, and the Religion
of Protestants is a new sprung-up Heresy: But if any one of those three
Affirmatives be false (much more all three) it is as certain, that the Faith of
the Modern Roman Church is an idolatrous and heretical novelty: none can
succeed to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, if Peter was not himself
Monarch of the Church: Neither can the Bishop of Rome succeed to Peter in the
Monarchy of the Church, albeit Peter were Monarch of the Church himself, except
Peter were also Bishop of Rome. Again, albeit Peter had been both Monarch of
the Church, and Bishop of Rome, it does not follow that the Bishop of Rome
succeeded to Peter by Divine institution in the Monarchy of the Church; unless
it be made out otherwise by Scripture, or unquestionable Antiquity. Calvin,
lib. 4. Inst. cap. 6. number. 8. rightly observes, that Peter might have had some
extraordinary privilege in his own person, to which none succeeded after him.

The first two questions, or Bishopric of Peter are disputed in this first
Book, the third question in the following Books.

The Monarchy of Peter, or his universal Bishopric is disputed unto chap. 22.
his particular Bishopric of Rome, from thence to the end. His Monarchy is
disputed three ways. First, from his institution, unto chap. 15. Secondly, from
his prerogatives and carriage, unto chap. 19: Thirdly, by testimonies of
Fathers, from thence to chap. 22.

His institution again is asserted unto chap. 11. and assaulted from thence
unto chap. 15. His institution is asserted by three testimonies of Scripture
and assaulted by as many. The three testimonies by which it is asserted; are
first, Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church.
The second is, Matthew 16. 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind upon Earth shall be bound in
Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose upon Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.
The third passage is, John 21. 15, 16, 17. Feed my Lambs, Feed my Sheep. Those
three testimonies are the main Foundation of the faith of the Roman Church. If
Peter be not ordained Monarch of the Church in those three testimonies, he is
ordained Monarch of the Church no where: and if he be ordained Monarch of the
Church no where, the Bishop of Rome did not succeed to him in the Monarchy of
the Church: and if the Bishop of Rome did not succeed to him in the Monarchy of
the Church, the faith of the Modern Roman Church is a cheat, communion with it
is so far from being necessar unto Salvation, that Salvation cannot consist
with it (we speak not of Gods secret providence) ordinarily. This sort of
reasoning is approved by Bellarmin himself in the preface of his disput de
Pont. Romans where he calls that controversy of the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, a debate de summarei Christianae; that is, whether Christianity can
subsist or not? By Christianity, or Christian Faith, or Christian Religion, no
question he means the doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome: and since in that
expression he grants, that it cannot subsist without the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, he must of necessity grant, that the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome (having no ground in Scripture or Antiquity) the Doctrine of the Modern
Church of Rome is warrantable by neither: which is further confirmed, because
in the same place he affirms, that the Christian Faith without the Supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, Is like a house without a foundation, a body without a
head, Moonshine without the Sun: which is as much to say, as without the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, the doctirne of the Modern Church of Rome, is
nothing at all; since it is notorious that a house without a foundation, a body
without a head, Moonlight without the Sun, are things impossible.

Since it is so then, if the Ancients, Fathers and Councils did not believe
that Peter was ordained Monarch of the Church in those three forementioned
passages of Scripture; questionless they did not believe the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, and if they did not believe the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, it follows of necessity that they did not believe any necessar
communion with the Church of Rome, notwithstanding all the braggings of our
adversaries to the contrair, boasting that the whole current of Antiquity is
for them. Whether their assertion be true or not, will appear by the following
enquiry? viz. What were the opinions of the Ancients concerning those three
passages of Scripture pretended by our adversaries for the institution of
Peter's Monarchy? By which enquiry will appear also by infallible consequence,
what opinion the Ancients had of necessar communion with the Church of Rome? So
it may be affirmed that the examination of those three passages is a
compendious disput of the whole controversies, which we have with the Church of
Rome.

CHAP. II. Tues Petrus, Disputed by Scripture and Reason.
THe first passage then, proving the institution of Peter to be Monarch of the
Church, is from Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church. This is the place in which our Adversaries have most confidence. It may
be safely said, that if Peter be not ordained Monarch of the Church in those
words, he is no where else. If any would yet have a more compendious Disput of
the controversies, it is to be found in this passage alone? For if in the
opinion of Antiquity, Peter was not ordained Monarch of the Church, or promised
to be ordained Monarch of the Church in this passage; questionless, they
neither believed the Supremacy of Peter, nor of the Bishop of Rome, nor
necessar communion with the Church of Rome; since the last two (as we said)
depend upon the first: and therefore we will examine this passage the more
acuratly. First, by Scripture and Reason. Next, (because they brag so much of
Antiquity) by testimonies of Councils and Fathers. In the last place, (because
they brag so much of Unity) by Popes, and Popish Doctors. Of which in Order.

Our Adversaries reason thus.

He who is the Rock upon which the Church is built, is Visible head of the
Church, or Oecumenick Bishop. But Peter is the Rock or Foundation upon which
the Church is built, as appears by the words of our Savior, Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church. Ergo, Peter is Oecumenick Bishop.

But it is answered: First, It is false that the Church is built upon Peter as
a Rock. Secondly, Although our Savior had called Peter the Rock, it does not
follow that he ordained him Oecumenick Bishop, as shall be proved, cap. 6.

That Peter is not the Rock, we will disput: First, By Scripture and Reason.
Secondly, by Councils and Fathers. Thirdly, by Popes and Popish Doctors. And
first by Scripture, 1. Cor. 3. 11. For other Foundation can no man lay, then
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ: by which it appears that Christ is only
the Rock upon which the Church is built, and not deter.

Bellarmin answers, That Christ is only the Primary Foundation, but Peter is
the Secondary Foundation. If this were not the meaning of Paul, he would
contradict himself, Ephesians. 2. 20. And are built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner stone.
Where, says he, ye have that di^^inction of Primary and Secondary Foundations:
Christ is called the Cornerstone, or chief foundations; the Prophets and
Apostles are secondary foundations.

But it is replied: First, That Bellarmin cannot apply his distinction of
secondary foundation to Peter alone by this passage, since the Apostle expressly
affirms, That all the Prophets and Apostles are Bellarmins secondary
foundations; and consequently, they are all Oecumenick Bishops, which Bellarmin
will not easily grant.

Secondly, Bellarmin would have distinguished far better foundations in proper
and improper. Christ is properly the foundation of the Church the Prophets and
Apostles ars improperly, or metonymically foundations; viz. they are called
foundations, because they preach Christ, or by reason of their Doctrine of
Christ, who is the true foundation: So Ambrosius; Primasius, Anselmus,
Lombardus, Cajetanus, Lyranus, and the interlinear gloss upon 1. Cor. 3. 11.
Guillaudus interprets after the same manner, and the great School-man Vasquez,
In secundam secundae, Disput. 210. cap. 7. has these words, Non Apostolos and
Prophetas intelligit, sed fidem illorum ab eis scilicet praedicatam and
annunciatam: that is, He calls not the Prophets and Apostles themselves
foundations, but only the faith which they preach. It is true that Aquinas,
following some of the Fathers, interprets the Apostles themselves to be
foundations; but the meaning is all one, they mean improper foundations: and
Thomas his gloss rejected by Vasquez himself, who comments upon him as we now
said.

Bellarmin objects; Secondly, Apocalypse 21. 14. And the wall of the City had
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.
Where, says he, all the twelve Apostles are called foundations.

But it is answered: First, Although they were, yet it makes not much for
Bellarmins purpose: for if all the twelve Apostles be secondary foundations,
Peter's being secondary foundation does not conclude him to be Oecumenick
Bishop, no more then it does the rest.

Secondly, It is false that the twelve Apostles are called foundations in that
place: John only affirms, that the names of the twelve Apostles were written
upon the foundation of that new Jerusalem.

Thirdly, Although both Haimo and Lyranus interpret the Apostles to be
foundations, yet they give the same gloss which they gave upon 1 Cor. 3. 11.
viz. Because of the Doctrine which they preach: the words of Haimo are, Et in
ipsis fundamentis, hoc est, infide Patriarcharum and Apostolorum nomina
duodecim Apostolorum. The words of Lyranus are, Dicuntur autem nomina
Apostolorum in ipsis fundamentis scripta, quia primo publicarunt fidem Christi
praedicando, and pro ipsa moriendo. The same is the explication of Aretas upon
this place of the Apocalypse, viz. The Apostles are called foundations, because
of their preaching Christ, and dying for him or the faith.

Stapleton answers to that place of 1 Cor. 3. 11. some other wise then
Bellarmin, making a distinction between (...) and (...), aliud and alterum;
which cannot well be expressed in English, except ye express it thus, another
and a different. Paul, says he, affirms that there is not another foundation
but Christ; but he does not affirm that there is not a different foundation
from Christ: Which two he distinguishes, because Peter, says he, is not
another foundation from Christ, differing essentially; but only a different
foundation, that is, differing accidentally: Christ, says he, is the principal
foundation; Peter is the subordinat and ministerial foundation.

But this subtilty of Stapleton is to no purpose: First, because the Greek word
(...) another signify sometime things which differ only accidentally, as Mat.
4. (...), He saw two other Brethren, Mark 3. (...). His hands was made whole as
the other. Therefore its false that (...) signifies a thing different by
nature; but (...), a thing differing accidentally.

Secondly, his distinction is refuted by the very text it self: for after Paul
said, Nemo potest aliud fundamentum ponere, he adds, praeter id quod positum
est, quod est Jesus Christus. By which words he expressly excluds all other
foundations beside Christ, whether they differ in nature, or accidentally.

Thirdly, in what sense can Stapleton affirm, that Christ and Peter are
foundations in the same specifical nature, differing only in accidentals, as
Peter and Paul two individuals? For Christ is properly a foundation upon which
the Edifice of the Church is built: Peter is only a foundation, because he laid
the foundation on Christ. These two foundations have nothing but the name
common, as Taurus the mountain, Taurus the constellation, and Taurus a bull.

Fourthly, Stapleton speaks contradictions, in affirming, that a principal
foundation, and a subordinat foundation have the same specific nature, and
differ only accidentally as two individuals, v. g. Peter and Paul: which is all
one as ye would say, The power of a King, and that of his under-officer were
the same; the same power in nature, differing only accidentally.

Fifthly, Stapleton contradicts himself in another place; for in his
relections, controvers. 3. quest. 1. art. 1. conclus. 3. he expressly affirms
that Peter is Fundamentum prima^ium in suo genere quale Christus est in alio
genere: which is diametrally opposite to what he affirms here. Here he affirms
Peter is a subordinat and Ministerial foundation, there he calls him a
principal foundation: here he affirms the foundation of Christ and Peter to be
of the same nature ejusdem species; there he affirms they are of different
natures, toto genere.

Lastly, this distinction of Stapletons is against all Antiquity, affirming
that the meaning of the Apostle admites of no proper Foundations but Christ
alone. So Hieronymus, Theodor^tos, Chrysostomus, Oecumenius, Lyranus, Solus
Christus, vel fides ipsius, est fundamentum, Christ only, or the faith of
Christ is the foundation.

And thus we have disputed by Scripture, that Christ is the only Rock or
Foundation; and consequently Peter cannot be the Rock on which Christ promises
to build his Church, in those words, Tu es Petrus, etc.

In the next place it is proved by reason, One thing cannot be signified by a
name, and its denominative: Petra, or the Rock, is the name; Petrus, Peter or
stony, is the denominative from that name. Ergo the Rock is not Peter.

Secondly, Petrus is of the masculine gender, and of the second person: Petra,
or the Rock, is of the feminine gender, and third person.

Bellarmin answers, Petra and Petrus are expressed in the Syrian tongue, (in
which our Savior spoke) by the same word Cephas, which removes those
difficulties, since our Savior spoke those words in the Syrian tongue.

It is replied, first, it is false that Cephas, signifying a stone or Petram,
and Cephas signifying stony or Petrum, are the same words in the Syrian tongue,
because Cephas, signifying a stone, is of the feminine gender; as appears by
the Syriack version, 1 Cor. 11. Mat. 22. Mark 16.

Secondly, Matthew the Apostle himself questionless knew the meaning of Christ
in these words, as well as Bellarmin, Baronius, Stapleton or Sanderus: but he
in his Gospel expressly affirms, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram adificabo
Ecclesiam meam. But if Peter had been the Rock, Matthew would have rendered
these words of Christ, Thou art the Rock, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church.

Here is to be observed the impudence, if not blasphemy, of Petrus de Bollo, a
Parisian Divine in his authentic probation of the sacrifice of the Mass,
having these words, Scimus quod interpres Matthaei Syri, Graecus and Latinus,
non fit hoc loco optime de hac nostrae fidei part promeritus. Si enim
dixisset, Et tu es Petra, and super hanc Petramres fuisset multo clarior: cum
Christus, qui Syriace procul dubio loquebatur, dixerit, Tu es Petra, and super
hanc Petram adificabo Ecclesiam meam: We know that the Greek and Latin
Interpreter of Matthew (who wrote in the Syrian tongue) have not deserved much
of our faith; for if he had rendered the words, Thou art the Rock, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church, the thing had been more clear, since assuredly
Christ spoke in the Syrian, Thou art the Rock, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church. Where he expressly affirms, that Matthew the Evangelist (or at least
his Greek Interpreter, since it is thought by some, that the Gospel of Matthew
was written originally in Syriack) translats the word of Christ unfaithfully
thus, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: whereas he
should have translated them, Thou art the Rock, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church. In affirming which, he speaks right-down blasphemy, if Matthew
penned his Gospel in Greek himself: and although that translation were not of
Matthew himself, but of some other nevertheless he condemns the whole primitive
Church, and the ancient Church of Rome among the rest, for approving as
authentic, a false interpretation in so substantial a point. That the Greek
version Matthews Gospel was held authentic by the Primitive Church, shall be
demonstrated, lib. 6.

The third reason why Peter cannot be the Rock, is this, The foundation, or
rock upon which the Church militant and the Church triumphant are built, are
both one: and consequently Peter would be the foundation of the Church
triumphant, if he were the Rock upon which the Church is built. And since the
Bishop of Rome succeeds to Peter, as they all averr, the Bishop of Rome is the
foundation of the Church triumphant: which assertion is so absurd, that no
Christian ears can hear it without detestation.

Finally, if Peter be the Rock upon which the Church is built, it would follow
that Peter was Oecumenick Bishop, when Christ said unto him, Tu es Petrus: The
meaning of Christ, say they, is, Tu es Petrus, or thou art the Rock: and
consequently thou art Oecumenick Bishop presently: since our Savior does not
say unto him, Tu eris Petra, or thou shall be the Rock or Oecumenick Bishop.
But if Peter had been the Rock, or Oecumenick Bishop at that time, the gates of
hell would have prevailed against him; which is expressly against the promise of
Christ, since Peter after that denied Christ thrice. And thus we have disputed,
Tu es Petrus, by reason.

Stapleton endeavors to prove by several reasons, that Peter is the Rock: which
in effect are the same reasons, clothed with diversity of words. The sum of
them is this, It appears, says he, by all the circumstances, that some
singular thing or other was given to Peter in those words; for Peter answered
only, Thou art the Son of the living God. Secondly, Christ pronounced him
blessed. Thirdly, Christ affirmed he had that secret only by revelation from
God. Lastly, Christ pronounced those words to him as a reward, Thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock I will build my Church.

It is answered, It was a sufficient reward for Peter, that he was called
Petrus, from Petra, the Rock, which was Christ. It had been too high a reward
for Peter, to obtain that which was proper to Christ; this is the opinon of all
the Fathers, as Hilarious de Trinitate, Petrus, quia habebat societatem fidei,
cum Domino habuit etiam unitatem nominis Dominici: ut sicut a Christo
Christianus dicitur, ita a Petra Christo, Petrus Apostolus vocaretur. Peter,
because he had society of faith, with the Lord he was called Peter from Petra,
as a Christian is called after Christ. Augustinus, Sermon. 13. De verbis Domini
secundum Matthaeum. Deinde addidit, Et ego dicotibi: tanquam diecret. Quiae tu
mihi dixisti, Tu es Christus Filius Dei vivi, and ego dico tibi, Tu es Petrus;
that is, Thou shall be called Peter, because of thy confessing me to be the Son
of God. Other testimonies might be heaped, but it is to no purpose.

Stapleton insists, that it was not the name only, which Peter got as a reward,
but some thing beside, proper to himself, viz. to be the Rock, upon which the
Church is built: which he proves by the authority of Chrysostom, whose words
are cited by him thus, Quoddam hic esse Filii donum proprium Petro datum, sicut
Patris quoddam donum erat eidem concessum: Pater enim revelavit Petro Christum
esse Filium Dei vivi; Filius tribuit Petro ut sit Ecclesiae Petra, that is,
Some proper gift was given to Peter here by Christ, as the Father had given
unto him such a gift: the Father revealed to Peter that Christ was the Son of
the living God; So the Son gives unto Peter to be the Rock of the Church.

It is answered, Stapleton cites Chrysostom falsely; his words in the Original
are, (...): that is, What is it and I will give it to thee? as the Father gave
unto thee to know me, so I will give unto thee. Neither said he, I will ask of
my Father, although it was a great ostentation of his power, and the greatness
of the gift ineffable: Nevertheless, I will give unto thee. What will thou
give, pray? the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

By which it appears that Stapleton plays the Sophister thrice. First in making
Chrysostom affirm, that some proper or peculiar thing was given to Peter,
whereas Chrysostom mentions no such thing at all. Secondly, he makes Chrysostom
affirm, that the gift given to Peter was to be the Rock upon which the Church
is built; whereas Chrysostom says no such thing, affirming only that the gift
given to Peter was the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: but it shall be proved by
the testimony of Chrysostom himself, chap. 8. That the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven were given to others as well as to Peter. Thirdly, he neglects the
comparison which Chrysostom makes, (leaving out now where he added before) viz.
As the Father gave unto thee to know me, so I give unto thee the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, The reason wherefore he neglects the comparison, is evident,
viz he was conscious, that the knowledge of Christ (the gift of the Father to
Peter) was common to all the Apostles; and therefore he feared the conclusion,
viz. That the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven (the gift given by Christ to Peter)
would be common to all the Apostles also.

And thus much of Stapletons reasons, proving Peter to be the Rock. Bellarmin
reasons thus, The pronoun hanc, this, is referred to the words immediately going
before, Thou art Peter; and therefore our Savior by this Rock means Peter.

But it is answered, There is no necessity of referring the pronoun hanc, or
this, to the words immediately going before, as appears by several places of
Scripture, as Acts 3. 15. And killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised
from the dead, of whom we are witnesses; where those words of whom, are
referred to the Prince of life, and not unto God who is nearest. That the
pronoun hunc or him, or this, is of necessity referred to the words fatrher off
and not to the nearest, appears also by Act. 2. 22. and 23. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.
most clearly v. 8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord
shall consume, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying wonders: observe, whose coming is referred not to the Lord,
which is nearest, but to that wicked one further off. And thus we have disputed
all the reasons of any moment pretended by either party in this question, it
Peter was the Rock?

CHAP. III. Tu es Petrus, Disputed by General Councils.
NOw let us Dispute, Tu es Petrus by antiquity, examining what was the meaning
of the Ancients concerning these words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church. They brag much of antiquity, viz. that the Council of
Chalcedon and all the Fathers interpret the Rock to be Peter.

But it is answered, They resemble Bankrupts, who brag they are richest when
they are poorest. A passage (related by Cicero lib. 2. de oratore) between
Silus and Crassus, may be applied to our adversaries, Fieri potest, ut quod
dixit iratus dixerit. Silus annuit tum Crassus, fieri potest ut quod dixit non
intelligeres: hic quoque Silus fassus est, tum Crassus fieri potest, ut non
omnino audieris quod te audisse dicis: Silus tacuit, omnes riserunt. This
passage is most fitly applied to our adversaries, bragging of the testimonies
of the Ancients, Councils and Fathers; for they bring not one testimony but
either it merits no credit, or else it is wrested and misinterpreted, or else
it is forged, as appears through the whole following Disput. What was the
opinion of the Council of Chalcedon, and the other first six general councils?
We will examine in this chapter: the opinion of the Fathers shall be examined in
the following chapters, unto chap. 10.

From the Council of Chalcedon they object the third action, where Peter is
called, Petra and crepido Ecclesiae, the Rock upon which the Church is built.

But it is answered, first, Those are not the words of the council, but only
the words of Paschasinus, Lucentius, and Bonifacius, Legates to Leo Bishop of
Rome, giving their votes against Dioscorus of Alexandria: what regard should be
had to such testimonies? Aeneas Silvius ( afterward Pope himself, under the
name of Pius second) will inform you, comment 1. On the Council of Basil: His
words are, Nec considerant miseri, quia quae praedicant tant opere verba, aut
ipsorum summorum Pontificum sunt, suas fimbrias extendentium, aut illorum qui
eis adulabantur; Neither do these miserable men consider, that these
testimonies of which they brag so much, are either of Bishops of Rome
themselves, enlarging their own interests, or else of those who are flattering
them.

Secondly, it is very strange impudence to them, to allege the authority of
the Council of Chalcedon, to prove the Supremacy of Peter, or of the Bishop of
Rome, by reason of his succession to Peter, as appears by what follows.

Aetius Legate of the Bishop of Constantinople and the foresaids Paschasinus,
Lucentius, and Bonifacius, Deputies of the Bishop of Rome, pleaded in the
behalf of their Masters the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, for the
primacy: Paschasinus and his fellows pleaded the sixth canon of the Council of
Nice. The words are those, Let the old custom remain in Egypt, Libya,
Pentapolis, viz. that the Bishop of Alexandria has power in those Provinces
(to ordain Bishops) since the Bishops of Rome has the like custom.

Aetius pleaded the same Canon, and likewise the fifth Canon of the said
Council of Nice; by which it was ordained, That when a Bishop was condemned by
a provincial Council, there should be no further appeal, unless to a General
Council: which exception, though not mentioned in the Canon, must of necessity
be understood. The said Aetius likewise pleaded the third Canon of the second
General Council of Constantinople; by which it was provided, That the Bishop of
Rome should have the first place in dignity, because Rome was the old Imperial
City; the Bishop of Constantinople the second place next to him, because
Constantinople was new Rome. The force of this argument consists in two things.
First, that the said second General Council of Constantinople ordained the
Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, and Constantinople to be equal, although
they gave the Bishop of Rome the first place in dignity. The second thing is,
That the Bishop of Rome had the first place in dignity, not by reason of his
succession to Peter, but for a civil respect; viz. because Rome was the old
Imperial City.

Paschasinus and his fellows replied, (or at least Bellarmin, and Baronius
would have so replied, if they had been pleaders before the Council) That the
third Canon of the Council of Constantinople was not to be regarded; because
the Bishop of Rome had never approved it; and therefore they urged the sixth
Canon of the Council of Nice, by which (say they) the Bishop of Alexandria had
authority confirmed to him in Egypt, because the Bishop of Rome had the like
custom. From which they argued thus, That the authority of the Bishop of Rome
was the cause of the authority of the Bishop of Alexandria; or, the authority
of the Bishop of Alexandria flowed from the authority of the Bishop of Rome:
And since the Bishop of Alexandria was before him of Constantinople, of old,
the said second General Council of Constantinople wronged the Bishop of
Alexandria, in preferring the Bishop of Constantinople to him. In a word, the
sum of their pleading was this, That, by the sixth Canon of the Council of
Nice, the Bishop of Rome had authority over him of Alexandria, And since the
Bishop of Alexandria was before the Bishop of Constantinople in former times,
that third Act of the second General Council of Constantinople ought to be
cassed, and antiquitated* because it contradicted the sixth Canon of the
Council of Nice, in preferring the Bishop of Constantinople to him of
Alexandria, and equalizing him to the Bishop of Rome.

Aetius, and the Deputies of the Bishop of Constantinople duplyed; First, That
the said Canon of the second General Council of Constantinople ought not to be
recalled (or at least Protestants would have so duplyed, if they had been in
their place;) First, Because it was a lawful General Council; And although the
Bishop of Rome had not confirmed it, because he had no authority above a
General Council; It was very unreasonable that any particular Bishop should cut
and carve for his own advantage, against the decree of the whole Church.

Secondly, The said General Council of Constantinople was received and
confirmed by a Synod at Rome two years after, the Bishop of Rome Dammasus
presiding in the said Council. And therefore it was false that the Bishop of
Rome never confirmed the said Council of Constantinople.

Thirdly, the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice gave no authority to the
Bishop of Rome over the Bishop of Alexandria; the meaning of the Canon being
only this, viz. The occasion of the Canon was one Miletius troubled all Egypt
by ordaining Bishops at his own hand. Alexander Bishop of Alexandria complains
to the Council of Nice, which upon his complaint, made the foresaid sixth
Canon. The true Gloss of which being, that the Bishop of Alexandria, should
have the power of ordaining Bishops in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, as he was
wont; Since the Bishop of Rome had the like power by custom, in the places
adjacent to Rome; or, (as Ruffinus a writer, who lived near these times,
interprets) in Ecclesijs Suburbicarijs, that is, in Churches within a hundred
miles to the walls of Rome. So then, the authority of the Bishop of Rome was
not the cause of the authority of the Bishop of Alexandria, or the Original
from whence it flowed; but only a pattern, according to which it was framed: as
one commonwealth may be framed in government according to the pattern of
another commonwealth, without any subordination in authority.

They duplyed fourthly, That the said General Council of Constantinople did no
wrong to the Bishop of Alexandria, in giving to the Bishop of Constantinople
the second place in dignity: which before that time, belonged to the Bishop of
Alexandria, since the cause ceasing, the effect also ceased. The cause why the
Bishop of Alexandria was second to the Bishop of Rome, was this, viz. The
government of Egypt was the second government in dignity, to the government of
the City of Rome: It was so ordained by Augustus, and therefore, was called
Praefectura Augustalis. Since it was not so now, because the government of
those Provinces depending on the City of Constantinople, was made the second
Government and preferred to that of Alexandria, and made equal to the
Government of those places, depending upon the city of Rome; therefore the said
council of Constantinople did no wrong in equalizing the Bishop of
Constantinople to the Bishop Rome: since the civil Government was a Type of the
Ecclesiastic, as is confessed by Baronius himself, ad Annum 39. Number. 10. That
the Government, and Privileges of the City of Constantinople, being made equal
to those of Rome, was the cause why the council of Constantinople made the
Bishop of Constantinople equal in Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction to the Bishop of
Rome: is reported both by Socrates, hist. lib. 5. chap. 8. and Sozomenus lib.
7. chap. 9. Who both give the reason of the said third Canon (in the Greek
Edition, but 5. or 7. in the Latin) to be, Because that Constantinople, had
not only the name of Rome, with like Senate and other Magistrates, but bare also
the same Arms and other rights, and honors which belonged to old Rome.

The Council of Chalcedon having considered the reasons of both parties,
allowed the interpretation put upon the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, by
the Orators of the Bishop of Constantinople; rejected that Gloss of those of
the Bishop of Rome; confirmed the third Canon of the second General Council of
Constantinople, with some advantage, and addition, as by the 28 Canon, whose
words are these; Definimus and communi calculo sancimus, quod attinct ad
praerogativas honoris sanctissimae Ecclesiae hujus Constantinopoleos novae
Romae, Etenim Patres, Sedi Antiquioris is Romae, ob eam caussam quia Imperium
obtineret Urbs illa, merito Primatum honoris detulere, Sed and eadem ratione
moti, centum quinquaginia religiosissimi Episcopi aequalem primatum honoris
assignarunt sanctissimae sedi novae Romae, Recte judicantes, eam Urbem quae
imperio and Senatu honestatur: and i^sdem privilegis fruentem cum antiqua Roma
and Regia; etiam in Ecclesiasticis negotijs aequa cu^ illa extollendam, Sic
tamen ut post eam secundum locum obtineat. By which Canon two things appears,
First, that the Bishop of Constantinople is expressly made equal in
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, with the Bishop of Rome. Secondly, that the Bishop
of Rome has the first place in dignity, not by reason of succession to Peter;
but only for civil respects; viz. because Rome was the old imperial City. It
appears also by the said Canon, that the former General Councils of Nice and
Constantinople, gave the primacy to the Bishop of Rome, for the same reason
only; viz. because it was the old imperial City. And therefore it is
intolerable impudence in our adversaries to object the authority of the
Council of Chalcedo^; to prove the Supremacy of Peter.

By which it appears the impudence of Bellarmin, and Baronius, who abuse their
Reader with strange Sophistry, and most shameless. The Council of Chalcedon,
say they, interpreted the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, to the advantage
of the Bishop of Rome: For immediately after the reading of the said Canon, the
beginning of which was, Ecclesia Romana semper habuit primatum, the Church of
Rome evermore had the primacy, The Canon being thus read, all the Council cried
out, Perpendimus omnem primatum and honorem praecipuum secundum Canones,
antiquae Romae Deo amantissimo Archiepiscopo conservari.

But it is answered; first, Those words of the Canon, viz. the Church of Rome
ever had the primacy; are forged, being found in no other copy, but in that of
Dionysius Exiguus: but his authority is not sufficient to out balance all other
copies of the Canons of the Council, both Greek and Latin; yea, that copy
corrected by Gregory 13 himself, which wants those first words pretended by
Bellarmin and Baronius: in which copy and all other copies, the first words of
the said Canon are, Antiquus mos perduret, etc. Let the old custom remain in
Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, etc.

Secondly, although the Canon had begun so, it makes not much to the purpose;
since it appears by the decree of the Council, that the Primacy of the Church
of Rome, was only a Primacy of dignity; for civil respects, and not a Primacy
of Jurisdiction, by reason of the Bishop of Romes succession to Peter: as
appears expressly by the words of the Canon: And also that the Bishop of
Constantinople was ordained by the said Council, equal in Jurisdiction to the
Bishop of Rome. If Bellarmin and Baronius affirm, that the words of the
twenty-eight Canon are mis-interpreted, their mouths are stopped, not only by
the carriage of Lucentius, and other two Legates of the Bishop of Rome, but also
by the carriage of Leo Bishop of Rome himself.

The carriage of Lucentius was this, When the Fathers of the Council had
subscribed the said twenty eight Canon, Lucentius stood up, crying, foul play:
Some of those subscribers were compelled so to do, by one indirect way or
other: The whole Fathers of the Council answered, they had deliberatly, and
voluntarily subscribed. Whereupon Lucentius protested against the Council, as
having preferred the judgment of a hundred and fifty Fathers of the Council of
Constantinople, before the judgment of three hundred and eighteen Fathers, in
the first general Council of Nice; which was as much to say, as he understood
the meaning of the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, better then those six
hundred and thirty Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, representing the whole
Church, This carraige of Lucentius is recorded in the Council of Chalcedon,
Act. 16. page 936. 937. 938.

Next, that the said Council decerned against the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, appears by four Epistles of Leo Bishop of Rome himself; in which he
thunders against the Council of Chalcedon for making the foresaid 28. Canon;
still ingeminating, Tu es Petrus, or that they had wronged the supremacy of
Peter; by which complaints of his it is most evident, that those 630. Fathers,
representing the whole Church in a general Council, meant nothing less then
the supremacy of Peter, in these words, Tu es Petrus. These four Epistles of
Leo are his 52. Epistle to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople; His 54. to
Martianus the Emperor, his 55. to Pulcheria the Empress; his 62. to Maximus
Bishop of Antioch; in which Epistles he complains heavily, that the Bishop of
Constantinople was preferred to him of Alexandria. Because Constantinople was
the seat of the Emperor, he foresaw (being a man of great Spirit and
foresight) that in the end, for the same reason, the Bishop of Constantinople
would be preferred to the Bishop of Rome; which accordingly fell out, as shall
be proved, lib 4. And thus it appears* with how little integrity our
adversaries object the Council of Chalcedon, to prove that Peter was the Rock,
meaned by our Savior in these words, Tu es Petrus, etc. By which proceedings of
the Council of Chalcedon, appears also, what was the opinion of the general
councils of Nice and Constantinople.

As for the sixth general Council, commonly called Trullanum, celebrated under
Pogonatus the Emperor; Anno 680. in its 36. Canon, it confirms the 28. Canon of
the Council of Chalcedon totidem verbis; By which it appears what was the
opinion of the Church concerning Tu es Petrus, in the end of the 7. age. And so
we have the opinion of the first, second, fourth, and sixth general Councils,
that Peter is not the Rock upon which the Church is built.

As for the third general council of Ephesus, and the fifth of Constantinople,
although in express words, they make not all the Patriarchs of alike
Jurisdiction; Yet they made Canons expressly contradicting the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome; and consequently, contradicting also Peter to be the Rock upon
which the Church is built. The council of Ephesus calls Celestine Bishop Rome
Fellow-Minister. It were a bold thing now in any Bishop to salute the Pope so.
Secondly, they deposed John Patriarch of Antioch, before ever they acquainted
Celestine Bishop of Rome, as appears by the Synodical Epistle, Binius Tom. 1.
page 806. Thirdly, they ordained that neither the Patriarch of Antioch, nor any
other Bishop ( ergo not the Bishop of Rome) should take upon him to ordain
Bishops in the Isle of Cyprus, Binius Tom. 26. page 768.

As for the fifth general council of Constantinople, it rejudged the cause of
Anthimius, after he had first been judged by Aggapetus Bishop of Rome; Binius
in his notes upon that council, Tom 2. page 416. Secondly, it condemned Vigilius
Bishop of Rome, and yet in the end the said Vigilius approved the said council:
Baronius, Anno 553. Binius in the place forementioned. And thus ye have the
opinion of the six first general councils, concerning the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, by reason of his succession to Peter, in the Monarchy of the
Church: By which passages it appears that the sixth first general councils
meaned nothing less, then that Peter was the Rock, upon which the Church was
built; or that Peter was ordained Monarch of the Church, in those words, Tu es
Petrus. It shall likewise be proved, lib. 5. That the seventh general council,
Anno 790. and the 8. Anno 870. had as little regard to the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome. The first of which condemned Pope Honorius as an Heretic and
the last approved of it.

And thus we have the opinion of the whole Church, concerning Tu en Petrus, the
first 900. year after Christ: all which time, it was no article of Faith, (as
appears by those eight general Councils) that Peter was ordained Monarch of the
Church, in those words, Tu es Petrus. The truth is, it was invented, First, by
Leo after the Council of Chalcedon, when the contention arose between the
Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, for the Primacy: it was still made use of
by the Bishops of Rome, after that, pleading for the Primacy; but it appears by
the 3^. Epistle of Gregory, that he made use of it, only for cu^a universalis
Ecclesiae, and not for Jurisdiction: for he expressly thunders against one
visible head of of the Church: amongst other reasons, he has this for one,
Although Peter had the care of the whole Church, committed into him yet was he
not universal Apostle. And thus we have reasoned, Tu es Petrus, from Scripture,
Reason, and General Councils. Now let us hear the opinion of the Fathers.

CHAP. IV. Of the Fath^rs interpreting the Rock to be CHRIST.
THeir impudence in objecting the Fathers, is yet greater: All the Fathers say
they, interpret the Rock to be Peter, Augustinus only excepted, deceived by his
ignorance, in the Syriack tongue. So objects ^ansenius, Gregorious de Valentia,
Agricola, Stapleton; but most of all Bozius, de signis lib. 18. cap. 1.

But it is answered, It is notoriously false, that all the Fathers call Peter
the Rock upon which the Church is built: because many of the Fathers call
Christ the Rock, as shall be proved in this 4. chapter. Others of them
interpret, the Rock to be the confession of Peter, thou art the Son of the
living God; as shall be proved, chap. 5. Others of them again, who interpret the
Rock to be Peter means nothing less, then that Peter was was ordained
Oecumenick Bishop by Christ, in those words, Tu es Petrus, as shall be proved
chap. 6. And first of those Fathers interpreting the Rock to be Christ.

Tertullianus against Martian. lib. 4. cap. 13. Where, telling a reason
wherefore the name of Peter was changed from Simon to Peter, gives this reason,
Quia Petra and lapis erat Christus, because the Rock was Christ.

Hilarious de Trinitate, lib. 2. Unum igitur, hoc est immobile fundamentum, una
haec est felix fidei Petra, Petri ore confessa, Filius Dei vivi: The sum is:
Christ confessed by the mouth of Peter is the only Rock.

Ambrosius, Sermon 84. Discoursing of the change of Peter's name, Recte igitur,
qui a Petra Christo Simon nuncupatus est Petrus, ut, qui cum Domino fidei
soeietatem habebat, cum Domino haberet and nominis Dominici unitatem: ut sicut
a Christo Christianus dicitur. Ita a Petra Christo, Petrus Apostolus vocaretur.
This testimony is very evident, and jumps in every thing with the exposition of
Protestants; showing that Peter is not the Rock, but only Christ: and Peter is
called Petrus, Rocky, from Christ, Petra, or the Rock.

Gregorius Nyssenus in the last chapter of his testimonies against the Jews,
Dominus est Petra fidei: tanquam fundamentum, ut ipse Dominus ait ad Principem
Apostolorum. Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam In
which words, Christ is expressly called the Rock, upon which the Church is built.

Theodoretus upon Psalm 47. Petra angularis est Christus, and ipse Dominus
beato Petro, inquit, Et super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam* and portae
inferi non prevalebunt adversus eam. The Rock is Christ upon which the Church
is built, etc. And the same Author, on 1. Cor. cap. 3. Christus est
fundamentum, Christ is the Rock.

Gregory Bishop of Rome himself, in Job, lib. 13. cap. 19. in Sacro eloquio,
Cum singulard numero Petra nominatur, quis alius quam Christus accipitur? Paulo
attestante, qui ait, Petra erat Christ^s. This testimony is evident, of a
Bishop of Rome himself, cannonized as a Saint in the Roman Church; giving a
general rule of interpreting the word Rock; viz. When Petra, or Rock or
foundation, is mentioned in Scripture, in the singular number, none but Christ
is understood.

Hieronymus on Matthew 7. Super hanc Petram Dominus fundavit Ecclesiam: ab hac
Petra Apostolus Petrus sortitus est nomen. By which words it appears, that
Christ is the Rock, from whom Peter had his name; and not Peter himself, which
will be further cleared by the next testimony.

Augustinus, Sermo. 13. de verbis Domini secundum Mattheum. Simon quippe ante
vocabatur, hoc autem nomen ei, ut Petrus vocetur a Domino, impositum est and
hoc, ut ea figura significare^ Ecclesiam: quia enim Christus Petra, Petrus
populus Christianus. Petra enim principale nomen est: ideo Petrus a Petra, non
Petra a Petro; quomodo non a Christiano Christus, sed a Christo Christianus
vocatur. Who before was called Simon, was after called Peter: Our Savior calls
him so, to signify the Church by that figure: Because Christ is the Rock,
Peter is the Christian People, etc. Other testimonies might be alleged out of
Augustinus, but it is needless to mention them, since it is confessed by our
adversaries, that Augustinus interprets the Rock to be Christ because he was
ignorant of the Syriack tongue; As if those other Fathers, especially
Hieronymus, most skilful of the Oriental Languages, were ignorant also of the
Syriack tongue. And thus much of those Fathers interpreting the Rock to be
Christ, by which it appears, how impudent an assertion it was of Bozius,
Ianseuius, De Valentie, Agricola, Stapleton, and others, affirming all the
Fathers (Augustinus only excepted) unanimously interprets the Rock to be Peter.

The falsehood of their assertion being discovered, they fall next to Sophistry
to defend their lying: And first, they fall upon Augustinus, taxing him of
ignorance of the Syriack tongue, for interpreting the Rock to be Christ, But it
is answered, First, the testimonies of those other Fathers denying Peter to be
the Rock, especially of Hieronymus, are no less evident, then the testimonies
of Augustinus,: But it were impudence in them, to object ignorance of the
Syriack tongue to Hieronymus, who was known to be most skilful in it. Secondly,
their Sophistry is very great, they object ignorance to Augustinus, of the
Syrian tongue, for denying the Rock to be Peter, following the penner of
Matthew in Greek; whose version was followed by the whole Church as authentic:
and defends the ignorance of supposititious Authors, such as Anacletus,
Optatus, Melevitanus, Isidorus and such like, who interpret Cephas (which
signifies a great stone in the Syrian tongue (a head to prove the supremacy of
Peter because of the affinity it has in its initial Letters, with the Greek
word (...), Cephale or head. So Turrianus and Baronius, Anno 31. defends those
ignorants, viz. Because it makes for the Popes supremacy, and blames
Augustinus, as ignorant, for no other reason, then because his interpretation
crosses it.

As for those other Fathers beside Augustinus, some of them taxes them also of
ignorance so Stapleton, Salmero, Cumerus, Maldonatus; Let us hear their reasons.

Their first is, These words, super hanc Petram, answers to the former words,
Tu es Petrus: But it is answered those words, Super hanc Petram, answer also to
those words, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: For there is no
necessity of referring the pronoun hanc, to the words immediately going before
which is proved by other passages of scripture; as Asts 2. 23 where the proun
hunc is referred not to God which is nearest, but to Jesus of Nazareth farther
off. And also in this Chapter, by testimonies of Fathers of more authority, and
less suspect in this particular, then Stapleton and Maldonat: and it shall be
proved further in the following chapters not only by testimonies of most
eminent Fathers, and Popish Doctors, but also by the testimonies of five Popes
themselves.

Their second reason is, Christ in these words, gives some reward or other to
Peter for his confession: but it is answered, Peter is rewarded, when he is
called Petrus from Petra, or Christ the Rock. Secondly, when he gets the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, whence Chrysostom, As the Father gave unto thee to
know me, so I give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.

The third reason is, That Christ in these words, super hanc-Petram, means not
the principal Rock, or proper, viz. himself; but only a Metaphorick, or
Ministerial Rock, and consequently the Rock must be Peter.

But it is answered the estate of the question is, whether Christ, that is the
principal Rock, be understood by super hanc Petrum? Stapleton proves not,
because, says he, Christ is not meaned which he proves by his own naked
assertion, without any other reason: which is a childish petitio principij.
However we will add a reason that his assertion is false; for if a Ministerial
Rock be understood, in these words, super hanc Petrum; Stapleton is hard put to
it, to prove out of these words, the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, which is
his main intention: Since it shall appear, cap 6. that all the Apostles are
Ministerial Rocks; and that by the testimonies of the Fathers, interpreting the
Rock to be Peter.

Their fourth reason is, The words of our Savior are, aedificabo Eccl^siam meam
super hanc Petram, Which imports as much, as the Church was not already built
upon that Rock; but only to be built upon it afterward: and therefore our
Savior by Hanc Petram, cannot mean himself upon whom the Church was already
built. But it is answered, This is nothing but sophistry, because already the
Church was only built upon Christ in Jude^; But our Savior is prophesying
here, that the Gopel shall be propagated throughout the whole world, and the
Church built upon himself. It is childish reasoning to argue the Church is
built upon Christ already, Ergo it cannot be said, it shall be built upon him
in time to come; it is all one as one would reason thus, Matthew 1. it is
affirmed, He shall save his people. Ergo he has not saved them; and
consequently, it is no less foolish to affirm the Church is already built upon
Christ, because he promises to build it upon himself in time to come.

Their fifth reason is, Christ promises to build the Churh upon one or other
besides himself; since he cannot be said to build the Church upon himself: for
it is the Father qui dedit ipsum caput super omnem Ecclesiam, as the Apostle
affirms, But it is answered, That assertion of Stapletons contradicts
Augustinus, affirming, super me ipsum filium Dei vivi aedificabo Ecclesiam.
Which is his gloss upon these words, super hanc Petram. Secondly, It
contradicts Bellarmin, affirming, in se jam aedificaverat Apostolos, and
Discipulos multos, He had already built upon himself many Apostles and
Disciples. Thirdly, It contradicts Scripture, Ephesians 4. 16. By whom all the
body being coupled and knit together, etc. receives increase of the body, unto
the edifying of it self in love. By which words compared with verse 15. follows
that the Church is built upon Christ by himself.

Their sixth reason is, If by hanc Petram be meant Christ, we cannot know which
is the true Church, and which is the false? and therefore of necessity by hanc
Petram, Peter must be meaned.

But it is answered, The Fathers we now mentioned, and shall mention in the
following chapter, knew very well how to discern the true Church by the false;
and yet none of them do ^nterpret Peter to be the Rock, upon which the Church
is built, especially, Augustinus, who disputing against the Donatists, cites
many passages of Scripture, by which we are instructed, to discern the true
Church by the false, and yet he never makes use of this place, Tu es Petrus.
Which he would not have omitted, if the mentioning of it had been so necessar,
to discern the true Church from the false: or if the true Church could not be
discerned from the false without it. Secondly, This reason is a childish, if
not blasphemous, petitio principij: As if none could show the true Church by
the false, except the successor of Peter, upon whom in their opinion the Church
is built: and so that is only the true Church, which acknowledges the Bishop
of Rome, to be head of the Church; as successor to Peter in the Monarchy of the
Church. And thus much of those Fathers interpreting the Rock to be Christ.

CHAP. V. Of the Fathers expounding the Rock, to be the Confession of Peter.
NOw follows those Fathers expounding the Rock to be the Faith, or confession
of Peter; which opinion though it seems to differ in words from the former, yet
in effect it is all one in substance with it. And therefore some of those
Fathers, who called the Rock Christ, they call also the Rock the confession of
Peter: So Nyssenus, etc. the Fathers interpreting the Rock to be the confession
of Peter, are these following.

The Liturgy commonly called that of S. James, ad confirmationem sanctae tuae
Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, quam fundasti super Petra fidei, ut
Portae inferni non prevaleant ei. The sum of which words is, that the Church is
founded upon the Rock of Faith.

Entychianus Bishop of Rome, Epist. 1. Unum hot and immobile fundamentum, una
haec felix fidei Petra Petri ore confessu, Tu es, inquit Christus filius Dei
vivi, that is, This is the only happy Rock of Faith, confessed by Peter
Hilarious in his Books of the Trinity, in many places affirms that the Church is
built upon the Rock of confession; or that the Rock is the confession of Peter.
It is needless to mention all his testimonies, this one will suffice, Super
hanc igitur confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est, The Church is built
upon this Rock of confession.

Nyssenus in the last chapter of his testimonies against the Jews, after he had
first called the Rock Christ, as we said before, in the following words he
adds, Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, hoc est,
super confessionem Christi: where he interprets the Rock to be also the
confession of Peter, by which it appears, that the sense is all one, whether
the Rock be called Christ or the confession of Peter?

Innumerable others interpret the Rock to be the Confession of Peter, whose
testimonies are needless to be mentioned, since none can deny them: As
Chrysostom, homil. 55. upon Matthew, and in other places. Basililus
Seleuciensis on Matthew 16. Theophalactus on the same place. Epiphanius Contra
Catharos, Is^dorus, Pelusiota, lib. 1. Epist. 235. Cyrillus, lib. 4. of his
Dialogues, with Hermias Theodoretus, lib. 2. npon the Canticles. Augustinus,
tract. 10. upon the first Epistle of John. Whereby again it appears that the
meaning of those Fathers, interpreting the Rock, to be Christ, and the
confession of Peter, mean the same thing: Since Augustinus most frequently
interprets the Rock to be Christ. It is needless to mention other Fathers,
calling the confession of Peter the Rock, as Felix third Bishop of Rome, in his
Epistle to Zeno the Emperor concerning the deposition of Peter Bishop of
Antioch; of the sixth General Council of Constantinople, called Trullanum: of
Damascenus in his Sermon upon the transfiguration of Christ; of Victor
Antiochenus, upon Mark third, and diverse others: which testimonies are
acknowledged by our adversaries to which they vary in their answers.

Pighius Hierarchiae, lib. 3. cap. 5. calls those Fathers ignorants; who
interpret the Rock to be the confession of Peter, and that they are not worthy
to be answered: Baronius is also totus in fermento, and calls them mad men,
Anno 31. chap. 7.

Bellarmin and Stapleton answers more modestly, to the testimony of those
Fathers, distinguishing the Faith or Confession of Peter; which they say may be
considered two ways. First, Absolutely, and in abstracto, that is, not
considered as in any subject. Secondly, as it is in the person of Peter, or, in
concreto. In the first acception; they deny that those Fathers call the Faith
or Confession of Peter to be the Rock: in the second they affirm they do, and
that their meaning is no other then that Petrus cre^ens, or Peter believing, is
the Rock. Which opinion they affirm to be all one with their own, viz. that
Peter is the Rock.

But it is replied, This gloss or distinction is far beside the meaning of
those Fathers, who interpret the Faith or Confession of Peter to be the Rock,
as thing differing from Peter himself. So Chrysostom in his Homile on Matthew
55. 5. Super hanc Petram dixit, and non super hunc Petrum. Non enim super
hominem, sed super fidem, aedificabit Ecclesiam. Which words he has also in
his Sermon upon Penticost, in which he quite overthrows the distinction of
Stapleton and Bellarmin, averring only the confession of Peter, and not at all
Peter himself to be the Rock.

Augustine in his 13. Sermon, de verb. Dom secundum Mac. has these words, I
will not build my Church upon thee, but thee npon me: whereby he expressly denis
Peter to be the Rock at all; likewise Cyrillus de Trinitate lib. 4. Gregory,
Nyssen, in his testimonies against the Jews, Hilarious lib. 2. of the Trinity,
expressly distinguish the Rock from Peter, and therefore they cannot mean that
Peter is the Rock.

It may be also proved by reason, that in the opinion of those Fathers, Peter
cannot be the Rock at all: that is, Petrus credens, or Peter believing. We will
only mention three reasons; First, The Rock upon which the Church is built is
perpetual, because a perpetual building requires a perpetual foundation; but
Peter is no perpetual foundation, since he dyed, and was removed a little after
that promise.

Secondly, The thing which Peter confessed, whether it be taken formally for
the Act of Confession, or objectively, for the thing confessed; cannot be Peter
himself, since both those propositions are false. The Confession of Peter, is
Peter; and the thing confessed by Peter, is Peter: but those Fathers in the
former chapter affirm, that the Rock was the thing confessed by Peter and the
Fathers of this chapter: that it was the confession of Peter: (the meaning of
both Fathers is the same, as we proved in Nyssenus, and Augustinus) Ergo
neither of those Fathers, whether they interpret the Rock to be the thing
confessed by Peter, or the confession of Beter, can mean that Peter is the Rock
himself.

Thirdly, Suppose that some believed in Christ, in the days of our Savior, who
never heard so much as the name of S. Peter. It cannot be denied but those
persons were built upon the Rock: But it cannot be affirmed that they were
built upon Peter, since they never so much as heard of his name.

Bellarmin, Polus, and Sanderus; endeavo^ to prove by several Sophistries, that
the Faith, or Confession of Peter cannot be the Rock upon which the Church is
built; because (say they) the house and the Foundation most be Homogeneous: the
Church is composed of Men, but the Confession, and Faith of Peter is a quality;
but a quality cannot be the foundation of a house consisting of Men: or
substances.

But it is answered, First, The Faith and confession of Peter may be considered
two ways. First, Formally for the quality of Faith, or act of Confession.
Secondly, Objectively, for the thing confessed, viz. Christ, when those Fathers
call the Faith, or Confession of Peter the Rock, they take it Objectively for
the thing confessed, or believed; for, as we said before, those Fathers who
call Christ the Rock, and those who call the confession of Peter the Rock, mean
all one thing; Since those who in one place call Christ the Rock, in another
call the confession of Peter the Rock: So Nyssenus and Augustinus, as we showed
before.

Secondly, We retort the Argument, reasoning ex concessis. First, they confess
that the Foundation of the Church, must be Homogeneous to the Church it self.
So Pighius and Bellarmin. Secondly, they grant that no Faith is Homogeneous to
the Church* So Pighius expressly affirms that Faith and the Church, differunt
toto genere: from those premises, no Logician will deny this conclusion to
follow in Camestres: Ergo, no Faith can be the foundation of the Church. Which
conclusion expressly contradicts the third Session of the Council of Trent,
asserting the Symbol of Faith to be the only and sure foundation, upon which
the Church is built, and against which the gates of hell shall not prevail: And
this is all of any moment what they object against those Fathers, affirming the
Rock to he the confession of Peter.

CHAP. VI. Of Fathers interpreting Peter to be the Rock.
When Bozius, and others of the Doctors of the Church of Rome, objected that
all the Fathers, Greek and Latin, interpreted the Rock to be Peter, Augustinus
only excepted; It was answered, First, That it was notoriously false, that all
the Fathers interpreted the Rock to be Peter: the truth of which answer we have
sufficiently proved in the former chapters, viz. many of the Fathers
interpreted the Rock to be Christ, chap. 4. Others of them interpreted the Rock
to be the Faith and Confession of Peter, chap. 5. Neither did those Fathers,
chap. 4. and chap. 5. contradict one another, we showed before that their
meaning was one; who called the Rock Christ, and the Rock, the confession of
Peter.

It was answered, Secondly, That the meaning of those Fathers, calling the Rock
Peter, was nothing less, then that Peter in those words of Christ, thou art
Peter and upon this Rock I will build my Church, was by our Savior ordained
Oecumenick Bishop: It is needless to set down all the testimonies of those
Fathers mentioned by Bellarmin; since we grant that they call the Rock Peter.
So Clemens, Tertullianus, Cyprianus, Athanasius, Origines, Hilarious, Ambrosius,
Hieronymus, Nazianzenus, Chrysostomus, Psellus, Augustinus, Maximus
Tautinensus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Leo Magnus, Prosper, Andreas Cretensis,
Gregorius Magnus, Theophylactus. Whose testimonies you may find in Bellarmin,
who objects them; we will only demonstrat in this following chapter, that those
Testimonies are of no moment, neither is it their meaning or scope to prove
that Peter was ordained O ecumenick Bishop; although they expressly affirm that
Peter is the Rock, upon which Christ built his Church. It is a notable and
subtle Disput, and of great importance, since upon it depends what opinion
Antiquity had of the supremacy of Peter, and consequently of the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, and necessar communion with the Church of Rome* The
reasons, wherefore those Fathers (although they call the Rock Peter) do not
affirm he was ordained Oecumenick Bishop, are those following. The first is,

Those Fathers could have no other opinion of the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, or of Peter, then that of the whole Church: But the whole Church in their
times was against the supremacy of Peter, or the Bishop of Rome; For it shall
be proved lib. 3. that the first; second, and third General Councils were
against the supremacy of both: and likewise the fourth and fifth General
Councils, lib. fourth and the sixth, seventh, and eight General Councils lib.
5. which was hinted at above, chap. 3.

Secondly, Many of Bellarmins testimonies are forged, as shall be proved, lib.
2. and 3. As the Epistle of Clement to James, of Athanasius to Felix Bishop of
Rome, as is acknowledged by Baronius, anno 357. paragraph 66. and Biniu^ upon
that Epistle tom. 1. part. 1. Council, of Augustinus in his Sermons upon the
Saints, of which we need no other proof of Forgery, then that our adversaries
themselves tax Augustinu^ of ignorance of the Syriack tongue, for interpreting
the Rock to be Christ: unanimously confessing he denies the Rock to be Peter.
It is needless to set down the reasons by which learned Men, both Protestants
and Papists prove those Sermons de sanctis attributed to Augustinus to be
supposititious.

Thirdly, Many of those Fathers who interpret the Rock to be Peter, interpret
it also to be Christ, or the Confession of Peter, as Tertullianus, Hilarious,
Ambrosius, Hieronymus, Chrysos^omus, Origines, Augustinus. Neither do they
contradict themselves, their meaning is all one, and it shall be immediately
showed nothing less then the Supremacy of Peter.

Fourthly, The reasons wherefore those Fathers interpret the Rock to be Peter,
infer no ways that he was Oecumenick Bishop; but on the contrair, demonstrat
that he was not Oecumenick Bishop: Since in their opinion others may be called
Rocks, as well as Peter, viz. Nazianzeus in his Oration, for moderation
affirms, Petrus Petra vocatur, quia Ecclesiae fundamenta suae fidei credita
habet. That is, Peter was called the Rock, because he had the foundations of
the Church concredited to his Faith, Ambrosius; Sermon 47. Because he laid
first the foundations of Faith amongst the nations, therefore Peter was called
the Rock. Theophylactus affirms, he was called the Rock, because of his Faith
and Confession that Christ was the Son of God. Epiphanius, Because he founded
the Faith of our Lord, upon which the Church is built, he was made a solid Rock
unto us. Haeres in Catharis. Theophanes Ceraneus, As he is cited by Salmero,
tom. 4. part. 3. tract. 2. affirms, That Peter was called the Rock, because of
his Confession: by which it appears that the reasons, wherefore Peter was
called the Rock, are two: First, because he founded Churches. Secondly, because
he confessed Christ: Neither of which infer an Oecumenick Bishop: since no
Sophister never so impudent can deny, that others as well as Peter, founded
Churches and confessed Christ: neither is it of any moment what they object,
that Peter was the first that founded the Church and confessed Christ: as
Theophylactus seems to import; since it shall be proved afterward, that the
Apostles before this confession of Peter, confessed Christ to be Son of God,
Matthew 14. and John 6. or the great Prophet; see also Luke 1. 42. and 43. and
2. 30. 31. 32. Secondly, Albeit Peter had first confessed Christ, and by that
confession first founded the Church; it argues no supremacy in Peter, or
Jurisdiction over the Church, no more then it follows that Aristotle has
Jurisdiction over Logicians, because he taught Logic first.

Fifthly, and mainly, because those Fathers who interpret Peter to be the Rock,
call others beside Peter in the same sense, Rocks; whence it is evinced
unanswerably, they intend nothing less then the supremacy of Peter; by that
gloss. It were tedious to go through them all, we will only instance some
testimonies of those Fathers, of whom our adversaries do most brag, by which
will appear the meaning of the rest. The first is of Origines, trastat. 1. upon
Matthew, Quod si super unum illum Petrum tantum existimas aedificari totam
Ecclesiam, quid dicturus de Joanne filio tonitrui, and Apostolorum unoquoque?
quin aliqui number audebimus dicere, quod adversus Petrum unum non praevaliturae
sint portae inferorum, adversus autem caeteros Apostolos, ac praefectos
praevaliturae sint? ac non potius in omnibus and singulis eorum de quibus
dictum est, fit illud quod dictum est, and portae inferorum uon praevalebunt
adversus eam; item illud, super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. No
Father is more pressed by Bellarmin, then Origin, to prove that Peter was the
Rock: and here ye have not only the testimony of Origin, that the other
Apostles were Rocks as well as Peter, but also his probation of it. First, he
propones and states the question, Do ye think (says he) that those words of
Christ, upon this Rock I will build my Church, are spoken only to Peter? you
are deceived, what shall we then say of John the son of thunder? So then the
proposition he undertakes to prove, is, that our Savior promised to build his
Church upon all the Apostles, as Rocks: which he proves by this reason, because
it was said to all, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: and a little
after the words now cited, he adds another reason, viz. because the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven were given to all the Apostles as well as to Peter.

Bellarmin answers, Origin in this place speaks allegorically, otherwise he
would contradict himself in his 5. homily upon ^xodus; where he calls Peter a
great Foundation, and most solid Rock, upon whom the Church is built.

But it is replied, there is no contradiction at all; for Peter may be Magnum
fundamentum and solidissima Petra, and yet not only the Foundation or Rock: for
the state of the question is not, Whether Peter was the foundation and Rock,
upon whom the Church was built? But whether he be the only Foundation and Rock
upon which the Church is built?

Bellarmin instances, secondly, That this testimony of Origin consists not with
the words of Christ, Because they are only spoken of Peter, and understood of
him; Ergo, this testimony of Origin must needs be allegorical. But it is
answered, Allthough the words of Christ were directed to Peter, yet Origin not
only affirms, but proves by two unanswerable reasons, that the promise was made
to all, as well as Peter: Moses speaking of Abraham, affirms he believed in
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: and yet the Apostle Paul
applies that to all the faithful, which is no Allegory, but Tropology, by which
a general promise belonging to all, is directed to one. Bellarmin should take
heed to reason thus; The words were directed to Peter alone: Ergo, the promise
was made to him alone: For if this promise was made alone to Peter, the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome is quite destroyed; since it was not made to
the Bishops of Rome; successors of Peter, being only made to Peter, to whom the
words were directed.

Bellarmins third reason to prove the testimony of Origines to be allegorical,
is this: If all the Apostles be foundations, or all the faithful, the whole
Church would be foundation of it self, since there are no other besides to be
the walls and the roof. But it is answered; First, that the Church is built
upon all the faithful, because it consists of them; and so Lyranus on Matthew
16. affirms, That the Church does not consist in men of power, and dignity,
either Secular, or Ecclesiastic: because many Bishops of Rome have been
Apostats from the faith; And therefore the Church consists only of the
faithful. Secondly, the Apostles are called foundations in a peculiar manner;
because they founded the Church by preaching that Doctrine received from
Christ, and sealed it with their blood.

Bellarmin objects lastly ad homin^m, that Protestants affirm that Peter cannot
be the Rock, because he is a mere man: but says he, that reason militats
against any other man's being the Rock. But it is answered, That Protestants
deny any man to be the Rock unless Christ, sustaining alone the whole burden
of the Church, as the Papists do of Peter: but they do not deny other men to be
the Rocks, in that sense mentioned to Bellarmins third reason now mentioned.
And thus much of Origines.

Another of the Fathers, one of Bellarmins great confidence, is Cyprianus; who
in his 27. Epistle, after he has mentioned how Christ said to Peter, Thou art
Peter, etc. And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. He
deduceth the Ordination of Bishops from these words, and the Government of the
Church: Ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae per
eosdem praepositos gubernetur. Here Pamelius himself acknowledges that Cyprian
applies that promise of Christ, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, to
every Bishop, and consequently when Cyprianus calls Peter the Rock; he cannot
mean the only Rock, or that Peter is Oecumenick Bishop.

Pamelius answers, Albeit in this place Cyprianus applies that promise of
Christ, Upon this Rock I will build my Church to all Bishops; yet, Epist. 55.
he applies it only to Peter. But it is replied, although it be true, that
Cyprianus, Epist. 55: makes mention only of Peter; yet it does not follow he
does apply it only to Peter: it is false that Cyprianus affirms, epist. 55.
that it can be applied to no other then Peter: since himself in this place,
epist. 27. applies it to every Apostle or Bishop.

The third Father is Augustinus, Epist, 165. affirming, that when Christ
directed those words to Peter, Peter represented by Figure the whole Church:
which he explains further, tract. 124. upon John, where after a long disput he
concluds, that the promise of Christ was made to the whole Church: whereby it
evidently appears, that Peter in those words is not ordained Oecumenick Bishop,
or the only Rock. In the same sense Hilarious, on Psalm 67. calls all the
Apostles foundations: so Theodoretius and Remigius, on Psalm 87. interpret
those words, fundamenta ejus in montibus sanctis, of all the Apostles and
Prophets: likewise the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 2. 20. calls all the Apostles and
Prophets foundations and Rocks. So the Apostle John seems to call them Apocall.
21. By which it is evident, that those Fathers calling Peter Rock or
Foundation, attributs no peculiar thing to him; which is not common to others:
and consequently they mean nothing less by such expressions, then that he is
Oecumenick Bishop.

Those testimonies so evident, put Bellarmin to his wits end. Let us hear and
examine an admirable piece of Sophistry.

Bellarmin, lib. 1. cap. 11. De Pont. Romans answers, that all the Apostles may
be called foundations three ways. The first is, because they were the first
who founded Churches every where. The second is, because the Christian Doctrine
was revealed to them all, by God. The third way is, by reason of their
governing the Church, they were all Heads Pastors, and Rectors of the Church:
but in the first two ways, all the Apostles were alike with Peter, Foundations
and Rocks of the Church. Not in the third way; for although they had all
Plenitudinem potestatis, plenitude of power, yet they had it only as Apostles
and Legates: Peter had that power as ordina^ Pastor, being head of the other
Apostles upon whom they depended: and this was the thing promised to Peter, in
those words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church.

But it is answered, Nothing can be more absurd, more contradictory; or more
entangling, then this distinction of Bell^rmins. We said before that the truth
of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome depended upon the Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome, it again upon the Supremacy of Peter, the principal ground of which
Supremacy, is, that promise of Christ, Thou art Peter, and open this Ro^^ I
will build my Church. The sense of those words conferring the Supremacy upon
Peter, depends upon this gloss, put upon those words by Bellarmin, which is
both against Antiquity and Reason; and therefore we may conclude that the truth
of the Doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome, depends upon the fantastic gloss
of a Jesuit, contradicting all Antiquity, and inconsistent with it self. And
first, it is against Antiquity, because they cannot give one instance from
ancient Interpreters* Councils, and Fathers, giving this gloss upon those words
of our Savior, Upon this Rock I will build my Church: neither was this gloss
ever heard of, or so much as dreamed of, before the times of the Jesuits, after
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome was openly assaulted. Secondly, this gloss
is contradictory to it self. By it Bellarmin intangles himself many ways: and
first, he grants that all the Apostles were equally Rocks and Foundations with
Peter, if the word Foundation be taken in the first two senses. But all the
Fathers who expone the Apostles to be foundations, and Peter among the rest,
did not so much as dream of any other way, why Peter or they are called
Foundations, but only of the first two, viz. in regard that they all alike
founded Churches, preaching that doctrine revealed unto them all alike,
immediately from God: and consequently foundation in Bellarmins third sense is a
dream of his own, by which he may well confirm his disciples, he will never
convert Proselytes, but expose himself to the ludibrious taxings of his
adversaries in making his own groundless fiction the main Basis of the
supremacy of Peter; and consequently, of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome
(and consequently of the Religion of the Modern Church of Rome: to which all
must be conform, under pain of damnation, according to that new article coined
by the Council of Trent: adding to that Article of the Creed, Catholic Church,
making it Catholic Roman Church.

Secondly, we have showed, That this third way of Foundation is a fiction of
Bellarmins, not dreamed of by the Ancients; which although it be sufficient to
refute it, yet it refutes it self by many contradictions: And first, of other
Popish Doctors: It gives unto all the Apostles plenitudinem potestatis,
plenitude of power, in which it contradicts the Theologick Dictionary of
Altenstaing approved by authority of the Church of Rome: In which Dictionar,
Plenitudo potestatis, is defined not only to be ordinis, but also,
Jurisdictionis, conferred by Christ only upon Peter, and his Successors: and
that now formalit^^ and subjective, it is only in the Bishop of Rome: which is
expressly contradicted by Bellarmin, who attributs it to all the Apostles,
pressed by the evident testimonies of those Fathers, seeing the gloss of that
Dictionar to be against all Antiquity.

Thirdly, Though Bellarmin be more sound then the gloss of that Dictionar; in
attributing to all the Apostles that plenit^de of power; yet he contradicts
himself, in giving to Peter a greater power then they had it flees the edge of
the quickest reason, to conceive any power greater then plenitude of power: and
therefore it is a flat contradiction to affirm that although all the Apostles
have plenitude of power, yet they depend upon Peter, as their head: which is as
much to say, as all the Apostles have that power, then which none can have a
greater: and yet Peter has a greater power then they.

Lastly, Bellarmin affirms that Peter has plenitude of power, as ordinar
Pastor; the other Apostles as extraordinar and Legates to Peter: in which he
intangles himself in a twofold contradiction. For to omit that distinction of
ordinar and extraordinar Pastor amongst the Apostles, is a fiction of his own
(the whole stream of Antiquity avowing all the Apostles to be extraordinar
Pastors, Peter as well as the rest) First, he makes the other Apostles above
Peter; since extraordinar Pastors are preferred to ordinar Pastors; the Apostle
Paul enumerating the hierarchy of the Church, Ephesians. 4 puts extraordinar
Pastors in the first place, viz. Apost^es, Prophets, and Evangelists, before
Pastors and Doctors: and so he contradicts himself, in affirming, that
extraordinar Pastors depend upon Peter, as their head, whom he makes ordinar
Pastor.

Secondly, He contradicts himself in making the other Apostles Legates to Peter,
and to omit, he does so without any ground (having no authority, but his own
assertion) he intangleth himself in his reason: for he has no other reason
wherefore the other Apostles are Legates to Peter: but only because the word
(...) Apostle, in the original imports one who is sent in commission: which is
all one with a Legate. But Bellarmin will not deny, that Peter in that sense is
a Legate also, because he is an Apostle, and so Peter will be Legate to Peter,
which is perfect none-sense, and contradiction.

Bellarmin borrowed this distinction of ordinar and extraordinar from Sanderus,
that famous English Jesuit (who with his Countryman Stapleton invented more
new distinctions to uphold the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, then all the
Doctors of the Church beside) Sanderus proves Peter to be ordinar, and the
other Apostles to be extraordinar, lib. 6. cap. 9. of his Monarchy. Thus,

Ordinar is called so from order, but in order, that is first which is most
ancient; since nothing can be first, before that which is first: but Peter was
the first, upon whom Christ promised to build his Church; and to give him the
power of the keys: Ergo, they were given to Peter alone. For albeit afterward
they were given to all the Apostles; yet Christ did not revock what he had
given first to Peter: and the fore Peter is ordinar Pastor, and the other
Apostles extraordinar.

But it is answered, This argument of Sanderus presuppons many things as
granted, which are either uncertain, or notoriously false. Secondly, albeit his
suppositions were true, they do not conclude his assertion, that Peter is
ordinar Pastor, having Jurisdiction over the rest, as extraordinar: He who
would see how that Sophistry of Sanderus is retexed at large, let him read
Chameir, tom. 2. lib. 11. cap. 6. number. 27. to the end of the chapter, the
substance of which is this.

First, He suppons, that as Ordinar, which is first; that extraordinar which is
last. But ordinar is taken (among Divines, speaking of Church Officers) for
that Office which is perpetual: extraordinar, for that which is for a time. So
in in the Old Testament, Priests and Levits were ordinar, Prophets extraordinar
Officers: and under the New Testament, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, and
Doctors, are ordinar Officers; Apostles, Evangelists extraordinar.

Secondly, Though the distinction of Sanderus, in that sense of ordinar and
extraordinar were granted; his assertion is uncertain, yea rather notoriously
false: he suppons that Peter first obtained the power, of binding, loosing, and
feeding the Flock of Christ: but that is uncertain; for these words of Christ
exhibit nothing to Peter for the present, but only promise to give him that
power of the Keys, and to build his Church upon him: neither was that promise
made to Peter alone, but to all the Apostles; as partly has been proved
already, but more fully shall be proved, cap. 6. and 9. and therefore the
supposition of Sanderus is uncertain and false.

Thirdly, Albeit his supposition were true, it is inconsequent, and proves
nothing: for albeit our Savior had exhibited first to Peter, the performance of
those promises, or the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: it does not follow that
Peter was ordinar head and Pastor of the other Apostles, having Jurisdiction
over them: and that they were extraordinar, depending upon Peter as their head:
as is declared by this similitude, a College of Judges consisting of such a
number, have afterward more added to their number: it does not follow, that
those who were first constituted, are ordinar Judges, and the others
extraordinar; much less, that those who were first constituted, have
Jurisdiction over those who were last: which is most evident in the common
wealth of the Romans, in which at first there were only four Pontifices, but
that number was after doubled: at first, only a hundredth Senators under the
Kings, but that number was tripled by Brutus, and augmented almost infinitely by
Emperors. At first, there was only one Praetor, next, two, one for the City, an
other for Strangers: Lastly, every Province had a Praetor. But none will deny
that those Pontifices, Senators, Pretors, had as much power as those who were
first constitut. And this much of those Fathers interpreting the Rock to be
Peter.

CHAP. VII. Tu es Petrus, Disputed from the Testimonies of Popish Doctors and
Pops themselves.
IN the former chapters we have disputed, Tu es Petrus, (the principal
foundation of the supremacy of Peter, of the Bishop of Rome, and Faith of the
Modern Roman Church) by reason and antiquity: of which our adversaries brag so
much, especially of antiquity. Now we will examine the exposition of those
words, by the testimonies of Pops, and Popish Doctors, interpreting that
promise of Christ, Upon this Rock I will build my Church. So that by Rock is
not meaned Peter at all, or at least Peter alone; by which two things will
appear, that the exposition of those words, super hanc Petram approved by the
Modern Church of Rome, as an article of Faith, is against all Antiquity, and a
new devised cheat of late, to establish the Supremacy of Peter, the Bishop of
Rome, necessar communion with that Church by an implicit faith; as articles of
the Creed necessar unto Salvation, The second thing that will appear is this,
they brag much of Unity and Concord among themselves; but it will appear by
this chapter, that there is no greater discord in hell, then is among those of
the Church of Rome, taxing one another of madness and heresy, in the
interpretation of those words, Upon this Rock I will build my Church: which
words are the principal, if not the only foundation of the Modern Roman Faith:
and it is to be observed, that those who interpret the Rock to be Peter only,
and tax others of their own profession of her sie, are but of yesterday, in
comparison of the others who deny it: and since those others who deny it, are
also but of yesterday, in comparison of Antiquity; it is evident, that this
interpretation of Peter's alone being the Rock is a new devised cheat to
establish the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, not known to the Ancients.

We showed in the former chapters, that some of the Fathers interpreted the
Rock to be Christ, cap 4. Others the faith of Peter, cap. 5. and those who
interpreted the Rock to be Peter, meaned nothing less, then he was the only
Rock; and in these words ordained Oecumenick Bishop. We will distinguish the
testimonies of those following Pops, and Popish Doctors in three Classes
accordingly: the first is, of those intepreting the Rock to be Christ. The
second, of those interpreting it the confession of Peter. The third of those
denying Peter to be the only Rock, of which in order.

The testimonies of the first class are those following; Gregorius Bishop of
Rome, in Job, lib. 31. cap. 19. in sacro eloquio cum singulari numero Petra
nominatur, quis alius quam Christus accipitur? Paulo attestante, qui ait, Petra
erat Christus. This testimony of a Bishop of Rome, and a Saint in the Roman
Calendar is unanswerable, proving that in his time, the Rock was expounded not
to be Peter, but Christ alone: which he not only affirms, but proves by this
reason, viz. when ever Rock is mentioned in Scripture in the singular number,
none other is to be understood but Christ: and whereas those Sophisters object,
that Gregorius is not speaking of those words of Christ, Upon this Rock I will
build my Church, because he proves it by the words of Paul, the Rock was
Christ, who is speaking of that Rock, from which Moses made water issue. It is
answered, Albeit that be true, that Paul is only speaking of that Rock yet it
is false, that Gregory speaks only of that Rock: his words are, where ever in
Scripture Rock is mentioned in the singular number, it signifies none but
Christ. But in these words of our Savior, Upon this Rock I will build my
Church. Rock is mentioned in the singular number, Ergo, according to Gregorius
the Rock in these words is only Christ, and not Peter at all.

The second testimony is of Anselmus, who lived in the 12. Century, who writing
upon these words, speaks as follows, Super hanc Petram, id est, Super me
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Quasi dicat: si^ es Petrus a me Petra, ut tamen mihi
reservetur fundamenti dignitas. Sed tu, cui ego amatori, and confessori me^
Participium mei nominis dedi, Super me fundamentum mundos lapides ordinabis.
This testimony is also most evident, in which Christ is expressly interpreted to
be the Rock, and Peter denied to be the Rock. All which is given to Peter, is,
to build the faithful upon Christ as the Rock: viz. by preaching and sealing
the Gospel with his blood as was showed before.

Lyranus upon the same words, Et super hanc Petram, quam consessus es, id est
super Christum. In which words he expressly interprets the Rock to be Christ. He
lived, anno 1320. whereby it appears it was no article of Faith in his days to
interpret the Rock to be Peter.

The Interlinear Gloss upon Matthew 16. 18. Petram id est, Christum in quem
credis: That is, by Rock is meaned Christ in whom Peter believed: but this
Gloss was approved by the whole Church.

Ioannes Arboreus Theosoph. lib. 5. cap. 5. Ecclesia fundata est super Petram,
and non super Petrum. The Church is built upon the Rock, and not upon Peter.

Petrus de Alliaco Cardinalis, in Recommend. sacrae Scripturae, he lived, anno
1400. his testimony in the said place is this, Non videtur quod in Petra
Petrus, sed in Petra Christus sit intelligendus, de quo agit Apostolus, Petra
autem rrat Christus. It is not like that the Church is founded upon the Rock
Peter, but upon the Rock Christ, as the Rock is taken by the Apostle Paul, when
he affirms the Rock was Christ. The same Author, lib. 2. cap. 13. of his
concordance, Per Petram Christum, quem confessus est, intelligimus; by the Rock
we understand Christ whom Peter confessed.

Pererius, lib. 2. in Daniel, although a Jesuit affirms, Quia Christus est
Petra, super quam fundata est and sustentatur Ecclesia: ideoque nullo unquam
tempore, nullaque vi labefactari and everti poterit: quin imo, nec portae
inferi adversus eam praevalebunt. In which words he gives a reason, wherefore
the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church; viz. because Christ is
the Rock upon which it is built: And thus much of the testimonies of those
Popish Doctors, interpreting the Rock to be Christ. And since some of them
lived very lately, it is evident, that the interpretation of the Rock to be
Peter, is but a new devised cheat. Now follows the second Class.

Of those Popes and Popish Doctors interpreting the Rock to be the Faith or
Confession of Peter. The first testimony is of Adrianus Primus, who lived in
the eighth Century, Anno 772. or thereabouts; who in his Epistle to the Bishops
of Spain and France, recorded in the Acts of the Council of Frankfoord, has
these words: Super hanc Petram, quam confessus es, and a qua vocabull sortitus
es dignitatem, super hanc soliditatem fidei Ecclesiam meam aedificabo. By which
words two things appear. The first is, That the Church is built in his opinion,
upon the Confession of Peter. The second is, That those who call the Rock
Christ, and those who call it the confession of Peter, mean both one thing:
since he expressly affirms, That the Rock is -- the objective Confession of
Peter, or -- that which Peter confessed, viz. Christ, which is all one, as if
he had called Christ the Rock.

The second testimony of Innocent third, who lived Anno 1000. or thereabouts.
In his Epistle to the Bishop of France, concerning Petrus Abeilardus, which
Epistle is mentioned by Otto Frisingensis, lib. 1. cap 84. degestis Frederici
primi-Beatus Petrus Apostolorum Princeps, pro eximia hujus fidei confessione
audire meruit, Tu es, inquam, beatus Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam: Petram utique firmitatem fidei, and Catholicae unitatis
soliditatem manifest designans: The sum of which words is, that our Savior, by
hanc Petram, or the Rock, means the firmness and solidity of Peter's Faith.

The third testimony is of Adrianus quintus, Bishop of Rome, who lived about
1278. in his epistle to Frederick the Emperor, recorded by Radivicus
Frisingensis, lib. 1. cap. 3. Quem in Apostolicae Confessionis Petra non
ambigimus per Dei gratiam solidatum; where the Rock is expressly called the
thing which Peter confessed.

The testimony of the fourth Bishop of Rome is of Nicolaus secundus, who lived
about anno 1060. His testimony is recorded by Gratianus, Distinct. 22. cap. 1.
Romanam Ecclesiam solus ille aedificavit, and super Petram fidei mox nascentis
erexit, that is, the Church was built upon the faith of Peter, then budding.

And thus much of the testimonies of four Popes or Bishops of Rome interpreting
the rock to be the faith of Peter: to which may be added testimonies of the
most learned Doctors of that Church, as the Glossator of the Decreta, distinct.
19. cap. Ita Dominus Joannes de Turre Cremata, lib. 2. cap. 102. and 1^2. in
summa de Ecclesia. Dionysius Carthusianus, who lived 1460. in his Commentaries
upon Matthew 16. 18. Gorranus upon the same place, and also Titelemanus and
Erasmus; all which expressly interpret the rock to be the confession of Peter:
it is needless to set down their words, since their testimonies are granted.

The third Class of Popish Doctors is of those, who, although Peter were
granted to be the rock, yet they deny him to be the only rock, upon which the
Church was built: and who call other Apostles rocks and foundations as well as
Peter. The testimonies are few, but the give^s of them are most notable Men:
the most famous Doctors that ever the Church of Rome could brag of. The first
is the testimony of Lombardus, Master of the sentences, the first Founder of
School Divinity among the Latins, as Damascenus amongst the Grecians: who
interpreting those words of Psalm 87. Fundamenta ejus in montibus sanctis,
affirms, that all the Prophets and Apostles are foundations.

The second testimony is of Nicolaus Cusanus, that famous Cardinal, whom
Espenseus, lib. 2. de adorat. Ecclesiae, and Aeneas Silvius afterward Bishop of
Rome, both commend as one of the ablest Divines that ever the Church of Rome
produced. His first testimony is 21. did. in novo 24. quest. 1. Sed scimus
quod Petrus nihil plus potestatis a Christo accepit aliis Apostolis; but we
know that Peter got no more power from Christ then the rest of the Apostles:
and likewise, lib. 2. cap. 13. concordi^ Catholicae, where he has this notable
testimony, Et quanquam Petro dictum est, tu es Petrus, -- Si Petrus per Petram
lapis fundamenti Ecclesiae in elligi deberet, tunc secundum S. Hieronymum ita
similiter alii Apostoli fuerunt lapides; Apocal. 21. In which words he expressly
affirms, and proves that the other Apostles were Rocks as well as Peter, which
he proves by the testimony of Hieronymus.

And thus much of that famous passage, tu es Petrus, of which so much noise is
made now a days: which although it be the principal place upon which the
supremacy of Peter, of the Bishop of Rome, and the Faith of the Modern Church
of Rome is built: Yet you see what little cause they have to brag of Antiquity;
since none of the Ancients interpret Peter to be the Rock; and also what little
cause they have to brag of Unity, since those who interpret Peter to be the
Rock only, are contradicted not only by the most learned Doctors of their own
Church, but also by six Popes, Felix 3. Gregory 1. Adrianus 1. Nicolaus 2.
Innocentus 3. Adrianus 5. And notwithstanding that their Popes are now esteemed
by them infallible Judges of controversies, yet Pighius and Baronius, who
interpret the Rock to be Peter only, tax all those six Popes of ignorance,
madness, as we said before: so does Maldonatus de Valentia, and other of their
Doctors, whose testimonies is needless to be mentioned, since they cannot
without impudence be denied.

CHAP. VIII. Of Matthew 16. 19. Of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.
HItherto has been prolixly disputed, the first argument of our adversaries,
proving Peter to be Oecumenick Bishop: viz. because (as they pretend) our
Savior promised to build the Church upon him as a Rock, verse 18. Now follows
their second argument, viz because our Savior promised to give to him the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, verse 19. But it is unanimously answered by
Protestants, that in those words, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, our Savior
does not mean universal Jurisdiction over the Church: And lest it should seem
to be a wilful denial, they give these following reasons, why Peter is not
ordained Oecumenick Bishop in these words? Or why the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, infer no universal Jurisdiction over the Church in the person of Peter
alone? The first reason is this, the power of the keys is only a forgiving or
remitting of sins, or not remitting them: or a binding and loosing, as appears
by the testimony of Augustinus in his 52. Treatise upon John; of Theophylactus
on Matthew 16. 19. of Anselmus, ibid. But none calls in question, but binding
and loosing, is a different thing from the power o^ an Oecumenick Bishop.

Bellarmin instances, lib. 1. cap. 13. de pont. Romans that the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, is universal Jurisdiction over the whole Church: which he
proves by three arguments. The first is, from the Metaphor of keys, Isaiah 21.
where Shebna is threatened to have the keys of the Temple taken from him, to be
given to Eliakim: that is, says Bellarmin, the government of the Temple, or of
the house of God.

But it is answered, Bellarmin is greatly mistaken; for, according to the
Hebrew, Shebna was not Perfect of the Temple, but only of the Kings house;
Bellarmin is deceived by the Latin version, turning it Tabernacle, whereas Aben
Ezra calls it, Master of the Kings house, the Septuagints, (...), and they call
Shebna, (...), that is, Treasaurer, or Master-houshold: that is the true
interpretation, as appears by Kings 2. cap. 18. in which place Eliakim (who
succeeded to Shebna in that charge) is called by the Septuagints, (...),
oeconomus, or Master-houshold; Shebna is called there a Scribe; which place he
obtained after the keys of the Kings house were taken from him, and given to
Eliakim. However it is a very bad argument of Bellarmins, When Shebna had the
keys of the Kings house, the government of the house was taken from him, when
they were taken away: Ergo, When Peter get the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
from Christ, he was made sole governor of the whole Church. Bellarmin should
observe, that keys are given sometime by an Inferior to a Superior* and
although that be but a new invention or ceremony, yet it is an acknowledgement
of authority; as when a King entering a Town, the keys are delivered to him: But
when keys are given by a Superior to an Inferior, chief Jurisdiction is no
ways denoted. But Bellarmin will not deny that Christ was Superior to Peter:
And whereas it is objected, that Christ has the key of David in the Apocalypse,
that is jurisdiction of the Church. It is answered, the case is different: none
calls the jurisdiction of Christ in question, neither had he the keys from any
greater then himself.

Bellarmins second argument is, That the keys import binding and loosing: that
is, inflicting of punishment, and dispensing with obligations of the Law; which
is supreme Jurisdiction over the Church: And consequently, Peter in these words
is instituted Oecumenick Bishop.

But it is answered, That binding and loosing import no supreme Jurisdiction,
as appears by its being common to all the Officers of the Church as well as to
Peter: it consists in bidding, forbidding, punishing by Spiritual Censures, and
Relaxations from them; which are common to all Church Officers, as shall
immediately be proved.

In the third place, Bellarmin proves that our Savior, promising to Peter the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, promised to him alone the government of the
whole Church, by the testimonies of Fathers. The first testimony of
Chrysostomus, hom. 55. on Matthew, affirming, that to Peter the whole world was
committed, and that he was made head and Pastor of the whole Church.

But it is answered, It is false, that either Chrysostomus affirms, the whole
world was committed to Peter, or, that he was head of the Church: Bellarmin
follows the corrupt version of Trapezuntius, in which he sophisticats
manifoldly: the words of Chrysostom are (comparing Hieremas with Peter)
Quemadmodum pater Hieremam alloqueus dixit: Instar colunae aneae, and mu^i
posui eum: sed illum quidem uni genti: hunc verototi orbi: In these words
Chrysostomus is comparing the Prophet with Peter, as the Lord (says he) put
Hieremas as a wall of brass to one Nation, viz. the Jews: sc Peter was made a
wall of brass to the whole world. But Chrysostom speaks not a word of Hieremias
being set over the Jews with Jurisdiction; and consequently, if the comparison
hold, Peter was not set over the whole world with Jurisdiction: which is the
first sophistry of Bellarmin, following Trapezuntius, in stead of (...), pos^it
eum, placed him. Trapezuntius; renders praeposuit, set him over, which is not
in the Appodosis of Peter. The second corruption is, that Trapezuntius adds of
his own, Cujus caput piscator homo, whose head was a Fisherman: It is true
indeed, a little before these words, Chrysostom calls Peter Pastor of the
Church; but that is nothing to an Oceumenick Bishop: for any Apostle may be
called Pastor of the Church, as shall be proved afterward in this Book.

Bellarmins second testimony is of Gregorius Magnus, lib. 4. Epist. 32. Where
speaking of Peter he affirms, the care of the whole Church was committed to
him; and that he was Prince of the Apostles. But it is answered, In what sense
Gregorius affirms, so shall be showed at length hereafter; where it shall be
proved first, that others were called Princes of the Apostles beside Peter: and
that the care of the whole Church was committed to others also who were not
Oecumenick Bishops.

Secondly, the impudence of Bellarmin is very great, in objecting this place of
Gregorius, in which he is thundering with great execrations, and detestation
against any, who takes upon him the tittle of Oecumenick Bishop; calling that
tittle new, Pompatick, Blasphemous against the mandats of Christ, the Canons of
the Apostles, and Constitutions of the Church: And among other reasons against
that title of universal Oecumenick Bishop, he objects this as one: If any took
upon him that title, Peter had reason to take it: but he had not that tittle,
although the care of the whole Church was committed to him: then this impudence
of Bellarmin no greater can be imaginable: Gregory expressly denies it to
follow, that Peter was universal Apostle, or Bishop, although the care of the
whole Church was committed to him: Bellarmin mutilats his passage, and makes
him conclude, that Peter was universal Apostle or Bishop, because the care of
the whole Church was committed to him. He cites this part of Gregory's
assertion, the care of the whole Church was committed to Peter: but he
suppresseth the other half of his assertion; that Peter was not universal
Apostle, and most impudently fathers a contradictory conclusion upon Gregory;
Ergo, Peter was Oecumenick Bishop. And thus much of the first reason, wherefore
Protestants deny, that the power of the keys imports no universal Jurisdiction
of Peter alone over the Church.

Their second reason is this, Because the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were
given to others besides Peter, which they prove; First by Scripture, next by
Fathers. The passages of Scripture are two. The first is, Mat. 18. 18. Verily I
say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The second place is in
Joh. 20. 23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose
soever sins yel retain, they are retained.

Bellarmin answers, That those two places now cited have not the same meaning
with Matthew 16. 19. He grants that the difficulty is somewhat pressing of
Matthew 18. 18. but there is no difficulty at all (says he) in John 20. 23.
which he proves by three Arguments. The first is this in Matthew 16. 19. The
Keys are promised to Peter without any particular determination; but in John,
they are determinated to the forgiveness of sins: but binding and loosing may
be exercised in other objects, then in pronounccing men guilty of sin, or
absolving them from sin, as in making of laws, and dispensing with them.

But it is answered, That the Fathers expounding those words, What ever ye shall
bind on earth, etc. Matthew 16. 19. referrs that place only to the binding and
loosing of sin. So Augustinus, tractat. 124. on John. Ecclesia, quae fundatur
in Christo, Claves ab eo regni Coelorum accepit in Petro, id est, potestatem
ligandi, solvendique peccata. In which words he expressly affirms, That the
keys committed to Peter, consisted in the binding and loosing of sin.

Secondly Theophylactus on Matthew 16. expressly affirms, What was given to
Peter in that place, was given to all the Apostles, John 20. He says indeed,
They were promised only to Peter, Matthew 16. (Christ directing his speech only
to Peter) but they were given to all: If ye ask when? ( says he) it is
answered, when he said, Whose soever sins ye forgive, alluding to John 20.

Whereas Bellarmin, affirms, That the power of the keys consists also in
making of Laws, he says nothing at all, except he prove that Peter had more
authority then the other Apostles in that particular of making Laws.

Bellarmins second Argument, to prove the same thing is not promised to Peter,
Matthew 16. which is given to the other Apostles, John 20. is this, in Matthew
it is said to Peter, Whomsoever thou shall bind, etc. But it is said to the
other Apostles in John, Whosesoever sins ye retain, etc. But to bind, is more
then to retain; for, to retain, is to leave a man in the same condition ye find
him; but to bind, is to impose new bonds upon him by excommunication,
interdicting, and Law.

But it is answered, This Argument of Bellarmins is of no moment: because,
according to the constant phrase of Scripture, Forgiving of sins, and loosing
of sins are all one; Ergo, their opposits, retaining of sin, binding a sinner
are all one. Since we bind men for their sins only, it is necessar, that the
sin being forgiven, they are loosed: or else that they are still retained if
they be not loosed. But it is absurd to affirm that anys sins are forgiven, and
yet retained: for Bellarmin seems to speak of that distinction, viz. remission
of fault, and remission of punishment, that is, the fault may be forgiven, but
not the punishment: But this distinction is vain, and belongs nothing to this
place. Bellarmin seems to import, that the Prerogative of Peter is, to have
power of remitting any of them, or both of them, which the other Apostles have
not: wherein he is topped first by Cyrillus, upon Matthew 16. who attributs the
full power of binding and loosing to the whole Church: which he proves in that
instance of the incestuous Corinthian. Secondly, he is topped by Aquinas,
affirming that every Minister binds in refusing the Sacrament of the Church to
those who are unworthy, and loses, when he admits them to it. Thirdly, the
Interlinear Gloss upon Matthew 16. affirms that sins are forgiven and retained
by two keys of power and remission.

Bellarmins third argument, proving that John 20. and Matthew 16. are not
alike, is this; because, says he, in John 20. Power of forgiving sins, by the
Sacrament of Baptism or Penitence is only conferred upon the Apostles: which he
proves by the authority of Chrysostom, and Cyrillus upon this place, John 20.
and also of Hieronymus, Quest. 9. ad Hedibia.

But it is answered, First, Those Fathers affirm indeed, that Power of
forgiving of sins in Baptism is given in this place: but it is false which
Bellarmin affirms, that it is only given and no more. For forgiving of sins is
but the half of the Power conferred by Christ upon the Apostles in this place;
since retaining of sins is also given unto them. Secondly, Fathers referr to
Baptism that loosing given to Peter, Matthew 16. So Cyprianus, epistle 73.
where he disputs, that forgiving of sins in Baptism is proper to the Pastors of
the Church: which he proves; first, by Peter who got that power, Matthew, 16.
19. and also by the other Apostles, to whom our Savior said, Whose sins ye
forgive, etc. John 20. Yea Gaudentius, in the first day of his ordination,
expressly affirms, that the gates of the Kingdom of heaven are opened no other
ways, then by Baptism and absolution: and thus much of the similitude of John
20. with Matthew 16. By what we have said, it appears that Bellarmin brings
nothing but Sopistry to prove that the places are not alike.

He grants that there is great difficulty to prove the dissimilitude of Matthew
16. 19. and 18. 18. Since binding and loosing is given to all the Apostles in
the last place as well as in the first to Peter; and not only retaining, as in
John 20. which Bellarmin affirmed to be a demonstration, that John 20. and
Matthew 16. were not alike places, viz. that retaining and forgiving was only
given to all the Apostles, John 20 which was not so much as binding and loosing
given to Peter, Matthew 16. Nevertheless, Bellarmin endeavors to prove that,
Matthew 16. 19. and 18. 18. are unlike places: although in the last binding and
loosing be given to all the Apostles as well as to Peter in the first: Because
that binding and loosing given to Peter, Matthew 16. is of greater authority,
then that given to the other Apostles, Matthew 18. 18 His argument is this,
which I believe he understands not himself.

In Matthew 18. (says he) Nothing is given to the Apostles at all, but only it
is promised to them, and explained what power they should have afterward? which
he prove; by two reasons. The first is, That they were not yet Priests or
Pastors, or Bishops, when Christ made them that promise, Matthew 18. 18. but
only after the resurrection. Secondly, because those words, Whomsoever ye shall
bind and loose, etc. Matthew 18. are the paralels of those said to Peter,
Whatsoever thou shall bind or loose, Matthew 16. But in Matthew 16. nothing was
exhibited to Peter, but only promised: Ergo, in Matthew 18. nothing was
exhibited to the other Apostles.

It is answered, That Bellarmin proves nothing but what he affirmed before,
viz. That it was hard to show a disparity between these two places: Or that
binding and loosing, Matthew 16. 19. and Matthew 28. 18. for in stead of
proving them different places, by his sophistical contradictory babbling, he
proves they are just the same: For first he grants, that nothing was exhibited
in either place, but only promised. Secondly, he grants that the words are
alike, Whatsoever thou shall bind, and whatsoever ye shall bind: Whence he
concluds that the places are not alike; whereas he demonstrats they are the
same. It is reasoning unbeseeming so brave a man to prove places not alike by
alike circumstances in both. Secondly, he contradicts what he said before, viz.
That power of Order was only given unto the other Apostles, John 20. but power
of Jurisdiction to Peter, Matthew 16. and therefore the places were unlike,
that power of order was only given to the other Apostles, John 20. he proved by
forgiving and retaining: that power of Jurisdiction was given to Peter, Matthew
16. he proves by binding and loosing: but here he grants that the binding and
loosing given to the other Apostles, Matthew 18. and that given to Peter
Matthew 16. are verba similia, or the same words, and consequently, that the
keys or power of Jurisdiction are given to the other Apostles as well as to
Peter: and consequently* he proves himself a liar, in affirming, that the keys
given to Peter, were keys of Jurisdiction, but not these given to the other
Apostles.

Alphonsus de Castro adversus haeres. lib. 12. and Fisher Bishop of Rochester
disputing against Luther, art. 25 proves that the keys given to Peter, Matthew
16. and these given to the other Apostles, Matthew 18. are not the same which
they prove by an Achillean argument, viz. it is said to Peter, What ever thou
bindest and loosest on Earth, shall be bound and loosed in the Heavens: but unto
the other Apostles, Matthew 18 it is only said, Whomsoever ye bind or loose on
Earth, it shall be bound or loosed in Heaven; but to bind and loose in Heaven is
not the same, but less then to bind and loose in the Heavens.

But it is answered, Any intelligent person may see that those
otherwise-learned men fight against their own conscience, when they are driven
to uphold the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, by such childish babbling: Since
men of so great Spirits and Learning, as those two were known to be, could not
be ignorant, that this distinction of Heaven and Heavens, is against Sense,
Scripture, and Fathers.

First, it is against sense, Because none can be ignorant, that Heavens in the
plural number, and Heaven collectively in the singular number are all one and
the same thing, in the ordinar phrase of speaking: Who is so stupid as to deny
it? Secondly, It is against Scripture, which promiscuously uses Heaven and
Heavens in the same sense: so Mark 1. compared with Luke 3. demonstrat. In the
first place, it is said, The Heavens were cloven assunder. In the last, the
Heaven was opened: and yet both the Evangelists are relating the same thing,
when John the Baptist baptized our Savior. So, Matthew 6. Christ affirms, Lay
up treasures for your selves in Heaven; but, Luke 12. Make your selves treasurs
in the Heavens. Thirdly, this distinction of Heaven and Heavens, is of so
little moment in the opinion of the Fathers, that they express, Matthew 18. in
the plural number Heavens, and Matthew 16. in the singular number Heaven. So
Hilarious, lib. 6. de Trinitate affirms, That all the Apostles had the keys
Regni Coelorum of the Heavens: he uses the same expression in his Book against
the Arrians. Cyprianus, epist. 54. affirms that all the Apostles had power of
binding and loosing in the Heavens: so does Chrysostomus, lib. 3. de
Sacerdotio, and Isidorus Pelusiota, lib. 2. epist. 5. and Augustinus against
the Adversary of the Law and the Prophets, lib. 1. cap. 17. and Paceanus,
epist. 1. to Sympronianus, and in his book against the Novatians. All which
Fathers affirm, that the Apostles had power of binding and loosing in Coelis,
in the Heavens. The schoolmen likewise speak after the same manner, as
Lombardus, distinct. 18. of the first chapter, lib. 4. and also in the same
book, distinct. 19. and Durandus, quest. 1. in his Commentaries upon the said
19. distinct. This is it that proved that all the Apostles had the keys not
only of Heaven, but of the Heavens, whereby it appears by the authority of
Scripture, Fathers, and Schoolmen, that the keys of Heaven and of Heavens are
one and the same thing.

If any be not yet convinced, it is further proved they are the same, because
the Fathers call the keys of Peter, the keys of Heaven, in the singular number:
So Ambrosius, lib 1. de penitentia, cap. 6. and Augustinus contra adversarium,
lib. 1. cap. 17. Ambrosius repeating the words of Christ to Peter, says,
Quaecunque ligaveris super Terram, erunt ligata and in Coelo.

Which is further confirmed, The Fathers in the same place speaking of Christ's
promise to Peter, call the keys promised to him, both the keys of Heaven, and
the keys of Heavens. So Ambrosius in the now cited place, after the former
words adds, Et quae^unque solveris super Terram, erunt soluta and in Coelis.
Augustinus in the forecited place, calls the keys given to the other Apostles,
both the keys of Heaven, and of the Heavens; for after those words (repeating
our Saviors promise to the Apostles) Quae solveritis super Terram, erunt soluta
and in Coelis, he affirms, Quae ligaveritis in Terra, erunt ligata and in
Coelo. And thus we have proved that Alphonsus de Castro, and Bishop Fisher are
mistaken in their distinction of Heaven and Heavens, by Reason, Scripture and
Fathers.

The original of this distinction they have from Origines, tract. 6. in
Matthew, where, comparing the keys of Peter with those words, Tell the Church,
and if he refuse to hear it, to make satisfaction after three admonitions, let
him be unto thee as a publican; he affirms, That Peter, although but one
person, yet had the keys of many Heavens, but others, or those admonishers,
three times; although many persons, yet had only the keys of one Heaven: and so
by the testimony of Origines, Bozius, lib. 18. cap. 1. de signis Ecclesie,
sustains that distinction of Heaven and Heavens mentioned by de Castro and
Bishop Fisher.

But it is answered, Those Doctors of the Church of Rome take great liberty to
themselves, in exposition of the Fathers: Bellarmin, as we showed before,
pressed by a testimony of Origin, not only affirming, but also proving, that
these words, upon this Rock I will build my Church: Or that in these words
nothing was promised to Peter, which was not promised to the other Apostles,
answered, that Origines was speaking allegorically, otherwise he contradicted
himself in his 5. Homily upon Exodus; where he called Peter that great
Foundation: which we proved to be no contradiction, cap. 6.

By the same argument we prove, that Origines in this place is speaking
allegorically, otherwise he contradicts Reason, Scripture, Fathers, and
himself: And likewise affirms a notorius untruth in this very place alleged.
And first, that he contradicts Reason, Scripture, and Fathers, in denying the
keys of Heaven, and the keys of Heavens to be the same, we have just now
proved, disputing with de Castro and Fisher.

Secondly, He contradicts himself in other places, in affirming that greater
power of the keys was given to Peter then to the Others, or that the keys of
the Heavens are more then the keys of Heaven; because elsewhere he disputs and
endeavors to prove, that the power of the keys given to Peter was the very same
given to the other Apostles, as in his first Treatise upon Matthew, mentioned
before, and vindicated, cap. 6.

Thirdly, Origin is comparing the keys of Peter with these three admonitions:
but if he speak literally, he lies, in firming, that those Admonishers had the
power of the key of one Heaven given them from Christ, or that what they did
bind and loose on Earth, should be bound and loosed in one Heaven, which is
promised no whereby Christ.

Lastly, Origines is comparing in these words, the power of Private Admonishers,
with that of Ministers, having the power of binding and loosing; and after his
manner falls to Allegories, by this distinction of Heaven and Heavens:
otherwise he were not only a liar in this place, but also a contradicter of
Reason, Scripture, and other Fathers, and of himfelf in other places. Bellarmin
thought it a sufficient Reason to prove that Origines spoke allegorically, viz.
otherwise he would contradict himself: and yet we showed there was no
contradiction; and therefore he cannot in reason deny that Origines in this
place speaks allegorically, since otherwise he would contradict Reason,
Scripture, all the Fathers, himself in other places, and also be a notorious
liar in this same alleged place?

We have have proved already, That Matthew 16. 19. inferrs not that Peter was
Oecumenick Bishop, because the power of the keys was no universal Jurisdiction
over the whole Church; we undertook to prove it by an other reason, viz.
because the power of the keys was not given to Peter alone, but to the other
Apostles as well as to him: Which we undertook to prove by two arguments.
First, by Scripture. Secondly, by Fathers. By Scripture we have already proved
it, viz. from Matthew 18. 18. and John 20. 23. vindicated from the exceptions
of our adversaries, alleging they were not alike places with Matthew 16. 19,
It only remains now, to prove by testimonies of Fathers, that the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven were given to others, as well as to Peter: those testimonies
are of two sorts. The first is of those affirming directly that the keys were
given to others besides Peter: the other sort is of those affirming it by
consequence. Of the first sort it is needless to mention any more, then we have
already mentioned in the vindication of these places: Such as Hilarious, lib. 6.
de Trinitate, and adversus Arianos, Cyprianus Epistola 54. Chrysostomus, de
Sacerdotio, lib. 3. Isidorus Pelusiota, lib. 2. epist. 5. Pacianus, ad
Sympronianum, epist. 1. and in his Treatise against the Novatians. All which
testimonies expressly affirm, That the keys were given to others beside Peter:
Neither is it needful to set down the words, since our adversaries cannot have
so much impudence as to deny them: To which testimonies may be added, that of
Hieronymus against Jovinanus, Cuncti Discipuli claves Regni Coelorum accipiunt,
all the Disciples got the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; of Origines, tract. 1.
in Matthew. An vero soli Petro dantur claves Regni coelorum, nec alius beatorum
quisquam eas accepturus est? Quod si dictum hoc, tibi dabo claves Regni
Coelorum, caeteris quoque commune est, cor non simul omnia communia? In which
words he expressly affirms, That which was promised to Peter, was promised also
to all the Apostles, as well as the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. And a little
after, Servator dans Spiritum Sanctum Discipulis per insufflationem, ait,
accipite Spiritum Sanctum etc. It is needless to add any more testimonies. Now
let us consider how our adversaries elude them.

And first, Cardinal Pool in his defense of the Ecclesiastic Unity, lib. 2.
grants those testimonies, but he denis that any thing is proved by them; viz.
That all the Apostles had alike power with Peter, in the power of the keys,
albeit it seems to be the meaning of those Fathers: which he illustrats by the
example of Moses, and the 70. Elders: since it is said, Numbers 11. That God
gave unto them a part of that Spirit which was in Moses, and consequently, they
had the same power in substance with Moses, but not in so excellent a way.

Maldonatus answers otherwise, viz. denying, That the same keys were given to
Peter, Matthew 16. and to the other Apostles, Matthew 18. and John 20, his
reason is, in the two last places, no mention is made of keys at all.

Stapleton is more subtle, for seeing that Christ says, Matthew 18. What ever
ye shall bind, to all the Apostles, is the same with that said to Peter, Matthew
16. Whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. He grants that the same binding and
loosing given to Peter, Matthew 16. is given to the other Apostles, Matthew 18.
but he affirms, That the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, are a thing different
from either of the bindings or loosings, in Relec. controvers. 3* quest. 1.
art. 1. conclus. 4.

Others answer, Distinguishing the keys of Order and Jurisdiction, they grant
that the keys of Order were given to all the Apostles, the keys of Jurisdiction
only to Peter.

It is needless, particularly to insist upon the refutation of those new
devised Sophistries, to hold up the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: they are
quite and diametrally opposite to the meaning of all antiquity, of which they
brag so much, as appears by two reasons. The first is, that the Fathers disput
expressly that the same keys were promised to Peter, Matthew. 16. and to the other
Apostles, Mat. 18. and John 20. and consequently, all those distinctions
devised of late by the Jesuits and others, are nothing else but fantastic
dreams, and sophistical evasions.

And first, Origines, tract. 1. on Matthew, disputs (as we said) That the
Church was built alike upon all the Apostles, because the keys were given alike
to all the Apostles: by which reasoning it appears, that he thought it a thing
uncontroverted in his time, that the keys were common to all the Apostles,
since he uses it as a Medium or Argument to prove, That the Church was built
upon all the Apostles, as well as upon Peter.

Secondly, That the keys were common to all the Apostles, he proves by John 20,
23. whereby it is evident, that the said place is the same in meaning with
Matthew 16. in which he flatly contradicts Bellarmin, who confidently affirmed,
that without all doubt, forgiving and retaining of sins, mentioned, John 20.
23. was not the same thing with binding and loosing, Matthew* 6. 19.

Thirdly, Cyprianus de Vnitate Ecclesiae, expressly affirms, That Christ gave
alike power to all his Apostles, John 20. 23. in these words; Accipite Spiritum
Sanctum, si cujus remiseritis peccata, etc. Receive the Holy Ghost, whosesoever
sins ye shall forgive, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained: and since all the Apostles (according to Cyprianus)
had alike power given them after the Resurrection of Christ, by John 20. 23.
without all question, he believed that the same power of the keys, was given to
all the Apostles, which was given to Peter, Matthew 16.

The second Reason, Why those distinctions of Polus, Maldonatus, Stapleton, and
Bellarmin, and others; or new devised evasions is unanswerable: viz. It appears
by the Fathers, that no greater Ecclesiastical power imaginable, could be given
to any, then that which was given to all the Apostles, in Matthew 18, and John
20. which quite destroys all those sophistical distinctions, tending all to
this: That the power given to Peter, was greater, Matthew 16. 19 then that
given to the other Apostles, Matthew 18. and John 20. That no greater power can
be imagined, then that which was given to all the Apostles, is proved by the
testimony of Chrysostomus, lib. 3. cap. 5. de Sacerdotio: Where speaking of
that power of the keys given to all the Apostles, yea, and to all Bishops, he
falls to an interrogative exclamation, (...)? That is, I pray you, what greater
power can be given then this? But this had been a most ridiculous interrogation
in Chrysostomus, if either he himself, or any other had believed that the power
of the keys, promised to Peter, Matthew 16. was greater then that promised to
the other Apostles, Matthew 18. and John 20. And thus much of the testimonies
of those Fathers proving directly, that the keys were given to others, as well
as to Peter.

Now follows the testimonies of Fathers, proving by consequence, that the
keys, Matthew 16. were not peculiar to Peter; out of which testimonies, three
arguments are deduced. The first is, If Peter alone had the power of the keys
promised to him, Matthew 16. Then Peter would only have exercised the keys,
and no other beside him, in such a highway as he did: But it appears by the
testimony of Gaudentius, primae de ordinationis suae, that all the Apostles as
well as Peter practiced, the keys, viz. in teaching, baptizing, and censuring.
Yea, Salmeron the Jesuit, in his Commentars upon 1. of Peter 1. disput. 1.
expressly affirms, That Peter seemed to neglect his duty in the exercise of the
keys, it so little appeared by his carriage and practice, that he had any
Jurisdiction over the other Apostles. Where observe the impudent shift of the
Jesuit, who being pressed by the carriage of Peter, that no token of his
Supremacy appeared, has nothing to answer; but that it was his own neglest:
which if it be true, was great unfaithfulness of Peter: if it be false, (as it
is,) it is great impudence in the Jesuit.

The second argument taken from the Fathers, proving consequentially that the
other Apostles were promised the keys, as well as Peter, is taken from
Augustinus, who affirms, That Peter represented the whole Church when Christ
promised him the keys: and so by consequence, in Peter, the other Apostles and
all Pastors of the Church had the keys promised unto them: the words of
Augustinus are those following in his 124. tr^^^at. upon John, Quando Petro
dictum est, tibi dabo claves regni coelorum, and quodcunque ligaveris super
terram, erit ligatum and in coelis, universam significabat Ecclesiam. And a
little after, Ecclesia, Ergo, quae fundatur in Christo, claves ab co regni
Coelorum accepit in Petro, id est, potestatem ligandi, solvendique peccata. In
which words he expressly affirms, That Peter was a figure of the whole Church,
when our Savior promised him the keys: and therefore in Peter the keys were
given to the whole Church, and not to Peter alone.

Our adversaries pussed with this testimony of Augustinus, after their
accustomed manner, fall to their new devised distinctions, explaining how the
keys were given to Peter, representing the whole Church? Or how they were
given to the whole Church in Peter? And first Horantius, lib. 6. cap. 10.
Locor. Cathol. affirms, That the keys were given to the whole Church in Peter;
that is says he, They were given to Peter for the good of the whole Church, as
when any is made King of any Nation, the Kingdom or Kingly Authority is given
to him for the good of the whole Nation: and so Peter, as Prince of the Church,
had the keys given unto him for the good of the whole Church: and in this
manner, the keys were given to the whole Church in Peter. But it is answered,
Horantius his Gloss is far beside the Text of Augustiuus; who expressly disputs,
The keys were not given to Peter alone, but to the whole Church: for if they
were only given to Peter, the whole Church would not have exercised them: he
disputs so, tractat. 50. upon John, and therefore concluds, that the keys were
not given alone to Peter, because the whole Church exercised them as well as
Peter: Augustinus does not disput for what end the keys were given? but to
whom also this Gloss of Horantius expressly contradicts Augustinus Horantius
affirms, That the keys in the same manner were given to the whole Church in
Peter, as when any is made King of a Nation, the Authority of a King is given
to the whole Nation: that is, says he, He who is made King gets that Authority
for the good of the whole Nation: which is a flat contradiction of Augustinus,
for that Nation, or whole Nation cannot be said to exercise the Kingly
Authority, when he who is made King gets it: But Augustinus expressly disputs,
That the whole Church exercised the keys as well as Peter: and therefore the
keys were given to the whole Church in Peter: otherwise, says he, The whole
Church would not have exercised them, tractat. 50. His words are, If Peter had
not represented the Church, our Lord had not said unto him, I will give unto
thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. For if that only was said to Peter,
The Church has no power of binding or loosing, and since the Church has that
power, Peter was the Sacrament or Figure of the whole Church, or mistically
represented the whole Church, when our Savior promised to him the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and that is the sum of the disput of Augustinus, tractat.
50. For satisfaction of the Reader we will set down his words which are these,
Nam si in Petro non esset Ecclesiae Sacramentum, non ei diceret Dominus, tibi
dabo claves regni coelorum, and quaecunque solveris in terra, soluta erunt in
coelo: and quaecunque ligaveris in terra, ligata erant and in coelr. Si hoc
Petro tantum dictum est, non facit hoc Ecclesia: Si autem and in Ecclesia fit,
ut quae in terra ligantur, in coelo ligentur, and quae soluuntur in terra,
soluantur in coelo, quia cum excommunicat Ecclesia, in coelo ligatur
excommunicatus: cum reconciliatur ab Ecclesia, in coelo soluitur
excommunicatus: si hoc, Ergo, in Ecclesia fit. Petrus quando claves accepit,
Ecclesiam sanstam significavit. By which it appears, that he expressly disputs
that Peter had not the keys given to him alone, because the whole Church used
them as well as he: and thence concluds, that he represented the whole Church,
when our Savior promised to him the keys: and therefore it is false which
Horantius affirms, That the whole Church got the keys in Peter, as Germany
gets the Empire, when any is made Emperor of Germany: Since all Germany does
not exercise the Imperial Authority as the whole Church does that of the Keys.

Bellarmin glosseth otherwise upon Augustinus, he affirms, Peter may be said
two ways to represent the Church. First, historically, as when any represents
that which is done by another, by that which is really done by himself: and so,
says he, Abraham having two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, represented God, who was
to have two peoples. The second way of Bellarmins representing, is called by
him Parabolick, viz. when any thing is represented by a probable fiction, not
really done: So our Savior preaching the Gospel, is signified by a sower of
good seed. He applies that Peter signified the Church the first way: so that
he truly, principally, and immediately got the keys; and in getting them,
signified the whole Church: which was to get them afterward in its own proper
way.

But it is answered, It is very ordinar with Bellarmin to spin out subtilties
nothing to the purpose to delude bis readers, when he is pus^ed: it were prolix
to retex his sophistry in this particular: we only answer, that Peter
represented the Church in none of those ways mentioned by Bellarmin, but in a
third, viz. As when a Society alike interessed in any privilege, has that
privilege given to them all, when it is given to any one of them: in which
case, every one of that Society has the benefit of that privilege as well,
and equally with him, to whom it was given in all their names.

Bellarmin objects, That it is not the meaning of Augustinus, that Peter got
the keys in the name of the rest as their Legate, or Vicar: Ergo, it is his
meaning, that Peter got them as their Moderator, or Prince: as when any thing
is given to a King, it may be said to be given to the whole Kingdom, because it
is given for the public utility of all.

But it is answered, It is true which Bellarmin affirms, that Peter did not get
the keys as a Legate, or Vicar gets any thing in the name of his King: for so
Peter had gotten nothing to himself, no more then an Ambassador representing
his King, marrying a wife to his King or in his Kings Name: but it does not
follow that Peter got the keys as Monarch of the Church, or as the Church got
them in Peter, as a Kingdom gets any thing given to their King: because it is
notoriously false, since the Church, according to Augustinus, had the power of
the keys, as well as Peter: but a Kingdom has not the use or property of that
which is given unto their King: and therefore we affirm, That Bellarmins
enumeration is still insufficient; for Peter got the keys neither as Vicar of
the Church, nor a Moderator or Prince of the Church, but as one of the Society
of the Pastors and Apostles of the Church, as if our Savior had said to Peter,
I give unto thee the power of the keys, and in thee to all Pastors, to be
alike exercised by thee and them.

Bellarmin instances that Augustinus affirms, that the Church was signified by
Peter, Propter eum quem gerebat Primatum, that is, Because of the Primacy he
had in the Church.

But it is answered, That Augustinus by Primacy means no other thing then
Apostleship, that is, Augustinus affirms, Peter had a Primacy in the Church,
because he was an Apostle in the Church: as he explains himself in many places,
as in his last Treatise upon John, he affirms that Peter signified the whole
Church, because of the Primacy of his Apostleship; propter Apostolatus
Primatum: he has the like words in his 23. Sermon upon the words of Christ,
and likewise upon Psalm 108. and especially, lib. 2. of Baptism against the
Donatists, he has these words, Quis nes cit illam Apostolatus Principatum,
cuilibet Episcopatui preferendum? Who knows not that the Primacy of an
Apostleship is to be preferred to any Bishopric? by which it is most evident,
that the meaning of Augustinus, affirming, Peter had a Supremacy in the Church,
is no other, then that he was an Apostle of the Church. Especially since
Augustinus disputed, that the keys were not given to Peter alone, but also to
the whole Church.

But Bellarmin instances, it is true, That the whole Church had the use of the
keys, as well as Peter, but by the gift of Peter, who distributed them to
other Pastors, according to his pleasure: himself only having them immediately
from Christ; as when a King, having his power immediately from God, communicats
his Jurisdiction to inferior Magistrates, in giving them particular charges of
exercising Jurisdiction.

But it is answered, This Gloss of Bellarmins is against all Antiquity:
innumerable testimonies of Fathers might be produced, that the other Apostles
had the keys given them as well as Peter: but Bellarmin cannot produce one
testimony to prove that the meaning of those Fathers is, That the keys were
immediately given to Peter, and by his communication distributed to the rest.
Nothing such appears out of Augustinus, but the contrair. Cyprianus expressly
affirms, That all the Apostles were of alike power with Peter. And Francisus de
Victoria, a great Popish Doctor, the most learned Divine that ever Spain
produced as he is called by Canus, loc. Theol, lib. 12. cap. 1. Relect. 2.
quest. 2. conclus. 3. and 4. Commenting upon that place of Cyprian de unita.
Eccles. expressly affirms, That all the Apostles received all the power both of
Order, and Jurisdiction immediately from Christ: and inveighs against the
ordinar Gloss upon that place, for distinguishing between Order and
Jurisdiction: that is for affirming, That all the Apostles had their Orders
immediately from Christ, but not their Jurisdiction, or the power of the keys:
which he affirms to be far from the meaning of Cyprian.

The third argument of Fathers, proving by consequence, that the keys were
given to others also beside Peter, is, because Peter spoke in the name of the
rest, or answered the question of our Savior for them all: Anselmus on Matthew
16. has these words, Notandum est, quod haec potestas, non solum Petro data
est: sed sicut Petrus, unus pro omnibus respondit, sic in Petro omnibus hanc
potestatem dedit: It is to be observed, that this power of the keys was not
only given to Peter, but as Peter alone answered for them all, so in Peter he
gave that power unto them all.

Bellarmin answers, That Peter answered for all as their Prince, Head, and
Mouth, not as one commissionat from them to answer in all their names: in which
case, he would have known what they were to answer to our Saviors question?
asking them what he was? But Peter did not know what the other Apostles would
answer to that question of our Savior; and therefore he answered as their
Prince and Head.

But it is replied, We grant that Peter was not commissionat from the rest to
answer for them; but we deny it to follow, that he answered as their Prince and
Head: there is amids, viz. he answered as one of their number, as when any is
riding out the way, he meets with a number of people, asks of them the right
way, or some other question: one more ready then the rest answers first. It is
notorious he had no commission from the rest to answer; and yet it does not
follow, that he is Head or Prince of the rest: by which it appears, that this
reasoning of Bellarmins is nothing else but Sophistry: and whereas Bellarmin
affirms, That Peter answered only for himself, and not for the rest, because he
knew not what they would answer; It is frivolous, because it was sufficient,
that Peter knew what they ought to have answered, if they answered aright:
Bellarmin urges, a reward is given to Peter in these words for his answer; but
since the others did not answer at all, but only himself* without commission
from the rest; It follows of necessity, that the reward, viz. the keys were
given to Peter alone, and not to the rest; especially, since our Savior
affirms, That it was revealed by God only to Peter, that Christ was the Son of
God.

But it is replied, The words of our Savior are, That the said mystery was
revealed to Peter by God only: but it does not follow, That it was revealed to
Peter only: that is uncertain, yea, rather notoriously false: Since Peter, John
^. 69. in the name of all the rest, has these words, And we believe, and are
sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God: by which it appears,
that the other disciples knew that mystery as well as Peter, since Peter
expressly affirms in that place, They all believed it.

Bellarmin instances, how know we that Peter spoke for the rest, and not for
himself alone? since it cannot be gathered from the Text. But it is answered
first, How knows Bellarmin that Peter answered for himself and not for the
rest? Since no such thing can be gathered from the Text. It is answered,
Secondly, That it is evident from the Text, that Peter answered for the rest:
because Christ asked not the question of Peter alone* but of them all: he
asks whom they thought he was: and since Peter immediately answered (being
more ready then the rest, as Chrysostom affirms) it is evident, that Peter
answered in the name of them all.

Franciscus Agricola, besides those reasons of Bellarmin, adds others to prove,
that Peter answered for himself alone, and not for the rest: His first reason
is this, Because he answered not for Judas, since Judas believed no such thing
as Christ was the Son of God; Ergo, he answered not for them all. But it is
answered, It does not follow. He answered not for them all, Because Judas
believed not: because, John 6. 69. Agricola will not deny that Peter answered
for them all; and yet, the not believing of Judas might as well militat against
his answering for them all, John 6. as Matthew 16. Peter answered, What they
all ought to have believed: and in so doing, answered for all, albeit they did
not all believe.

Another of Agricola his reasons not mentioned by Bellarmin is this, Our Savior
pronounced only Peter blessed, and not the other Apostles: Ergo, Peter answered
only for himself; and not for all: otherwise our Savior would have called them
all blessed.

But it is answered, Our Savior called only Peter blessed, because Peter only
answered: and so in pronouncing him blessed, He called them all blessed,
because he answered in the name of them all. So, Hilarious, de Vinctat. 6.
alluding to this place, says O ye holy and blessed men, who procured the keys
^o the Kingdom of Heaven^, by the merit of your Faith: In which words he
applies that blessing of Christ to all alike.

Agricola has three other Reasons, Proving that Peter answered only for
himself, and not for all; but they are the same with those of Bellarmin, which
we answered already: and thus much of the keys, Matthew 16. 19. which is the
second argument pretended by the Romish Doctors, for proving that Peter was
instituted Oecumenick Bishop by Christ.

CHAP. IX. Of John 21. 15, 16, 17. Or feed my Sheep.
THe third argument, proving that our Savior ordained Peter Monarch of the
Church, is taken from the words of our Savior, John 21. 15, 16, 17. where
thrice our Savior commands him to feed his Sheep, viz. to feed his Lambs, verse
15. his Sheep, verse 16, 17.

But it is answered, That argument is inconsequent; for although our Savior
enjoined the feeding of his Sheep to Peter, it does not follow that he ordained
him Oecumenick Bishop: for three reasons The first is, because feeding of
Christ's Sheep is not to command Christians, nor to exercise dominion over them,
as a Monarch: Since the Apostle Peter himself, in his first Epistle, cap. 5.
verse 3. expressly forbids dominion to those to whom the feeding of Christ's
Flock was enjoined, verse 2.

Bellarmin, lib. 1. cap. 15. de Pont. Romans endeavors to prove, that in the word
Feeding, supreme Jurisdiction over the whole Church is committed to Peter by
several reasons. The first is, that it comprehends all the duty of a Pastor:
which consists not only in Ministering Food, but also in Governing and
Chastising: As appears by our Savior using the Greek verb, (...), which
signifies to feed by commanding, in which sense, Kings are called by Homer,
(...), Pastors of the people.

But it is answered, Bellarmin subtilty in such Grammaticisms has no ground:
Our Savior in the same place, uses the Greek verb, (...), as well as, (...):
both which, not only the Syrian Interpreters, but also the Latin renders the
same way, viz. to feed. But it is notorious that the verb (...), imports no
dominion at all; but only Ministration of food. Secondly, albeit there were
such a Mystery in the Greek verb, (...), as to signify Jurisdiction; Yet it is
enjoined to Peter, over the Flock only, and not over the Pastors: which does
not conclude an Oecumenick Bishop, to whom Bellarmin gives authority of feeding
the Pastors, as well as the Flock.

Bellarmins second reason, by which he proves that supreme authority is given
to Peter, by these words of our Savior, Feed my Sheep, is, because several
Fathers, calls that which was enjoined to Peter, in these words, (...),
Praefecturam, or, A having authority over the Flock of Christ: So Chrysostomus,
lib. 2. de Sacerdotio, and Augustnius on John 21.

But it is answered, Chrysostom is disputing there of the Priesthood, which is
common to all Priests, and not of an Oecumenick Bishop: Neither can it be
denied, that any Bishop has that authority over his own Flock, which is
mentioned by Chrysostom in that place: viz. Governing and Chastising, which is
also the meaning of Augustinus. Bellarmin cites an other testimony of
Gregorius, de cura Pastorali, where Pastors are called by him Rectors; but his
meaning is the same, as appears by the scope of his disput, needless to be
inserted: he is enumerating these duties belonging to a Pastor: amongst which,
he does not mention one peculiar to an Oecumenick Bishop, and which is not
common to all Pastors.

Bellarmin uses other reasons, besides these two, which in effect, are the
same with his first reason: It is very ordinar with him, to repeat the same
arguments in other words, to make ignorants believe that his Army is numerous.

The second reason, wherefore our Savior in these words, Feed my Sheep, injoyns
no universal jurisdiction over the Church, is, because he injoyns the same to
others beside Peter: Which is proved, First by Scripture: Secondly, by Fathers.
The passages of Scripture, are John 20. 21. where our Savior affirms, As my
Father sent me, so send I you: Which words are expounded by Cyrillus, lib. 12.
in John, by Chrysostomus, hom. 85. upon John, By Theophylactus upon this place
to this purpose: viz. Cyrillus affirms, That all the Apostles were ordained
Doctors of the whole World, to inlighten not only the Jews, but all the Nations
of the World. Chrysostomus and Theophylactus, interpret these words, That
Christ enjoined his own work unto all the Apostles.

The second passage of Scripture is, Matthew 28. 19. Go therefore and teach all
Nations^, the Greek verb, (...), to Teach, imports all the authority that a
Master has over his Disciples; viz. To Govern them, to Chastise them, and not
only to teach them: And consequently, is of as large an extent as, (...), to
Feed: Of which Bellarmin brags so much: And thus much of Scripture.

In the next place, it is proved by Antiquity, that nothing peculiar was
imagined to Peter, in these words, Feed my Sheep. The first testimony is from
the third Epistle amongst these of Cyprian, in which the Clergy of Rome, speaks
thus to the Clergy of Carthage* Sed and Simoni sic dicit, diligis me?
respondit, diligo. Ait ei, pasce oves meas. Hoc verbum factum, ex ipso actu quo
cessit, agnoscimus: and caeteri Discipuli similiter. By which words it appears,
that it was the opinion of the Clergy of Rome, in the days of Cyprian, That the
feeding of the Flock of Christ, was enjoined to others, viz. to all the
Apostles as well as to Peter.

Cyprianus himself, de Vnitate Ecclesiae, They are all Pastors, but the Flock
is one, which all the Apostles feed with one consent; and a little before,
immediately after he had cited these words of our Savior, Feed my Sheep, he
subjoyns, That Christ gave to all the Apostles alike power after his
Resurrection.

Augustinus, tract. 123. upon John, Chrysostomus, de Sacerdotio, lib. 2.
Basilius, cap. 22. of the Constitution of Monks, all expressly affirm, That the
feeding of the Flock of Christ, was committed to all Pastors and Bishops, by
our Savior in these words. It is needless to set down the words of these
Fathers, since these testimonies are granted by our Adversaries; who
notwithstanding of them, endeavor so to prove, that these words of our Savior,
were in a peculiar manner directed to Peter. So Bellarmin and Sanderus, they
reason thus.

First, Bellarmin takes much pains to prove, that our Savior directed his
speech only to Peter, which none denis: Quid tum postea? He instances, that the
rest are excluded by these words of our Savior, Love thou me more then those?
By the threefold reiteration of that question; by these words of our Savior,
when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands and by these words
of Peter, verse 21. Lord* what shall this man do? And of the answer of Christ,
What is that to thee? Follow thou me. But, say they, Peter would never have
asked what John should do? If Christ had said to John, Feed my Sheep, neither
would the Lord have answered, What is that to thee? Follow thou me: but he
would have answered, He shall feed my sheep, as thou shall.

But it is answered, All this reasoning is nothing else, but a rible rabble of
sophistry; First, Bellarmin sophisticats in stateing of the question: as if
Protestants denied, that these words of our Savior were directed to Peter
alone: And therefore he proves, by all those circumstances foresaid, that our
Savior spoke only to Peter, which none denis. The thing which is denied, is,
the consequence, or it does not follow, That the feeding of the Flock of
Christ, was only committed to Peter, because the words of our Savior were only
directed to him: no more then it follows, That Adam and Eve should only
increase and multiply, because God directed his speech to them only.

Secondly, Bellarmin does not consider, for what reason our Savior directed his
speech to Peter only, in these words, Feed my Sheep? It was not, because it was
his intention to give to Peter Jurisdiction over the whole Church: but for
other two reasons. The First is, because Peter had thrice denied him: so
Cyrillus in John, lib. 12. cap. 64. who affirms so much. And likewise Isidorus,
Pelusiota, lib. 1. epist. 103. and also, epist. 356. and Nazianzenus, in his
Oration in Sancta Lumina, has these words, Christ admitted Peter an Apostle
again, and healed his threefold denying of him, by a threefold interrogation,
to which Peter made a threefold confession: by which words, an other reason
appears, wherefore our Savior directed his speech to Peter alone? viz. To
restore him to his Apostleship, which he had lost, by denying Christ. Cyrillus
in the foresaid place affirms, Although all the Disciples were sore afraid, and
ran away, when Christ was apprehended, yet the crime of Peter was greatest,
because he denied him thrice in so short a time: where he affirms also, that
the Apostleship was restored unto him, by these words of our Savior, Feed my
Sheep. After his answering the threefold interrogation of Christ, he had
professed thrice, He loved Christ: by testimonies of which Fathers, it appears,
that nothing peculiar to Peter was given in these words, Feed my Sheep. Since
the Apostleship is common to Peter, with the other Apostles. And therefore,
Peter was not ordained Oecumenick Bishop in these words.

The third Sophistry of Bellarmin, consists in his reasoning thus, If Peter,
says he, had believed that these words of Christ had belonged to John, as well
as to himself; or if our Savior had enjoined to John, the feeding of his Sheep,
as well as unto Peter, Peter would never have demanded of our Savior, What John
should do? Neither would our Savior have answered him, What is that to thee?
Follow thou me: For Peter would have known what John should do; viz. Feed
Christ's Sheep, and our Savior would have answered him, John shall feed my Sheep
as thou do.

But it is answered, This disputation of Bellarmins is most shameless babbling
for that question of Peter, Asking what John should do? And that answer of
Christ, What is that to thee? are not relative to these words of Christ, Feed
my Sheep: but to these, verse 18. When thou shall be old thou shall stretch
forth thine hands: showing to Peter what death he should die? Whereupon Peter
asks Christ, What John should do? or what should become of him? or what death
he should die? To which our Savior answers, What is that to thee? That this is
the true gloss, appears by the text it self, by the Fathers, Cyrillus,
Euthymius, by the ordinar gloss, by all the Ancient Popish Doctors upon the
place, As Aquinas, Carthusianus, Gorranus, Cajetanus, Toletus, by late Popish
Doctors, as Maldonatus, Barradas, and Emmanuel Sa: So that Bellarmins gloss is
nothing else but one of his new devised fictions, by which he and others of late
endeavor to uphold the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, contrair to common
sense, Scripture, and the whole current of Popish Doctors themselves, who lived
before these last times.

Fourthly, Bellarmin comes on with an other of his glosses, of like nature:
viz. seeing that it could not be denied, that other Apostles and Pastors beside
Peter, were enjoined to feed the Flock of Christ; since it was so clearly
asserted by Scripture, and Fathers; He invents a new distinction, that they did
it by the permissiom of Peter, or to use his own words, Quia vocantur a Pe^ro
in partem solicitudinis: that is, because they had a calling from Peter so to
do, or, Were admitted by him to a part of the care.

But it is answered, This distinction of Bellarmins has not the least ground.
It is against Scripture, John 20. 21. and Matthew 28. 19. as both passages are
expounded by the Fathers: It is contrair to Fathers, as was proved by the
testimonies of the Clergy of Rome, of Cyrianus, of Augustinus, Chrysostomus and
Basilius. Finally, it is contrair to Popish Doctors, as Franciscus de Victoria,
who (as we showed before) disputed expressly, That all the Apostles had not only
their Order, but also their Jurisdiction immediately from Christ: And
reprehended the ordinar gloss, for using that distinction, in exposition of
that place of Cyprian, de Vnitate Ecclesiae. All the Apostles after the
Resurrection had alike authority and power from Christ. Neither can Bellarmin
produce one testimony of Antiquity to maintain his gloss, viz. That Peter
immediately had the power of feeding the Flock of Christ from Christ himself,
and the other Apostles and Pastors had it only from Peter.

Sanderus, lib. 6. cap. 4. of his Monarchy, uses another argument, from those
words of our Savior, Peter love thou me more then these? From which words he
concluds, That the Feeding of the flock of Christ, was enjoined immediately only
to Peter; because, says he, Peter loved Christ better then the other Apostles
did: and therefore, the ^eeding of the flock of Christ was committed to him
alone, as the reward of his love.

But it is answered, First, it cannot be gathered from the text, that Peter
loved Christ better then the other Apostles did? since Christ only asked him,
whither he loved him better then the other Apostles did? and Peter answered,
thou know that I love thee: but he adds, not better then the other Apostles
do. 2. Tho it were granted (as some of the Fathers maintain) that Peter loved
Christ better then the other Apostles did, it is inconsequent for that reason
to conclude, that Peter had Jurisdiction over the rest: for the same argument
would conclude, that the Apostle John had Jurisdiction over those Apostles, who
loved not Christ so well as himself: that Stephanus a Deacon had Jurisdiction
over Nicolaus, and other Deacon: that Peter himself had more ample Jurisdiction
then Sylvester second, Alexander sixth, and other Monsters, which were Bishops
of Rome: which Bellarmin will not grant readily, since all Bishops of Rome, are
in his opinion, of alike authority with Peter.

Lastly, Turrianus, lib. 2. cap. 22 in his defense against Zadeel, reasons
thus; Let it be granted (says he) that all the Apostles, and all Pastors had
their authority of feeding the Flock of Christ^ it does not hinder a
distinction of Order among them, not though that authority be equal, as they
are Pastors: yet it does hinder one to be a Presbyter, an other to be a Bishop
above him, another to be universal Bishop above all: as all men, qua homines,
or as men are equals, yet some of them are Kings, others subjects.

But it is answered, It far less follows, that there are several degrees of
Church Orders, because they are of alike authority, or that because these
words, Feed my sheep, were enjoined with alike authority to Linus and Cletus
Bishops of Rome: therefore the one of them was Oecumenick Bishop, the other
not. The truth is, to answer in earnest to Turrianus, its false which he
affirms, That the equality of Authority can consist Jure Divino with
Subordination of one Bishop to another. All Bishops are Jure Divino of alike
Authority. Subordination, or distinction of degrees in Bishops are Jure humano,
as shall be proved in the following Books.

We have vindicated two reasons, why these words of our S^vior, Feed my sheep,
conclude not that Peter was ordained Oecumenick Bishop. The first was, That
feeding of the sheep of Christ, inferrs no dominion over them. The second was,
because our Savior enjoined the Feeding of his sheep to others, as well as to
Peter: which we proved by Scripture, and Fathers, and answered all what our
Adversaries objected to the contrair: Now follows a third Reason, wherefore
those words of our Savior to Peter, Feed my sheep, does not conclude him
Oecumenick Bishop; and is this: because many were Christ's sheep whom Peter did
not feed, as the Indians, Ethiopians, and Gentiles committed to the Apostleship
of Paul: yea, the very Apostles themselves were the sheep of Christ, and yet we
do not read in Scripture, or in writings of the Ancients, that ever Peter did
instruct, correct, or send any of the other Apostles, or that he had any way
dominion over them.

Bellarmin steps in, endeavoring to prove, that Peter was enjoined by these
words, Feed my sheep, to feed the other Apost^es also: he endeavors to prove it
two ways. First, reasoning from words: next, by arguments. He reasons from
words two ways. First, by a distinction of sheep from lambs; he reasons thus
our Savior says to Peter twice, Feed my lambs, and once, Feed my sheep: But,
says he, By twice naming of lambs, he means two peoples, Jews and Gentiles:
by sheep, he means Pastors, or the Apostles themselves. And so according to
this witty Gloss, Peter is commanded to feed the postles also. But if ye object
to him, That the Greek Text marrs all his subtilty, because it has twice, Feed
my sheep, and but once, Feed my lambs: He cuts that knot, by telling you that
the Greek Text is corrupt: which is as much as to say, That the Greek copies,
approved by the Ancients, (as shall be proved, lib. 6. is corrupt, and that the
Latin version (in which there is not so much as one sound line) is pure, and
that to maintain a fantastic, ridiculous, groundless Gloss of a Jesuit,
against Scripture, against Antiquity, and an object of laughter, to the most
Learned of the Roman Church themselves.

And first, It is against Scripture, who in that sort of speech takes evermore
sheep and lambs indifferently for the same thing, Matthew 10. 16. It is said,
Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves, Luke, cap. 10. verse 3.
speaking of the same Mission, says, Go your ways: Behold, I send you forth as
lambs amongst wolves. The Syrian Interpreter in both these places, calls the
Apostles Lambs amongst Wolves; yea, our Savior, Acts 8. 32. is compared both to
a sheep and a lamb, from Isai. 53. 7. as to one thing: He was led like a sheep
to the slaughter, or like a lamb dumb before his shearer: What thinks Bellarmin
of his subtle distinction now? Secondly, all Antiquity upon the said passage
of John 21. 15, 16, 17. interprets lambs and sheep to be one thing. So
Augustinus, tractat. 123. upon John; Cyrillus upon John, lib. 12. cap. 64.
Chrysostomus on John, Homily 87. Ambrosius, or the Author of those sermons
attributed to him, Sermon 46. It is needless to mention other Fathers.

Thirdly, Bellarmin exposes himself to the laughter of his own fellow Jesuits,
as appears by two testimonies. The first is of Maldonat the Jesuit, upon John
21. Where he has those words, Agnos esse eos, qui in grege, id est, in
Ecclesia Christi essent, dubium non est, nec subtiliter disputandum, cur agnos
potius, quam oves appellaverit? quod qui fecerit, videat etiam atque etiam, ne
doctis hominibus risum praebeat; where he expressly affirms, Those who make such
distinctions, as Bellarmin, between lambs and sheep, exposes themselves to the
laughter of learned men.

The second testimony is of Jansenius in his Concordance, It is needless to set
down his testimony, the substance of it is, That there is no my stery at all
that Christ now says, Feed my she^p, then feed my lambs. The Evangelist only
changes the terms, or words, signifying the same thing, Elegantiae causa, for
elegancy, or ornatness.

Bellarmins second reason from words, is from those words of our Savior, My
sheep, my lambs. All the Apostles, says Bellarmin, are the sheep of Christ:
Ergo, Peter is commanded to feed them all by those words, Feed my sheep; since
none are excepted, and therefore the indefinit Precept, Feed my sheep, is
equivalent to this universal Precept, Feed all my sheep. Which Turrianus
confirms not only by the Pronoun (...), but also by the Greek article (...) or
(...), which article^ and Pronoun evermore makes an indefinit universal.

But it is answered, This argument of Bellarmins is of like solidity with the
former. First, it is against Scripture, to call an indefinit proposition
universal, as Acts 2. 17. And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: This one
instance overthrows the sophistry of Bellarmin and Turrianus. These
propositions are indefinit: if universal, they were notoriously false; and yet
they have both the Articles (...) and (...), and the pronoun (...).

Secondly, Albeit all the Apostles be the Sheep of Christ, yet some of Christ's
Sheep are only fed by himself immediately, such as the Apostles: others are fed
by those whom Christ appoints, and those are only the Sheep our Savior means in
these words, Feed my Sheep: viz. all others besides the Apostles, which are
alike fed by all the Apostles.

In the next place, Bellarmin from his sophistry in words, falls to his
sophistry in arguments. His first argument is this, These words, Feed my Sheep,
are all one, as if our Savior had said, Rule my Sheepfold, or Flock: but the
Sheepfold of Christ is only one, in which the Apostles are also comprehended;
Ergo, our Savior in these words, injoyns Peter to feed the Apostles also.

The sophistry of this reason appears by the parallel of these words, Matthew
28. 19. Go ye teaching all Nations, which questionless is to teach the
Sheepfold of Christ which is but one. And since Bellarmin will not deny, that
Peter is one of that Sheepfold: Ergo, according to Bellarmins Logic, all the
Apostles are enjoined in these words, to teach Peter, or to feed Peter: which
Bellarmin will not deny to be a great paradox.

The sophistry of this sort of reasoning, is all one with that, making pasce
oves meas, an universal Precept; which is only, indefinit. There is a great
difference also between unum Ovile, and universum Ovile: Vnum Ovile is
recommended to every Bishop, but not universum Ovile: in a word, as we said
before these Sheep and Lambs, are meant others besides the Apostles, and not
the Apostles themselves.

Bellarmins second sophistry is this, Our Savior in these words, commends unto
Peter, either all his Sheep, or none of them, or some certain indefinit Sheep,
or indefinitly Sheep: Its false, that no Sheep are commended to Peter, or that
some certain Sheep are commended to Peter, or indefinit Sheep are commended to
Peter: Ergo, All the Sheep are commended to Peter, and consequently the
Apostles themselves.

But it is answered, First, we retort the sophistry, Matthew 28. 19. our Savior
injoyns all the Apostles to teach, either some certain person, or no persons,
or indefinit persons, or all persons. But the first three are absurd, (if
Bellarmins Logic hold) Ergo, they are commanded to teach all persons, and
consequently Peter himself: which Bellarmin will not deny to be a great Paradox.

Secondly, ommitting these foolries, we affirm, That our Savior in those words
injoynes Peter, and all the Apostles, to teach that doctrine which he had
revealed unto themselves immediately: that is, as he had fed them, so they
should feed others beside themselves.

Bosius de signis comes in with a notable sophism which is this, our Savior
(says he) says not to Peter, Feed my sheep hereafter, but in the present
tense, Feed now my sheep: But when our Savior spoke these words, he had no
other sheep but the Apostles: Ergo, says he, our Savior commands Peter to feed
the Apostles.

But it is answered, we retort the argument just as we did before, our Savior,
Matthew 28. 19. affirms, Teach ye all Nations in the present tense, but there
were no other Christians to be taught then, but the Apostles (if Bozius subsume
right.) Ergo, the Apostles there, are commanded to teach Peter, which he will
not easily grant.

It is answered, Secondly, there is no difficulty in the words at all, the
meaning of our Savior is no other, then that Peter being by these words
ordained an Apostle, or restored to his Apostleship (according to some Fathers)
is enjoined to put his function in practice, with the first occasion: in the
same sense, that the other Apostles, Matthew 28. 19. are enjoined, to go and
teach all nations, who were subjected to them, by right of their Apostleship:
But in this place, John 21. to affirm, that the other Apostles were subjected
to Peter, by reason of his Apostleship, is petitio principii, which we affirm
to be notoriously false.

CHAP. X. Of the Sophistry of Gregorius De Valentia, and the Candide Confession
of Cardinal Cusanus.
WE have prolixly disputed those three passages of Scripture pretended by our
Adversaries, to prove that the Apostle Peter; was ordained Monarch of the
Church by Christ: we will conclude the disput with two passages, the one of
Gregorius De Valentia, that famous Jesuit: the other of Cusanus, that no less
famous Cardinal. The ingenuity of the last will be the more perspicuous by the
impudent Sophistry of the first, which is this.

If our Savior, says he, had said to Peter, I will not build the Church upon
thee, as upon a Rock: or thou art not the Rock upon which I will build my
Church: or I will not give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: what
thou binds on earth shall not be bound in Heaven: and what thou loosest on
earth, shall not be loosed in Heaven? Feed thou not my sheep: without all
question, the Heretics would conclude, that our Savior did not ordain the
Apostle Peter, Head and Monarch of the Church: and therefore since our Savior
said unto Peter, Thou art the Rock, upon which I will build my Church: I will
give unto th^^ the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: what thou binds on earth
shall be bound in Heaven: and what thou loosest on earth shall be loosed in
Heaven. And since our Savior enjoined him to feed his sheep: therefore says
he, It cannot be denied, that our Savior in these three passages, ordained the
Apostle Peter Monarch of the Church: Because, if the negation of those things
conclude, that Peter was not ordained Head of the Church by Christ, the
affirmation of them concluds he was: having thus reasoned, he falls to the
commendation of his own acumen: and of his invincible Argument: affirming, (not
without laughter and astonishment of those who read him) Hic nisivel
conscientia reclamante, vel praecipitante inscitia, and incogitantia, nihil ab
adversariis responderi posse, certissimus sane sum. That is I am certainly
persuaded, says he, That nothing can be answered to this argument by our
adversaries, except they be blinded either with ignorance, or fight against the
light of their own conscience.

When I read this argument of Valentia, as it is related by Chameir, tom. 2.
lib. 11. cap. 19. number. 11. I believed that Chameir had mistaken him, or else
that there was vitium Typographi, or a fault of the Printer: but when I
consulted Valentia himself in his Analysis, lib. 7. cap. 7. and his Commentarys
upon Thomas. I found to my astonishment, that he so played the fool, and then
bragged of his madness. This argument of his is a most ridiculous Sophism: and
I cannot but admire that any learned man (such as Valentia) was not ashamed to
make use of such an Argument, much more to brag of it as invincible.

The ground of his argument consist in a Topic Axiom of his own divising
against all the rules of Logic: viz. If the negation of a certain particular
conclude any thing not to be: then the affirmation of the said particular
coucluds the said thing to be, as one would reason thus, if the Apostle Peter
was not a Pastor of the Church, he was not Oecumenick Bishop, Ergo, if he was a
Pastor of the Church, he was Oecumenick Bishop: which argument would prove any
Pastor of the Church, or all Pastors of the Church to be Oecumenick Bishops. So
this axiom of Valentia is the foundation of a Syllogism consisting of
affirmatives in the second figure: as one would reason thus.

An Oecumenick Bishop is a Doctor, or Pastor of the Church, Peter and Paul were
Doctors and Pastors of the Church; Ergo, Peter and Paul were Oecumenick
Bishops.
Who sees not this reasoning to be childish sophistry? how can any learned man
brag, that such an argument as this is invincible? It is notorious, if we
endeavor to reason according to that Axiom of Valentia: We must either reason
thus, in the second figure, where all the Propositions are true, but the
argument consequent, because consisting of Affirmatives, or else if we reason
in the first figure, the Proposition or Major is notoriously false, viz.

All Pastors of the Church are Oecumenick Bishops, Peter and Paul are Pastors
of the Church; Ergo, They are Oecumenick Bishops.
So it appears, that the Axiom of Valentia is false; viz. when any thing is
disproved by the negation of a particular: It is proved by the affirmation of
it. For although it follow, Simon Magus was no Pastor of the Church, Ergo, he
was not Oecumenick Bishop.
Yet it does not follow, Gregorius de Valentia was a Doctor or Pastor of the
Church, Ergo, he was Oecumenick Bishop.


And thus we have retexed that invincible argument of Gregorius de Valentia,
viz. If Peter did not feed the flock of Christ, and had not the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, it follows necessarily that he was not Oecumenick Bishop?
Ergo, if he did feed the sheep of Christ, and had the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; It follows, that he was Oecumenick Bishop. Which argument concluds
alike with this.

If Bucephalus be not a man, he cannot be a Jesuit; Ergo, if Luther be a man,
he must be a Jesuit: and thus much of Valentia.

We have seen how our Adversaries dispute, those three Foundations of the
Monarchy of Peter, and consequently, of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
upon which the truth or falsehood of the Roman faith depends: since without it,
the faith of the Church of Rome (as Bellarmin himself confesses in the preface
of his books, de Pont. Rom.) Is a Body without a head, a house without a
foundation, Moonshine without the Sun. Which is as much to say, as the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, having no ground in Scripture and Antiquity,
the faith of the Modern Roman Church is no faith at all. What ground the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, or of Peter, has in these three
forementioned passages of Scripture, from Matthew 16. 28. Matthew 16. 19. John
21. 15, 16, 17. in the opinion of the Ancients? We have prolixly showed, by
which appears, what little shelter our Adversaries have in Antiquity? of which
they brag so much. They brag also of Unity, or concord among themselves, and
therefore it will not be unpleasing to set down the opinion of Cardinal Cusanus
(as great an Antiquary, as learned a man, of as much Intergrity as any,
whomever the Church of Rome produced) concerning these three foresaid passages
of Scripture; upon which the Roman faith is founded: His words, lib. 2. cap.
13. concord, Cathol. Are these following, Nihil enim dictum est ad Petrum, quod
etiam alijs dictum non sit: nonne sicut Petro dictum est, quodcunque ligaveris,
ita alijs est dictum, quemcunque ligaveritis? Et quanquam Petro dictum est, Tu
es Petrus. Si Petrus per Petram lapis fundamenti Ecclesiae intelligi deheret,
tunc secundum, S. Hieronymum ita similiter alij Apostoli fuerunt lapides, Apoc.
21: Et sicut dictum est Petro, Pasce Oves, tamen ista Pastura est in verbo and
exemplo, quae praecipitur alijs Apostolis, ite in mundum universum, etc.

It is Englished, thus, Nothing was said to Peter, which was not said to the
other Apostles: as it was said unto Peter, What ever thou shall bind, etc. Was
it not also said to the rest, Whom soever ye shall bind, etc? And although it
was said unto Peter, Thou art Peter, if Peter be signified by the Rock, as a
stone of the foundation of the Church: then according to Hieronymus, the other
Apostles were also foundation stones, Apoc. 21. And as it was said to Peter,
Feed my Sheep, nevertheless, that feeding consists in teaching, and example,
which is enjoined to the other Apostles also, in these words, Go ye teaching
all Nations. And thus much Cusanus, in which words although a Cardinal, yet he
shows himself a Protestant, in the exposition of these places, which are the
chief basis of the Modern Roman faith: and he proves his exposition by
Scripture, and Antiquity: Which is as much to say, that in his opinion to wrest
these three passages, to prove the institution of Peter Monarch of the Church,
is against both Scripture, and Antiquity: Yea, in an other place, viz. did. in
novo 24. quest. 1. he expressly affirms, That it is most certain that Peter got
no more power from Christ, then the other Apostles; his words are, Sed scimus
quod Petrus nihil plus potestatis a Christo accepit alijs Apostalis: and
because they distinguish Equality of Order, from Equality of Jurisdiction; that
is, all the Apostles had equal power of Order, but not of Jurisdiction. And
whereas, Secondly, they distinguish mediate power from immediate power, behold
their Unity, yet in both these distinctions: Franciscus de Victoria ( according
to Canus, loc. theol. lib. 12. cap. 1. the learned Divine of Spain) Relect.
2. quest. 2. conclus. 3. and 4. has these words, Potestatem Apostoli
receperunt immediate a Christo, quod pro certo mihi videtur pronunciandum. Haec
est aperte sententia Cypriani, epist. de unitate Ecclesiae: hoc erant caeteri
Apostoli quod Petrus, nec audienda est glossa, dicens, Hoc non intelligi de
potestatis plenitudine, ut patet apud Cyprianum. Quod pro certo mihi videtur
pronunciandum: In which words, he not only affirms, That all the Apostles had
their power immediately from Christ: but also, alike power immediately from
Christ: reprehending that ordinar distinction of the Roman Church, viz. That
all the Apostles although they had their power immediately from Christ, yet not
secundum plenitudinem potestatis, which he proves by that passage of Cyprian,
de unitate Ecclesiae, affirming, What ever Peter was, the other Apostles were
the same, of alike power and dignity with him. And thus much of these three
famous passages of Scripture, Matthew 16. 18. and 19. and John 21. v. 15, 16,
17. all the grounds which these of the Church of Rome have, to prove that the
blessed Apostle Peter, was ordained by our Savior, visible Monarch of the
Church, or Head of the Church under himself.

CHAP. XI. Of first Peter, Fifth verse Vindicated.
ALthough Protestants be not obliged by law of Disputation, to prove a
negative: or that Peter was not ordained Oecumenick Bishop by Christ (it being
enough for them, to refute these arguments of our Adversaries, endeavoring to
prove he was) yet since the Spirit of God, (foreseeing that the supremacy of
Peter would be the pretended foundation of that Kingdom of Antichrist) has
recorded several passages in Scripture, expressly inhibiting, and militating
against that function of Visible Head, and Oecumenick Bishop. Therefore these
passages ought not to be neglected (since they are recorded in Scripture for
our instruction) but on the contrair, diligently examined, and vindicated, from
the perplexed sophistry of our Adversaries. Their offensive sophistry, in those
three places which we have already disputed, was very great: their defensive in
these three following is no less: But in a fourth place claimed by both sides
most admirable.

Our Adversaries pretended three arguments, to prove the institution of Peter's
Monarchy of the Church. First, Because the Church was built upon him. Secondly,
Because the keys of Heaven were promised to him. Thirdly, Because our Savior
directed these words to him, Feed my Sheep. The Protestants disput against the
supremacy of Peter's institution by Christ, by three arguments also. The first
is, because all Domination is forbidden in Church Officers. The second is,
because there is no Head in the Church but only Christ. The third is because
the Apostles puts more persons then one in the first or highest place of the
Hierarchy of the Church.

The first argument, then, is this, All dominion is forbidden in the Church,
but the institutiou of Peter's Monarchy of the Church, or an Oecumenick Bishop,
inferrs domination: Ergo, the office of an Oecumenick Bishop is forbidden in
the Church. The Minor is proved by 1. Peter 5. 2. and 3. Feed the Flock of God,
which depends upon you, caring for it not by constraint; but willingly, not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as though ye were Lords over Gods
heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the Flock.

Sanderus, lib. 6. cap. 1. Of his Monarchy, seems to deny the Major, viz. That
an Oecumenick Bishop inferrs domination: Affirming it inferrs only Primacy, but
he is abandoned by all the Doctors of the Church of Rome; since it cannot be
denied, that the Bishop of Rome has domination (and as shall immediately be
proved) Tyranick domination. And therefore, all the Doctors of the Church of
Rome distinguish, viz. that Tyranick domination is only forbidden, 1. Peter 5.
they deny that the domination of an Oecumenick Bishop is Tyranical.

But it is replied, First, that all domination is forbidden, and not only
Tyranical domination. Secondly, the domination of an Oecumenick Bishop, is
tyranical, as it is now excercised by the Bishop of Rome.

Haius our Countryman, disput. lib. 1. answers that Peter 1. 5. forbidds
only, tyrannical domination, which he proves by the Greek verb, (...), used by
the Apostle in the said place, which evermore imports tyrannical domination, as
the verb, (...), signifies to exercise dominion lawfully.

But he is mistaken: Both these verbs are used promiscuously in Scripture for
the same: both signifying lawful dominion, or exercising dominion lawfully, as
appears by comparing, Matthew 20. 25. and Mark 10. 42. where the verb, (...) is
used, speaking how the Kings of the Gentiles exercise dominion over their
Subjects? But, Luke 22. 25. speaking of the same Lording, he uses the other
Greek verb, (...); Whereby it appears that these two Greek verbs signify both
one sort of ruling which is lawful: and not the one of them used by Peter, 1.
5. signifies tyrannical domination: Since none will deny, that the ruling, or
domination of the Kings of the Gentiles, may be lawful domination. Which is
further confirmed, because the Septuagints, speaking of lawful domination, in
many places uses the same Greek verb, (...), made use of by Peter, 1. 5. 3. as
Psalm 72. 8. and 110. 2. and Genesis 1. 28. other innumerable places might be
added, but these are sufficient.

It is answered, Secondly, Although it were granted, that tyrannical domination
were only forbidden, Peter 1. 5. yet it quite overthrowes an Oecumenick Bishop,
Or the domination now exercised by the Bishop of Rome, then which no greater
tyranny can be imagined, since he takes upon himself, supreme dominion: 1. In
Spirituals. 2. In Temporals. 3. Over Souls departed. 4. Over Angels. 5. He
takes upon him titles proper to God himself. 6. Hears blasphemous comparisons
of himself with Christ, made to himself by others: not only not punishing these
blaspheming Parasyt^, but also hearing them patiently, and rewarding them.
These six particulars seem incredible, notwithstanding that they are the
doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome, and particular Church of Rome (the
infallibility of which Bellarmin with great animosity endeavors to demonstrate,
lib. 4. de Pont. Romans cap. 4.) appears by what follows, tracing these six
particulars in order.

And first, He assumes to himself Infallibility in Cathedra; that is, Teaching
the whole Church he cannot err: which is most abominable tyranny: since under
the pain of Heresy we are bound to believe a Pope, if he shall teach Heresy.
They strive to elude this, Because a Pope cannot teach Heresy to the whole
Church. Which assertion of theirs is false, as appears by these following
reasons. First, It is granted by them all, that Popes may be most wicked men;
yea, and Magicians. But it is madness to affirm, that men living in paction
with the Devil, cannot err, teaching the whole Church. Secondly, It is evident
by History, and confessed by Barronius himself, Anno 538. number. 20. and
Liberatus, breviar. cap. 22. that Vigilius Bishop of Rome, obtained that
Bishopric from the Empress Theodora: and from Belisarius General to
Justinianus the Emperor, by promising to the Empress to cass and abrogat the
Council of Chalcedon, to establish by authority the Eutychian Heresy, and by
promising gold to the said Belisarius: and likewise that he wrote several
Epistles to several persons, confirming them in the Eutychian Heresy. But it
is impudence to deny, that any entering to the Bishopric of Rome, by such
means, can be infallible in teaching the Church. Thirdly, They who affirm and
teach that a Bishop of Rome is infallible in Cathedra, fights against reason,
common sense, and the light of all History; by which it appears, that several
Popes have not only been condemned by other Popes, and general Councils, for
Heretics, but also for teaching Heresy: Of which we shall give many instances*
part 3. lib. 2. tedious to be inserted here; we will only mention Honorius
Bishop of Rome, who was condemned as an Heretic by the sixth General Council,
act: 12. and 13. by the seventh General Council in the last ^ct. by the eight
General Council, act. 7. And likewise it appears by the records of the said
Councils, that the said Honorius was declared an Heretic, by three Bishops of
Rome, Agatho, Leo second, and Adrianus second: and lest they think to escape
this difficulty by distinguishing (as they use to do in such cases) that
Honorius taught Heresy as a private person, and not in Cathedra: It is evident
by the 12. and 13. Act of the sixth Council, that the said Council condemned
two decretal Epistles of the said Honorius, as Heretical. But none will deny
that Popes in their decretals, teach the whole Church. Alphonsus, de castro,
lib. 1. cap. 4. page 20. concluds, Calestinus Bishop of Rome taught Heresy,
because he had read Heretical Doctrine, in an old decretal Epistle of his:
Likewise of late, Pope John 23. was declared an Heretic by the Council of
Constance, and Eugenius 4. by the Council of Basil. By which is sufficiently
proved, The tyrannical dominion of the Bishops of Rome in Spirituals, since all
of that Church are bound to believe that as an Article of Faith which he
teaches, although he should teach Heresy, call good evil, and evil good: As
appears by that blasphemous gloss, In caput quanto personam de translatione
Episcopi in decretalibus. Where it is affirmed that none should presume to call
in question what the Pope does? Since he has an Heavenly arbitriment, can
change the nature of things, make Justice Injustice, Injustice Justice? Which
if it be not tyrannical domination none is imaginable: the words of the gloss
are these following, Papa habet coeleste arbitrium, and ideo naturam rerum
mutare; potest substantialia unius rei applicando alij, and de nullo posse
aliquid facere, and sententiam quae nulla est, facere aliquam: in his quae vult
ei esse pro ratione voluntatem: nec esse qui ei dicat, cur ita facis? Potest
enim suprajus dispensare, and de injustitia facere justitiam, corrigendo jura,
and mutando: demum plenitudinem obtinet potestatis. It shall be proved likewise,
part. 4. lib. 1. that he gives pardons for money, for sins to be committed for
so many years to come. And thus much of his tyrannical dominion in Spirituals,
which was the first particular.

The second particular of his tyrannical dominion, is in Temporals. Authority
of deposing Kings, is attributed unto him, it is taught by the Church of Rome,
that the Pope has power to absolve Subjects from their Oaths of fidelity to
their natural Princes; to command them to fight against them, and consequently
to kill them: that all are obliged to acknowledge him for their natural Prince
whom the Pope shall appoint. It is taught also in that Church, That the Pope is
direct Monarch of the whole World, both in Spirituals and Temporals. So Bozius,
lib. 10. de signs Ecclesiae, and Carerius de potestate Papae, and all the
Canonists they teach also, That a Pope deposing a King without any reason, but
his will, does him no wrong, because he takes only what is his own from him: As
a King does no wrong to the Governor of a Province, when he gives his
government to another Subject. Although the former have done no offense, as is
maintained by Thomas Bozius, lib. 3. cap 4: de jure status.

Here our Romish Emissaries in Scotland endeavor to persuade their Proselytes
that this doctrine of deposing Kings, is not the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, but only of some particular Persons, whom they call the Popes Flatterers.

But is replied, that those Gentlemen are either not well versed in their own
principles, or else they are like Father Cotton the Jesuit, who being demanded
by the Parliament of Paris, If he believed that the Popes had power to depose
Kings? Answered, He did not believe it in France, but if he were at Rome, he
would believe it. However that it is to the doctrine of the Church of Rome*
that the Pope has power to depose Kings; is proved by these following reasons,
which will puzle those gentlemen very sore to answer. The first is this,
innumerable Books are Printed teaching this doctrine, and yet are Printed by
authority and license, as containing no doctrine, contrair to the true
Catholic doctrine of the Church of Rome. Ergo, the deposing of Kings by the
Pope is the true Catholic doctrine of the Church of Rome: since a doctrine
which is not contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, must of necessity
be the doctrine of the Church of Rome.

The second reason is this, All the Roman Doctors unanimously maintain, (except
some few who dare not set out their Head) that whatever the Pope and his
Cardinals discern in a Conclave, is of equal (if not of a Superior) Authority,
with that which is decreed in a General Council; but the Conclave at Rome gives
unto the Pope power of deposing Kings: Ergo, it is the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome. That such power is given to the Pope by the Conclave, appears by
innumerable bulls, as that of Gregory 7. against Henry the 4. Emperor. That of
Paul the third, against Henry the 8. of England. Of Paul the 5. against Queen
Elizabeth. Of Sixtus the 5. against Henry 3. and 4. Kings of France.

The third reason is this, Every one is bound to believe that to be the true
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which the Pope teaches in Cathedra, in which
case they maintain he is infallible; But the Pope teaches in Cathedra, that he
has power to depose Kings by his decretal bulls, obliging the whole Church (as
is notorious) in which he assums to himself that power, as appears by
innumerable of his Bulls, especially by those now mentioned against the
Emperor, Kings of England and France: in which, he expressly assumes unto
himself authority of building, or aedificandi; of casting down, or demoliendi;
of planting, plantandi; of rooting out, eradicandi, transferendi, of
transferring, Kingdoms at his pleasure. In some of which Bulls also, he
applies to himself those words of the Prophet, Per me Reges regnant, By me
Kings reign: which is notorious blasphemy. And thus we have proved, against
those Gentlemen, that they are mistaken, in denying that is the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, which gives authority unto the Pope, to depose Kings.

They are not yet satisfied, as appears by two objections, made by one of those
Gentlemen to my self: The first was this, that I could not instruct, that it
was the Doctrine of any General Council, that the Pope has power to depose
Kings: and consequently I could not make out, it was the doctrine of the whole
Church of Rome. To which objection I answered First, that I had made it out,
That it was the doctrine of Popes in Cathedra, and consequently I had made it
out, that he and all other Romanists, were obliged to believe it as an Article
of Faith. He told me plainly, he did much doubt of that, neither was he of that
opinion, That the Pope could not err in cathedra, but still pressed me to prove
it by the Authority of some General Council; protesting he detested that
doctrine as unsound. I desired him to read Baronius, anno 1072. and he would
find, that the Emperor, Henry the 4. was exautorated by a Council at Rome, number.
16, 17, 18. and by another at Collen, 1118. number. 20. and by another at
Fritislar, ibid.

The Gentleman answered very pertinently, That these were only petty particular
Councils: but he desired the authority of a General Council. I desired him to
read Baronius, ad* an. number 1102. number. 1, 2, 3. and also the same Author, 1116.
number. 5. and also anno 1119. Where he will find that doctrine to be the doctrine
of General Councils, especially, that of Lateran, anno 1116. is called a
General Council by Baronius. Likewise I desired him to read Bzovius, anno 1245.
number. 4. The Council of Lions, in the tombs of Councils, tom. 28. page 431. The
decretals sext de sententia and re judicata (ad Apostolica; where he would
find, that the Emperor Frederick the second was deprived, or declared to be
deprived, and his subjects quit from their Oaths of Allegiance by Innocentius
4. in the Council of Lions. I desired him also to read an Act of a General
Council at Lateran, under Innocent third, where he would find that doctrine, or
that power of Deposing Kings, attributed to the Pope: which Act he would find
in Bzovius, anno 1215. Paragraph 3. in Binnius and Crab in their collection of
Councils, C. l 3. and in Gregorius, de haeret. C. excommunicamus.

I desired him also to read, Ses. 25. Canon 19. of the Council of Trent, where
he would find that power of the Popes so intelligibly asserted, and
consequentially (although not expesly) that it was one of the main reasons for
which the Kingdom of France stood out against that Council of Trent; rejecting
its Authority. By the said Canon, any Dominus fundi is deprived of the Dominion
of it, if a duel be fought in it: and since a King is comprehended under
Dominus fundi, the Council takes upon it, to deprive him of a part of his
Kingdom: but if they have power to deprive him of a part, by the same reason,
they take upon them power to take his whole Kingdom from him. And this way I
answered his first objection, viz. that it could be instructed by Act of no
Council, that the Pope had power to depose Kings, and consequently it was not
the doctrine of the Church of Rome.

His second objection was, that notwithstanding all this, it was not the
doctrine of the whole Church of Rome, because all the Church of France rejected
it as a pernicious doctrine.

I answered this objection by a twofold distinction. The first of times, viz.
When the King of France was low, and the Pope high. The second distinction was
of causes, wherefore Kings are deposed? one of which, and the main one was
heresy. I desired him to read history, and he would find, that when* the Kings
of France were low, and their Kings suspected of heresy, that it was the
doctrine of the whole Clergy of France, that the Pope had power of deposing
such Kings at such times: for proving of which, I desired him to read first a
decree of the Sorbon, printed at Paris, in which they approved the bulls of
Sixtus 5. excommunicating and deposing Henry 3 and 4. Kings of France. I
desired him secondly to read that speech of Cardinal Peron, in the name of the
Clergy of France, as their Speaker in an Assembly of the Estates: in which
speech, he openly maintains, That it is the opinion of the whole Church of
France, and ever was, that Heretical Kings (that is Protestants) ought to be
deposed: that the Pope had power to depose them: and that true Frenchmen ought
them no allegiance. And thus much of the Popes power in temporals by the way:
it shall be more largely disputed (God willing) part. 3. lib. 2 what we have
said is sufficient to prove, That the Dominion of the Bishop of Rome is
tyrannical, and consequently, according to their own confession forbidden,
Peter 1. 5, 3.

The third particular of the tyrannical Domination of the Bishop of Rome, is
over souls departed.

The fourth is over Angels. Both which usurpations appear by the Bull of
Clement sixth proclaiming a Jubilee, The words of the Bull are these,
Concedimus, si confessus in via moriatur, ut ab omnibus peccatis suis sit
immunis penitus and absolutus: and mandamus Angelis, ut animam e purgatorio
penitus absolutam, in Paradisi gloriam introducant. And in another Bull,
Nolumus ut paena inferni illi infligatur, concedens cruce signatis, ad eorum
vota tres aut quatuor animas, quas volunt ex purgatorio posse eripere: in which
Bulls he takes upon him to command Angels, and to place Souls in heaven or hell
as he pleases.

The 5. particular, proving the tyranny of the dominon of the Bishop of Rome,
is, in assuming divin power to himself: So Nicolaus 2. in Gratianus did. 96. (
Satis evidenter. Where he affirms, That the Pope cannot be Judged by any
Secular Prince, because the Pope was called God by Constantine, but God cannot
be judged by man. Likewise, Bonifacius, 8. 6. decret. de electione C.
fundamenta, affirms, That S. Peter was assumed in the fellowship of the
individual Trinity: and consequently, the Bishop of Rome has the same
privilege, as Peter's Successor. So Glossa extravag. C. antiquae de voto. Where
speaking of Matrimony held by the Church of Rome, to be a Sacrament of divine
Institution; a doubt is moved, how that vow made in Matrimony, can be dissolved
by a Constitution of the Church? Since it was made solemnly to God. The
Glossator answers the doubt, That it cannot be made void by a mere man: but
only by the Pope, who is not a mere man, but Gods Vicar. Thirdly, he usurps
Divinity in making the Decretal Epistles, or the Canon law of equal authority
with the Scripture. So Gratianus, distinct. 19. C. in Canonicis expressly
affirms so much. Innumerable examples might be afforded of this kind, but those
are sufficient.

The sixth and last particular of the Tyranny of the Domination of the Bishop
of Rome is, his hearing, patientissimis auribus, without offense, biasphemous
titles attributed to him in Orations, Books, and Pamphlets printed by his
Authority: which is all one, as he had styled himself by those titles. So by
the Gloss in the Canon Law, he is called our Lord God the Pope, as is found in
those Editions printed at Lions 1584. and at Paris 1585. 1601. 1612. All which
Editions were set out after Gregory 13. had corrected the Canon Law: the words
are, Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam, Conditorem dictae decretalis, non sic
potuisse statuere, prout statuit, haereticum censeatur; extravagant, John 22.
tit. 14. de verb. sig. cap. 4. etc. We could produce innumerable such, but it
were tedious; yet we cannot omit that blasphemous Pamphlet, presented to
Innocent the 10. who before his Popedom was called Cardinal Pamphilius. The
scope of which Pamphlet is to compare the Pope, whom he calls Pamphilius,
with Christ, whom he calls Philius. To be short, he preferrs the Pope to
Christ in most horrible manner: and yet the Pope was no wise offended at that
fl^ttery: It seems, he understood not what Blasphemy meant; for an other time
being desired to hear a Theological Controversy between the Jansenists, and
Molinists disputed before him, that he might determine it* He answer ed, He was
an old man, it did not belong to his profession, and he had never studied
Divinity, as is reported by S. Amor in his journal, where he affirms, He heard
the Pope affirm so publicly. And thus much of Peter 1. 5. 3. The first
Argument of Protestants against Peter's institution of Oecumenick Bishop, we
have proved two things in the vindication of that passage. The first is, that
not only tyrannical Domination, but all sort of Domination is forbidden in that
place. The second is, although it were granted, that only tyrannical Domination
in Churchmen were forbidden in the same place: yet it quite overthrows the
institution of an Oecumenick Bishop, which we have proved to be most
tyrannical, and that by six arguments, which in effect, amongst Candide men are
unanswerable.

CHAP. XII. The Supremacy of Peter assaulted, from Ephesians 1. 22. and 4. 23.
and 5. 23. And Colossians 1 18.
IN the former Chapter we assaulted the Institution of Peter in that Oecumenick
Bishopric, by the testimony of Peter himself, forbidding all sort of Lording
or Domination in Church men: where we also proved two things. First, that not
only tyrannical Domination was forbidden by the Apostle in Church Rulers, but
all Domination. Secondly, although tyrannical Lording had only been forbidden;
nevertheless the injunction of the Apostle inhibited, That Lording assumed by
the Bishop of Rome now to himself: proving by demonstrative arguments, that the
power of the Bishop of Rome now-a-dayes, was not only tyrannical, but
blasphemous, and a right-down Gigantomachy: which shall more largely be proved,
part. 4. lib. 1. In this following chapter, we make use of a second argument
against the institution of Peter in that universal Bishopric by Christ: viz.
it appears by these Scriptures mentioned in the title. That Christ is the Head
of the Church: and if Peter were by divine Institution Oecumenick Bishop, the
Church would have two heads, since our adversaries maintain, that an Oecumenick
Bishop is head of the Church.

They answer to this difficulty, varying one from another, some one way, some
another, some the third way, others the fourth. It will not be unpleasing to
examine their Sophistry. The first answer is of Bellarmin distinguishing: The
Church, says he, cannot have two principal Heads, nevertheless it may have two
heads, whereof the one is subordinat to the other. In a word he answers, Christ
is Caput primarium Ecclesiae, primary head of the Church, Peter, and his
Successors, the Bishops of Rome are Capita secundaria, or secundary heads. But
this distinction of Bellarmins is both against Scripture and Antiquity: It is
against Scripture, which calling Christ the head of the Church, and the Church
the body of Christ, does so by a Metaphor taken from a humane body: and, as a
humane body cannot have two heads, one subordinat to another, that the
similitude may hold, the Church cannot have two heads.

Secondly, this plurality of heads in the Church is against Antiquity.
Gregorius Magnus, lib. 4. epist. 36. directed to Eulogius, Bishop of
Alexandria, exclaims most bitterly against John Bishop of Constantinople,
taking upon him to be head of the Church under Christ: neither is it of any
moment what some object, that Gregory does not inveigh against the title it
self of Oecumenick Bishop, but only against John Patriarch of Constantinople,
for usu^ping to himself that title, Head of the Church: which did not belong
unto him, but to the Bishop of Rome, as Successor to Peter. We affirm this
solution is Black Sophistry, because Gregory disputs generally against all who
presume to take upon them that title, whether Bishops of Rome or not, as
appears by his general reason. He arguments thus:

He is proud and arrogant, and a forerunner of Antichrist, and like Lucifer,
exalting himself above the other Angels, who takes upon him that which is
proper to Christ, or belongs to Christ only.

But he who takes upon him to be head of the Church, takes that upon him which
belongs only to Christ: Ergo.

By which reasoning of Gregorius, it is evident, that he disputs against all
who take upon them to be secundary heads of the Church, Bishop of Rome, and
all: his reason militats no less against the Bishop of Rome, then against him
of Constantinople: and in his 38. Epistle, he ingeminats the same reason, viz.
That those who take upon them to be Head of the Church under Christ, will not
be able to hold up their face at the last day: because in so doing, they took
upon them that title which belonged only to Christ: which title also, Gregory
in several other of his Epistles, calls new, Blasphemous, against the mandats
of Christ, Canons of the Apostles, Constitutions of the Church, etc. Which
testimonies of Gregory shall be examined hereafter, and vindicated from the
sophistries of Bellarmin, Baronius, and others.

This secundary head, is also assaulted by Basilius in Ascetitis in the Prooem,
where he calls Christ the only head of the Church. And thus ye have the opinion
of Basilius, and Gregorius, both called the Great, that a Secundary Head of the
Church, is an Antichristian fiction, since they thunder so against it in the
person of any one man: none can be so ignorant, as to think, that Gregorious
exclaimed against John, for taking on him that title of caput primarium: Ergo,
the thing he disputs against, is that caput secundarium, defended now by
Bellarmin.

Bellarmin nevertheless disputs for that secundary head, three ways. First,
because it is no ways injurious to Christ. Secondly, because it illustrats the
glory of Christ. Thirdly, because it is necessar to the Church. Let us hear how
he pleads? And first, how he proves it is not contumelious to Christ? His
argument is this, Many titles of Christ are communicated to men, such as
Pastor, Bishop, Apostle, Prophet, Light, Foundation: Yea, and the title of God
himself; and yet no injury is done to Christ, when men are called Apostles,
Pastors, Doctors, and Gods, etc. Ergo, no injury is done to Christ, when a man
is called Head of the Church under Him. And consequently, a secundary Head of
the Church is no ways contrair to Scripture.

But it is answered, First, we have warrant in Scripture for these other
titles, attributed to both Christ and men: but we have no warrant in Scripture
to call any man Head of the Church. By which it appears, that our Savior has
reserved that title to himself alone. It is great presumption in any man to
take upon him that title belonging to Christ, without any warrant. Secondly,
those other titles communicated to men, which are attributed to Christ
principally, may be compared to those titles, which are common to a King, and
his Subjects: Some of which without any derogation to the King at all, may be
communicated to the Subject: as Noble, Rich, Powerful, Lord, Magistrate, etc.
But none of the Subjects can be called Kings. Just so, in these titles common
to Christ with men, no wrong is done to Christ, when they are called Lights,
Foundations, Apostles, Doctors, Prophets, etc. But the title of head of the
church can no more be co^munictaed to a man, then the title of a King to a
subject. Head of the church is the Kingdom of Christ, Thirdly, those other
titles objected by Bellarmin, common to Christ and other men, are not properly
attributed to both: but properly to the one, and Figuratively or Metaphorically
to the other: So these titles which are properly attributed to Christ, are
attributed to men improperly, and secundum homonymiam. And again, these titles
that are proper to men, are in the same manner improperly attributed to Christ:
But Bellarmin, and his Fellows maintain, that the title of Head of the Church
belongs properly both to Christ, and men, as the title of a King properly
belongs to both. Now let us examine those titles objected by Bellarmin more
particularly.

And First, Pastor, Apostle, Bishop, Prophet, these titles are attributed to
men, without auy injury to Christ: because these titles belong properly to men,
and from them translated to Christ: and since our Savior demits himself
voluntarily, to these titles, it is no injury to him, though they be attributed
to him, Metaphorically and Abusively.

In the next place, are Light and Foundation, which according to an Homonymy
are attributed to Christ and to men. And first, Light, if it were attributed to
them both properly, the assertion of John the Apostle would be false,
affirming, That John Baptist was not the Light, but only Christ; by whom it
appears also, that Christ was called the Light, because he illuminats; men are
called Lights because they are illuminated. So Cyrillus, Thomas Aquinas, and
Augustinus upon the place: which last affirms, that the Apostle called our
Savior the true Light, because he was that Light which illuminats: men were
only called Lights, because they were illuminated by him, and therefore are not
the true Lights: And since Christ is the true Light, and men are not the true
Lights; it is evident, that the title of Light is attributed to both by a
Homonymy.

In the next place comes Foundation, Prophets and Apostles are called
Foundations two ways. And first, Tertullianus, lib. 4. cap. 39. against
Marcion, Chrysostomus, Oecumenius, Theophylactus, interpret these words of
Paul, super fundamenta Prophetarum and Apostolorum, as if the Prophets and
Apostles themselves were Foundations: But it is certain they cannot be called
so, but only by reason of their Ministry: that is, in so far as they were
Ministers of founding Churches, as is confessed by Justinianus the Jesuit, who
affirms, That the faith of the Ephesians was built upon the testimony of the
Old and New Testament, that is by a Metonymy; but Christ is not that way called
Foundation: and therefore the title of Foundation is attributed by a Homonymy
to Christ, and the Apostles and Prophets; and in that sense the Apostle Paul
denies that there is any Foundation but Christ.

Others interpret the meaning of Paul, calling the Apostles and Prophets,
Foundations to be that they preached the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament,
which is the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; viz. which they did lay.
So the interlinear and ordinar gloss, following Ambrosius, and Anselmus: so
also Lyranus, Aquinas, Lombardus, Cajetanus, Gagnaeus the Jesuit, and Salmero.
In what ever sense Foundation be taken, it is properly attributed to Christ,
improperly by a Homonymy to men.

Bellarmins last tittle is GOD: Men are called Gods, says he, Psalm 82. and
since they are so called, why may not a man be called Head of the Church?

But it is answered: First, Kings and Judges are not called Gods there, but
only that men judged so of them, because of their flourishing estate: so that,
Fgo dixi, Dii estis, are not the words of GOD, but of the Psalmist himself, as
d^vers learned men gather from the text. Others think that the Psalmist is
speaking of the Angels. However, albeit the title of GOD were attributed to
Kings and Judges; it does not follow, that the title of Head of the Church, may
be attributed to men: because the title of GOD is attributed to men abusively,
by a too high strained Metaphor: But Bellarmin and his fellows endeavor to
maintain that the Bishop of Rome is properly head of the Church, as a King is
head of his Kingdom: And in this manner Bellarmin undertakes to prove, that it
is not injurious to Christ, that any should take upon him the title of Head of
the Church.

In the next place, he goes a step higher, endeavoring to prove, That a visible
head of the Church, sets forth the glory of Christ, as the glory of a King is
augmented by a Victory.

But it is answered, When a Viceroy intruds himself without a Commission upon a
Province; he is so far from setting forth the glory of his King, that he
eclipseth it, by neglecting of his authority, and proves a Rebel. Let Bellarmin
instruct if he can, in what place of Scripture, any has commission to be
visible head of the Church under Christ? We proved in the former chapters, that
what he alleged in the behalf of Peter, was new devised Sophistry,
contradicting Scripture, Antiquity, and of no great moment, to prove the
supremacy of Peter, in the opinion of the most learned Antiquaries, which ever
the Church of Rome produced. Secondly, Bellarmins visible head of the Church,
carrys himself not like a Viceroy, but like a King, which must be injurious to
the true Head of the Church: Yea, Bellarmin himself endeavors to prove, that
the said secondary head reigns in the Church, as a King does in a Kingdom:
Neither can the Bishop of Rome be said to be Viceroy to Christ, otherwise in
the government of the Church, then a King is Viceroy to GOD, in the government
of a Kingdom. But Kings are absolute, and not Viceroys, and therefore that
visible head of the Church is absolute also, being subordinate no otherwise to
Christ, then Kings are to GOD. Thirdly, when a Viceroy takes upon him to go
beyond his commission, or to govern contrair to the law of his King, he wrongs
the authority of his King, and no ways sets forth his glory. But Bellarmins
visible and secundary head takes upon him, to dispense with the Law of GOD (as
we showed in the former chapter) proving that he took power upon him, to make
Justice Injustice, and Injustice Justice.

In the third place, Bellarmin goes a step higher yet, and endeavors to prove
that a secundary visible head is necessar for the Church: because, says he, in
the absence of Christ, the Church cannot be contained in Unity, unless it be
governed by one visible head under Christ.

But it is answered, Stillgood: that assertion of Bellarmins, if not
blasphemous, is notoriously false: viz. That the Church cannot be contained in
Unity by Christ alone, unless a visible head be joined with him: Which
contradicts Scripture, which in every place attributes the cause of that Unity,
of the Church to Christ alone: So John 17. That they may be one in us, and Romans
10. We many are one body in Christ: and Gal. 3. Ye are all one in Christ; and
the reason is evident, because that Unity is Spiritual, Ephesians. 4. Studying to
keep the unity of the Spirit; See also 1. Corinthians. 12. and Philip 1. By which
places it appears, that the Invisible and Spiritual presence of Christ alone,
preserves the Church in Unity, which is also granted by many and famous Roman
Doctors, who prove the infallibility of the Church, to depend upon this promise
of Christ, viz. That he would be present with them to the end of the World.

We have heard Bellarmin disputing for a visible head, and proving that it is
not derogatory to the honor of Christ: We will now examine an argument of
Sanderus, that famous English Jesuit, who proves, that it conduces to the
glory of Christ, that the Church should have a visible head: because, says he,
More ways of Preaching that glory of Christ, are by a visible head then without
it. But it is answered, (to omit the inconsequence of that argument) we deny
the Antecedent, or distinguishes it, viz. These ways of Preaching Christ, only
illustrat his glory which are ordained by himself: which a visible head is not.
Sanderus instances, Rulers of particular Churches, or Bishops, are called Heads
of their respective Churches under Christ, by Gregorius Magnus and other
Fathers: Ergo, why may there not be one visible head of all the Church under
Christ? But it is answered, First, if Sanderus had objected that argument to
Gregorius Magnus himself, he would have denied it to follow: for although he
seems to call Bishops heads of particular Churches, yet he detests an universal
head (as we showed before) as injurious to Christ. Secondly, when Gregorius
calls Bishops heads of the Church, he speaks abusively and improperly, and
without any warrant in Scripture.

And thus we have showed hitherto, how Bellarmin and Sanderus have endeavored
to prove, that it is not inconsistent with the Church, to have two heads:
because, the one is a Primary head, the other a Secundary head. Panigarola,
lectione 6. uses a very strange argument, to prove, that the Church of
necessity, must have a visible head beside Christ: Otherwise, says he, It
would be a monster, if a visible body as the Church had only an invisible head,
which is Christ. But it is answered: First, the Church will be no less a
monster, if it have two heads; one visible, another invisible. Secondly,
Panigarola speaks blasphemy, which we bind upon him by this argument: First,
All bodies visible, having an invisible head are monstrous bodies. This
Panigarola grants. Secondly, The Church is no monstrous body. This he grants
also: how can he then deny this conclusion in Baroco: Ergo, The Church has not
an invisible head, or Christ is not head of the Church, which is right-down
blasphemy.

Alphonsus de Castro, puzzled with the difficulty of two heads, has a
distinction of his own, of two bodies: as Bellarmin made a distinction of two
heads. De Castro, denies That body of which Christ is the head, to be the same
with that body which has a visible head, or Peter, or the Bishop of Rome for
its head. He explains himself thus, the Church may be called a body two ways,
says he. First, as it is a total body. Secondly, as it is a Mystical body. The
first way is, when it is considered, comprehending all the Members with Christ:
and in that sense, Christ is head of the Church. In the second way it is
considered, as a body consisting of all the other members (Christ excluded) and
in that acception, Peter or his Successors, are visible heads of the Church: So
the Church cannot be said to have two heads; for Christ, and Peter and his
Successors, are not heads of the same body, but of diverse. Christ is head of
the Church, as it is a total body, Peter, and his Successors as it is a
Mysticalbody.

But it is answered, Alphonsus de Castre (as cannot be denied) was a brave
learned man, and stood as little awe of the Pope, to speak his mind when truth
required, as any Doctor of that Church: yet this distinction of his of a body
in total, and mystical, is used by no body but himself: it is also contrair to
Scripture, which in every place, where the Church is called the body of Christ,
considers it, as containing all other members, Christ excluded: And so the
Scripture never mentions that body, which de Castro calls a total body. For the
Scripture, calling the Church the body of Christ, means no other body, then
that which de Castro calls mystical. This distinction of de Castro might be
solidly refuted otherwise; but it is needless to insist, since it is owned by
no others, except by Spondanus, who seems to come very near it thus.

The Apostle says he, Ephesians. 4. affirms Christ to be the head from which the
whole body takes increment. He observes, First, that Christ is distinguished
from the whole body, which is the Church: Ergo, says he, since the Church is a
whole body without Christ, it must of necessity have a head beside Christ,
otherways it could not be a whole body, since no body can be whole without a
head. And therefore the Church has a visible head, proportionable to it self
beside Christ, since it is a whole body without Christ.

But it is answered, He is a notorious Sophister: First, when the Apostle,
Ephesians 4. opposes the whole body to Christ, under the name of body, or
whole body, he comprehends all the other members only, beside the head, and not
as having a head of its own: As appears by the Commentaries not only of the
Fathers upon that place, Ephesians. 4. such as Chrysostom, and his admirer
Theophylactus, and Theodoretus, but also by the expositions of Justinian and
Salmero two famous Jesuits, upon that place, Ephesians 4. All which,
expounding what the Apostle calls, totum corpus, or, the whole body, interpret
it to be these members, Quae a capite sensum accipiunt, or, have influence of
sense, or life from the head: And consequently, they make totum corpus, the
whole body, to be no otherthing, then all the other members, the head excluded:
and consequently, totum corpus, the whole body, has not an other head beside
Christ.

Secondly, By totum corpus, or whole body, questionless the Apostle means the
Church, as it comprehends both the Church Militant, and the Church Triumphant.
Spondanus argument, if it conclude at all, must of necessity conclude, that the
said visible head is head of the Church Triumphant: and so the Bishop of Rome,
must be head of the Church Triumphant also which none will affirm.

Thirdly, The ground of this distinction of Spondanus, is notoriously false,
viz, That the head would not be proportional to the body, except it were
visible. For to omit that Christ is constantly called the Head of the Church in
Scripture, which should be enough to stop the mouth of Spondanus; our Savior is
a proportional Head to the Church, because, he is a man like unto us in all
things, except sin.

We will conclude this disput of Head of the Church with one Argument, used by
some Protestants against a Visible Head of the Church; which is this, If the
Church had any other Head but Christ, it would be called the body of the said
Head: but it is never called the body of any Head, but of Christ: Ergo, It has
no other Head but Christ.

Bellarmin answers two ways: And first he affirms, That the Church is not
called the body of that visible Head, because it is only Secundary, and not
Primary: and therefore, the Church is only called the body of Christ.

But it is replied, If there were any such thing, as that secundary head, the
Church could with no less reason be called its body, then it could be called
head of the church. Since the relation is reciprocal, and the body is no less
the body of the Head, then the head is the head of the body: and since the
Church is no where called the body of that secundary head, it is evident, that
the said secundary head is a fiction.

Bellarmin urges, that a King is the Head of his Kingdom, and the Kingdom may
be called his body: likewise, a Viceroy may be called secundary Head of the
Kingdom or Province: but the Kingdom or Province, cannot be called the body of
a Viceroy, and in like manner, the Church cannot be called the body of that
secundary Head, the Bishop of Rome, or Peter.

But it is replied, As the Viceroy is head of the Province, so the Province may
be called the body or Province of the Viceroy: but since the Church cannot be
called the body of that secundary head, as Bellarmin confesses, it is evident,
there is no such secundary head at all in the Church.

Secondly, Bellarmin grants, that the Kingdom may be called the body or Kingdom
of the King: but he endeavors to prove, that the said secundary head reigns in
the Church, as a King does in a Kingdom: and therefore the Church may be called
the body of the said secundary head, if there were any such thing. But since
the Church is no where called the body of that secundary head, it is evident,
that the said secundary head is a mere fiction. Bellarmin gives a reason,
wherefore the Province is not called the body of the Viceroy? but only of the
King, viz. because the Governor of a Province is not perpetual, but only for a
time. And for the same reason, the Church is not called the body of that
secundary head, because it is not perpetual, but only for a time. But this
reason is frivolous, because, that secundary head of the Church is as
perpetual, as a King in a Kingdom: and therefore the Church may be called as
well body of that secundary head, as a Kingdom is called the body of a King.
But since in Scripture, the Church is no where called the body of that
secundary Head; it is evident, it is a fiction, viz. that secundary head, which
is further confirmed. Bellarmin affirms also, That the Province cannot be said
to be the Province of the Viceroy, because he is not absolute: but it may be
called the Province of the King, because he is absoluto, and depends upon none
but God. But that secundary head of the Church depends upon none but Christ:
and therefore the Church may as well be called his body, and Church, as a
Kingdom may be called Kingdom of the King. But since the Church is no where
called body of that secundary head, it is evident, that the said secundary head
is but a fiction.

Bellarmin pressed with those difficulties, ^^ies to another distinction, viz.
that the Church is called the body of Christ, not in relation to Christ, as
head, but only as ^e is referred to Christ, as a great hypostasis: as when
Peter or Paul is lying any where, we may affirm, There lies the body of Peter*
there lies the body of Paul. In which sense, body comprehends head and all, and
is not considered, as distinct from the Head and other members.

Bellarmin, by this device does not take away the difficulty, for two reasons.
The first is, although it were granted that the Church were called the body of
Christ, as the word Christ is a Hypostasis, comprehending both heads and
members: in which sense, the body of Peter, or Paul may be called their body,
and not their head; -- we say, Although that were granted, yet Bellarmin will
not deny, that the Church is called the body of Christ, sometimes, as it is
referred to Christ as head: and therefore, if there were any Secundary head,
the Church would be called its body in that respect also: which since it is
not, it is evident, that there is no such thing as a secundary head.

The second reason is, that it is false which Bellarmin affirms, that ever the
Church is called the body of Christ, in that sense of great hypostasis: it has
neither ground in Scripture, nor Antiquity: it is only devised by Bellarmin
himself, who abuses Scripture, and a passage of Augustinus to prove it. The
place of Scripture is 1 Corinthians. 12. verse 12. Where the Apostle affirms, That
all the members of the body, although they be many, yet are but one body,
even so is Christ: which makes nothing for him; for the Apostle there means no
^uch thing, as Bellarmin affirms, citing Augustinus falsely to prove it.
Augustins words are, Non dixit ita and Christi, idest, corpus Christi, vel
membra Christi: sea ita and Christus unum Christum appellens caput and corpus,
as he would say, The Apostle called Christ, which is the head of the Church,
and the Church, which is the body of Christ, one Christ: which he had
foolishly affirmed, if that had been the Apostles mind, that the Church is
called the body of Christ, as the body of Peter and Paul lying any where,
comprehending the head also. And thus much of that famous disput o^ the head of
the Church. We have seen how Bellarmin vexet^ himself to find out distinctions
to maintain that secundary head, and to show why the Church is not called the
Body of that secundary head? But the Roman Doctors of late maintain, that the
Church is, and may be called the body of that secundary head, seeing that
Bellarmins distinctions would not serve the turn.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Hierarchy of the Church, Ephesians 4.
WE have prosecuted two Arguments against the institution of the Supremacy of
Peter: now follows the third, which is this, If Peter had been ordained by
our Savior Monarch of the Church, then the Apostles themselves, and these who
lived in their times, delineating the Hierarchy of the Church, would have
mentioned it, or affirmed, That the Government of the Church was monarchical,
under one visible head. But both the Apostles themselves, and those who are
confessed by our adversaries, to have lived in the times of the Apostles,
delineating the Hierarchy of the Church, put ever still more persons then one
of equal authority in the highest place of the Hierarchy: whereby it is
evident to any, who is not wilfully blind, that the Government of the Church
was not by Christ's Institution Monarchical.

And first, the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4. enumerating the Hierarchy of the
Church, verse 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. has these words, He that descended, is even
the same that ascended, far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.
He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers. In which words ye have the Hierarchy of the
Church, consisting of several degrees, in every degree many persons: the
highest degree, is that of the Apostles: which are also many, or in the Plural
number, whereby it is evident, that our Savior did institute no Monarchy in the
Church, in one single person, or in Peter: neither can it be affirmed, That
this enumeration of Church Officers, ordained by Christ, is not full, or is not
perfect; as if the Apostle had omitted some Church Officers, ordained by
Christ: because it appears by verse 12, 13, and 14. That no more were
necessary for the building up of the Church, or performing any duty necessar
for the Churches instruction: viz. for the repairing of the ^aints, for the
work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, verse
12. Till we all meat together (in the unity of faith, and that acknowledging
of the Son of God) unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ, verse 13. That we henceforth be no more children, wavering,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, etc.

By those words of the Apostle it appears, that no more Church Rulers are
necessar eitheir for the founding of the Church: or confirming it after it is
built, or defending it when it is confirmed from onsets of the Devil, or his
instruments: and since no visible Monarch of the Church is mentioned by the
Apostle, it is evident, that there was no such Monarch ordained by Christ.

Bellarmin answers two ways. One way is, that the Apostle in those words, is
not delineating the Hierarchy of the Church: but only enumerating diverse gifts
of some of the Church, and 1 Corinthians 12. he adds the gift of tongues.

But it is replied, It cannot be denied, but the Apostle is enumerating
diversity of gifts; since verse 7. He expressly affirms so much, but it is to be
added, that he enumerats those gifts, as they are in Officers of the Church
only* whence appears the dissimilitude of this place from 1 Corinthians. 12. In
which gifts are enumerated, which are not peculiar to Church Rulers, but are
also found in laiks: Such as gifts of healing, and tongues, etc. That this is
the Apostles meaning, appears by two reasons. First ^he enumerats none, verse
11. Who has not a degree of ruling in the Church. The second is, because ver.
12. 13, 14* He does not enumerat any utility redounding to the Church, which is
not wrought by the Ministry, ver. 11. He enumerats the Ministers of the Church,
ver. 12. 13, and 14. He enumerats the ends wherefore these Ministers were
ordained: All which ends, Oecumentus comprehends under one, that is, says he,
Those degrees of Ministers enumerated, verse 12. were for that end ordained,
that they might minister unto the Church, as appears, ver. 12, 13, and 14.

It is to be observed, that the Apostle enumerats here all Church Officers*
both extraordinar and ordinar. The extraordinar are those who were ordained
only to continue for a time: Such as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets. Ordinar,
are those ordained to be of perpetual standing in the Church: as Doctors, and
Pastors. And since in all those Orders of Church Ministers there are many, and
not one only in each degree: it is evident, that one Oecumenick Bishop, or a
visible head of the Church, is not comprehended under any of those Ministers.

Bellarmin puzzled with this answers another way. He grants, that the
enumeration of Church Ministers here is perfect: but he denies that an
Oecumenick Bishop has no place in that enumeration: because, says he, All the
^ierarchy of the Church* and consequently an Oecumenick Bishop, is confus^dly
represented under the name of Pastors and Doctors: But finding that Pastors and
Doctors were only inferior Orders, below, Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists.
He passes from this, and affirms next, That an Oecumenick Bishop is
comprehended under Apostles: because, not only here, but also 1 Corinthians 12.
Apostles are put in the first place: and therefore the chief Ecclesiastic
Power was given to all the Apostles; but to Peter, as ordinar Pastor: and
therefore to have a Successor in it, to the other Apostles, as exraordinar and
Delegats to Peter: and therefore none should succeed them.

But it is answered, we prolixly disputed this distinction of Bellarmins to be
groundless, contradictory and inconsistent with it self, cap. 6. It is needless
to repeat what we said there in this place. It is sufficient here, that never
any ancient or Modern Interpreter before the times of the Jesuits, did so much
as dream, that an Oecumenick Bishop was comprehended by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
11. Which could be made out by an Induction of all the Commentaries, of ancient
and Modern Writers upon that place. By which it appears, that all those
testimonies by which those Jesuits prove the Supremacy of Peter, (and
consequently the verity of the Roman Faith,) are either in Scripture or
Fathers, depraved by new devised Glosses unknown to the Ancients: and also
their answers, are of the same stuff, by which they elude passages of Scripture
and Antiquity, destroying the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome, and in it the
whole edifice of the Roman Church. Both their offensive and defensive arms, are
but devised of late, since the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome was established.

That any may see, that this Gloss of Bellarmins, is a fiction of his own
devising, we will prove by three Arguments, of three several Interpreters. By
which it will appear, what was the opinion of the Church, concerning the
meaning of this passage, Ephesians 4. 11. since the times of the Apostles unto
those days?

The first Interval is of the Primitive Church, before the Council of Nice,
what was the opinion of that Church in that Interval? appears by the testimony
of the ancient Author ( by some believed to be Dionysius Areopagita, the
disciple of Paul) his words, epistle 8. are those: Tu ergo cupiditati,
iracundiae, rationi modum statue pro dignitate: tibi vero divini Ministri: his
Sacerdotes: Pontifices Sacerdotibus: Pontificibus Apostali stoli,
Apostolorumque successores. Quod si qu^s etiam in istis ab officio discedat, a
sanctis qui sunt ejusdem ordinis corrigetur: atque ita non insultabit ordo in
ordinem: sed unusquisque in suo ordine, ac Ministerio premanebit. In which
words ye have two things. The first is, That the chief place in the Hierarchy,
in the times of the Apostles, was held not by one, but by many, viz. by all the
Apostles alike: neither makes he mention of Peter, his having that chief power,
as ordinar Pastor, and of the other Apostles, as having it a^ Delegats to
Peter: which will be further confirmed by the second thing observable in these
words, which is this: After the Apostles were removed, the chief place in the
Hierarchy consisted also not in one person, but in many alike, viz. in Bishops,
who succeeded to the Apostles in the first place of the Hierarchy: which also
he expressly affirms to be of equal Order and Jurisdiction: many and not one
having Jurisdiction over all, as a visible head: which quite destroys the
Gloss of Bellarmin, for if others succeeding to the other Apostles, were in the
first place of the Hierarchy (which this Author flatly affirms) it is false
which Bellarmin affirms, that all the Apostles had the chief power, only during
their own time, not communicable to their Successors. And likewise, if those
successors of the other Apostles, were in the first place of the Hierarchy,
equally and alike, (as this Author also affirms) It is false, which Bellarmin
affirms, That the Successors of Peter the Apostle, had ^he chief authority in
their single persons, as visible Monarchs of the Church. It may be proved by
the Glosses of Maximus, and others, that this Dionysius was not the Disciple of
the Apostle Paul, mentioned in the Acts, because, he seems to make mention of
the Metropolitants, above Bishops. But it shall be proved, lib. 2. by
unanswerable testimonies, That there was no Office above that of a Bishop in
the Church, before the latter end of the third age. However, albeit he be not
the Disciple of Paul, (as some affirm he is) yet he is an ancient Author, and
delineats, the Hierarchy of the Church, not to have been monarchical in his
days.

The second testimony, is of Ambrosius, who l^ved in that interval between the
Council of Nice, and anno 604. at which time Bonifacius third, was made (first
of all the Bishops of Rome) universal Bishop by an Edict of the Emperor Phocas.
The words of Ambrosius are, Apostoli sunt Episcopi, nam in Episcopo omnes
ordines sunt, quia primus sacerdos est, hoc est, Princeps Sacerdotum, and
Propheta and Evangelista, and ad caetera adimplenda officia Ecclesiae in
Ministerio fidelium. In which words he is showing, what Church-Rulers in his
own time were answerable to, or represented these mentioned by Paul Ehes. 4.
11. And he affirms, That Bishops succeeded to the Apostles, in the first place
of the Hierarchy (Apostoli sunt Episcopi, says he,) in which words he
expressly affirms, That the chief place in the Hierarchy in his own time,
(which was the latter end of the 4. Age) was in many, and not in one, viz. in
Bishops who answered to the Apostles: And consequently, he contradicts this
gloss of Bellarmin, who affirms that the Successors of Peter (and not of the
other Apostles) only succeeded in the first place of Hierarchy, as Monarchs of
the Church. One Tenebrio or an other (whose name I have forgot, and also where
I read it) intends to prove by these words of Ambrosius an Oecumenick Bishop,
because Ambrosius makes mention of these words, of Primus Socerdos, and
Princeps Sacerdotum, that is of first Priest and Prince of Priests. But any (if
not altogether stupid, or else intending to deceive) may perceive, that it is
far from the meaning of Ambrosius, his words are, Bishops succeed to the
Apostles, or answer to the Apostles (mentioned by Paul, Ephesians. 4. 11) because a
Bishop is first Priest and Prince of Priests: by which i^ appears, that he is
comparing Bishops with inferior Priests or Presbyters, and not Bishops with
Bishops. Which is further confirmed, because not only Hieronymus (contemporarie
with Ambrosius) and other Fathers, but also Ambrosius himself, calls all
Bishops, Summos Sacerdotis, or chief Priest, and of alike Jurisdiction: So
Anacletus, epist. 2. Tertullianus, de Baptism. cap. 17. Hieronymus, contra
Luciferianos, and in his Epistle to Evagrius, Gaudentius, in tractu de Prim.
die suae ordinat: Eusebius, Emissenus, in Homil. Augustinus, epist, 36. which
is of Paulinus, to Romanianus, Ambrosius himself, lib. 3. cap. 1. de
Sacramentis, and also epist. 5. and 34. Other innumerable testimonies could be
produced, proving all Bishops alike, are Summi Pontifices, or Sacerdotes: and
consequently, that the first place of the Hierarchy is in many alike, and not
in one single person, as in the Bishop of Rome or successor of Peter.

The third testimony is of Anselmus, who lived in the 11. age who explaining
what Church-Rulers were answerable to these mentioned by Paul, Ephesians, 4. 11? In
which he numbers the Apostle Pettr, Andrew, etc. To which now-adays, says he,
Answers Primats, and Patriarchs, or Archbishops, which quite destroys the
gloss of Bellarmin, since he makes many in the first place of the Hierarchy,
and does not dream, that the other Apostles were delegats to Peter, and had the
first place in the Hierarchy, for that reason not communicable to their
successors. And thus we have proved, that the first place of the Hierarchy,
Jur. divino, was not in one single person, which we have demonstrated by
Scripture and Antiquity: And consequently, that Peter was not ordained by our
Savior Monarch of the Church, which was our third argument. These of the Church
of Rome answers the testimonies of these Fathers, calling; All Bishops alike,
or all Bishops Highpriests, by distinguishing equality in that of Order, and
that of Jurisdiction. In the first sense, they grant all Bishops are alike, but
not in the last. We proved before, and shall prove hereafter, that distinction
is frivolous, for the present it will be sufficient to refute that distinction
of Order and Jurisdiction, by the testimony of an Author in great esteem, in
the Church of Rome, and believed by them to be the Disciple of the Apostle
Paul: viz. Dionysius, Arcopagita, whom we now mentioned, epist. 8. has these
words, If any do amiss, he is to be censured by the Priests: If the Priest go
astray he is to be ordered by the Bishop: If the Bishop debord, he should be
judged by those who succeeded to the Apostles: but if those debord, they ought
be judged by those of the same Order. Observe, he puts many in the same order
of alike Jurisdiction. In the first place of the Hierarchy which quite
destroys that distinction of Order and Jurisdiction.

CHAP. XIV. Of Luke 22. 25. Compared with Matthew 20. 25, 26. And Matthew 18.
And Luke and Mark 9.
HItherto has been disputed the institution of Peter's supremacy, pro and
contra, it has been defended by these three famous passages of Scripture,
Matthew 16. 18. Matthew 16. 19. and John 21. 15. 16, 17. It has been brangled
by other three, Peter 1. 5. 3. Ephesians. 1. 22. and from Ephesians. 4. 11. Before we
proceed to dispute the supremacy of Peter, by his carriage: We will first
explain a passage of Scripture claimed by both: that is, the Romanists by it
endeavor to establish the supremacy of Peter The Protestants by the same place
endeavor to overthrow it, the place is, Luke 22* 24, 25, 26. where after
Supper, a strife arose among the Disciples who should be greatest? Verse 24 Our
Savior answers, That the Kings of the Gentiles rule over them, and for that
reason, are called bountiful verse 25 But, says he, Ye shall not be so, but let
the greatest among you, be as the least, and the chiefest, as he that serves.
Verse 26.

Let us examine: First, how the one side endeavor to assault the supremacy of
Peter, by these words? In the next place, shall be disputed, how the other side
by the same words, assert it? The one or other side, must of necessity prove
the Sophister, let us examine which? And the Reader may judge which side has
the better.

The Protestants urge this place, against the supremacy of Peter, in the same
manner, as they did that passage of 1. Peter 5. 3. disputed and vindicated
before cap. 11. viz. ruling or domination is forbidden in the Church, in this
place, Luke 22. 25. which cannot consist with an Oecumenick Bishop, which our
Adversaries grant to have the right of domination in the Church.

Bellarmin and Sanderus answer in this place, Tyrannical domination is only
forbidden, and not all domination; their reason is, because, domination and
ruling like that of the Kings of the Gentiles, is only forbidden, and not all
domination.

But it is replied, That this answer is grounded upon two false suppositions:
The first is, That all domination of the Kings of the Gentiles is tyrannical.
The second is, that these words, verse 26. But ye shall not be so, have relation
to the way of domination, and not to domination it self. The first supposition
is false: As is proved thus.

First, It is notoriously false, That all domination of the Kings of the
Gentiles is tyrannical; not only, because it is affirmed in several places of
Scripture, That Kings rule by GOD, and all powers are of GOD. But also, because
the Scripture commands obedience to be given unto them, for that reason: and
also, Injoyns all to pray to them: but it is absurd, to affirm, That tyrannical
government is by GODS ordination, or that, The Word of GOD commands obedience
unto it, or injoyns all to pray for it.

They answer, It is true indeed, that all the ruling of the Kings of the
Gentiles is not tyrannical. To affirm so, it fights against history, and
experience; but in this place, our Savior forbids his Apostles, To imitate the
Kings of the Gentiles, when they exercise Dominion unlawfully.

But it is replied, This is their second false supposition, viz. that these
words, verse 26. But ye shall not be so, are relative to the way of domination,
and not to domination it self. Whereas these words, are referred not to the way
of domination, or tyrannical domination: but dominattion simply is forbidden in
the Church, which is proved by these following reasons.

The first is, That domination is forbidden, for which the Disciples did
contend, or, Who should be greatest in it? But it is against all sense to
affirm, That they contended who should be the greatest Tyrants? By which it is
evident, that not only tyrannical domination, but all sort of domination is
forbidden.

Secondly, That is forbidden, which is opposite unto Ministry, but all
domination is opposite to Ministry, as appears by Matthew 20. 28. and 26. In
which place the same contention, or such an other contention, among the
Disciples is related; and for the same reasons, domination is forbidden.

Thirdly, Luke 22. 25. These who rule among the Gentiles, by reason of their
domination, are called bountiful. Whereby it is evident that our Savior,
forbids domination simply: for none are called bountiful, by reason of
tyrannical domination.

Fourthly, These words, Ye shall not be so, or, ye shall not do so, or, not so
ye, according to the constant phrase of Scripture, denotat an inhibition of a
thing altogether, and not of it in such and such a way. So Genesis 4. Cain
affirms, And he who meets me, shall kill me: the LORD answers, Non sic, not so:
the meaning is, he shall not be killed at all: And not that he shall not be
killed after such and such a manner. So Nehem. 5. 15. Nehemia complains, That
some of the former Governors had extorted the people, and taken bread, and
wine, and money from them; and made their servants rule over them. He adds, I
did not so, his meaning is, That he did not only not take bread, and wine, and
money from them, or oppressea them in such a manner: but that he did not
oppress them at all. Likewise, Psalm 1 3. it is said, That the righteous man
shall be like a tree bringing forth fruit seasonably, etc. Verse 4. it is
affirmed, The wicked are not so, the meaning is, not only, that the wicked shall
not prosper in that manner only: but that they shall not prosper at all.
Likewise, Matthew 19. when the Pharisees objected to Christ, that Moses did
command to give a bill of divorce, that a man should put away his wife upon
every slight occasion. Our Savior answers, verse 8. From the beginning it was
not so. In which words, the meaning of our Savior is, That divorces without
just reason, should not be given at all, and not that divorces without reason
may be given, in some cases, although not in other. And thus we have proved,
that in Luke 22. 25. not only tyrannical domination, but all domination is
forbidden in the Church. And consequently, the supremacy of Peter is also there
forbidden: since a visible head of the Church cannot be without domination. And
whereas our Adversaries affirm, that only tyrannical domination is forbidden:
Although it were so, this place quite militats against an Oecumenick Bishop;
because we did demonstrate cap 11. by six unanswerable particulars or
arguments, that the domination of the Bishop of Rome: was not only tyrannical,
but also blasphemous.

We have hitherto disputed against the supremacy of Peter, from this place,
Luke 22. 25. Now let us examine, how from the same place, Bellarmin and
Sanderus disput for it? Their Sophistry is admirable, and therefore it will not
be unpleasing to examine it. Their first sophistry consists in this, viz. being
pressed with parallel places to this, that nothing can be gathered from those
contentions of the Apostles, for the supremacy of Peter, but rather much
against it. Sanderus as a ground of his future sophistry, makes a distinction
between this place, and these other parallel places, which is this. The
Apostles, says he, Contended four several times for dominion. The first is,
after the transfiguration of Christ in the mountain, Mark. 9. 34. and Luke 9.
46. The second, after the petition of the sons of Zebedeus, or of their Mother,
Matthew 20. verse 20. and Mark. 10. 35. The third time was, when the Tribute
was paid, Matthew. 18. 1. The last time was, after the Supper, Luke 22. The
first three times, Sanderus grants that nothing can be gathered, for the
supremacy of Peter: because in these places, only profane domination is
forbidden. But in the last place, Luke 22. not only profane domination is
forbidden: but also, Lawful domination, or the supremacy of Peter is generally
and confusedly, if not ordained, at least signified, or intimated. If ye ask at
Sanderus, What more in this last place, then in the three first, since in all
the four places, the thing for which the Apostles strove, was the same: and the
answer of Christ unto them was the same? He answers you, several ways, but
before we examine his answers, we will first show how he is mistaken, in
affirming the Disciples strove four times for dominion. Albeit it be no great
matter how many times they strove? Yet, it is certain, that they did not strive
four times, but only two, or at the most three times. First, because the
Evangelists does not mention it oftener then two times, as Matthew. cap. 18. and
20. Mark. cap. 9. 10. Luke cap. 9. 22. Secondly, it is certain that Matthew 18.
Mark. 9. and Luke 9. mentions the same contention or history, as appears, not
only by the place Capernaum mentioned, Mark. 9. and the paying of the Tribute,
was made in the same place, Matthew 17. After which the contention arose,
Matthew 18. But also, by the circumstance of the little Child, mentioned Luke
9. 47. and Mark 9. 36. Hieronymus also, and Euthymius, affirm, That the same
story is related, Matthew 18. and Mark and Luke 9. The second contention is
mentioned, Matthew 20. Mark 10. and Luke 22. It is very probable, that the same
history is related also in those three places; because the answer of Christ is
the same in them all: but Euthymius makes Luke 22. a different contention from
Matthew 20. and Mark 10. because in Luke 22. no mention is made of the petition
of the Sons of Zebedeus, or their Mother, as Mark 10. and Matthew 20. So at the
most, the Apostles strove only three times for dominion, if not two times only.
But let it be granted to Sanderus, that they strove four times: We ask him,
what more can be gathered for the supremacy of Peter, from Luke 22. then from
the other three places? siince is all four they strove for the same thing, viz.
dominion. And our Savior disswades them from such striving, for the same
reasons, in the first three places, (or at least in some of them) for which he
diswades them, Luke 22.

Sanderus answers, and also Bellarmin: First, that Luke 22. Our Savior affirms,
Let the greatest among you be as the least; but Matthew 20. 26. he only
affirms, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant. The
difference is, Greatest, Luke 22. imports a superiority, which Great, Matthew
20. does not import.

But it is answered, They babble, for it appears expressly by the words, that the
meaning of our Savior in both places is the same. As for the objection, it is
of no moment, for great among you, and greatest among you, is the same thing:
Great among you is an Hebraism, for the superlative of the Latins and Grecians,
which superlative, the Oriental tongues have not; and so great and greatest are
the same thing, Matthew and Mark retain the Hebraism, but Luke expresses it in
the comparative degree (...), whereas Matthew and Mark have (...), that is,
what Matthew and Mark calls great in the positive degree, Luke calls more
great, in the comparative degree: whereas the expressions of both are
equivalent to (...), greatest among you, in the superlative degree. For its
certain, at least, that the meaning of great in Matthew and Mark, and of
greatest in Luke 22. is the same: because the Syrian Interpreter, renders them
both by one word. Likewise, that great in Matthew and Mark, is the same with
greatest in Luke, appears, because great in Matthew and Mark is comparative,
for immediately, after these words follow, He who should be first among you.
Whereby it is evident, that great is all one with greatest. Since first is
relative to among you; and consequently all one, with (...). Sanderus urges
secondly, that in Matthew and Mark, our Savior affirms, He who will be great
among you, but in Luke, He who is greatest among you, whereby it is evident,
that one already is greatest among them. Where he observes a twofold
difference. First, by reason of the Greek Article (...). which ever denotats a
single person: Secondly, by reason of the substantive verb. (...), est, is,
which denotats one who now is greatest among you.

But it is answered, to omit the substantive verb, is not mentioned in Luke at
all, who affirms only (...), and not (...): ( Sanderus and Bellarmin argue from
the Latin Version) both the articles (...), and the substantive verb (...), are
mentioned, Luk 9. (...). But Sanderus grants one is not made least in that
place.

Bellarmin urges another difference, as Luk 22. (...), which word signifies a
Prince or Captain, a single person commanding over many: But is answered,
Nothing can be gathered from that word, because, Acts 15. 22. and Heb. 13. 16.
17. many (...), leaders are not only said to be in the Church, but also in the
same Particular Church.

Sanderus yet instances that, Matthew 20. 16. It is affirmed, He who would be
great among you, let him be your servant. But Luke 22. 26. He who is greatest
among you, let him be as he that serves. He imagins some great mystery between
these two expresions, let him be a servant, and let him be as a servant: By
which subtilty of his, any may see what poor shifts they make to prove the
Supremacy of Peter, and consequently the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and
also the Religion of the Modern Church of Rome: For none but a brazen faced
Sophister, can observe any difference in those words of our Savior, Matthew 20.
Let him be a servant, and Luk 22. Let him be as a servant: neither of the
Phrases are proper, as if our Savior had said in either place, Let him be
properly a servant, in both places the speech is Metaph^rical, which Masters of
Rethorick descrive, to be a Similitude contract^d to one word, or, Metaphora
est ad unum verbum contracta similitud^, the difference between a metaphor, and
a similitude is, that a metaphor contracts the similitude to one word, v. g.
when we call a subtle witty man like a Fox: it is a similitude formally
expressed: but when we call him a Fox, it is a metaphor: and so it may be
concluded, that both those speeches may be called as well similituds, as
metaphors. That is, a similitude is a metaphor enlarged by the particles as, or
like. And a metaphor is a similitude contracted, taking away those particles
as: when we say in the similitude, a subtle man is like a Fox: we say in the
metaphor, He is a Fox. The meaning is the same in both expressions: now to
apply, Let him serve, or be a servant, Matthew 20. is the metaphor or the
similitude contracted: but in Luke 22. Let him be as a servant, is the
similitude or metaphor enlarged, and the meaning in both is one, viz. The only
way to be great in the Kingdom of Heaven, is to carry themselves humbly and
like servants: And therefore, Sanderus is endeavoring to make ropes in the
sand, seeking any mystical difference between, Let him be a servant, Matthew
20. and let him be a^ a servant, Luke 22.

Sanderus urges still, that Luke 22. one must be greatest already amongst
them, since our Savior instructs him, how to carry himself in that station,
viz. as a servant.

But it is answered, This objection is of like stuff with the former, for if it
were of any force, it would conclude that one also were least among them
already: that is below all the rest; which Sanderus will not readily grant:
because, Luke, It is said, He that is least among you, shall be great, cap. 9.
48. The truth is, the speech of our Savior in both these places is indefinit,
not mentioning any one in particular, either as greatest or least. The true
meaning of his words are, He who is most submissive among you, be who he will,
one or other? deserves the greatest respect, and for that reason will be
greatest in the sight of God, or in the Kingdom of heaven.

In the last place, Bellarmin, and Sanderus both set on with an admirable
Sophism, they differ in words, yet object the same in substance. Sanderus
propones it thus.

Immediately after our Savior had uttred these words, Let him who is greatest,
be as a Servant. He proposes an example of himself to be followed: by that
person who is greatest, in these words, For I my self am as a servant in the
mids of you; that is, says Sanderus, Since I who am greatest of you all, and
primary head of the Church, carries my self like a Servant, he who is head of
the Church under me, and greatest among you, should follow my example:
other-wise, says he, The words of our Savior would not cohere with the words
going before: which they do by reason of the illative particle. For, verse 27.

But it is answered, We have proved already, that the speech of our Savior was
directed to them all: and therefore it coheres well enough when he proposes
his own example as a reason of his former exhortation to them. His meaning is,
I who am greatest among you, am as a Servant in the mids of you; And therefore,
any who would be really above the rest in esteem of God, let him follow my
example, by carrying himself humbly.

Bellarmin proposes this Argument in another manner, and in effect surpasses
Sanderus both in Sophistry and Impudence. He reasons thus, lib. 1. cap. 9. De
Pont. Romans Christ says he, affirms, That he was a Servant in the mi^st of
them, Luke 22. But John 13. he affirms, The Disciples spoke truth, when they
called him Lord and Master. The scope of our Savior in these words then, Luke
22. is to ordain one greatest amongst them, or to exhort him, who is ordained
already greatest to follow his example, both in greatness and humility: as if
he had said, My will is, that one of you should be head over the rest as my
Vicar, and that he shall carry himself humbly, as I do, viz. as a Servant to the
rest.

But it is answered, That Bellarmin sophisticats two ways. First, he suppons
falsely, that this exhortation of our Savior, and the reason of it from his own
example was directed to one in particular: whereas it is directed to all the
Apostles, and therefore, his first sophistry is in the persons exhorted.

His second sophistry is in the thing exhorted, viz. to follow his own example.
Bellarmin mentions two things in which they are enjoined to follow the example
of Christ. First, his greatness. Secondly, his humble carriage in the opinion
of Bellarmin. Our Savior exhorts them to follow his example in both, to prove
which he brings in that passage of John 13. impertinently, having nothing to do
with this passage, Luke 22. By which it appears, that our Savior exhorts them
only to humility, or to follow the example of his humility, and not of his
greatness, as is evident by the words uttered by him, as his reason, For, I am
as a servant in the mids of you. The Sophism of Bellarmin redacted to a form is
this, I am head of you all, and carries my self humbly, follow my example:
Ergo says Bellarmin, He exhorts one to be head of the rest, as himself was;
and to carry himself humbly as himself did, whereas our Savior desires them all
indefinitly (not one in particular) to follow his example in humble carriage:
not in Domination, which he expressly forbids, verse 26.

That this gloss of Bellarmins is a new devised fiction amongst the rest, to
uphold the Supremacy of Peter against all Antiquity, we could further prove by
many Fathers. On these words we will mention one testimony; by which it
appears, that in the opinion of Antiquity, the words of our Savior were spoken
indefinitly to all, and not to one in particular. Secondly, that he exhorts
them only to follow his example, in humble carriage, and not in Domination.
This passage is of Theophylactus, upon those words, Cum igitur ego, qui ab
angelica and rationali natura ador^r, in medio vestri ministro, quo pacto vos
aequum est, magnifice de vobis sentire, and Primatum ambire? By which words it
appears, First, that his speech is directed to them all. Secondly, that he
exhorts them only to follow his example in humility: we could also instance
other testimonies, but it is needless.

Hitherto, in this Book we have disputed the Supremacy of Peter, pro and
contra, viz. we have examined all what is alleged of any moment, either for
the institution, or against the institution of Peter in that function of
Oecumenick Bishop. Both the one side, and the other bring several Arguments,
which we have omitted; but they are of no moment in comparison of those we have
examined, being in effect nothing else but Corrolaries of the former, or else
some places of Scripture mis-interpreted, sophisticated, and wrested by the
late Jesuits against the stream of antiquity, and Analogy of Scripture it self.
Neither are they taken for the most part from the Institution of Peter (as the
former) but from his carriage and Prerogatives (as they call them.) And lest
any should think, that we omitted them, as if they were unanswerable, we will
in those following Chapters anatomize all of them which are not merely
ridiculous.

CHAP. XV. of the Prerogatives of Peter in general.
BEllarmin, lib. 1. cap. 17. De Pont. Romans having disputed the Institution of
Peter, or the promise of it, from Mat. 16. 18, 19. and John 21. 15, 16, 17.
that is, from the Rock, from the Keys, and from the feeding of the sheep of
Christ; promises next to prove it by Prerogatives, which is a very uncertain
way of probation, except he explain it, what Prerogatives were? They must of
necessity, belong either to the person of Peter, or to the function of
Oecumenick Bishop: if they belong only to his person, they are nothing to the
purpose. Since many have personal Prerogatives, as well as Peter, the
Prerogatives of Paul are nothing inferior to those of Peter: And since they do
not conclude Paul to be Oecumenick Bishop, no more do these Prerogatives of
Peter conclude him to be Oecumenick Bishop. What more glorious Prerogatives can
any have then those of Paul? He was brought up in all sorts of learning, and of
a Persecutor was miraculously converted to Christ, Act. 9 only called a chosen
vessel, ibid. To him only Christ appeared after his ascension, ibid. Rapt up to
the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. labored more then all the other Apostles, 1 Cor.
15. Rebuked Peter as a dissembler in his face, Gal. 2. gave a man over to
Satan, 1 Cor. 5. was first sent by the Spirit to preach unto the Gentiles,
Acts 13. healed the sick only with his handkerchief, Acts 19. Struck Elimas
with blindness, ibid. converted the Proconsul, ibid: while he was yet alive
himself, his Epistles were cited as Canonick Scripture, and that by Peter
himself: 2 Peter 3. The name of Christians had its first original from the
Preaching of Paul. So Chrysostomus, as he is cited by Photius Bibliothec. cap.
270. In a word, Chrysostomus himself, Homily 77. de poenitent. etc. magnifieth
so those Prerogatives of Paul, as if no mortal man were capable of greater: and
since these Prerogatives of Paul do not conclude him Oecunick Bishop; how can
those Prerogatives of Peter conclude him to be so? And lest any should think
that the reason is, because the Prerogatives of Peter were greater then these
of Paul: hear Ambrosius, or if ye please Maximus, Sermon 66. who having
declaimed on the Prerogatives of Peter, and Paul, concludes in those words,
Ergo* beati Petrus and Paulus, eminent inter universos Apostolos, and peculiari
quadam praerogativa praecellunt, verum interipsos, quis cui proponatur incertum
est? The sum of which is, That the prerogatives of both are so great, that none
can tell which of them is to be preferred, viz. Peter or Paul? If this does not
satisfy the Reader, that the Prerogatives of Paul were as great, as these of
Peter; let him hear Chrysostom, Hom. 66. where he affirms expressly, That none
doubted of this, viz. that none of the Apostles went before Paul: and also on
Galat. 2. he affirms, Paulus non egebat voce Petri, nec eo opus habebat: sed
honor par erat illi; nihil hic dicam amplius. By these last words, it is
evident to any intelligent Reader, that in his opinion, Paul was to be
preferred to Peter.

We have spoken already of personal Prerogatives, that they can be no argument
to prove the Supremacy of Peter, since in the opinion of the Ancients, the
Prerogatives of Paul were equal to those of Peter, as expressly is affirmed by
them: and also Superior to those of Peter, as may be gathered, not obscurely
from their words: albeit out of modesty they affirm it not expressly.
Prerogatives then concluding Peter to be Oecumenick Bishop, must of necessity
be prerogatives inseparable from that function. And in that case, the pretended
successors of Peter, or the Bishops of Rome must also have those Prerogatives:
that they have, none but a mad man will affirm; since among these Prerogatives
are numbered walking upon the water, and such like, which would puzle the
Bishops of Rome now to do. In a word, among all those prerogatives of Peter,
there is not one that concludes him more Oecumenick Bishop, then they do him
Emperor of Rome, which none but a Sophister will deny. There is not one of them
which is not either notoriously false, or notoriously impertinent, or else
refuted already. For ye must understand amongst the Prerogatives of Peter, they
not only reckon up what they have said already, as, Tu es Petrus, sibi dabo
claves, pasce oves meas: but also those very things which they disput, after
they have disputed his Prerogatives, tempting the Readers patience with
repetitions of the same things. Any who will take the pains to anatomize those
Volumns of Controversies set forth by Bellarmin, they will find them to be
nothing else, but a Rible Rabble of contradictory Sophistry, impertinent
Rhetorications, and oratorial digressions, tedious repetitions of the same
things ad nauseam usque; wrested, mutilated, falsely interpreted, and forged
Testimonies of the Ancients, to deceive his Reader, confirm ignorants in the
Romish idolatry; thinking to deterr his learned Adversaries from discovering
his weakness by his prolixity. In which Artifices, Baronius is nothing inferior
to him, being the most shameless corrupter of Antiquity, which the world has
hitherto produced: as appears by those exercitations of Causabon, and others
upon him. One thing is to be observed in him, Bellarmin, P^tavius, and some
others; that when they are most destitute of reason, they brag most: and when
they cannot answer an Argument in reason, they fall a scolding; taxing learned
men, yea, of their own side, of ignorance, madness, and heresy, for refusing
to acknowledge fantastic fictions, devised by themselves, as irrefragable
principles.

Their Sophistry is very great in this following disput of the Prerogatives of
Peter: in which Bellarmin, and Baronius clash together in things of greatest
importance. The truth is, there is not any thing worth the answering in all
this prolix disput of prerogatives; Nevertheless, lest any should think I
omitted their arguments, because they are unanswerable, I will trace the method
of Bellarmin, answering his arguments, so that any indifferent man may be
convinced of the truth. And if any be not satisfied, let him read Chamier,
Whitaker, and others, who prosecute that dispute to the full. The Popish
Authors enumerate not the prerogatives after the same manner: some reckoning
fewer then others. Bellarmin enumerats all these which any of them mentions, in
number 28. the first 20. they endeavor to prove by Scripture, the other 8. by
Tradition. We will dispute the first 20. in the following 16. chapter, and the
other 8. chapter 17. Of which in order.

CHAP XVI. Of the Scriptural Prerogatives of Peter.
THe Scriptural Prerogatives of Peter, as we said, are twenty, the truth is,
they are not worth the refuting: but lest our Adversaries brag that we omitted
them, because they could not be answered, I entreat the Reader to have
patience, till I pass through that Augiae Stabulum, viz. that disput of
Bellarmin, concerning the prerogatives of Peter. Where ye shall find, First,
That though they were all true, and proved, yet those forementioned
prerogatives of Paul, are nothing inferior to them. Secondly, It will appear
that there is not one of them, but it is either impertinent, and nothing to the
purpose; or else, notoriously false. But now have at them.

The first prerogative is, That our Savior changed the name of Peter, from
Simon to Peter, John 1. Tu es Simon. filius Jonae, tu vocaberis Cephas: Thou
art Simon the son of Jonas, thou shall be called Cephas. But it is answered, it
proves nothing: First, many had new names given them, and yet were not
Oecumenick Bishops: Yea, other Apostles also, as Paul, was once called Saul;
also the sons of Zebedeus, James and John, had the names of Boanerges given
unto them.

Bellarmin instanceth many ways, vexing himself and his Reader; so do Stapleton
and Toletus, but nothing to the purpose: wearying both themselves and their
Readers, with extravagant fantasies, falling again upon Tu es Petrus, which we
disputed to the full before.

The second prerogative is this, When the names of the Apostles are enumerated,
Peter is still named first, as Matthew 10. Mark 3. Luke 6. Acts 1 Mark 5. and
other places.

But it is answered, It is notoriously false, as appears by 1. Corinthians. 3. and
9. Galat. 2. Mark 16. John 1. In all which places, other Apostles are named
before Peter: And although it were true, that Peter was ever named first, it
concludes no primacy of Jurisdiction, but only of order, which may be among
those of equal authority. As in a College of Judges, the name of the eldest
Judge, or President, is the first in the Nomenclature or Catalogue.

The third prerogative is from Matthew 14. 29. That Peter only walked upon the
waters with our Savior: As also, that John 21. 7. That Peter did leap in the
Sea for haste to be at Christ.

But it is answered, This is a great prerogative in Peter, indeed, showing only
the fervor of his mind, and love to Christ; But inconsequent, to prove him
Oecumenick Bishop. Christ's appearing to Paul after his Ascension, was a
prerogative nothing inferior: Peter is no more concluded Oecumenick Bishop, by
this prerogative, then the other Apostles by the miracles wrought by them.

The fourth prerogative is from Matthew 16. 16. viz. That the Mystery of the
Trinity, and Incarnation of Christ, was first revealed to Peter, before it was
revealed to any of the rest.

But it is answered, Although it were granted, as in effect many Fathers
believe that it is true; it is inconsequent to prove Peter Oecumenick Bishop.
Secondly, it is notoriously false, and presuppons that the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Saints of the Old Testament, were ignorant of the Mystery of the
Trinity and Incarnation of Christ. If they instance, they knew only in general,
That the Messiah would be the second Person of the Trinity, Incarnas, and born
of a Virgin; but not in particular, that Christ was the Messiah. It is replied
that John the Baptist, before ever Peter knew Christ, professed that Jesus of
Nazareth, in particular, the supposed Son of Joseph and Son of Mary, was the
Son of GOD, and the Savior of the World, foretold by the Prophets. Nathanael
also professed so much. It is a most simple evasion of Bellarmins, That these
confessed Christ to be the Son of GOD, in that manner, as all the Saints are
called Sons of GOD, or by Adoption: since John the Baptist expressly testifies
that Christ was the Messiah foretold by the Prophets. Also, that the same was
revealed to Simeon, Luke 2. none without impudence can deny Nathanael also,
John 1. not only calls Christ the Son of GOD, but also the King of Israel: and
Augustine, tract. 7. in John, affirms, that the confession of Nathanael, and
that of Peter were the same.

The fifth prerogative, is Matthew 16. 18. The gates of hell shall not overcome
it. It is answered, we showed before the exposition of this place, viz. That
the gates of hell should not overcome the Church. They allege here a great
prerogative, for, say they, the rest of the Apostles had not this promise, for
the gates of hell prevailed against the Churches founded by the other ^pestles;
since the Church of Jerusalem founded by James, and also the Churches founded
by the other Apostles are decayed. But it is answered, This prerogative is
grounded upon a false supposition; viz. that our Savior meaned by the Church of
Rome, the Church founded by Peter, of which he did not dream: for we showed
before, that the Rock upon which the Church is built, was only Christ: and that
these Fathers who interpreted the Rock to be the confession of Peter, or Peter
himself, meaned all one thing with those who interpreted the Rock to be Christ;
as is evident in Augustinus, who in one place interprets the Rock to be Christ.
In an other the confession of Peter. In a third, Peter himself. However, they
entangle themselves pitifully, in expounding the Rock both to be Peter, and the
seat of Peter: which are different things, and it shall also be proved in the
last chapter of this book, that Rome was not the seat of Peter, more then of
Paul. And therefore they absurdly interpret, the Rock to be the Church of Rome.

The sixth prerogative, Matthew 17. Christ commanded tribute to be paid for
him and Peter: whence some Fathers gather, that the Apostles themselves knew
the supremacy of Peter. So Hieronymus on Matthew 18. as he is cited by
Bellarmin.

But it is answered, Although some Fathers were of that opinion, that the
Apostles knew by that tribute paying, that Peter would be preferred to them
all: the opinion of those Fathers is notoriously false; for the strife of the
sons of Zebedens was after the tribute paying. But they never would have
demanded to be preferred to the rest, if they had known that Peter was
preferred already: Yea, also that contention of all the Apostles for the
primacy, was after that tribute paying. But they had been madmen to have
contended for the thing Peter had already. As for Hieronymus, Bellarmin cites
him unfaithfully, he on Matthew 18. expressly affirms, That these were in an
error who collected the supremacy of Peter (...) that tribute paying: Bellarmin
has an other shift, that the error mentioned by Hieronymus, consisted in this,
That they believed by that tribute paying, that Peter would be a temporal
Prince or Monarch. But it is replied, though that fiction were granted, they
are also in an error, who believe that the Bishop of Rome is a temporal
monarch. But they affirm, that Peter was the same which the Bishop of Rome is:
but that he holds himself as a temporal Monarch, and teaches it in Cathedra,
we showed before, cap 11. However it is a very strange consequence, Peter paid
tribute; Ergo, he was Monarch of the Church, since the Bishops of Rome (as shall
be proved, part 3. lib. 1.) refuse to pay tribute, Because they pretend they
are Monarchs of the Church. It is notorious also, that all the Apostles,
viritim, paid tribute as well as Peter.

Bellarmin and others instance with great pomp, that some mystery lurks in
this, that our Savior commanded tribute to be paid for him and Peter: viz.
That the heads of the families only paid tribute, and consequently, that
Christ was head of the family, and Peter secondary head under him.

But it is replied, That argument would conclude, that all the Church Militant
paid only tribute to their Oecumenick Bishop; or that the said tribute was
paid for all the Church Militant: which cannot be mentioned without laughter.
However, they go on in sophistry, and proves by the testimony of Hieronymus,
that only the heads of families paid tribute: Quid tum postea? It does not
follow, That the head of the Church Militant paid tribute for all the Members
of it. Secondly, it is impudent sophistry, to pretend the authority of
Hieronymus. His words are, Post Augustum Caesarem, Judaea facta est tributaria,
and omnes censi capite ferebantur. It is stupendous sophistry (since no
learned man can be so ignorant) to affirm, that Hieronymus in these words,
mentions, That heads of the families only paid tribute: since it appears to
all, who are not utterly ignorant of the Latin tongue, that census capite,
imports as much as Viritim, that is, Every person paid tribute, or every head
for himself, and not only heads of families.

It is demanded then, What was the meaning of our Savior, in that paying of
tribute for Peter and himself? Chrysostomus, hom. 59. on Matthew, thinks this
was the reason, Because both our Savior and Peter were first born. But the holy
Father is in a great mistake, for two reasons. The first is, Because that
tribute was not the tribute of the first born, (which was paid only once in a
life time) but an annual tribute, which was paid every year. Secondly, Peter
was not first born, but Andrew his brother.

Jansenius, a Learned and Ingenuous Papist, Concord. 69. affirms, the reason
was, Because Peter and Christ was then together alone. He is not so subtle as
Bellarmin, to gather any supremacy of Peter, from those words: The truth is,
both Peter and our Savior dwelt at Capernaum, as may be gathered from Matthew
9. 1. Mark 2. 1. Luke 4. 31. 38. And it is very like that our Savior was then
in the house of Peter, to which he went out of the Synagogue, Luke 4. 38. and
being Peter's Guest, and Master also, paid for him; ye may see by hunting this
prerogative, how they scrape Sophistry out of the fire, to prove the supremacy
of Peter.

The seventh prerogative, is, two miracles in fishing, Luke 5. 3. and John 21.
6. If ye demand, what can be gathered from these miracles? They tell you,
Christ taught in Peter's ship, and Peter's ship was the Church; and since Peter
was head of his own ship, he was also head of the Church.

But it is answered, How know they that the ship was Peter's? Salmero the Jesuit
doubts he was so rich. And so that argument falls a will, except they prove
that the ship was Peter's. It is admirable to consider how Bellarmin plungeth
himself in Sophistry; distilling the supremacy of Peter from the lymbick of his
brains by wild allegories; that the Reade^ may laugh. It will not be amiss to
anatomize his Dispute.

First, He affirms, these two miracles of Fishing, both signify the Church:
that of Luke 5. the Church Militant, because it was before the Resurrection:
that of John 21. the Church Triumphant, because it was after the Resurrection.
He adds an other reason, in the first Fishing, our Savior bid^ them only make
ready their nets for the fishing. In the second, he injoyns them, to cast out
the net upon their right hand. Who doubts but the Church Militant is signified
by the first Fishing? Because in it both good and bad are received; what ever
side of the ship the net be cast from. And who can call it in question, that
the second fishing signifies the Church Triumphant? In which only the good are
comprehended, since the Apostles are enjoined, To cast out the net on the right
side of the ship: still good, but better follows. In the first fishing, the
nets do break, denotating the Schisms and Heresies of the Church Militant. In
the second, the nets did not brea^ at all, which signifies, The Unity of the
Church Triumphant. Learned subtility follows, In the first fishing, the number
of the fish is not determinated which were catched, signifying, or fulfilling
that passage of the Psalm, I spoke and they were multiplied without number;
which is a clear demonstration, That the Church Militant is represented by that
fishing. But in the second fishing, the caught fish were precisely 153. By
which it is no less evident, that in it, The Church Triumphant is represented.
Lastly, If any obstinat Heretic be not convinced by these former reasons, that
in these two fishings, the Church Militant and Triumphant are represented, they
cannot but be convinced, by this following reason. viz. In the first fishing,
the fish were taken in the ship, Luke 5. But in the second, John 21. The fish
were not taken in the ship, but drawn a shore in the net. The first signifying,
The fluctuating of the Church Militant, receiving indifferently all. The
second, The stability of the Church Triumphant, receiving none but the Elect.

Upon those irrefragable principles, Bellarmin demonstrats the supremacy of
Peter thus. Since, says he, Both these fishings represent the Church, and
Peter is the chief Fisher of them both: Who but an Heretic will deny, that
Peter is head of the Church? And as if there were no more to prove, but that
Peter was the Master-Fisher; he falls to the proving of it. First, Our Savior
seeing more ships on the shore, entered that of Peter's, and not the rest.
Secondly, He bade Peter lanch out, and make ready the nets. Thirdly, He said to
Peter, Fear not, after this thou shall be a Fisher of men; and thus way he
proves Peter to be Master Fisher in the first Fishing. That he was also in the
second he proves: First, because Peter affirmed, he was going a fishing, and
the rest said, they would go with him. Secondly, Peter drew the net to the
land. It is needless to spend time in refuting has quisquilias: any who would
see Bellarmin and his fellows are exsibilated by Chamier, let him read tom. 1.
lib. 11. cap. 17. from the beginning to number. 10.

The eight prerogative is taken from Luke 22. 32. But I have prayed for thee
that thy faith fail not: therefore when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. If ye ask them, What prerogative is here? They tell you first, that
these words were spoken to Peter immediately after our Savior had conferred the
supremacy upon him: In the former contention, verse 26. confusedly and
generally, not naming him. But now, in these words, he designs in particular,
Peter to be that person whom he called greatest amongst them, verse 26.

But it is replied, It was proved false, cap. 14. that any person was ordained
greatest among them, Luke 22. 26.

Secondly, They build on this, because Peter is enjoined by Christ to confirm
his brethren therein. But it is answered, Confirming of brethren inferrs not an
Oecumenick Bishop: because Paul and Barnabas, confirmed brethren, Acts 14. 22.
So Judas and Silas, Acts 15. 32. Innumerable other particulars (but it is
needless to mention them) might be produced. And whereas they urge, that the
word confirm imports authority. It is answered, Sometime it does, but not
supreme authority; however in this place it imports no authority at all, but
only good example: So Theophylactus, Twenim, Petre, conversus bonum exemplum
sies poenitentiae omnibus: nullusque eorum qui in me credunt, desperabit, in te
respiciens. Where observe, he makes that confirming, nothing but by good
example, he shall confirm his brethren; for in these words, our Savior is
meaning the Apostasy of Peter in his thrice denying him: and so Theophylactus
comments upon the place, viz. that Peter shall confirm his Brethren, by keeping
them from despair of forgiveness, although their sins were never so great;
since Christ pardoned him, after so great a sin as denying him thrice: This
exposition of Theophylactus is the same with that of Ambrosius, and Euthymius
and Maldonat the Jesuit, who upon this place has these words, Ambrosij,
Theophylacti, and Euthymij interpretatio mihi non displicet, qui conversum
exponunt ^peccato, quo Christum negavit, acta poenitentia, quasi aliis de suo
vulnere fecerit medicinam. In which words the Jesuit expressly aquiesceth in the
exposition of these Fathers Whence appears the notable sophistry of Bellarmin,
lib. 4. cap. 3. de pont. Romans who interprets these words of our Savior,
Therefore when thou art converted, confirm thy brethren thus. The sense, says
he, of these words, is not that Peter repenting him of his sin, or converted,
should confirm the Apostles by his example: but this, Thou whose faith cannot
be deficient, when thou fees others vacillating, convert thy self to them, and
confirm them.

They object many things here, as that Theophylactus affirms, That Peter
after his repentance shall recover Primatum omnium, and Praefecturam orbis: that
Ambrosius affirms, Petrus Ecclesiae praeponitur postquaem tentatus a Diabolo
est. Augustinus also calls Peter Rectorem Ecclesiae, cui claves Regni Coelorum
creditae sunt. But these objections are of no moment. And first, that
Theophylactus affirms that Peter recovered the Primacy above all, it is
nothing. For first, the meaning is no other, then that he has a chief place in
the Church in dignity, not in Jurisdiction: and it shall be proved, cap. 19. and
20. that not only the other Apostles are called Principes Primates, but also
Praefecti orbis, and Rectores Ecclesiae.

The ninth Prerogative of Peter is, that our Savior first of all appeared to
him after his resurrection: But it is answered, first, although it were true,
it is of no moment to prove Peter Oecumenick Bishop. Secondly, it is
notoriously false, because he appeared to Mary Magdalene, before ever he
appeared to Peter, Mark 16. 19. before ever he appeared to his own mother, or
to any of the Apostles. If Bellarmin answer, That Mary Magdalen was only a
woman: It is replied, It concluds, Women had the Primacy over the Apostles, if
the Argument were of any force. Secondly, it is very probable, that our Savior
appeared to these two disciples, going to Emmaus, before he appeared to any of
the Apostles: for when they came back to Jerusalem, and found the eleven
gathered together, then they affirmed, that the Lord was risen indeed, and had
appeared to Simon: which is all that Bellarmin alleges to prove that Christ
first appeared to Peter, except that of 1 Corinthians. 15. He appeared unto Cephas,
and after that unto the eleven: however, albeit it be very probable that our
Savior appeared to Peter, before ever he appeared unto the other Apostles: yet
it concludes no more that Peter had Primacy over the the other Apostles, then
that those two Disciples going to Emmaus, had primacy over them, since he
appeared unto them, as well as unto Peter, before ever he appeared to the other
Apostles.

The tenth Prerogative is taken from John 13. when our Savior washing the
Apostles feet, did first wash those of Peter. It is answered first, Although it
were true, it is of no moment to prove Peter Oecumenick bishop. Secondly, it is
only a conjecture of some Fathers, that Peter's feet were first washed: it
cannot begathered from the text at all. Augustinus is of that opinion indeed,
and so is Nonnus in his Poetical paraphrase: but other Fathers are against it,
as Chrysostomus, Theophylactus. Bellarmin urges here, that those Fathers
affirm, That Judas only had his feet washed before Peter: but what then?
Bellarmins reason is very bad, concluding from that washing, Peter to be
Oecumenick Bishop, since Judas was washed before him: he instances Judas was a
Traitor, and none of the other Apostles would have suffered our Savior to wash
their feet before these of Peter's, but only Judas. But it is replied, First, if
there had been any my stery of Primacy in that washing of feet, our Savior
would never have washed the feet of Judas before those of Peter. Secondly, not
only Origines and Ambrosius affirm, That he washed the feet of other Apostles*
before those of Peter, (besides Judas) but also Popish Doctors affirm the same,
as Aquinas, Lyranus, and Salmero the Jesuit.

The eleventh Prerogative is from John 21. 18. where our Savior says to Peter,
But when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another
shall gird thee. If ye demand what Prerogative is here? They answer that in
those words, Christ shows to Peter what death he should die, viz. That he
should be crucified as himself was. But it is answered, First, although it were
true, it does not conclude Peter to be Oecumenick Bishop. Secondly, that our
Savior foretold to Peter a violent death in those words is more then probable*
but that he foretold the death of the cross, can no ways be gathered from the
words. And whereas they insist upon stretching forth of hands, it is of no
moment; since those words do not conclude stretching forth of hands upon the
cross necessarily, since ones hands are stretched out when they are bound:
which sort of stretching, our Savior questionless means by, as appears by these
words, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, but when thou shall be
old, thou sh^lt stre^ch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and lead
thee whither thou would not. The Syrian Interpreter, Alius cinget lumbos
tuos shall gird thy loins. Interlinear Gloss, cinget vinoulis, shall gird thy
loins. Lyranus (convinced that stretching of hands was by Cords, and not by
Nails) affirms, That Peter was crucified, being bound by cords upon the cross:
which is a very ridiculous fancy: however, that by stretching of hands, is not
meant crucifying, but only binding, appears by the following words; and lead
thee whither thou would not. It is notorious, that they use not to lead one
who is crucified already any where.

The twelfth Prerogative is from Acts 1. 15. And in those days Peter stood up
in the midst of the Disciples. Here they gather great things. First, that Peter
convocated the rest of the Apostles; Ergo he was Oecumenick Bishop. But first,
it is inconsequent; although he had gathered them in one, it does not follow,
that he did so by authori^y, but only by advice and counsel. Secondly, it is
notoriously false, that Luke in that place affirms any such thing as that the
Apostles were convocated by Peter.

The second thing they gather, that Peter having proposed, that one should be
chosen in the place of Judas, they all obeyed his command. But it is answered,
Peter only uttered his opinion, (as any one of them might have done) that such
a thing was necessary, and they followed his opinion. It is ridiculous to
collect ^^om thence any authority of Peter over the rest.

Salmero the Jesuit collects, that Peter represented Christ, because Luke
affirms, He stood up in the midst of them. But it is answered, It follows
likewise, that the little child, Mat. 18. and the man with the withered hand,
Mark 3. and Paul, Ast. 27. Were visible heads of the Church. That standing in
the mids, imports no authority of it self, but rather a Ministry, appears by
Luke 22. 27. where our Savior affirms, He was in the mids of them as a servant.

The thirteenth Prerogative, is, from Acts 2. where after the Apostles had
received the Holy Ghost, Peter first of all, did promulgat the Gospel. But it
is answered, First, although it were true, it is inconsequent to prove Peter
visible head of the Church, as is notorious. Secondly, it is false, or at least
not certain, that Peter preached the Gospel first: for Luke affirms, Before
that time, the Apostles spoke with tongues to the admiration of all the
hearers, but questionless, what they spoke was the Gospel.

The fourteenth Prerogative, is, from Acts 3. 6. Where Peter cured the lame
man. If ye ask, what Prerogative is here, since Paul and other Apostles did
equivalent miracles? They answer, It was the first miracle the Apostles did
after Christ's Ascension.

But it is replied, What although it were? It does not conclude Peter to be
Oecumenick Bishop. Secondly, if it be not false, it is uncertain, for we read
in the second chapter, that the Apostles did many miracles, which probably was
before that time.

The fifteenth Prerogative, is, from Asts 5. Where Peter killed with a word
Annanias and Sapphira. But it is answered, Paul, Acts 13. struck Elimas the
sorcerer with blindness with a word only, or in as miraculous a manner.

The sixteenth Prerogative, is, from Acts 9. 32. And it came to pass, as Peter
walked throughout all quarters, he came also to the Saints that dwelt at Lydda.
If ye ask what they mean* They will tell you, that Peter did the office of a
General in an Army. But it is false, that Peter walked through the Saints,
visiting them otherwise, then Paul did, Acts. 18.

The seventeenth Prerogative is from Acts 10 where Peter preached first to the
Gentiles, being commanded so to do in that vision. But it is answered, Although
Peter had first preached unto the Gentiles: it does not conclude him Oecumenick
Bishop. Secondly, if not false, it is at least not certain, because Philip his
preaching at Samaria, and his baptising of the Eunuch are both mentioned by
Luke, before that vision of Peter concerning Cornelius.

The eighteenth Prerogative, is, from Acts 12. Where it is affirmed, That the
Church made continual intercession for Peter, when he was imprisoned. But it is
answered, None but a Sophister, would object that to prove Peter Oecumenick
Bishop. Bellarmin instances. That they prayed not for James, and Stephen: But
it is answered, That's far worse Logic to prove Peter Oecumenick Bishop.
Secondly, it is impious in Bellarmin to affirm, That the Church did not pray
for Stephen and James: although it be not mentioned, he cares not what he
babble, because all he spoke, was received as Gospel by his disciples at Rome.

The nineteenth Prerogative is* from Acts 15. where Peter first speaks, and all
the rest followed his opinion.

But it is answered first, That Luke mentions, that there was great debate
amongst them before Peter spoke: and therefore it is uncertain, that Peter
spoke first. Secondly, whereas they call that speaking of Peter's, a pronouncing
of the sentence. It is notoriously false, for Lyranus himself affirms* it was
pronounced by James, verse 19. as it was indeed. The reason they give is,
Because James was Bishop of the place. Thirdly, Cardinal Cart husianus, upon
Acts 15. expressly affirms, That James presided in the Council, which quite
destroys the Supremacy of Peter for an Oecumenick Bishop, who has the only
right of presiding in Councils, either by himself, when he is present, or else
by his Legates, when he is absent. Fourthly, in the Council of Basil, the
Fathers of that Council denied, that the Legates of the Bishop of Rome should
preside in that Council, because they never did read, that Peter did preside in
any Council. Turre-Cremata, lib. 3. cap. 24. Summae de Eccles. affirms the
same: and for that reason Paul, Galat. 2. preferrs James to Peter; whence
appears that it is false, that Peter presided in that Council, and albeit he
had presided, it does not conclude him Oecumenick Bishop: for it shall be
proved, part. 2. and part 3. that in the Council of Nice, and other General
Councils, that those who presided in them were not Oecumenick Bishops.

The twenty Prerogative, and last Scriptural is, from Gala. 1. where Paul
affirms, That after three years, he went up to Jerusalem to see Peter. But it
is answered, All who were visited by Paul, were not Oecumenick Bishops: and
here Bellarmin miserably sophisticats in the Fathers. And first, he cites
Chrysostomus, affirming that the reason was, because Peter was greater then
himself. But it is answered, That Chrysostomus words are elder then himself:
for so he explains, greater then himself, (...), that this is Chrysostom's
meaning is evident, because in the same place he affirms, That Paul went to see
Peter, not that he needed any thing from him, being equal to him. He affirms
also, I say no more, which is as much as in his opinion, Paul was to be
preferred to Peter. In like manner, he sophisticats in Hieronymus, whom he
brings in affirming the reason of that visit, was, because, Peter was the first
Apostle. But it is answered, The meaning of Hieronymus is the same with that of
Chrysostomus by first Apostle, he means either in age, or dignity, not in
Jurisdiction, because he expressly affirms in the same place, That Paul came to
see Peter, non discendi studio, qui and ipse eundem praedication is haberet
Autorem, sed honoris priori Apostolo deferendi, thas is not to learn any thing
from him, but to do him honor as the strst Apostle. Augustinus expressly calls
it a faternal visit, and so does Tertullianus. Lombardus also affirms, The end
of Paul visit, was to show Peter that he was his Coapostolus, or fellow Apostle
with him, not to learn any thing from him. Aquinas, the other great Master of
the Schoolmen, affirms the same, paraphrasing upon the words of Paul, he
says, Non ut discerem ab eo, sed ut visuarem eum, not to learn from him, but
to see him.

And thus we have waded through that immense Ocean of that disput of
Bellarmins, concerning the Scriptural Prerogatives of Peter, in which we have
omitted nothing of moment, or what is worth the answering. Bellarmin alleges
some testimonies of Fathers, showing to favor (as he cites them) some of these
Prerogatives of Peter: but he basely sophisticats, as we have given a Specimen
in the chief of them, whose testimonies we have vindicated. He deludes his
Reader in this, viz. because those Fathers acknowledge some of those
Prerogatives, therefore by Sophistry, he would persuade his Reader that Peter
was Oecumenick Bishop in their opinion, which was very far from their mind, as
partly we have showed in the former chapters, and partly shall show in the
following.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Prerogatives of Peter by Tradition.
IN the former Chapter, we have disputed the Scriptural Prerogatives of Peter,
twenty in number: now follows Prerogatives of Peter by tradition, which are
eighth in number. The first is, that Euodius, and some other affirm, That Peter
only of all the Apostles was baptized by the hands of Christ.

But it is answered first, That Euodius testimony is not much to be regarded,
Baronius himself thinks it not to be written by Euodius, because the author of
it affirms, That Steven was martyred seven years after the death of Christ.
Secondly, he says, The house in which our Savior celebrated the Supper, was in
the house of John the Apostle, which directly contradicts, Matthew 26. Mark 14.
and Luke 22. As for Bellarmins other witnesses, Nicephorus and Euthymius, they
have it from the said supposititious Euodius: This Euodius was Patriarch of
Antiochia, immediately after the times of the Apostles, at least called so, in a
large sense; For it shall be proved, part. 2. lib. 1. that no Patriarchs were
established before the Council of Chalcedon.

Secondly, Many of the Fathers expressly affirm, That it is false, that Christ
baptized Peter. So Euthymius himself (after he had recited the opinion of
Euodius) Eulogius in Photius, Biobliothec. cap. 280. Tertullianus, de Baptismo,
cap. 12. Chrysostomus on the Acts, homil. 1. who all affirm, That Peter and the
other Apostles were baptized by John the Baptist; Augustinus, epist. 108.
disputs this question, whither John or Christ baptized the Apostles? He is in
doubt of it, but inclines most to that opinion, that they were baptized by
Christ. Nevertheless, there is no prerogative in Peter there, since he speaks
of the Baptism of all the Apostles as well as Peter.

Thirdly, Although Peter had been baptized by Christ alone and not the other
Apostles, it does not conclude him to be Oecumenick Bishop.

The second Traditional prerogative, is, That only Peter was ordained Bishop by
Christ, and the other Apostles by Peter

But it is answered, It is a mere fable, contradicted by Chrysostomus on
Matthew, hom. 5. Who affirms, That James first obtained a Bishopric: if that
be true, then he was a Bishop before Peter; And if before Peter, then he
behoved to have been made Bishop by Christ, since Peter could not make James a
Bishop, when he was not Bishop himself.

Secondly, It shall be proved in the last chapter of the book, that neither
Peter, nor any of the Apostles were Bishops properly: but in a large sense, as
Bishop comprehends Apostle, Acts 1. 20. and in that sense, Christ himself is
called a Bishop, 1. Peter 25.

The third Traditional prerogative, is, from Acts 8. Where Peter detected Simon
Magus; the tradition is, that after that time, the same Peter extinguished him.

But is answered, Albeit it were true, that Simon Magus was killed by Peter, it
does not conclude him Oecumenick Bishop. Bellarmin instances, That Simon Magus
was Prince of Heretics, whom Peter killed: Ergo, Peter was Oecumenick Bishop
who killed him. But it is answered: First, Bellarmins Scholars at Rome, may
well approve of this way of disputation, but it is laughed at else where.
Secondly, that argument would conclude Paul to be Oecumenick Bishop, since
Cyrillus, Cathes. 6. Sulpitius, hist. Sacr. lib. 2. Ambrosius sermon. 66.
attribute the killing of Simon Magus jointly to Peter and Paul.

Thirdly, That killing of Simon Magus by Peter, seems to be a fable, since
those who reports it contradict other in the manner. Hegesipus, lib. 3. cap. 2.
affirms, That Simon Magus made wings to himself, and fell a flying: Clemens,
lib. 6. cap. 9. affirms, That he had no wings, but only was carried in the Air
by Devils: Sulpitius calls them two Devils. Some of them, says, Simon Magus,
brake his neck in the fall, at the Prayer of Peter: Others that he brake only
his thigh bone.

Finally, All this story of Peter and Simon Magus, depends upon Peter's being at
Rome; but all the Ancients testimonies, who testified Peter was at Rome,
depends upon the authority of Papias, whom Eusebius discrives to be the author
of many fables, as shall be showed at large, in the last chapter of this book.
Where also it shall be proved, by unanswerable presumptions, that Peter was
never at Rome: and that all Bellarmins proofs to the contrair, are of no moment.

The fourth Ttraditional prerogative of Peter, is, That Peter by the command of
Christ. fixed his Bishopric at Rome, which was the imperial City: Ergo, Peter
was Oecumenick Bishop. But it is answered: First, it does not follow: Secondly,
Bellarmin cannot prove by Scripture or Antiquity, That Peter fixed his
Bishopric at Rome much less at the command of Christ, Bellarmin instanceth
(...) authority of Leo, ser^^n. 1. de natali Petri and Pauli. But it is
answered; First, Leo does not affirm, That Peter was enjoined to his Bishopric
at Rome, but only to preach the Gospel as an Apostle, his words are, Quum
Apostoli imbuend^^ Evangelio mundum, distributis sibi terrarum partibus,
suscepissent, Petrus, Princeps Apostolici ordinis ad arcem Romani destinatur
imperij. But Paul went also to Rome, for that end to preach the Gospel as an
Apostle. But this question, if Peter were at Rome, and Bishop of Rome? Shall be
disputed in the three last chapters of this book.

The fifth traditional prerogative of Peter, is, That Christ appeared to him at
the end of his life, or a little before he dyed: and when Peter asked him,
whither he was going? He answered, he was come again to be crucified.

But it is answered: First, it contradicts Scripture, affirming, Acts 3. 21.
That the Heavens must contain him until the day of Judgment. Secondly, the
author of this fable is Hegesippus, fasly believed to be him, who lived in the
days of the Apostles; as Baronius affirms, anno 69. number. 7. Origines hom. in
John 37. calls it Appocryphal. And albeit it were true, it does not conclude
Peter to be Oecumenick Bishop: for Bellarmin himself affirms, That our Savior
left the Heavens, and coming unto the Air, appeared unto Paul, Acts 9 4. and so
that argument would conclude Paul Oecumenick Bishop also. Where mark, how he
is entangled, when he affirms, Christ appeared to Peter in Rome, to prove that
Peter was at Rome; when it is objected to him, Acts 3. 21. That the Heavens
should contain Christ till the last day, and therefor contradicts Scripture,
He answers, Christ appeared to Paul in the Air. But here to prove Peter
Oecumenick Bishop, he affirms, That our Savior after his Ascension, left
Heavenbut once, when he appeared (...) Peter: Else he loses time in declaiming
so much upon this prerogative. For he must either deny that Christ appeared to
Paul out of the Heaven: or else he cannot affirm, without Sophistry, that
Christ's appearing to Peter is a prerogative.

The sixth traditional prerogative of Peter, is, That only these Churches were
Patriarchal seats, which were founded by Peter, as Rome, Alexandria, and
Antiochia.

But it is a notorious untruth, For not only Jerusalem and Constantinople, but
also many other Cities were Patriarchal seats: His proofs are shameless. As
first, the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, which mentions only these three
Patriarchal seats; And likewise, the Council of Chalcedon, Action 16. But it is
answered, these Councils mention only these three, in these Canons cited by
Bellarmin: but the Council of Nice mentions Jerusalem, Canon 7. under the name
of Aelia. As for the Council of Chalcedon, it mentions other Patriarchal seats,
in many places, as Canon 28. it mentions him of Constantinople. Likewise, the
second General Council of Constantinople mentions at least ten Patriarchal
seats in the East. Secondly, if ye take the word Patriarch strictly, it shall be
proved, part. 2. lib. 2. that there was no Patriarch before the Council of
Chalcedon, established by Law. And therefore, it is false which Bellarmin
affirms, That these three were ever held Patriarchal seatsonly, because they
were founded by Peter; as shall be proved at large, part. 2. lib. 2. Thirdly, It
is false which he affirms, viz. That those Churches were called Patriarchal,
because they were founded by Peter: since it is notorious, that the dignity of
Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, depended upon civil respects, and not
upon their Apostolic founders. For first, the Bishop of Rome had the first
place, because he was Bishop of the Old imperial City: he of Constantinople the
second, because he was Bishop of New Rome, as appears by the third Canon of the
second General Council of Constantinople, by the 28. Canon of the fourth
General Council of Chalcedon, by the 36 Canon of the fifth General Council of
Constantinople. As for the other Patriarchs, Baronius himself, ad annum 39. number
10. has these words, Majores in instituendis sedibus Ecclesiarum, non aliam
miss rationem, quam secundum provinciarum divisionem, and praerogativas a
Romany antea stabilitas, quam plurima sunt exempla. And a little after, he
affirms, That the Patriarch of Alexandria was preferred to him of Antioch,
because Egypt was praefectura Augustalis; And not Antioch, which was only a
proconsulat of Syria: And for that reason also, It was preferred to Jerusalem,
because Jerusalem was under the said proconsulat. But if Bellarmins prerogative
of Peter hold good, Antioch would be preferred to Constantinople, because it
was founded by the Apostle Peter: and also to Alexandria, because it was only
founded by Mark. But more of this, part. 2. lib. 2.

The seventh traditional prerogative is, The feast of the chair of Peter, viz.
that there was a Festival day observed in the Church, of the institution of
Peter, in his Bishopric ever since his time.

But it is answered: First, Bellarmin is very wary in this objection, in
speaking of the Feast of Peter's chair in general, not nameing which chair in
particular. Better hold his peace, for this feast was in remembrance of Peter's
Bishopric of Antioch, and not of Rome. If this argument have any force, it
proves the Bishop of Antioch Oecumenick Bishop, and not the Bishop of Rome.

Secondly, It is notoriously false, That this feast was observed by the whole
Church. Bellarmins proofs are Augustinus, Sermon 15. de Sanctis: which book is
proved by Erasmus to be forged; How ever it is of no moment, whether it be
forged or not?

Thirdly, Baronius himself speaking of Feasts, in honor of their Founders, or
of Feasts observed by Churches for that Reason, affirms (speaking of the Church
of Rome) That the feast of the foundation of that Church was late, and
according to the example of some Oriental Churches.

The last prerogative of Peter, is, That in old Epistles called Literae
Formatae, -- after these words, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, the name of Peter was inserted. If ye answer, that it is but a late
invention, Bellarmin will produce an Epistle of Atticus Bishop of
Constantinople But it is replied, Several makes mention of these Literae called
Formatae; but of that sort as they are mentioned by Bellarmin, where the name
of Peter is placed next after the Trinity; in such Letters, ye have no example
of old, but o^ late in the collections of the decretals, and Canon Law. Ye find
only two of them in Gratianus, distinct. 73. The first dated 1002. The second
1315. Ye find other of them in Ivo. derect. part. 6. cap. 134. and 135. As for
that epistle of Atticus, any may see it forg^d: However it is of no moment,
whether it be forged or not? He that would see the proofs of its Forgery, let
him read Chameir upon this prerogative: However these formatae literae, were
conceived thus, (...), which three letters signify Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
Then was written (...) the initial letter of Peter: next, the first letter of
his name who wrote the letter. Secondly, The second letter of his name to whom
it was written. Thirdly, The third letter of his name, who carried the letter.
Fourthly, The fourth letter of the name of the City, from which it was written,
etc. All these ceremonies were used to preveen miscarrying, or forging of
letters. And thus we have purged that Augiae Stabulum, of that disput of
Bellarmins, concerning the prerogatives of Peter; And consequently, answered
all, what is objected by Bellarmin in this argument of prerogatives, for the
supremacy of Peter, which is the fourth general argument, proving him
Oecumenick Bishop alleged by our adversaries.

CHAP. XVIII. Several Arguments from the Carriage of Peter, disproving his
Supremacy.
OUr Adversaries in the three preceding chapters, endeavored by all the Art
they could, to prove the supremacy of Peter by his prerogatives; most of which
were in his carriage. In this chapter, we will shortly minute some arguments
from the carriage of Peter that he could not be Monarch of the Church ordained
by Christ. And it is very strange, that our adversaries should have endeavored
to prove the supremacy of Peter by his carriage, since Salmero the Jesuit, in
his Commentaries upon the First of Peter, ingenuously confesses, nothing can
be gathered from his carriage, to prove his supremacy. And consequently, he
acknowledges all these arguments, proving his supremacy from his carriage, to
be nothing else but sophisms. That the arguments from his carriage, disproving
his supremacy, are no sophisms, appears by what follows, we will only mention
three. The first is this, it appears by Acts 8. 14: That Peter and John were
delegated by the Apostles, who were in Jerusalem to preach the Gospel in
Samaria: but an Oecumenick Bishop, cannot be delegated, as is notorious. Who
would take upon them to send the Bishop of Rome in commission nowadays? They
answer to this argument variously.

Panigarolla, discept. 6. answers, That it was by Peter's own procurement, that
he was sent by the other Apostles: but he only guesseth, his answer has no
warrant in the text, and by such answers as his, any passage of Scripture,
albeit never so evident, may be eluded.

Bellarmin, Stapleton, Sanderus, Salmero, and Baronius, anno 35. number. 9.
affirms, That it is not inconsistent with Equals, to be sent from their Equals.
They give many instan^es: The first is, That GOD the Father sent Christ, and
both sent the Holy Ghost: but that instance is ridiculous; not being a Mission
of like Nature with that of Peter from the other Apostles. Likewise, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is from Equals: but that Mission of Peter was from
those (as the Roman Doctors maintain) under his own authority.

They instance, secondly, Herod sent the wise men to Bethlehem; but he had no
authority over them. But it is answered, First, That the wise men had no
authority over Herod: the state of the question is, Whether Peter had authority
over the other Apostles? The force of the argument consists in this, that since
they sent him, or delegated him, he had none: and consequently, he was not
Oecumenick Bishop. Secondly, Herod did not delegate the wise men, not (...) but
(...), between which two verbs there is great difference; the first signifying
a sending with authority: the second many times a dimission only; as appears in
several Classick Authors, having the same signification with (...). So Homier
odyss. 15. and other where.

Their third instance, is from Joshua 22. Where the people sent Phine has the
High Priest to the Reubenites and Gadites: Josephus also, lib. 20. cap. 7.
Antiquit. relats, That Ishmael the High Priest was sent to Nero, by the people
of the Jews:

But it is answered, These instances are not to the purpose: And first,
Phinehas was not High Priest, but only the Son of Eleazar the High Priest; and
it is great impudence in Stapleton to affirm, he was High Priest: Bellarmin
calls him not High Priest, but only Priest; but he reasons from him, as he were
High Priest. As for Ishmael, Bellarmin takes no heed that he was sent as a
Legate, (as Rufinus interprets) but Bellarmin will not grant that Peter was sent
as a Legate; neither will he grant that Ishmael being a Legate, was greater then
these who sent him: Bellarmin uses other instances of Paul and Barnabas, sent,
Acts 15. from the Church of Antioch to Jerusalem, who were the chief Doctors of
the Church. Whence, says he, To be sent does not import, that these who sent
them were greater then they.

But it is answered: First, The question is not, whether the Apostles who sent
Peter, were greater then he? But whether he was greater then they were? We do
not affirm, The other Apostles were greater then Peter, but only since they
sent him as a Legate, he was not greater then the other Apostles. Secondly, Acts
15. the Greek verbs (...), and (...), are not used by Luke, but the verb (...);
which signifies a honorable deduction, or dimission: And so Cajetanus the
Cardinal, and Salmero the Jesuit, interpret the place.

Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, affirms, That Pius second (the Cardinal thinking
it fit) had an intention to go against the Turks in person.

But it is answered, He had no intention to go in commission from the
Cardinals, but only to follow their advice.

Stapleton instances, So did Peter go to Samaria out of his own accord, not
necessitated by any authority. But he is refuted by the Greek verb (...), which
evermore signifies a sending with authority, as appears by John 1. where it is
said, That the Jews sent Priests and Levites to Jerusalem. And likewise, 2
Timothy 4. Tychicus was sent to Ephesus. And likewise, Acts 11. Barnabas was
sent: in all which missions, the great verb (...), and not (...) is used, but
not so, Acts 10. when Paul was sent from Antioch.

The best solution of all is given by Renatus a Sorbonist, who grants, that
Peter was sent by the other Apostles, as Legate, and less in authority then
they. But (says he) it does not follow he was not Oecumenick Bishop; because
the authority of the whole Church, is more then the authority of an Oecumenick
Bishop. It cannot be denied, that this answer of Renatus takes away the force
of the Argument. But it is much doubted, that this answer is owned at Rome:
since the doctrine of the particular Church of Rome (the infallibiliy of which
is defended by Bellarmin and all the Italians) is, that the authority of the
Bishop of Rome is above a General Council: which after many debates and
oppositions in the Council of Constance, and Basil, at last was concluded in
the Council of Florence: whence the argument is yet in force against the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, although not against Renatus, and others of his
opinion.

The second argument against the Supremacy of Peter, from his carriage, Acts
11. 3. where he was challenged by the brethren for going in to men
uncircumcised. The Argument is this, An Oecumenick Bishop cannot be questioned
for any thing he does; but Peter was questioned: Ergo, He was not an Oecumenick
Bishop. The first proposition is proved from the Canon Law, in Gratianus,
Distinct. 40. Canon Si Papa. Where it is expressly affirmed, and likewise,
Distinct. 19. and Cause. 17. quaest. 4. And likewise in the same distinction,
19. cap. in memoriam. The words are, Licet vix ferendum ab illa sancta sede
imponatur jugum, tamen feramus, and pia devotione toleremus, But the Gloss in
the Decretals, cap, quanto Personam de translatione Episcopi, affirms, That the
Bishop of Rome has coelesle arbitrium, and ideo naturam rerum mutare*
substantialia unius rei applicando alii, and de nullo posse aliquid facere, and
sententiam quae nulla est, facere aliquam: necesse qui ei dicat, Cur ita facis?
po^se enim suprajus dispensare, and de injustitia facere justitiam, corrigendo
jura, and mutando: demum plenitudinem obtinere potestatis, By which it appears
expressly, that none will question an Oecumenick Bishop. And Since Peter was
questioned by those men, it is evident, they did not acknowledge him Oecumenick
Bishop.

Bellarmin, lib. 1. cap. 16. mentions this Argument, but does not answer it,
but falls in a digression, endeavoring to prove, that Peter was not ignorant of
that mystery, of the calling of the Gentiles before that vision, Acts 10. but
he seems expressly to contradict Scripture, as appears to any having the use of
reason, considering both that vision, and also his speech meeting with
Cornelius, verse 34.

Stapletonin Relect. Controvers. 3. quaest. 1. art. 3. and in other places
answers, That it is the duty of a good Pastor to show himself ready, to give an
account of his actions, to any who calls them in question.

But it is replied, Stapleton says truth, and Peter so in the same place: but
he takes not away the force of the Argument, since in the sore-cited passages
of the Canon Law, it is forbidden by the Pope himself, to call what he does in
question, since he is bound to give an account of his actions to no power
earthly, either spiritual or temporal, but only to God.

The third Argument is almost like the second, but more puzling, It is then
from Galat. 2. 11. where the Apostle Paul affirms, That in Antiochia he
resisted Peter to his face, for he was to be blamed; which quite destroys the
Supremacy of Peter in two particulars: First, that he was blamed and resisted.
Secondly, That he was deservedly resisted. This objection puts the Roman
Doctors by the ears together how to answer it? The most ingenuous among them
confess, that Paul in those words expressly thought himself equal to Peter;
otherwise, he durst not have spoken them. So Lombardus. Cajetanus affirms, That
Paul in these words, thought himself greater then Peter. The other Doctors
answer variously.

And first, Carerius and Pighius, following Clemens Alexandrinus, mentioned by
Eusebius, hist. lib. 1. cap. 14. affirms, That it was not Peter the Apostle,
but an other Cephas, who was reprehended by Paul. But this opinion is
ridiculous; for Paul is comparing himself in those words, to the chief of the
Apostles, one of which was Peter: whereby it is evident, that it was Peter the
Apostle whom he resisted, and not an other Peter; and therefore this opinion is
exploded by Hieronymus, and other Fathers.

The second answer, is of Gregorius de Valentia, Pighius, and Carerius,
following Chrysostomus, and Hieronymus, affirming, That it was but a
dissimulation, and the reprehension proceeded from Paul, by paction between him
and Peter: viz. That Peter (the Jews arriving) should leave the Gentiles, that
Paul might have occasion to reprehend him: And consequently, that the Jews
might be instructed of the calling of the Gentiles by Paul's reprehension.

But it is answered, This Argument is laughed at by Augustinus, as not becoming
the gravity of Paul, who had sworn before, that he lied not.

Others affirm, That Peter erred not in faith, (so Sanderus, and Stapleton) but
only in conversation.

But it is answered, The less his error was by the said reprehension, the less
it appears he was Oecumenick Bishop: for if he erred not in faith, no body
should have presumed to resist him, as is expressly forbidden, by the forecited
Canons of the Canon Law.

Baronius answers, That Peter erred not at all* But it is false, and gives the
lie unto the Apostle Paul, who affirms, He was to be blamed.

Bellarmin answers another way, viz. That one may reprehend another, although
superior in Authority, if it be done with reverence, as Paul did Peter here. He
cites Augustinus, epist. 19 to Hieronymus, and Gregorius Magnus, homil. 18. on
Ezekiel, who expressly affirms, That Peter was greater then Paul, and yet he was
reprehended by him.

But it is answered, That takes not away the force of the argument: First,
because the question is not, Whether Peter was greater then Paul? But whether
he was Oecumenick Bishop? Bellarmin will not affirm, That an Oecumenick Bishop
may be reprehended; else he will not only contradict the Canon Law, (as we
showed, and which they make of equal authority with the Scripture) but also
himself, lib. 4. cap 5. de Pont. Romans where he affirms, That if the Pope
command Vice, and forbid Virtue, the Church is bound to believe that Vice is
Virtue, and Virtue Vice. Secondly, it expressly appears by the words of Paul,
Gal. 2. That he made himself equal to Peter, as is acknowledged by the ordinar
gloss, Lombardus, Cajetanus: yea, Chrysostomus; after he has gathered from the
words of Paul, that he was equal to Peter; he adds, Ne dicam amplius, by which
words, he thinks Paul was greater then Peter. Thirdly, The Doctrine of Paul was
preferred to that of Peter, that of Peter being found dissimulation, and that
of Paul sincere Christian Doctrine.

It is needless to examine the answers of others, as of Stapleton and Eckius,
yet we will mention two other answers. The one of Aquinas, the other of
Cardinal Pool; that of Aquinas, and Eckius is almost all one, viz. They grant
that Peter and Paul was alike. But they distinguish, that Paul was equal to
Peter in the execution of authority, but not in authority of Government, in
executione Autoritatis, non in autoritate regiminis.

But it is answered, This distinction of Thomas is a plain riddle: It would
puzle Oedipus himself. It is ordinar with Sophisters to imitate that fish,
called Sepia: when it is caught, it vomits up a black humor like ink, to
deceive the fishers: none can conceive this distinction of Thomas without
contradiction. For if Paul were equal to Peter in the execution of Authority:
he was equal also to him in the authority of Government; since the execution of
Authority is the Act flowing from the other, or from the Authority of
Government: if the same be the authority of both Peter and Paul? This
cantradiction is inevitable, but if the Authority of Peter be greater then that
of Paul, he still contradicts himself, in affirming Paul was equal to Peter in
the execution of authority, no subordinat Magistrate can be equal in the
execution of Authority to the Supreme Magistrate.

Eckius distinguishes more to the purpose, viz. between the Office of an
Apostle in teaching and governing. Paul was equal to Peter the first way, and
therefore, he reprehended him, not the second way.

But it is replied first, Albeit this distinction were granted, it does not
take away the force of the Argument: which consists in this, whether Paul were
greater or less then Peter? it is nothing to the purpose? An Oecumenick Bishop,
according to the Canon Law, ought to be questioned by none: and since Paul
questioned Peter's actions, it is evident according to the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, that Peter was not Oecumenick Bishop: neither is it of any
moment, that the Canon Law provides, that a Pope may be questioned for Heresy:
since that sort of questioning is antiquated by the Council of Florence, and
the constant Practice of the Modern Church of Rome. Neither was the error of
Peter an Heresy, but only an action of dissimulation.

Secondly, the distinction of it self is contradictory for two reasons. First,
because Government of the Church pertains to the office of an Apostle, all the
Apostles having exercised all the parts of that Government. Secondly, this
reprehension of Paul was directly in execution of the authority of Government,
because Government comprehends reprehension of transgressors, both in doctrine
and manners, or actions. But in this particular, the actions of Peter were
reprehended by Paul.

Cardinal Pool, a very Learned man, retorts the Argument, lib. 2. de unitate
Ecclesiae, where he affirms, This reprehension of Peter by Paul, concludes
Peter to be Oecumenick Bishop: but he tells not how? Baronius (it seems)
explains him, anno 53. number. 46. the argument is very pretty, viz. They who
followed the example of Peter Judaizing, preferred it to the decree of the
Council of Jerusalem. Ergo, they believed his authority was above that of the
Council, and of Paul; yea Barnabas himself followed Peter before either the
Council or Paul.

But it is answered (to omit that it is not certain, whether this dissimulation
of Peter's was before or after the Council of Jerusalem) Baronius had reasoned
far better thus, Paul preferred the decree of the Council to the fact of Peter,
reprehending Peter in his face, Ergo; Peter was not Oecumenick Bishop. For
albeit those Judaizing had preferred the example of Peter to the decree of the
Council: it does not follow, that Peter was above a Council, except they had
rightly preferred the example of Peter to the decree of the Council. And this
much of the carriage of Peter, and his Institution. We have omitted hitherto
nothing of moment, pretended by either side, assaulting, or asserting the
Supremacy of Peter from his Institution, Prerogatives and Carriage. It remains
only now to disput the Supremacy of Peter, pro and contra, by testimonies of
Fathers. And first* we will examine the testimonies of Bellarmin, cap. 19. and
20. where he uses many repetitions, (according to his custom) of testimonies
disputed already. In the next place we will examine testimonies of Fathers
pretended by Protestants, cap. 21. and with them absolve this disput of the
Supremacy of Peter.

CHAP. XIX. Testimonies of Fathers examined, seeming to prove the authority of
Peter over the Church.
HItherto our adversaries have disputed the supremacy of Peter from his
institution, prerogatives and carriage, now they endeavor, to prove it by
testimonies of Fathers, from which they muster up an army of Testimonies, in
number 24. which Bellarmine affirms to be the Oracles of the 24 Elders in the
Revelation, and that nothing can be answered to those testimonies, except that
answer of Luther and Calvin to the testimonies of Leo, (viz.) that they were
men, and consequently might err: but it will appear, by the Protestants
answers, that these testimonies are not so invincible. All those testimonies
may be reduced to two general Classes; the first is, in which Peter is compared
with the whole Church; the second, wherein he is compared with the other
Apostles: the first Class again is subdivided in several sorts, according to
the diversity of attributes given to Peter.

The first kind, are those testimonies wherein Christ says to Peter, upon this
Rock, etc. feed my Sheep, I will give to thee the Keys, etc. which is the third
time that Bellarmine has repeated them; and therefore it is sufficient to
answer, as before, that nothing was given peculiar to Peter; as was not only
asserted by those Fathers mentioned by Bellarmine, as Origin and others, but
likewayes proved by them.

The second sort are of those Fathers affirming, that the care of the whole
Church was committed to Peter, which he proves by the testimonies of
Chrysostomus, in his his 55. Homile upon Matthew, where Peter is called Pastor
Ecclesiae, Pastor of the Church: and likewayes of Maximus sermon 3. de
Apostolis, of Gregorius, lib. 4. epist. 32. who both affirm, that the care of
the whole Church was committed to Peter.

But it is answered, so was it to all the Apostles in those words, Go and teach
all Nations, Matthew. 28. 2. Chrysostomus in many places affirms, that Paul had a
care of the whole World, that he had Orbis praefecturam, Homilia 22. in 1. Cor.
And likewayes, that all the Apostles had the care of the whole Church, Hom. 87.
upon John: he likewayes affirms, that Timothy governed the whole World, Hom. 1.
to the people of Antioch; and likewayes that Timothy took upon him praefecturam
totius orbis, Orat. 6. against the Jews: whereby it appears, that by Peter's
having care of the whole Church, he is not proved to be oecumenick Bishop,
since others had the same care of the whole Church. Nevertheless, Bellarmine
uses two cheats, the first is in citing Chrysostomus, calling Peter Pastor of
the whole Church, whereas the Greek imports only he erected his mind, and made
him Pastor: his second cheat is; in citing Gregorius, as if his meaning were,
that Peter was oecumenick Bishop, because the care of the whole Church was
committed to him; whereas it is notorious, that Gregorius in those words, is
disputing against an oecumenick Bishop; amongst other reasons he brings for
one, although the care of the whole Church was committed to Peter, yet he was
not universal Apostle; which last words Bellarmine fraudulently supresseth.

The third rank of testimonies are those, calling Peter head of the Church: as
of Chrysostomus, Hom. 55. on Matthew. of Cyprianus ad Jubaianum; of Augustine,
sermon 125. de tempore; of Hugo Ethereanus, lib. 3. against the Grecians.

But it is answered, first, that those testimonies prove nothing: as for
Cyprianus, he is not speaking of Peter at all; his words are only Ecclesiae
unius caput, and radicem tenemus; that is, we abide in the unity of the Church,
which is one, and head of the faithful: But of this testimony, more hereafter:
It is sufficient to tell for the present, that Pamelius (who uses to catch the
least advantages for the supremacy of Peter) in his Annotations upon those
words of Cyprian, mentions nothing to that purpose; as for Chrysostomus, he
calls not Peter head of the Church at all; it is only Trapizuntius who
translates him unfaithfully: as for Augustinus, those books de tempore, no
learned man will affirm to be his, for two reasons, the first is, because he
calls Peter the foundation, not only of the Church, but also of the Faith,
which is far from Augustinus mind, who interprets the Rock or Foundation, not
to be Peter, at all; for which Bellarmine and others tax him of ignorance, as
we said before. The second reason is, because he calls Peter's denying of
Christ, Exiguum peccatum, a small sin, but non aggravates it more then
Augustinus: as for Hugo Ethereanus, he lived but of late in the twelfth Age,
according to Bellarmine, but in the fifteenth according to others; and
therefore, his testimony can no more be regarded by the Protestants, then the
testimony of Luther and Calvin by Bellarmine.

Secondly, albeit Peter were proved to be head of the Church by those
testimonies, it does not prove that he was oecumenick Bishop; because others
beside Peter, are also called heads of the Church by the Fathers; Martyrius is
called Praeses and head of the Church, epist. 1. incert. Patriarch, in corpore
juris graeco Romani. Athanasius is called head of all men, by Basilius, epist.
52. Paul is called head of nations, by Gregorius, 1. in his fourth book upon
Kings 1. James and John are likewise called heads by Chrysostomus, in his 26.
Homile upon the Acts: yea, all Pastors and Doctors are called heads by
Gregorius second Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle to ^ermanus of Constantinople,
in the second Synod of Neice. By which testimonies it appears, that the words
Caput or head infers not an oecumenick Bishop, but either a primacy of order,
or rather eminency in gifts; and so it is taken by Paul, 1 Cor. 12.

The fourth rank of testimonies are those, stiling Peter Bishop of the
Christians, Christianorum Pontifex primus: for which, Bellarmine produces
Eusebius in his Chron, anno. 44.

But it is answered, first, that there are no such words in the Greek text of
Eusebius, restored by Scaliger. Secondly, although it were proved by Eusebius,
it does not conclude that Peter was oecumenick Bishop, because it appears that
Cyprianus (epist. 69.) when he was demanded to have him Martyred, was called
Episcopus Christianorum, Bishop of the Christians; but (says Bellarmine) Peter
was called by Eusebius, first Bishop of the Christians; but not so Cyprianus.
But, (say the protestants) the word First, imports only a priority of order,
dignity or time, and not of jurisdiction; many of the Fathers gave to Peter
that title of First, or primus, because they believed that he was first
ordained Apostle; so Cyprianus, etc.

The fifth rank of testimonies are those, affirming that there is Una Cathedra,
etc. one Chair of Peter: which was placed at Rome; in which Chair, Unity was
preserved by all, neither did the rest of the Apostles constitute any other
Chairs against that one Chair in which Peter sat first: To whom succeeded
Linus, etc. Optatus, lib. 2. against Parmenianus; in which words ( says
Bellarmine) ye have the Chair of Peter and his successors, called the Chair of
the whole Church, which infers, that according to Optatus, Peter was oecumenick
Bishop.

But it is answered, that Optatus in those words, is disputing against the
Donatists, who had set up a Bishop of their own faction at Rome, in opposition
to the true Bishop: Which Optatus reprehends, Because (says he) there is but
one Chair at Rome founded by Peter; in which first himself sat, and then his
successors; in which place, ( viz.) Rome, none of the other Apostles did
constitute another Chair, much less ye ought to set another Bishop in that
Chair, in opposition to the successors of Peter. That this is his meaning (
viz.) that he speaks of the particular Church of Rome, and not of the universal
Church, is evident, because otherwise it were notoriously false which he
affirms, that no Chair was constituted by the other Apostles: For James did
constitute a Church at Jerusalem, and John at Ephesus, etc.

The sixth rank* are the testimonies affirming Peter to be Magister Ecclesiae,
a Master of the Church; likewayes, that the Church is called, Eclesia Petri,
Ambrosius, Sermon 11.

It is answered, first, that not only Erasmus, but also Costerus (a stiff
maintainer of the Pope) denies Ambrosius to be the Author of those Sermons. 2.
Although he were, it imports not much for calling Peter a Master of the Church,
he calls him no other thing then an Apostle; For all Apostles governed the
whole Church, or were Pastors of the whole Church, as we said before. 3.
Whereas we said another calls the Church, the Church of Peter, he speaks very
improperly; such kind of speaking is not found in Scripture, or in Fathers:
perhaps his meaning is, that it is the Church of Peter, because it was the
Church in which Peter taught, and in that sense it may be called the Church of
Paul also, or of any other of the Apostles, although properly the Church is
only the Church of Christ, and of none other.

The seventh rank is, of testimonies preferring the Chair of Peter to-other
Chairs, Augustinus, de Baptismo, lib. 2. It is answered, Augustins words are,
Quis nescit, Apstolatus principatum cuilibet Episcopatui praeferendum? Who is
ignorant, that the principality ^o the Apostleship is to be preferred to any
Bishopric? In which words, it cannot be conjectured what Bellarmine can
gatherfor the Supremacy of Peter? Augustine in these words, is comparing
Cyprian with Peter in one respect, he prefers Peter to Cyprian, because (says
he) the principality of the Apostleship is to be preferred to any Bishopric,
or Peter, because an Apostle is to be preferred to Cyprian, who is only a
Bishop. But in the words following, he says, Albeit their Chairs be unequal,
yet the glory of both the Martyrs is the same, in which words he seems in a
manner equal to Peter.

Eighthly, Bellarmine cites a testimony from the Thesaurus of Cyrullus for the
Supremacy of Peter, (viz.) That Christ got the Scepter of the Church of the
Gentiles from God, which he gave unto Peter and unto his successors only, and
unto none other.

But it is answered, that the testimony is suppositious and forged, being not
found at all in any Edition of that Book: It is only mentioned by Thomas
Aquinas, in Opusculo, contra Graecos, in his little Book he wrote against the
Graecians, and some think he forged it: but Thomas was a most holy man, and it
is more like he was abused by some others.

Ninthly, Bellarmine cites some testimonies from Bernardus and others, who
lived after the sixth Century; but those testimonies, especially of the
Latins, who lived at that time, cannot be regarded, because they lived after
that time in which Bonifacius 3. was ordained oecumenick Bishop by Phocas: Such
testimonies for the Supremacy of Peter, can have no more force, then the
testimonies of Bellarmine or Barronius, or any other Doctor of the Church of
Rome.

Tenthly, he cites the testimonies of Leo, and the other Bishops of Rome; but
neither can those be regarded, because they lived after the time in which the
Bishop of Rome, and the Patriarch of Constantinople contended for the primacy.
If Bellarmine will not believe the Protestants, that those testimonies are of
no moment; let him consider what is said by Aeneas Sylvius (sometimes Pope
himself) who in his first Comen, upon the Council of Basil, has these words,
Those miserable men are not aware, that those testimonies which they so
magnify, are either (ipsorum summorum, Pontificum Fimbrias suas extendentium)
Are either of Popes themselves enlarging their authority, or else of their
flatterers.

Bellarmines eleventh testimony, is taken from Eusebius Caesariensis, lib. 2.
hist. cap. 14. who affirms, Peter is, (...), Captain of the Militia of God. In
which testimony, he triumphs as if he had found out the whole business; What
else (says he) can be the meaning of Eusebius, then that Peter is head of the
Church Militant?

But it is answered, first, that Bellarmine (following the version of
Christopherson) cites Eusebius fraudulently, whose words are not, (...), but
(...). That is, Not Captain of the Militia of God [simply.] But, as one of the
Captains of the Militia of God. Secondly, Isidorus Pelustota, lib. 3. epist.
25. gives the same Epithet to Paul, calling him a most generous and valiant
Captain, (...), and consequently, Bellarmine triumphs before the Victory, since
that testimony of Eusebius concludes Peter no more to be oecumenick Bishop,
then that of Isidorus, Paul. And this much of those testimonies cited by
Bellarmine, for proving the Supremacy of Peter over the Church, which was the
first Class.

CHAP. XX. Testimonies of Fathers, proving the Authority of Peter over the
Apostles.
THe second Class of testimonies, consists of those, proving the Supremacy of
Peter over the Apostles, for which Bellarmine cites Cyprian, epist. 71. but he
sets not down the words of Cyprian, but only sums them thus, When Paul
reprehended Peter, Peter did not answer; I have the primacy, ye most obey me,
and not I you: Ergo, says Bellarmine, according to Cyprian, Peter had the
primacy over Paul.

But it is answered, that this Logic is very strange, because Cyprian affirms,
that Peter did not say unto Paul, I have the primacy; Ergo, according to
Cyprian, Peter had the Supremacy. It would seem rather by these words, that
Cyprian thought Peter had not the Supremacy. The words of Cyprian (which
Bellarmine suppresseth) are, Nec Petrus vendicavit sibi, aliquid insolenter aut
arroganter assumpsit, ut diceret se primatum tenere, etc.

That is, Peter being reprehended by Paul, did not take any thing to himself
insolently or arrogantly, as to say, he had the primacy; from which words of
Cyprian, it follows rather, that if Peter had said to Paul, he had the
primacy, he had been arrogant and insolent; and consequently it appears rather
that Cyprian, in these words, denies Peter to have the Supremacy: It seems
Pamelius understands him so, for he answers (in his Annotations upon that
place) this very passage of Cyprian, as an objection against the Supremacy of
Peter.

In the next place, Bellarmine brings a number of very specious testimonies, to
prove the Supremacy of Peter over the other Apostles, as that Basilius affirms,
he was preferred to the other Apostles; Nazianzenus, That the other Apostles
were inferior to him; Epiphanius, that he was Captain of the Apostles;
Cyrillus Hierosolym, that he was prince of the Apostles; Cyrillus, Allexand.
That he was Prince and head of the rest; Theophyl. Prince of the disciples;
Oecumenius, he obtained the precedence of the other Apostles; Hieronymus, he
was chosen head of the twelve, that occasion of Schism might be removed: The
Author of the question upon the Old and New Testament, placed amongst the works
of Augustinus, he was made their head, that he might be Pastor of the flock of
Christ.

Those testimonies in effect, at the first veiw, seem to be of moment, but well
considered do not prove at all, that Peter had any jurisdiction over the other
Apostles; or that he was their oecumenick Bishop, for two very relevant
reasons. The first is, because those very Epithets are given by the Fathers,
yea by Paul himself to other Apostles, beside Peter. But since those
Appellations does not prove those other Apostles oecumenick Bishops; no more
can they prove Peter to be such. That those Titles were given to others beside
Peter, is proved by those following testimonies.

Paul in the Galatians, calls James and John Pillars, as well as Peter; whereby
it appears, he makes them equal with Peter: Eusebius Emissenus, Homilia in
Natal. Petri and ^auli, calls Paul and Andrew Princes of the Apostles.
Ruffinus, lib. 2. cap. 1. hist. calls James Prince of the Apostles. Chrysostom
in Galat. 2. calls Paul, Prince of the Apostles Prudentius calls Peter and Paul
Princes of the Apostles. Lastly, those very Fathers who give those elegies to
Peter; affirm, that the Church was built on all the Apostles, as well as Peter;
and some of them expressly gives the chief of them (as head) (or Caput) to
others beside Peter, as Basilius, which we mentioned before.

The second reason wherefore those titles (of head, or Prince) prove not any
jurisdiction of Peter over the other Apostles, is very relevant, and is this (
viz.) the principals of the Fathers expressly affirm, that Peter had no
jurisdiction over the other Apostles. Origenes, the Apostles were Kings, and
Christ, (not Peter) King of Kings. Cyprianus de unitate ecclesiae, Christ after
his resurrection, gave a like power unto all the Apostles: and a little after,
what ever Peter was, the other Apostles were the same, and had equal fellowship
with him, both in honor and power: Chrysostomus, in Galat. 2. Paul needed not
the testimony of Peter; he was equal to him in honor, I will say no more
whereby it is evident, in his opinion, Paul was more honorable then Peter.
Likewayes, Hom. 66. in Matthew. None goes before Paul, neither does any doubt of
it. Hieronymus, Galat. 2. paraphrasing on Paul's words, says, I am nothing
inferior to Peter, we are both placed in the ministry by the same person,
(viz.) Christ. Likewayes, lib. 1. against Jovinian, the Church is founded upon
all the Apostles equally, all of them got the keys of the Kingdom of heaven
alike. Augustinus, epist. 86. Peter and the other disciples lived in concord
together; where observe, Peter is called condisciple with the rest. Gregorius
first Bishop of Rome, himself disputing against an oecumenick Bishop, lib. 4.
epist. 32. amongst the other reasons, brings this for one, although the care of
the whole Church was committed to Peter, yet Peter was not oecumenick or
universal Apostle. Other testimonies might be heaped to this purpose, as of
Ambrosius, in 1 Cor. 11. and Gal. 2. and likewayes of Primasius, Theophylactus,
and the ordinar Gloss, who all of them affirm the same upon Gal. 2.

And thus it is proved by two unanswerable reasons, that by those titles of
Head and Prince, Peter is not oecumenick Bishop. Of that title of head, we
spoke before, that it was given unto others, as well as unto Peter, and now
have proved the same of the title of Prince. If ye ask then, what is the
meaning of those expressions of the Fathers, calling Peter Prince and Head of
the Church or Apostles? It is answered, the word Head or Prince may import a
threefold Primacy, 1. of Jurisdiction, and in that sense, none but Christ is
called head or prince of the Church. 2. A primacy of Order without
Jurisdiction, as when any of the same College chooses one to be their Head,
as Deacons choosing an Archdeacon, who has only primacy of Order, and not of
Jurisdiction 3. A primacy of gifts or graces; so the title head is taken 1 Cor.
12. so also Paul and James, etc. are called heads and Princes of the Apostles
by the Fathers, as we said before, because they had eminent gifts. So ^omer and
Virgilius are called Princes of the Poets; Cicero and Demosthenes, Coriphaei
oratorum; and Plato and Aristotle, Philosophorum principes. So Nicodemus was
called Prince of the Jews, by Cyrillus and Polycarpus. Bishop of Smyrna, Prince
of Asia by Hieronymus. The meaning of the Fathers then, giving to Peter those
titles of head, or prince, is not of the first sort of primacy, as was
demonstrated; but only of the second and third sort of primacy, that is, by
reason of his eminent gifts, in which others also excelled, as Paul and John,
but especially and chiefly because he was eldest Apostle, and first called to
that function: some think Andrew was called before him, but however, Peter had
the priority of dignity; in what sense, it imports not much, so it was not
priority of Jurisdiction: which that it was not, was now proved by uuanswerable
testimonies of the Fathers.

CHAP. XXI. Some testimonies of Fathers, disproving the supremacy of Peter
vindicated.
IN the former Chapters were answered, those testimonies of Fathers alleged by
Bellarmine, to prove the supremacy of Peter over the Church, cap. 19. and over
the other Apostles, cap. 20. in answering which testimonies, we proved, by
opposing testimonies to testimonies, that the meaning of those Fathers was
nothing less, then that Peter was Monarch of the Church, which we proved by
two sort of testimonies; first, by those in which the same things were said of
others beside Peter, by which they endeavored to prove his supremacy, such as
head of the Church, prince of the Apostles, etc. The second sort was of those,
expressly denying that Peter had any superiority above the other Apostles, of
which kind we alleged many. In this Chapter, we will vindicate the said
testimonies from the exceptions of our Adversaries; and because their answers
to them all, are almost the same with those which they make unto a certain
passage of Cyprian, and an other of Hieronymus, we will vindicat both those
passages from their sophist^y, which are in effect two notable ones.

The first testimony is of Cyprianus, de unitate ecclesiae, Hoc erant utique
and caeteri Apostoli, quod Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and honoris, and
potestatis: That is, What ever Peter was, the other Apostles were the same,
endued with alike fellowship of honor and power.

This is a notable passage, in which Cyprianus is expressly disputing against
the supremacy of Peter; for first, he affirms, all the Apostles were the same,
which Peter was, and least any should think that his meaning is only, that they
were all Apostles or fellows, he adds, Pari consortio, they were of alike
fellowship, since it might be objected, that inequality might be amongst those
of the same fellowship; and our Adversaries ordinarily distinguish between
order and jurisdiction, as if the other Apostles were inferior to Peter in
jurisdiction, he adds, they were alike fellows in honor and power; that is,
they had all alike jurisdiction with Peter. This place of Cyprian puts our
Adversaries to their wits end; they elude it two ways, they who have any
shame by sophistry, others more impudente by forgery; we will examine their
sophistry in this Chapter, reserving their forgery until the last Chapter of
the seco^ Book.

Pamelius objects, that the Book of Manutius, and of Cambron has those words
of Cyprian otherwise, viz. after the words of Cyprian, which we cited, follow
those, Sed primatus Petro datur, ut una Ecclesia, and Cathedra una monstretur:
That is, But the primacy is given to Peter, that it might appear there is only
one Church, and one Chair.

But it is answered, albeit it might be defended, that those words make not
much for the supremacy of Peter in Jurisdiction, but only in dignity and order,
it shall be demonstrated, that Manutius added those words to the text of
Cyprian, by the command of Cardinal Baromaeus, against the Faith of all the
ancient Copies of Cyprian, both printed and Manuscripts, lib. 2. cap. ult.

Agricola his gloss, since it depends upon those forged words, Primatus Petro
datur, is not worth the answering: Hayus, Bozius, Turrianus answer thus: Its
true (say they) that the Apostles were all of a like power before Peter was
ordained Monarch of the Church by Christ, viz. before he said to him, tu es
Petrus, and this is the meaning of Cyprian; Bozius adds, that this place of
Cyprian expressly makes for the supremacy of Peter, because Cyprian affirms in
the same place, that the equality of the Apostles was taken away by those
words, Pasce oves meas; after which words that equality of ^ower ceased.

All this is soph^stry, and first Bozius lies notoriously; Cyprian affirms
no such thing, as that the equality of the Apostles ceased after those words,
Pasce oves meas, since it is the mind of Cyprian, that the equality of the
Apostles was, or consisted in feeding the flock of Christ; for he expressly
affirms in the same place, that the equality of the Apostles was ordained after
the resurrection; for immediately before (...) words we cited, he affirms,
Christus Apostolus omnibus, post resurrectionem suam, parem potestatem tribuit:
and therefore, it is false that after those words, Pasce oves meas, the
equality of the Apostles was taken away. Bellarmine uses another distinction,
lib. 1. cap. 12. viz. that all the Apostles had alike authority over the
Church; but they were not of alike authority amongst themselves. This is the
answer also of Costerus, encherid, cap. 3.

But it is answered, this gloss of Bellarmines is very strange; first, how can
Peter be oecumenick Bishop, if the other Apostles had alike Authority over the
Church with him? for, the Bishop of Rome questionless will not affirm, that any
other Bishop has as much Authority over the Church, as he has. Secondly,
though this distinction were granted, it takes not away the force of the
testimony, for disparity of persons, does not infer a disparity of Authority
alike in them all, but only that the Authority is more eminent in dignity in
some, then in others. Thirdly, whereas Bellarmine grants, that they were all
alike Apostles, but the function of an Apostle is the highest degree in the
Church; Ergo, if they were equal to him in the Apostleship, they were equal to
him in the highest Ecclesiastical function. As for that distinction of
Bellarmines, That that equality of the Apostles with Peter was extra radinar,
and not derived to their successors as the Authority of Peter, who was ordinar
Pastor, and whose Authority was derived to his Successors; we proved before,
that it was a fiction of Bellarmines own invention, not known to the Ancients.

Sanderus, lib. 6. cap. 4, of his Monarchy, has another distinction, viz. that
albeit all the Apostles were of equal Authority over Christians, yet the
Original of that Authority was from Peter, although as to the execution, it was
alike in them all.

But it is answered first, this distinction is pressed with the same
difficulties, with which those of Bellarmines was; it is a flat contradiction,
to affirm any to be equal in the execution of that Authority, with those from
whom they have it: yea Leo Bishop of Rome complained heavily, that the Bishop
of Constantinople was made equal to him as to the execution of it. This
distinction of Sanderus leans on a false foundation, viz. that the rest of the
Apostles had their Authority from Peter: which expressly contradicts Cyprian,
who affirms, they had it from Christ, and Paul, 2. Cor. 5. professes, he was
an Ambassador from Christ, or in the name of Christ. And Franciscus de
victoria (as we showed before) expressly disputs, that all the Apostles had
their Authority immediately from Christ; and taxes the gloss on Cyprian,
making use of this dictinction of Sanderus, against the mind of Cyprian:
However, it may be granted, that Peter was the first in Dignity, although the
other Apostles were equal to him in Authority.

Stapleton, lib. 6. cap. 7. in principis, uses a threefold distinction, the
first is, that all the Apostles were of alike power as Apostles, but not as
Bishops; But that distinction was exploded before, cap. 16. The second
distinction is, quo ad amplitudinem, rerum gerundarum, sed non quo ad
superioritatem in ordine gerendi: that is in effect the same distinction with
that of Bellarmine, now mentioned, and therefore it needs no other answer,
since it imports no other thing, then that the equality of the Apostles power
was relative to the Church, but their inequality consisted in their relation to
Peter. His third distinction is, that Peter had power of Government above the
other Apostles: but according to the execution of that Power, all the Apostles
were alike with him: But that distinction, is likewayes contradictiory, as we
showed before, and this much of Cyprian.

The second testimony, is of Hieronymus, lib. 1. in Jovinianum, Vt dicis, super
Petrum sundatur ecclesis: licet id ipsum alio loco, super omnes Apostolos fiat,
and ex aequo super eos ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: but you affirm, that the
Church is founded upon Peter, although the same be done in another place upon
all the Apostles, viz. that the Church is builded upon them all alike; which
gloss of Hieronymus, quite destroys that argument of Peter's Supremacy, viz.
that he was the only Rock among all the Apostles, upon which the Church was
builded.

Bellarmine answers, that Hieronymus explains himself in the same place, where
he affirms, one was chosen among the twelve; that a head being constitute,
occasion of Schism might be taken away, etc.

But it is replied, Cardinal Causanus sees no such gloss in these words of
Hieronymus, as we showed before, cap. 10. where he affirms, that nothing
peculiar was promised to Peter, in these words tues Petrus, and proves it by
this testimony of Hieronymus, that the Church was builded alike upon all the
Apostles, and in what sense Peter is called head by Hieronymus, was showed
before, cap. 20. for it is certain, that Hieronymus, by calling Peter head of
the twelve, does not mean Peter had jurisdiction over the rest; otherwise he
would expressly contradict himself, in this same place; he calls him heaa
therefore in the same sense, that others are called heads, which we mentioned,
cap. 20.

But Bellarmine instances, that he was made head of the twelve, that schism
might be takan away. But it is replied, that was before they were sent by
Christ to preach the Gospel: but Cyprian and Hieronymus seems to be of that
opinion, that Peter was head of the twelve, as the Apostles were a private
Company or Congregation; but after the resurrection, that authority ceased,
when our Savior commissionated them all alike to preach the Gospel through the
world with equal authority.

And this much of that famous Dispute of the supremacy of Peter, in which we
have fished all what is of any moment from that immense Ocean of Antiquity,
either to assault it, or assert it; by which it appears, to any indifferent
Reader, upon what a weak foundation the Faith of the Modern Church of Rome is
built, viz. the supremacy of Peter, or that Peter was oecumenick Bishop: which
was a concert that the Ancients did not dream of, before the fifth Age after
the Council of Chalcedon, when that contention arose between the Bishops of
Rome and Constantinople for the primacy. Before the time of Leo first, the
Bishops of Rome and Leo himself pleaded a priority in dignity by Acts of
Councils, but succumbing in that, Leo was the first that devised tues Petrus
for the primacy, his successors still argumenting the force of that Argument,
and used it afterward for universal jurisdiction; whereas at first, it was
objected only for cura universalis ecclesiae. Now having absolved that dispute
of Peter's Monarchy, we will examine his Bishopric of Rome, which is the second
part of the Bishopric of Peter.

CHAP. XXII. Bellarmines Argument answered, Proving that Peter was a^ Rome.
HItherto has been disputed, Whether Peter was instituted oecumenick Bishop by
Christ, which was the first assertion or ground, on which the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome is founded: Now follows the second, which according to
Bellarmine, lib. 2. de pont. Romans is, that Peter at the command of Christ fixed
his seat at Rome, and did sit there as Bishop unto his death. Here arises a
twofold question, first, Whether Peter was at Rome? next, Whether he was
Bishop of Rome? if he was never at Rome, it is certain he was never Bishop of
Rome; and albeit he had been at Rome, it does not follow he was Bishop of Rome:
it was commonly believed, that Peter was at Rome, and Bishop of Rome, before
the time of Marcilius Patavinus, who lived in the 14. Age, and wrote a Book,
entitled, Defensor ^acis, in which he maintains Peter was never at Rome, nor
Bishop of Rome, and proves, that all the Ancients were deceived, who affirmed
either the one or the other: his reasons shall be mentioned in the following
Chapters; in this are answered the reasons of Bellarmine, proving the first,
that he was at Rome.

The assertion of Bellarmine was, that Peter was Bishop of Rome by ordination
of Christ; to prove which, he brings nothing, but falls to prove that Peter was
first at Rome, and next that he was Bishop of Rome, and instead of Christ's
institution, he brings nothing but conjectures of the Ancients, to prove that
Peter was at Rome, and perverted testimonies to prove that he was Bishop of
Rome. It was showed before, that all the Faith and Doctrine of the modern
Church of Rome, depended upon the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, which
supremacy consisted in three assertions; first, that Peter was oecumenick
Bishop by divine institution, which makes nothing for the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, without the other two, viz. that Peter by divine institution
was Bishop of Rome, and that the Bishop of Rome succeeded to Peter by divine
institution in the Monarchy of the Church; any of those two being brangled, the
whole foundation of the modern Roman Religion is quite destroyed. Bellarmine,
to prove both the one and the other (after he had undertaken to prove them by
divine institution) brings nothing but conjectures involved with
contradictions, and consequently the whole Edifice of the Church of Rome is
builded upon such conjectures. The succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter,
shall be disputed in the following Books: in this Chapter are answered those
reasons, proving that Peter was at Rome; in the next shall be answered, those
reasons proving Peter was Bishop of Rome, and then we will conclude this Book
with those reasons of Marcilius Petavinus and Ulrichus Velenus, proving that
Peter, was neither at Rome, nor Bishop of Rome.

Bellarmines first reason to prove that Peter was at Rome, is from 1 Pet. 5.
13. The Church which is at Babylon salutes you, etc. This was the Church (
says Bellarmine) in which Peter remained when he wrote this Epistle, viz.
Babylon, which in the Scripture many times signifies Rome; and therefore Peter
by Babylon means Rome, and consequently Peter was at Rome.

But it is answered, albeit in the Apocalypse, which is a mystical Prophecy,
Rome be meant by Babylon, yet we do not find in Scripture in any Epistle, that
Rome was called Babylon: it would be a ridiculous expression to conclude an
Epistle written at Rome from Babylon. The Apostle Paul in all his Epistles
written at Rome, never concludes from Babylon, but from Rome, and therefore
Peter in this Epistle understands not Rome, but Babylon. It is to be observed,
there were two Cities called Babylon; the first Babylon in Assyria, which was
the head of the Babylonish Empire; the other Babylon was in Egypt, and
afterward was called Cayre: Peter by Babylon means either the one or the
other, more probably the first, because it appears by History, that many Jews
remained there, and Peter was the Apostle of the Jews, as Paul was of the
Gentiles.

Bellarmine objects, that Irenaeus, Justinus and Tertullianus, expone that
Babylon mentioned by Peter to be Rome.

But it is answered, those Fathers follow the authority of Papias, believed to
be the Disciple of John, as Bellarmine affirms, he was followed by Irenaeus,
who in Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 39. affirms, that the said Papias and Polycarpus
were auditors of the Apostle John; but Eusebius in the said place confutes that
opinion, by the authority of Papias himself, who denied that ever he had seen
the Apostles with his eyes; Eusebius adds, that he was a man of no spirit and
the Author not only of the Millinarii, but also of other fabulous traditions:
and so in the opinion of Eusebius, the authority of Papias is not much to be
regarded. And since the whole foundation of the Church of Rome, depends upon
the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; and since the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, depends upon Peter's being at Rome; and since Peter's being at Rome,
depends upon the testimonies of some Fathers, following the Authority of
Papias; it may be concluded without sophistry, that the whole Doctrine of the
Church of Rome depends upon the said Papias: what sort of man he was, we have
now showed from Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 39.

Bellarmines second Argument, to prove that Peter was at Rome, is this, There
were Christians at Rome, before ever Paul came to Rome, Ergo Peter was at Rome:
and here he endeavors to prove by many testimonies, that Peter was the first
that preached the Gospel at Rome, but to no purpose, since those testimonies
are of no more force to prove that Peter was at Rome, then those he alleged in
the former Argument. That they are false, appears by Orosius, lib. 7. cap. 4.
who affirms, that Christians were at Rome in the time of Tiberius, but Peter
came not to Rome, till after the death of Tiberius, that is, the second year of
Claudius, as Bellarmine himself confesses.

Bellarmine answers, That Orosius does not affirm, that Christians were at Rome
in the time of Tiberius, but only that the Senate of Rome made a decree, that
they should not come to Rome; which is the true meaning of Orosius.

But it is replied, Orosius expressly affirms, that Tiberius made a motion to
the Senate of Rome, that Christ should be acknowledged as a God; but the Senate
refusing, set forth an Edict, that Christians should be exterminated or
extruded the City of Rome, which imports that Christians were at Rome; which is
confirmed by Eusebius, in his Chronicles, an. 38. who says, the Senate
eliminated Christians from the City; but eliminating is properly to put them
out, that were in already. Likewayes, both Eusebius in the said place, and
Tertullianus, Apol. cap. 5. affirm, that Tiberius threatened death to the
Accusers of Christians at Rome, whereby it evidently appears that Christians
were at Rome. Likewayes, Platina in the life of Christ, affirms expressly, that
the Senate ordained Christians to be put forth of the City: likewayes, Clement
in his first book of Recognitions, affirms, that Barnabas was at Rome in the
time of Tiberius.

Bellarmine answers to this last objection, That those Books of Clement are
Apocryphal. But it is replied, when they setch testimonies from this Book to
prove any o^ their Tenets, they call it authentic; So Coccius and others,
(...) when they are pressed with testimonies from it, they call it Apocryphal.

Bellarmines third reason, to prove that Peter was at Rome, is, That several of
the Fathers affirm, that Mark wrote his Evangel at Rome, as he heard Peter
preach it there.

But it is answered, that all this depends upon the Authority of Papias,
neither do they agree amongst themselves in the relation; for, Hieronymus
following the authority of Papias, whom Eusebius called an Impostor (as we said
before) affirms, that Mark wrote the said Evangel when Peter was alive, and
that the said Mark died the eigth year of Nero: but Irenaeus affirms, lib. 3.
cap. 1. that Mark wrote his Evangel, after the death of Peter and Paul.

Bellarmines fourth reason, to prove that Peter was at Rome is, that his
Sepulcher is at Rome, which he proves by the testimony of many Fathers. But it
is answered, they were all deceived by Papias; Secondly, those Fathers who
affirm, that Peter dyed at Rome, relate some circumstances of his death, which
seem incredible; as first, they affirm, that Peter and Paul died in one day;
but that seems incredible, because Paul came to Rome about the third and fourth
year of Nero, he professes that he was then old: They likewayes affirm, that
he died the fourteenth year of Nero, and so he lived ten years after he called
himself old: But this seems not to consist with that assertion, of his dying in
one day with Peter; for, it is scarce credible, that Peter could be alive ten
years after Paul called himself an old man, since Paul was very young when he
was converted; but it appears by John 21. 18. that Peter was an old man before
Paul was converted, that is, when Christ was alive; but Paul was not converted
until a year after the death of Christ, and therefore it seems incredible,
that Peter could live ten years after Paul called himself an old man. The
second incredible circumstance is, that they affirm, that Peter a little before
his death, having an intention to leave Rome, Christ appeared to him in the
Port of the City, and desired him to return: but the Scripture affirms, that
the Heavens shall contain Christ until the last day; and Peter himself
affirms, that Christ shall not descend from Heaven till then. And whereas
Bellarmine objects, that Christ appeared to Paul in the air, he speaks so
without any ground, because Act. 9. it is only affirmed, that a great light
shined round about Paul, and that he heard a voice; but the Scripture there
does not affirm, that Christ was in the air; Paul might have seen Christ as
Stephen did, in heaven, himself being upon earth, Act. 7. 55. And those are the
reasons by which Bellarmine proves Peter was at Rome, which all are founded
upon conjectures. And since the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome is founded upon
the supremacy of Peter, and that Peter was at Rome; and since Peter's being at
Rome is founded upon contradictory conjectures (as partly we have showed, and
partly shall show hereafter, minuting the reasons of Velenus) by consequence,
the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome is founded upon contradictory conjectures.

CHAP. XXIII. Bellarmines reasons proving, that Peter was Bishop of Rome,
answered.
IN the next place, Bellarmine endeavors to prove, that Peter was Bishop of
Rome, and therefore he behoved to be at Rome: and his first reason is, That the
Church of Rome was ever held the first Church, but there can be no other reason
why it was held so, but only that Peter was Bishop.

But it is answered, first, that Rome was held the first Church of old, not in
power, but in dignity, because Rome was the chief imperial City, as appears
expressly by the third Canon of the second general Council at Constantinople,
the 28. Canon of the fourth general Council of Calcedon, the 36. Canon of the
sixth general Council of Constantinople, of which hereafter, part. 2 lib 1. and
2. Secondly, if respect be had to other reasons, besides the imperial dignity
of the City, it is false that Rome was held for the first Church, as appears by
many testimonies, first, Theodoretus, lib. 5. cap. 9. affirms, that the second
general Council at Constantinople, in an Epistle to Damasus Bishop of Rome and
the Bishops of the West, calls the Church of Jerusalem, Mother of all Churches.
Secondly, Nazianzenus, epist. 18. affirms, that the Church of Caesaria was from
the beginning: and was esteemed almost the Mother of all Churches. Thirdly,
Basilius, Epist. 20, to Athanasius, affirms, That the Church of Antioch was
head of all Churches. The same is affirmed by Chrysostomus in several places,
as in his Homile of the praises of Ignatius, and in his third Homile to the
people of Antioch: by which testimonies it is evident, that Rome was called the
first Church for a civil respect only, and that in other respects, other
Churches were preferred to it.

Bellarmines second Argument is this, The Heretics cannot show ( says he)
where Peter was Bishop after he left Antioch, if he was not Bishop of Rome,
since they affirm he was Bishop only of a particular Church, and not of the
universal Church.

But it is answered, Bellarmine may well confirm his Disciples by such
reasoning, but he will never convert Heretics by it: It is false which he
affirms, that the Protestants maintain that Peter behoved of necessity to be
Bishop of one particular Church or other; they deny he was Bishop of any
particular Church at all, as shall immediately appear; and therefore, it is
ridiculous in Bellarmine to conclude, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, because
they cannot instruct where he was Bishop elsewhere, when he left Antioch: they
ask him again, how Bellarmine proves that he was Bishop of Antioch? they ask
him also, where he was Bishop before he was Bishop of Antioch? for Bellarmines
Argument presuppones, that Peter of necessity, was still Bishop of one place or
other.

Bellarmines third reason, to prove that Peter was Bishop of Rome, is taken
from the testimony of Fathers, affirming, he was Bishop there twenty five
years: As for those 25. years, they shall be proved false in the following
Chapter: In this we will answer and explain the testimonies of those Fathers,
affirming Peter was Bishop of Rome; because in effect they are the only Basis
of the Popes supremacy, we will examine them more diligently, and make it
appear, that they are so many testimonies, proving Peter was never Bishop of
the particular Church of Rome.

It is answered, to those testimonies of Eusebius, Optatus, Ambrosius,
Hieronymus, Sulpitius, I sidorus, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, etc. affirming Peter to
be Bishop of Rome, that the word Bishop is taken two ways; first, for a
function of governing the Church in general, so Peter calls Christ The Bishop
of our souls, epist. 1. cap. 2. so an Apostleship is called Bishopric, Act. 2.
Secondly, Bishop is taken in a stricter sense, for a certain function
Ecclesiastic, inferior unto the Apostolic function; so it is taken by Paul,
1 Timothy cap. 3. If any desire a Bishopric: in which last sense we now take it,
and so answers those testimonies of Bellarmine, by which he proves that Peter
was Bishop of Rome, that those Fathers take Bishop in the first sense, and
their meaning is no other then that Peter as an Apostle, taught at Rome twenty
five years. That this is no shift or evasion, is demonstrated by these three
following reasons.

The first reason is, that the Fathers reckoning the successions of the Bishops
of Rome, put Paul with Peter in the first place, whereby it is evident, that
those Fathers take the word Bishop in the first sense, comprehending the
Apostleship; since none of them, nor Bellarmine himself, will affirm, that Paul
was Bishop of Rome in the second sense. That this is the truth, viz. that Paul
is named first Bishop of Rome with Peter, appears by those following
testimonies.

First of Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. Fundantes igitur and instruentes beati
Apostoli ( Petrus and Paulus) Lino Episcopalum administrandae ecclesiae
tradiderunt: The blessed Apostles ( Peter and Paul) when they founded the
Church of Rome, they made Linus Bishop.

The second testimony is of Epiphanius, here is. 27. Episcoporum in Roma
successio hanc consequantiam habuit Petrus and Paulus, Linus, Cletus: The
succession of the Bishops of Rome was this, Peter and Paul, Linus, Cletus.

The third testimony is of Eusebi^^ (...) 3. cap. 2. post Petri and Pauli
Martyrium prin^^^ (...) Episcopatum Linus sortito capit: After^^ (...) Peter
and Paul, Linus had the Bishopric^^ (...)

Suchlike other (...) epist. 65. of Optatus, (...) all put Peter and Paul
(...) that in the Bulls of (...) are jointly (...) has the (...) is, (...) in
the first sense, as it (...) an Apostle.

The second reason is, because Fathers enumerating the Catalogue of the Bishops
of Rome, do it in manner following.

PETER and PAVL.
1. Linus. 2. Cletus. 3. Clemens. 4. Euaristus. 5. Alexander. 6. Sixtus. 7.
Telesphorus. 8. Hyginus. 9. Pius. 10. Anicetus. 11. Soter. 12. Eliutherius,
etc.
WHere they do not reckon Peter and Paul among the Bishops, but only reckons
the Bishops from them as their founders, putting Linus as first Bishop, Cletus
as second, Clemens as third; whereas if Peter and Paul had been Bishops, Linus
had been second, Cletus third, Clemens fourth, etc. That they reckon them so,
appears by these following testimonies, First of Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. who
calls Clement the third Bishop, Sixtus the sixth. Eliutherius the twelfth: but
if he had reckoned Peter as first Bishop, then Clemens had been the fourth,
Sixtus the seventh, Eliutherius thirteenth.

The second testimony is of Eusebius, hist. lib. 3. cap. 2. where he calls
Linus first Bishop; and likewayes, cap. 4. where he calls Clemens third Bishop;
and cap 16. where he calls Clemens third Bishop, Linus first Bishop, Cletus
second Bishop; and lib. 4. cap. 1. he calls Euaristus fourth Bishop, and cap.
5. he calls Telesphorus seventh Bishop: likewayes in his Chronicles, he gives
unto them the same order of succession, anno. 69. and 81. and 93. and 100.
whereby by it is evident by Eusebius, that Peter was not Bishop of Rome, since
he gives ranks to the other Bishops, as if Linus had been first Bishop.

The third testimony is of Gregorius, lib. 1. cap. 27. who reckons the order of
succession of the Bishops of Rome, as Linus were first Bishop, and not Peter;
for he calls Clement the third Bishop of Rome; but if he had included Peter in
the Catalogue of the Bishops, Clement had been the fourth Bishop in his
Calculation.

Some Romanists answer, that those testimonies do not prove Linus was first
Bishop, Cletus second, Clemens third, absolutely, but only that the meaning of
those Fathers is, that Linus was the first Bishop after Peter, Cletus the
second, Clemens the third; which is as much as if those Fathers had said, Peter
was first, Linus second, Cletus third, Clemens fourth.

But it is replied, that is but a shift or evasion, because it appears to any
who is versed in Eusebius, that when he speaks so, First Bishop after such an
one, I^ that one in his opinion be a Bishop himself, he includes him in the
number, and makes him first Bishop, as appears by his Catalogue of the Bishops
of Alexandria, where he calls Cerdo the third Bishop after Anianus, but he
calls Anianus first Bishop, lib. 12. cap. 3. So, cap. 16. he reckons Anianus
first, Abilius second, Cerdo third; whereby it is evident, that when he speaks
so, viz. third Bishop after such an one, That he evermore includes that one in
the number, when he thinks he is a Bishop, as is evident by his reckoning of
the Bishops of Alexandria, Cerdo (says he) was third after Anianus; That is,
Anianus was first, Abilius second, Cerdo third: But in the Catalogue of the
Bishops of Rome, when he calls Linus the first after Peter, Cletus the second,
Clemens the third, he includes not Peter in the Catalogue, but reckons them as
Peter were not Bishop at all, other ways he would call Peter first Bishop of
Rome, as he did Anianus first Bishop of Alexandria.

The third reason proving those Fathers calling Peter Bishop of Rome, takes the
word Bishop largely, and not strictly, and properly is unanswerable, because it
appears by their own testimonies, and likewayes of other Fathers, that Linus
and Cletus, were Bishops of Rome when Peter was alive; whereby it is evident,
that Peter was called Bishop of Rome, only because he and Paul founded that
Church (in the opinion of those Fathers) for Peter could not be Bishop of Rome
properly, if Linus was Bishop of Rome when Peter was alive: but that Linus and
Cletus were Bishops of Rome when Paul was alive, is proved by these following
testimonies.

The first testimony is of Tertullianus, lib. de praescrip. cap. 32. (according
to the distinction of Pamelius) where he affirms, that Polycarpus was ordained
Bishop of Smyrna by John the Apostle, and in the same manner, Clemens was
ordained Bishop of Rome by Peter: but it is notorious, that John was alive when
he ordained Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, neither was John Bishop of Smyrna
himself; therefore it follows, that Clemens being ordained Bishop of Rome by
Peter, that he was Bishop of Rome when Peter was alive, since Polycarpus was
Bishop of Smyrna when John was alive.

The second testimony is of Irenaeus, and is this, in Eusebius, lib. 5 hist.
cap. 6. where Eusebius brings in Irenaeus speaking thus, The blessed Apostles
[Paul and Peter] founding the Church of Rome, gave unto Linus the Bishopric of
the Administration of the Church: whereby it is notorious, that the function of
Peter and Paul was different from the function of Bishop (in the strict and
proper sense) and likewayes, it is evident by the word, that while they were
alive, they did put Linus in the actual possession of the Bishopric of Rome.

Bellarmine answers, that Peter did put Linus and Cletus in the Church of Rome,
when he was alive, not as Bishops, but as Coadjutors unto him, especially Peter
being oftimes called elsewhere by his Apostolic sunction: But he intangles
himself foully; first, he makes Peter sufficient to govern the whole Church, as
elsewhere he affirms, and yet in this answer, he makes him insufficient to
govern the Church of Rome without a Coadjutor. 2. Irenaeus affirms, that Paul
ordained Linus Bishop of Rome, as well as Peter; and if Linus had been
Coadjutor to those who ordained him, he would have been Coadjutor to Paul as
well as to Peter, and consequently, Paul was also Bishop of Rome. 3. Irenaeus
expressly distinguishes the Office of an Apostle from that of a Bishop, in
these words, for he affirms, Peter and Paul founded the Church of Rome, and
gave the Bishopric thereof to Linus: So Epiphanius, heraesie 27. affirms, that
the Office of an Apostle was not tied to one place, and therefore in their
absence, Rome could not be without a Bishop.

The third Testimony is of Ruffinus, in his preface to those Books of
Recognitions attributed to Clement; his words are these, Linus and Cletus were
Bishops of Rome, before Clement, but while Peter was alive, to wit, that they
might be Bishops, and himself might fulfill the office of an Apostle: in which
words, Ruffinus expressly calls Linus and Cletus Bishops of Rome, having a
distinct Office from that of Peter; whereby it evidently appears, that Peter
was not Bishop of Rome in the strict sense mentioned before; which is further
confirmed by the next following words of Ruffinus, wherein he affirms, that
Zacheus was in the same manner ordained by Peter Bishop at Caesaria, as Linus
and Cletus were at Rome. But Bellarmine will not affirm, that Peter was Bishop
of Caesaria, and Zachaeus his Coadjutor; and although this testimony of
Ruffinus does not convince Barronius, yet Onufrius, Sanderus, Feuardentius,
confess ingenuously, that it can hardly be shunned. Barrontus gives no regard
to the testimony of Ruffinus, because he interprets that sixth Canon of the
Council of Neice against the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; but since
Ruffinus lived very near that time, and since he is seconded by all the ancient
Interpreters: as shall appear in the following Book, who all interpret that Act
against the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as well as he, though in a
different manner) his authority is more to be regarded then that of Bellarmine,
or Barronius, devising a new interpretation of the said Act 1300. years after
the date of it, against the current of all Antiquity, as shall be showed, lib.
2. cap.

CHAP. XXIV. Presumptions that Peter was never at Rome, and demonstrations that
he was never Bishop of Rome.
IN the two preceding Chapters has been answered those reasons alleged by
Bellarmine, to prove that Peter was at Rome, and Bishop of Rome; by which it
appears, upon what weak reasons the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome is built,
and which is quite destroyed, if neither of these be true: The weakness of
Bellarmines grounds will further appear, in this present Chapter, in which are
mentioned some strong presumptions, that Peter was never at Rome, and
invincible demonstrations that Peter was never Bishop of Rome, if the word
Bishop be taken in the proper and strict sense which we mentioned before. That
Peter was never at Rome, may be persuaded by the following reasons,

First, those Fathers affirming Peter was at Rome, agree all that he was twenty
five years Bishop there; and yet, some of them affirms, that he came to Rome in
the second year of Claudius, so Hieronymus, in Catalog some of them in the
fourth year of Claudius, so Fasciculus temporum, following Marianus, Scotus:
Beda also on Acts 13. affirms the same; and also Waldensis, tom. 1. lib. 1.
cap. 7. some of them a^ffims that he came to Rome, anno 13. of Claudius so the
Book called Passionale de vitis sanctorum: some of them that he came not to
Rome until a little before his death, so Origines, tom. 3. ingeues. which
behoved to be in the latter end of Nero; Damasus also, in Pontificali affirms,
he came to Rome under Nero: Thomas Aquinas, in Gallat. 2. lect. 1. affirms, he
came to Rome in the 14, year after Paul's conversion, which was 18 years after
the passion of Christ, who suffered in the 18. year of Tiberius, who reigned
twenty two years: Caligula almost four; therefore, according to Thomas, Peter
came to Rome in the sixth or seventh year of Claudius; but many of those
foresaid Authors affirm, that Peter did sit 25 years at Rome, which is a
manifest contradiction since, they all agree almost, that he died in the last
year of Nero.

Bellarmine answers, Its certain that Christ died, and yet learned men vary
about the time. But it is replied, that the certainty of Christ's death is had
from Scripture, and not from those who vary about the time of it; but the
certainty of Peter's being at Rome is had no where, but from those who vary
about the time of his coming there; and since they contradict other in the
last, they merit no credit in the first.

Bellarmine answers, secondly, that no approved Authors varies in the time, but
only some bastard Authors such, as Fasciculus temporum etc. But it is replied,
that Bellarmine will not affirm, that Origines, Marianus, Scotes, Beda,
Damasus, are bastard Authors; but it is proved that all those vary.

The second persuasion that Peter was never at Rome is this, they who affirm,
Peter went to Rome in the second year of Claudius; so Hieronymus, Eusebius and
others affirm, it was to defeat Simon Magus, who died in the last year of Nero,
that is, twenty five years after the second year of Claudius, and for whose
death, Peter also himself was put to death by Nero: but since Peter went a
purpose to Rome to destroy Simon Magus, it is a thing incredible, that he could
not do it in less then twenty five years; yea, Bellarmine himself affirms;
that Peter after he had stayed seven years at Rome came back to Jerusalem: but
this is more incredible, that Peter would go to Rome to overcome Simon Magus,
stay there seven years, and come back without doing any thing, and suffer Simon
Magus to live eighteen years after.

The third reason why Peter was not at Rome, is this, they who so affirm,
maintain also, that Peter went to Antioch five years after the passion of
Christ, was seven years Bishop there, and then went to Rome, where he was
Bishop twenty five years: but it appears by Galat. 1. and 2. Acts 12. and 15.
that Peter for the most part was at Jerusalem, at least to the eighteenth year
after Christ's passion; but according to the Calculation of those Authors, Peter
had been seven years at Rome, in the eighteenth year of Christ's passion, and
consequently, he could not be at Rome, and at the Council of Jerusalem, in the
eighteenth year after Christ's passion.

Bellarmine answers, that Peter in the seventh year of his Bishopric was
expelled Rome, because Acts 18. it is mentioned, that Claudius expelled the
Jews from Rome, and came back to Jerusalem that year of the Council, from
whence he returned back to Rome and died there.

But it is replied, he involves himself in a world of absurdities; first, in
affirming Peter was expelled Rome by Claudius, when he made that Edict against
the Jews; because if Peter had been expelled by that Edict, it behoved of
necessity to be some considerable time before the Council of Jerusalem, since
Peter being expelled by that Edict, was present at the Council of Jerusalem;
but Paul and Barnabas (as is affirmed by Luke) after that Council, stayed some
time at Antiochia, and then Paul journyed to Syria and Cilicia, then he came to
Derbas and Lystra; after that, having gone through Phrygia, Galatia, Mycia, he
came to Troat, and thence to Macedonia, where he was imprisoned at Philippi;
Thence passing through Amphipolis and Apolon^a, he came to Thessalonica, from
thence to Berea, from thence to Athens, Acts 15. 16. and 17. After all those
journeys, he arived at Corinth, where he did find Aquila and Priscilla, who
were now come out of Italy, by reason of that Edict of Claudius; whence it
appears, that Bellarmine affirms falsely, that Peter was expelled Rome by reason
of that Edict of Claudius, since when Paul found Priscilla and Aquila at
Corinth, it behoved to be some years after Peter was expelled Rome, considering
Peter's journey from Rome to Jerusalem before the Council, Paul's tedious
journeys after the Council, before he met with Priscilla and Aquila, who were
new come out of Rome by reason of that Edict of Claudius (or as the Syrian
Interpreter) were expelled Rome at the same time, by that Edict of Claudius: So
it is impossible, that Peter so long time before could have been expelled by
the same Edict.

Secondly, Bellarmine himself confesses, lib. 2. cap 6. de pont. Rom., that
Peter had left a dangerous example to posterity, if he had retained two
Bishoprics at one time. But its no less pernicious example to leave their
particular Charge, as Bellarmine affirms, Peter did; neither is it of any
moment to affirm, that he was forced to leave it by that Edict of Claudius,
since Peter should rather have suffered, then obeyed that Edict: Secondly,
because as Bellarmine affirms, when he was Bishop of Antiochia, he wandered up
and down, leaving his Charge. Thirdly, it seems very absurd which Bellarmine
affirms, that Peter in one year was Bishop of Antioch, imprisoned at Jerusalem,
and Bishop of Rome.

Fourthly, if Peter had been Bishop of Rome, in the time of the Council of
Jerusalem, he would not at that very Council, made that paction with Paul;
taking upon himself to be Apostle of the Jews, and leaving it to Paul to be
Apostle of the Gentiles, among which his own Bishopric of Rome was.

Fifthly, it is not credible, that Peter should have been fourteen years (at
the time of the Council at Jerusalem) partly Bishop of Antioch, partly of Rome,
2 Church for the most part of Gentiles, and yet to compel the said Gentiles to
judaize as Peter did.

The fourth reason that Peter was never at Rome, is this, that Paul in his
Epistle to the Romans, salutes many, cap. 16. but he makes no mention of Peter
at all; but it is incredible he would have saluted so many, and ommitted the
salutation of Peter, who was Bishop of the place.

Bellarmine answers, That he did not salute John in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, nor James in his Epistle to the Hebrews; and yet John was Bishop of
Ephesus, and James Bishop of Jerusalem.

But it is replied, this answer of Bellarmine is very childish, for to omit
that neither John nor James were Bishops at all, but only Apostles and founders
of those Churches, as we said before, John was not at Ephesus at that time, nor
stayed there, and James at that time was dead; neither did Paul write his
Epistle to the Hebrews, to the particular Church of Jerusalem, but to the whole
Jews.

Bellarmine answers, secondly, That Peter was not returned to Rome, when Paul
wrote his Epistle to the Romans. But it is replied, first, Aquila and Priscilla
were returned to Rome, whom Bellarmine affirms were expelled at the same time
with Peter, whom Paul salutes, Romans 16. 3. but it is incredible, that Peter who
was Bishop of the place, would not have returned with the first. Secondly, Paul
among the causes of his thanksgiving for the Faith of the Romans, cap. 1. 8.
and other praises; cap. 16. or of his own prayers, cap. 16. 10. makes no
mention of Peter at all; yet constantly in his Epistles, he uses to mention
the Ministers of the Churches to which they are directed, whether they be
present or not, as appears by 1. Corinthians. cap. 16. 15. Ephesians. 6. 21. Phil. 2.
19. Col. 4. 9. 12. etc.

The fifth reason that Peter was never at Rome is, it is known that Paul wrote
several Epistles from Rome, in the time of Nero, in whose time Bellarmine
affirms, that Peter was at Rome; in which Epistles, he makes frequent mention
of others of lesser note; and yet he makes no mention of Peter at all, as Col.
4. 11. and 2. Timothy, 4. 16.

Bellarmine answers, first, that a negative testimony proves nothing; it does
not follow Peter was not at Rome, because Paul makes no mention of him.

But it is replied, it is not only a negative testimony, which is the ground of
the Argument; but an Argument a minore ad majus; Paul makes mention of others
of lesser note: much more he would have made mention of Peter, if he had been
at Rome. 2. There are two sorts of negative testimonies, the first, is, purely
negative; the second is privative, when nothing is testified when it should
have been testified: this last sort of negative Argument is most efficacious;
as is acknowledged by Medina upon Thomas, part. 83. quaest. 1. art. 3. Neither
can it be denied that this is good reasoning, There was but one World created,
That only the second person of the Trinity assumed flesh, because the Scripture
makes no mention, that more Worlds were created, or that the other persons of
the Trinity were incarnate. But this Argument is taken from a privative
testimony, viz. Paul could not, without just reprehension, make no mention of
Peter, if Peter had been at Rome at that time, as appears by Colos. 4. 10, 11.
where Paul affirms, that Marcus, Justus and Aristarchus, were all the Jews
which were his work-fellows in the Gospel: But if Peter had been at Rome, Paul
had spoken untruly in excluding him from being one of his work-fellows, which
he restricts to the following three: for, if Peter had been at Rome, Paul would
never have affirmed, that those three were the only work-fellows he had at
Rome. Again, 2 Timothy 4. 10, 11. he affirms, that all his fellows had forsaken
him, except Luke, who only was with him: but if Peter had been at Rome, he
would never have forsaken Paul, nor had it been true which Paul affirmed, that
none were with him but Luke.

Those passages puzleth Bellarmine very sore, as appears by his perplexed
answer he gives to that passage of Colos. 4. that Paul speaks only of his
domestics, which is a most miserable effugium: for to omit that Paul kept
not such a port, as to have so many domestics, he expressly calls those three
persons, Aristarchus, Marcus, Justus, all the fellow laborers in the Gospel he
had at Rome.

Secondly, Bellarmine answers to 2 Timothy 4. 16. That Paul speaks there of those
who might have been intercessors for him to Nero; which is a very simple
evasion, he has no ground at all for it; and it is clear against the meaning
of Paul who speaks of those who should have corroborated him, or confirmed him,
as appears from verse 17. where he affirms, that God was with him and
strengthened him only, except Luke, verse 11. But if Peter had been at Rome, he
would not have neglected such a duty to Paul.

Thirdly, Bellarmine answers, That perhaps Peter was elsewhere when Paul wrote
those Epistles from Rome; which is as much to say, that Peter was Bishop of
Rome, and yet was never at Rome, when the Scripture makes mention of the
Teachers of that Church, that Paul could never find him at Rome, albeit
Dionysius, praised by Bellarmine, affirms, cap. 3. that he was at Rome the same
time with Paul, and died with him in one day. And this much of those reasons,
proving that Peter was never at Rome; although they be not demonstrative, yet
they are very persuasive. Velenus in a Treatise purposly written of that
subject, adds many more, but these are sufficient in this Compend.

In the next place, we will allege some unanswerable reasons, proving that
although Peter had been at Rome, yet he was never Bishop of Rome. The first is
this, the Office of an Apostle and a Bishop (in the strict sense) are
inconsistent in one person; a Bishop is restricted to a certain Charge, but an
Apostle by institution is bound to have no certain Charge, as appears by those
words of Christ, Go unto the whole World, by which words they are expressly
commanded not to tie themselves to any particular place, or at least, it is
permitted them not to tie themselves to a particular place: but if they had
been Bishops, they were of necessity tied to a particular Charge. If any of the
Apostles had been Bishops, Paul had as much reason to be called so, as any
other of the Apostles; but we never read, that Paul was Bishop of any
particular Church, except only Irenaeus and some others affirm, that he and
Peter were conjunct Bishops of Rome: but that quite destroys Peter's Bishopric
of Rome, as we said before, since the word Bishop is taken in a large sense, as
they must of necessity confess, since Bellarmine will not affirm, that Paul
was Bishop of Rome, in a proper sense.

The second reason is this, they confess that Peter was very often absent from
Rome, and very long; Cartesius affirms, that he was 18. years absent; Onuphrius
7, Bellarmine 5, but if he had been Bishop of Rome, he woul not have been so
long from his Charge. They affirm indeed, that he was hindered; but to omit
that he was not hindered so long, how comes it, that in his absence he wrote no
Epistles to his Charge at Rome, since he wrote to the Jews? And whereas they
affirm, that he was at Rome when he wrote to the Jews, it is frivolous, first,
because we showed before, that his being at Rome at that time, depended upon
the authority of Papias, the author of many fabulous traditions, as was proved
by the testimony of Eusebius. Secondly, albeit he had been at Rome when he
wrote those Epistles to the Jews, he had much more reason to write to the
Romans his own* ^harge, in so long an absence; and since he did not, it is
evident he was never Bishop of Rome.

The third reason is, they give Peter three Bishoprics all at one time (at
least, some of them, who affirm Peter was Bishop of Rome) They all grant, that
Peter was first Bishop of Antioch, before he was Bishop of Rome, except only
Onuphrius, who affirms, that he was first Bishop of Rome, and next of Antioch,
so he had two Bishoprics. Nicephorus, lib. 14. cap. 39. affirms, that Anterius
Bishop of Rome wrote, that Peter transferred his seat from Rome to Alexandria:
by which contradictions, it appears they have no ground at all that Peter was
Bishop of Rome; if it had been true, what needed them have their recourse to
such contradictions?

The fourth reason is, Bellarmine affirms, lib. de pont. Romans that all the
right of the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter is founded upon the
command of Christ, by which Peter went to Rome and fixed his seat there. But
all those almost who testify Peter was at Rome, affirm, that the occasion of
his going thither was to defeat Simon Magus, neither do they mention any
command of Christ at all, as the cause of Peter's going thither.

The fifth reason is, that Peter and Paul made a paction, that Peter should be
Apostle of the Jews, Paul of the Gentiles; but if Peter had been Bishop of
Rome, that paction had been violated. Bellarmine answers, Peter's principal
charge was the Jews, and Paul's the Gentiles: But it is replied, if Peter had
been Bishop of Rome, his chief Charge had been the Gentiles, or else he fixed
his Chair where his chief Charge was not; both which are alike absurd.

The sixth reason is, that Linus and Cletus were Bishops of Rome when Peter was
alive; whereby it is demonstrated, that Peter was not Bishop of Rome. That
those were Bishops when Peter was alive, was proved in the former Chapter, and
likewayes the evasion of Bellarmine to this objection in the same place was
refuted.

Finally, as we showed in the former Chapter, they who affirm Peter was Bishop
of Rome, affirm also Paul was conjunct with him: whereby it evidently appears,
that they take the word Bishop in a large sense, since they make Paul his
conjunct, and does not reckon him in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome, as
we showed in the former Chapter.

And thus we have compendiously examined those two famous questions, first,
Whether Peter, by divine institution, was Monarch of the Church? Second.
Whether by the command of Christ, he was Bishop of Rome. It was proved in the
Preface, that the whole Doctrine of the Church of Rome, was founded upon the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; that the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome
consisted in this, that he succeeded to Peter, by divine institution, in the
Monarchy of the Church: which succession again, depended upon two assertions,
first, That Peter was Monarch of the Church, by divine institution; 2. That he
was Bishop of Rome: any of which being proven false, the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome is a cheat, and consequently also, the Doctrine of the Modern
Church of Rome depending upon it, as Moonshine upon the Sun, as is professed
by Bellarmine in the Preface of his Books, de pont. Romans

FINIS Libri primi.
THE GRAND IMPOSTOR DISCOVERED: OR, AN HISTORICAL DISPUT, Of the Papacy and
Popish Religion.
PART I. BOOK II. Of Bishops.
CHAP. I. Of the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter.
IN the former Book, were disputed the first two Questions, of the Supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, viz. Whether Peter was, by divine right, Monarch of the
Church? 2. Whether he was by divine Institution, Bishop of Rome? Now follows
the third Question, Whether the Bishop of Rome, by divine right, succeeded to
Peter in the Monarchy of the Church? Bellarmine and others brag, with great
confidence to prove that he did, but their performance is very little: not so
much as one of them, when it comes to the push, brings any passage of Scripture
to prove it, except only Bozius, lib. 18. cap. 3. where he makes use of two
places, the first is Phil. 4. 3. the words are, And I beseech thee, faithful
yoke fellow, help those women which labored with me in the Gospel, with
Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers, whose names are in the book
of life. Any reasonable man would admire, by what Chemistry he can distill the
succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter, out of these words? He will tell
you, Clement there mentioned was Bishop of Rome: Secondly, That the care of
those women of Philippi belonged to him, Ergo, he was oecumenick Bishop;
otherwise, how could he have any meddling at Philippi, which was so far distant
from Rome?

Let us examine this Logic, it will recreat the Reader: First, how knows he
that Clement was Bishop of Rome? He will tell you, that there was one Clement
that succeeded to Peter Bishop of Rome.

But we ask him, though that were granted, what then? how knows he that it is
the same Clement whom the Apostle mentions here? He will tell you, this Clement
mentioned by the Apostle, is called by Paul his fellow laborer; Ergo, he was a
Bishop, and consequently designed at least Bishop of Rome.

But it is replied, first, It does not follow that Clement was a Bishop,
because he is called by Paul his fellow laborer; for that same Argument would
conclude Priscilla and Aquila, a man and his wife, to be both Bishop. Romans 16.
Paul calls them his fellow laborers.

Secondly, Salmero the Jesuit, pressed by the Madeburgenses that Clement was
not oecumenick Bishop, because Paul calls him fellow laborer, Phil. 4. 3.
answers, That at that time Clement was not designed Bishop of Rome; and
therefore it does not follow: where observe how he contradicts Bozius; Bozius
concludes he was oecumenick Bishop designed, because Paul calls him
fellow laborer; Salmero grants, that it follows he was not designed oecumenick
Bishop, because Paul calls him fellow laborer: Bozius reasons, he is called
fellow laborer, Ergo, he was designed oecumenick Bishop; Salmero reasons, Paul
calls him his fellow laborer, Ergo, he was not designed oecumenick Bishop at
that time; having no other shift to elude the Argument of the Madeburgenses.

Again, although it were granted, that Paul meant Clement Bishop of Rome, how
proves he that Clement succeeded to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church? which
is the Question.

He answers you, because Paul desires his yoke fellow to assist him in the care
of those women at Philippi: for what ado had Clement with women in Philippi, he
being designed Bishop of Rome, except the care of the Church of Philippi had
belonged unto him, and consequently he was oecumenick Bishop? But to omit the
bad consequence of that Argument, he mistakes the words of Paul or their
construction; Paul does not desire his yoke fellow to assist Clement in having
a care of those women; he only desires him to have a care of those women, who
labored with Paul himself and with Clement in the Gospel: That this is the
true meaning of the words, is granted by Popish Doctors themselves commenting
upon this place, as Justinianus the Jesuit, Cardinal Cajetanus, Lyranus; yea,
the French Lovaine Bible translates these words, Qui ont ^^auaille auec moy en
l'Evangile auec Clement, and mes autres co^diuteurs.

The second place alleged by Bozius, is from 2 Pet. 1. 15. I will endeavor
therefore always, that ye also may be able to have remembrance of those things
after my departing.

If ye ask him, how he concludes that the Bishop of Rome succeeded to Peter
from those words? He tells you, Peter promises after his death, to put those
to whom he wrote in remembrance of those things, or to have a care that they
should remember those things.

If ye ask him, what then? he tells you, Since Peter was dead himself, he
behoved to put them in remembrance by another, and that other must of necessity
be one who succeeded to him in the Monarchy of the Church. Let us retex this
Logic, that the Reader may laugh.

First he suppones, that Peter was to put them in remembrance by another then
himself, which cannot be gathered from Peter's words: he answers, Peter himself
was dead; Ergo, he beh^ved to do it by another. It is replied, Peter, while he
was yet al^ve, might have a care that they should remember these things after
his death: Secondly, the whole current of Popish Doctors contradicts him,
affirming, that Peter promises to have a care by himself, and not by another,
that they should remember those things, viz. From this place they prove
intercession of Saints; and so according to them, the meaning of Peter is, that
when he is departed, he will intercede for them. Thirdly, the true meaning of
Peter is, that while he is alive, he will endeavor to provide them faithful
Pastors, to instruct them, that they may remember those things: and therefore,
his meaning is nothing less then an oecumenick Bishop: and this much of Bozius.

Bellarmine states the question very perplexedly, and so obscurely, that it
appears to any, he is diffident to make out what he undertakes: First, he
observes four things, and then he falls a disputing.

His first observation is, That the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter,
in the Monarchy of the Church, is Jure Divino; But the manner or way of
succession, ratio successionis, depends upon the fact of Peter: which
distinction of Bellarmins is very obscure and implicating; he explains himself,
that Peter might never have fixed his seat at Rome, and therefore it depends
upon the ^act of Peter, that the Bishop of Rome succeeds to him: but he had
said before, that Peter had fixed his seat at Rome, by the command of Christ:
how can any make sense of those expressions? he involves himself here in many
contradictions; first he affirms, that the succession of the Bishop of Rome to
Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, is Jure divino, or by institution of
Christ; but that the Bishop of Rome succeeded to Peter in the Monarchy of the
Church, is not Jure divino, but depends upon the fact of Peter: which is as
much to say, that the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter is Jure divino,
and yet the Bishop of Rome succeeded not Jure divino.

Secondly, he affirms, That it depended upon the fact of Peter, that he was
Bishop of Rome: and yet he says, lib. 2. Fundatur jus successionis Pontificum
Romanorum, in eo, quod Petrus Romae suam sedem, jubente Domino, collocaverit,
atque ibidem usque ad mortem sederit; That is, the right of the Bishop of Rom's
succession is founded in this, viz. that Peter at the command of Christ, fixed
his Bishopric at Rome, and did sit Bishop there till his death. How can those
two consist together? First, Peter was expressly commanded by Christ to fix his
Bishopric at Rome; Secondly, and yet notwithstanding, it was in Peter's option
whether he should do so or not? He might be further pressed, but it is
sufficient to answer here (to omit his contradictions) that all his
suppositions are false: first, it is false, that the succession of the Bishop
of Rome to Peter is Jure divino, Secondly, it is false, that the Bishop of Rome
succeeded to Peter, because Peter fixed his seat at Rome, since it was proved
in the former Book, that Peter was not Bishop of Rome at all. Thirdly it is
most false, that Peter at the command of Christ, fixed his seat at Rome,
neither does he bring any thing to prove it, beside his own assertion: these
three places, Matthew. 16. 18, and 19. and Joh. 21. 15. (though it were granted
that Peter was ordained by Christ Monarch of the Church by them, which was
proved false in the former Book) mentions nothing of the fixing his seat at
Rome.

The second observation of Bellarmine is this, If ye absolutely ask (says he)
if the Bishop of Rome, by divine institution, be Monarch and Head of the
Church? it is answered, certainly he is. Where he involves himself in another
contradiction: in the former observation he affirmed, that the Bishop of Rome
his succession to Peter depended upon the fact of Peter, which he granted was
changable; but nothing can be by divine institution, which depends upon an
uncertainty.

His third observation is very admirable, The Bishop of Rome, as the Bishop of
Rome, (says he) succeeds not to Peter Jure divino, and yet est de fide; that
is, we are obliged to believe it, as an article of Faith: which is very
mysterious language, how can we belive that by divine Faith, which is not
revealed by God? he answers, We are obliged to believe it, as well as that
Paul left his Cloak and Parchments at Troas.

But it is replied, those things are expressly mentioned in Scripture, and its
very strange, that the Scripture should mention the Cloak and Parchments of
Paul, and not mention the Roman Bishopric of Peter, or the Bishop of Rome's
succession to Peter.

Bellarmine goes on, They are not mentioned expressly, but deduced by necessar
consequence out of Scripture. It ye ask him from what places of Scripture? he
tells you, Its a tradition Apostolic: If ye ask him how he proves that? he
tells you, by Councills, Fathers, Institution of Bishops, Appellations, etc.
and so he takes up the whole dispute, by producing such probations: Where the
Reader may observe, that after such bragings of the succession of the Bishop of
Rome Jure divino, in the Monarchy of the Church, the Mountains have brought
forth a Mouse, viz. he brings nothing but perverted Testimonies of the
Ancients, falsely translated, and many of them forged, others mutilated, as
shall appear in this, and the next two following Books; where also it shall be
proved, by the Testimonies of those same Counsels and Fathers, pretended by
him, that the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter in the Monarchy of the
Church, is a mere fiction, not known to the Ancients of the first six
Centuries: Its true indeed, that some ambitious Bishops of Rome, contending
with the Bishops of Constantinople for the Primacy, (which contention did begin
after the Council of Chalcedon, Anno 453.) invented this fiction of the
succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter: But that it was a new invented
fiction, appears by two reasons: The first is, because the Council of
Chalcedon, Canon 28, made the Bishop of Constantinople equal in Jurisdiction to
the Bishop of Rome. Its true indeed, the said Council gave the first place in
dignity to the Bishop to Rome, but it appears expressly by the words of the
Canon, that it was not by any reason of succession to Peter, but only because
Rome was the chief imperial City; the words in the Original are, (...), because
Rome was the imperial City: where it is to be observed, that Aetius for the
Bishop of Constantinople, and Paschasinus for the Bishop of Rome, had pleaded
with great animosity for the Primacy before the said Council; both alleging
the sixth Canon of the Council of Neice, (Paschasinus not mentioning Tu es
Petrus at all) in the end, the Council having heard them both at length,
pronounced in favor of the Bishop of Constantinople, interpreting the sixth
Canon of the Council of Neice, as making all the Patriarchs equal in
Jurisdiction with the Bishop of Rome: after which Decree of the Council, the
following Bishops of Rome devised Tu es Petrus, pleading for the Primacy.

The second reason is, that in the latter end of the sixth Century, Pelagius
Secundus and Gregorius Primus, Bishops of Rome, pleaded with great animosity
against a visible Head of the Church, as Derogatory to Christ: and Gregorius
amongst other reasons, uses this for one, that Peter was not universal
Apostle, or visible head of the Church, Epistola 32. but more of that
hereafter. Since then before the latter end of the fifth Age, never any Bishop
of Rome pleaded the succession by Peter unto the Monarchy of the Church, and
since Gregorius in the beginning of the seventh Age expressly disputed against
it, it is evident, that the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter, is a new
devised fiction: yea, it shall be proved, lib. 5. that the said succession to
Peter was held no article of Faith in the Church of Rome, before the eleventh
Age, and not then neither, without great contention.

Bellarmin's fourth observation is this, That the universal Bishopric, and the
Bishopric of Rome, are not two Bishoprics, nisi potentia, and therefore they
are but one Bishopric: wherein he expressly contradicts himself; he said
before, that the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter in the Monarchy of
the Church was Jure divino, but as he was Bishop of Rome, it was not Jure
divino; now he makes them one Bishopric, but how can that consist, since he
had made them before two, whereof the one was Jure divino, and the other not?

Secondly, Bellarmine may be asked, Whether the Pope be Bishop of Rome, because
he is universal Bishop? or if he be universal Bishop, because he is Bishop of
Rome? (one of the two must of necessity follow, since they are on Bishopric in
effect, and distinct only potentia) if he affirm he is Bishop of Rome, because
he is universal Bishop; then it follows, that Peter had been Bishop of Rome,
although he had never been at Rome: and consequently, he was Bishop of Rome,
when he was Bishop of Antioch. If he affirm, he is universal Bishop, because he
is Bishop of Rome, it follows, he is universal Bishop, because he is a
particular Bishop, which is against nature, and reason: And this much of the
stating of the question.

Bellarmine having stated the question, falls a disputing, and it appears by
his first Argument more distinctly, what he means, which Oedipus himself could
not gather from his stating of the question: his Argument is this, One or other
of necessity beloved to succeed to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, Jure
divino, but no other but the Bishop of Rome could succeed to him, Ergo, the
Bishop of Rome succeeded to him. That one or other behoved to succeed to Peter,
he proves by six reasons, which in effect is the sum and repetition of all
those two prolix disputs of his, that the Government of the Church is Jure
divino Monarchical, and that Peter was the said Monarch.

His first reason ^s, Because the Church is the end of a Bishopric: since the
Church is one, therefore there must be one Bishop in the Church.

But it is answered, Christ is that one Bishop: that the Church should have any
other Bishop under Christ as a visible head, Bellarmine suppones falsely; its a
sort of disputing called Petitio principii, where the thing is taken as
granted, which is the state of the question.

His second reason is, That in the times of the Apostles the Church had a
visible head under Christ: But the Government of the Church is ever the same.

But its answered, it is false, that in the times of the Apostles the Church
had a visible head; as was prolixly, proved, lib. 1.

His third reason is of the same metal, Joh. 21. 15. Christ says to Peter,
Pasce oves meas, Feed my Sheep.

But it is answered, that passage was prolixly answered before.

His fourth reason is, by feeding of the sheep of Christ, is meaned, feeding of
all the Sheep of Christ, which none but one visible Head could do. But that
objection was also answered before, lib. 1.

His fifth reason is, from 1 Cor. 12. ^1. The head cannot say unto the feet, I
have no need of you. From which place he reasons thus: The Church ( says he)
is compared to a humane Body with a Head, here the Head is brought in speaking
to the Members, that it cannot say, I have no need o^ you* Or, which is all
one, this Head of the Church has need of the Members, but this must be another
Head then Christ, because Christ has no need of the Members.

But it is answered, this is a flat abusing of Scripture: the scope of the
Apostle in that place is to show, that although some in the Church have more
excellent Gifts then others; yet, the fellowship and endeavors of those of
mean Gifts is necessar, for the edification of the Church* which he proves, by
a similitude taken from a humane Body, where some Members are more noble, as
the Head; some less, as the Feet: And (says he) as he Head cannot say unto the
Feet, I have no need of you, or ye are not necessary to the Body; So they of
more excellent Gifts in the Church, cannot say unto those of meaner Gifts, we
have no need of you, neither are ye necessary for the edification of the
Church: That this is the true exposition of this place, appears by the
Interpretation of all the Ancients, as Ambrosius, Chrysostomus, Theophylactus,
whose Interpretation is also followed by those two Leaders of the Schoolmen
Lombardus and Aquinas; neither did ever any Interpreter-dream to prove a
visible Head out of this place, before the times of the Jesuits, as
Bellarmine, Sanderus and Turrianus. Their reason is most ridiculous, There is
but one Head of the Body, (say they) to which the Church is compared; Ergo,
there is but one Head in the Church. Which Argument may be retorted thus, There
are but two Feet in the Body, to which the Church is compared; Ergo, there are
but two Feet in the Church, or two only in the Church, who have meaner Gifts.
The Sophistry discovers it self; for according to the Interpretation of the
Ancients, that one Head of the Body answers to many persons in the Church, as
appears by the 70. Epistle of Basilius to the Bishops of Italy and France,
where he has these words, Cum igitur non possit Caput Pedibus dicere, Non
estis mihi necessarii, omnino non tolerabitis nos abdicari; Since the Head
cannot say unto the Feet, ye are not necessary, ye will not suffer us to be
abdicated, or cut off He repeats the same words, Epist. 77. to the Transmarine
Bishops. Likewayes, Primasius, Oecumenius, and the Author of those Commentaries
attributed to Hieronymus, compares all Bishops to that one Head of the Body,
and so does Aquinas, to which he compares also the Civil Magistrates. And this
much of that head, mentioned 1 Cor. 12. 21.

Bellarmin's last reason to prove, That the Government of the Church is Jure
Divino Monarchical, and consequently, that one or other behoved to succeed to
Peter, is taken from the High Priest in the Old Testament; under whom the
Government of the Church was Monarchical, Ergo, (says he) the Government of
the Church under the New Testament, is Jure Divino Monarchical, under one
visible Head.

But it is answered, first, many things were in the Church Government in the
Old Testament, which are not in that of the New; and therefore the Argument
does not follow. Secondly, Bellarmine could not have produced a sharper Sword
to cut his own throat; for the High Priest in the Old Testament was a Type of
Christ, and as the said High Priest governed the Church, without a visible Head
under him in the Old Testament; So Christ governs the Church in the New
Testament, without a visible Head under him. And this much of those reasons, by
which Bellarmine endeavors to prove, that one or other behoved to succeed to
Peter in the Monarchy of the Church.

In the next place he endeavors to prove, that the Bishop of Rome succeeded to
him; which he does thus: Either the Bishop of Antioch, or else the Bishop of
Rome, succeeded to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church: but not the Bishop of
Antioch, Ergo, the Bishop of Rome.

But it is answered, first it is false, that either the Bishop of Antioch, or
the Bishop of Rome succeeded to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, since we
proved before, that Peter was not Monarch of the Church himself, and therefore
no Bishop could succeed him in the Monarchy of the Church. Secondly, We proved
also in the last Chapter of the first Book, that Peter was Bishop of no
particular Church. Thirdly, though it were granted, that either the Bishop of
Antioch, or the Bishop of Rome, behoved to succeed to Peter in the Monarchy of
the Church, the Bishop of Antioch ought to be preferred to the Bishop of Rome;
because we have Scripture express that Peter was at Antioch, but none at all
that he was at Rome; but on the contrary, it appears by infallible presumptions
from Scripture, that he was never at Rome, as was proved in the last Chapter of
the former Book; where it was also proved, that the Testimonies of those
Fathers, by which Peter was proved to be at Rome, were grounded on the
Authority of Pappias, an Author meriting no credit, in the opinion of Eusebius.

Bellarmine in the next place endeavors to prove. That the Bishop of Rome
succeeded to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, by several general Arguments;
As, 1. Testimonies of general Councils. 2. Of Bishops of Rome themselves. 3. Of
Greek Fathers. 4. Of Latin Fathers. 5. From Viccars. 6. From Right of
Appellations. 7. From exemption from judgment. 8. From ordination of Bishops.
9. From Laws, Dispensations and Censures. 10. From Names or Titles.

In the following Books, we shall not miss one of his Arguments of any moment
unanswered, and not retorted. But, to avoid repetitions, we will alter his
method, distinguishing the Bishop of Romes succession to Peter in several
Intervals, as was showed in the Preface of this Treatise: in this second Book,
we will dispute the succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter, in the Monarchy
of the Church, from the days of the Apostles, until the death of Cyprian;
that is, until anno, 260. or thereabout, insisting most upon these four
following particulars:

First, we will dispute the occasion of the opinion of Aerius, by whom it was
maintained, unto cap. 5.

In the second place we will dispute, that there was no Office in the Church
during that interval, above that of a Bishop, unto cap. 9.

In the third place, we will answer what is objected for the Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome in that interval by our adversaries, unto cap 13.

Fourthly, we will examine several forgeries, pretended by our adversaries for
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in that interval. Of which in order.

CHAP. II. The occasion of the opinion of Aerius, who were his followers, and
what the Bishop of Rome was at first in their opinion?
SOme Protestants stumble at the word Hierarchy, and will needs have the word
Hieredulia put in the place of it, the first word in the Original signifying
Church-ruling, the last Church-ministry: However, that the Church Hierarchy or
Hierodulle, instituted by the Apostles, consisted of Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, is denied by none; as in civil families, some servants had titles of
honor given them, and were called (...), majores domus familiam ducentes,
trusties, master-housholds rulers, of the family; others were called by the
common name of Servants: So in the Ministry of the Church, some Ministers had
titles of honor given them, and were called (...), Overseers, Bishops; (...),
Presbyters, Elders; all other Ministers of the Church were called (...),
Deacons, which is as much as to say, Ministers, or were called by the name of
Ministers common to them all. Those titles of Bishop and Presbyter are borrowed
by a metaphor from the civil administration; they who ruled Cities of old among
the Jews and Grecians were called Presbyters, and rulers of Provinces were
called (...), Bishops, Overseers, as appears by 1 Maccab. 1. All other Church
Ministers were called Deacons or Ministers simply.

In the times of the Apostles, Bishops were called Presbyters, and Presbyters
Bishops; so Tit. 1. those who are called Presbyters, verse 5. are called
Bishops, verse 7. It appears also by Philip. 1. and 1 Timothy 3. and Acts 20. that
the Rulers of Churches in one City are called Bishops in the plural number;
which could not be, if Presbyters were not called Bishops, since there could be
but one Bishop in one City, as all know. Those also who lived at the same time
with the Apostles, speak after the same manner: Clement Bishop of Rome,
mentioned by Paul, and familiar with him in his Epistles directed to the
Corinthians (which Epistle is mentioned by Hieronymus, but never seen, till of
late Cyrillus, Patriarch of Constantinople, sent it from the Bibliothick of
Alexandria to King James, as a precious monument of Antiquity) calls the Rulers
of the Church of Corinth Bishops in the plural number, directing his Epistle to
the Bishops and Deacons of Corinth: and likewayes in the body of his Epistle,
he calls those very persons Bishops in one place, whom he calls Presbyters in
another. Polycarpus also directs an Epistle to the Presbyters and Deacons of
Philippi, and in the body of his Epistle he calls these very persons Bishops:
this o^yearpus was the disciple of John.

This manner of speaking continued unto the latter end of the second Age*
Irenaeus, who lived about that time, in an Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome,
calls the predecessors of the said Victor, Presbyters, ruling the Church of
Rome: Likewayes, whom he calls Presbyters, lib. 3. cap. 2. in the very next
Chapter he calls Bishops; and again, lib. 4. cap. 43. he calls them Presbyters.
Pius also Bishop of Rome, in an Epistle to Justus Bishop of Vienna, speaking of
the succession of Bishops in several Places, calls it a succession of
Presbyters. Other Testimonies might be multiplied to this purpose, but it is
needless, since it is confessed by Bellarmine and Petavius, that in those
primitive times, Presbyters were called Bishops, and Bishops Presbyters
promiscuously.

Aerius, who lived about the middle of the fourth Age, believed for that reason,
that the Office of a Bishop and a Presbyter in those times was one and the
same; and that no Bishop was Jure Divino, above a Presbyter: which opinion
Epiphanius, Hereste 75. calls Furiosum dogma, and for that reason, ranks Aerius
among Heretics: but he answers the Arguments of Aerius vere childishly, in the
opinion of Bellarmine himself; for when Aerius objected those formentioed
passages of Scripture, naming many Bishops in one City, Epiphanius answers, the
reason is, Because in these times there was such penury of Presbyters, that
many Bishops were in one City: then which answer, nothing is more ridiculous.
However, the authority of Epiphanias is of no more weight to make any Opinion
Heresy, then the authority of some other Fathers, who declared them Heretics
who maintained the Antipodes, Avertinus, lib. 3. Anal. Augustinus also seems to
call Aerius an Heretic; but its very like, that he calls him so for some other
reason, then denying the divine right of Bishops: other things were laid to the
charge of Aerius (how justly is doubted) it may be also that Augustinus takes
Heresy in a large sense as it comprehends Schism: for he professes himself
in that place, he knows not what is the regular distinction of Heresy. That
Schismatics were sometimes called Heretics, appears by the sixth Canon of the
first Council of Constantinople, which, In codice canonum, is 169.

That Augustine called not Aerius an Heretic, for denying the divine right of
Bishops, but only for making a separation upon that account, or else for some
other reason, is evident; because, not only Augustinus himself, but also many
others of the most eminent Fathers, seem to be of the same opinion with Aerius,
as Medina confesses; and although Bellarmine and Petavius reprehend Medina for
so saying, yet in end, both are forced to acknowledge, that some of those
Fathers were of that opinion. Likewayes, many Popish Doctors came very near the
opinion of Aerius; all the Protestant Divines abroad, for the most part, are of
that opinion; and many learned Protestants at home, as Whitaker, Reynolds, etc.
although some eminent English Divines be against it, as Andrews, Hall, and
other learned men. However, it is certain, that none were more submissive to
Episcopal Government amongst the ancient Fathers, and some of the modern
Doctors, then those who dispute expressly against the divine right of Bishops;
as Augustinus quaest. 101. upon 1 Timothy 3. Hilarious upon the same place, and
likewayes upon Ephesians. 4. Hieronymus in his Epistle to Euagrius, and likewayes
upon Tit. 1. Ambrosius (as he is cited by Amalarius) upon Tim. 3. Chrysostomus
and his admirer Theophylactus, Primasius oecumenius Sedulius upon Tit. 1. and
among the late Fathers, Amalarius, Isidorus, Rabanus Maurus; amongst the Popish
Divines, Cusanus, lib. 2. de concordia Catholica, cap. 13. Contarenus and
Dionysius, Carthusianus on Philip. 1. Durandus in Rationali, lib. 2. cap. de
Sacerdotibus, and likewayes upon the sentences, lib. 4. did. 34. q. 5.
Marsilius Patavinus, dict. cap. 15. Haymo on Philip. 1. Asorius the Jesute, P.
2. Q. 2. cap. 16. All which Popish Doctors came very near the opinion of
Aerius, and yet were very submissive to Episcopal Government: Whitaker, a most
stout defender of Aerius, yet was most submissive to the Episcopal Government;
and many of the most eminent Divines abroad, who defended the opinion of
Aerius, yet in their Epistles to several English Divines, they exhort
dissatisfied persons, to submit to the Government of the Church of England:
which in effect is, the same with that Church Government which was established
by the first general Council of Neice.

Those who follow the opinion of Aerius, affirm, that the Bishop of Rome, in
the beginning, was nothing else but the first Presbyter, or first ordained
Presbyter, amongst the Presbyters of the Church of Rome: Hilarious by many cited
by the name of Ambrosius) upon Ephesians. 4. affirms, that in those primitive times,
a Bishop was nothing else but primus Presbyter, that is, Presbyter of oldest
ordination, and he dying, the next in order coming to be first Presbyter,
became hoc ipso Bishop, without any new ordination; as appears by the the same
Author, 1 Timothy 3. where he expressly affirms, when any is ordained Sacerdos, he
is ordained both Bishop and Presbyter; for, says he, Una est ordinatio
Presbyteri and Episcopi, quia uterque est Sacerdos. That is, The ordination of
a Bishop and Presbyter in one, because both are Priests: Whence it appears that
Bellarmine is mistaken, who affirms, that a first Presbyter behoved to be
ordained of new, when he became Bishop, according to the opinion of that
Author: Petavius grants, that a first Presbyter became Bishop, without any new
formal ordination, but it was requisite that he should be consecrated by a
secret imposition of hands, called by him (...), that is, a mystical
imposition of hands; but he brings no probation, he only affirms, it. We read
of such a secret imposition of hands, not in that case, but in other two: the
first, is, when Miletius troubled all Egypt by his ordaining without
authority, those whom he ordained were not formally re-ordained, but only
consecrated by that secret imposition of hands, or private imposition of hands,
as witnesses Theodoretus, lib. 1. cap. 10. The other case is, those who were
baptized by Heretics, were not rebaptized, but only anointed with the
Chrisme, together with that secret imposition of hands: both the one and the
other case is mentioned by Justinus, in Respons, ad Orthodox. It is to be
observed, that although the first Presbyter was called Bishop, Antonemastice,
yet the other Presbyters were called Bishops; and the first Presbyter sometimes
Episcopus Episcoporum, Bishop of Bishops; so the Apostle James is called by
Clement, when the said James was Bishop or first Presbyter of Jerusalem: whence
appears, the weakness of that objection of Bellarmine, proving that the Bishop
of Rome was reputed oecumenick Bishop, because he is styled by some, Episcopus
Episcoporum, Bishop of Bishops.

CHAP. III. Conjectures of Aerians, concerning the original, progress, and
universal establishment of Episcopacy.
THe first step then of the Bishop of Rome (in the opinion of those who follow
Aerius) was from a first Presbyter to a Bishop, before the time that Bishops
and Presbyters were distinguished, all Presbyters were called Bishops, but
after that time, no Presbyter was called Bishop, as Ambrosius (cited by
Amalarius) affirms, on 1 Timothy 3. The word Bishop in greek (...), imports as
much as an Overseer; those who had the oversight of any charge were called by
the Graecians (...), Bishops; so we find in Xenophon Physicians called. And in
other Authors Moderators of Controversies, and Visitors of Cities amongst the
Athenians, were called Bishops. Rulers of Provinces, or who were set over
Provinces, 1 Maccab. 1, are called (...), Bishops. Yea, in the glosses of the
old Graecians, Kings are called Bishops: Hesychius amongst his glosses has
(...), in the same sense in which they are called by Homer, (...), Pastors of
the people; by which it appears (if we durst affirm it) that Salmasius is in a
mistake, affirming that Bishop is only a word of care, tutelage, or curatory,
and not a word of rule or command: Bellarmine also is in a mistake, who eludes
that passage of Augustine, a Bishop is greater then a Presbyter by consuetude;
affirming the meaning of Augustine to be, that before the times of Christians,
the word Bishop was not a title of honor, but by the consuetude of Christians,
it became to be so.

The time when Episcopacy did first begin, is guessed to he about the latter
end of the second Age, when Victor was Bishop of Rome: which conjecture is
proved by two reasons: The first is this, Ambrosius on 1 Timothy 1. 3. (as he is
cited by Amalarius) affirms, That after Episcopacy was brought in, Presbyters
were called no more Bishops as they were before, nor were Bishops called
Presbyters: but we read in the Epistles of Victor, that Presbyters are called
Bishops, and Bishops Presbyters, as was beforementioned; but after the time of
Victor we find, that neither Bishops are called Presbyters, nor Presbyters
Bishops: whereby it is very probable, that in those days a Bishop was
distinguished from a Presbyter. The second reason is this, Ignatius (falsely
believed to be the Disciple of John) lived about that time, and in his Epistle
to the Magnesians, calls Episcopacy (...), a new Ordination, whence it appears,
it did begin about that time. That the said Inatius lived in those days (and
consequently could not be that Ignatius who was the disciple of John) appears,
because he mentions the heresy of Valentinus, who affirmed, that Christ
proceeded from Siges; which Heresy was never heard of, till immediately before
the times of Victor; and therefore the said Ignatius behoved to live after the
time of Valentinus, and consequently about the time of Victor. To which two
reasons, may be added a third, ( viz.) That the said Magnesians and Tralliani
were so averse from receiving of Bishops, (as if those Tralliani had been so
called after Mr. Robert Trail) that Ignatius was forced to spend much
Rhetoric, to persuade them to receive a Bishop: but it is very unlike they
would have been so refractory, if Bishops had been among them from the
beginning: And this much of the original of Episcopacy.

As for the progress; Bishops were not brought in, in all places at one time,
but by degrees, first at one place, then at another: It is very like they first
began at Rome, and that Victor was the first Bishop that ever was; he was a
very aspireing man, and for his presumption, was sharply rebuked by Irenaeus,
and bitterly mocked by Tertullian: and therefore, it is very unlike such an
alteration of Government could begin in any other City then Rome, which was the
chief Imperial City: for which reason, Potentior principalitas, a more powerful
principality was attributed to the Church of Rome by Irenaeus, by reason of
which (says he) and also by reason that the Traditions of the Apostles were
preserved more purely there, it is necessary that all Churches conform
themselves to that Church.

That Episcopacy was not established in all places at once, in alike
perfection, is evident by three reasons. The first is, when Presbyters in other
places had no ordination, they had it still at Alexandria unto the times of
Heraclas and Dionysius, which was about Anno 235. as is testified by Ambrosius
(by some thought Hilarious) on Ephesians. 4. and Augustinus (if he be the Author) on
Tim. 1. 3. quaest. 101. upon the Old and New Testament, and Hieronymus in his
Epistles to Euagrius. The second reason is, when Bishops only confirmed in the
West, Presbyters confirmed throughout all the East, as is testified by Cyrillus
Hierosol mitanus, in his Catechize de Chrismate, and Severus Alexandrius, de
Ritibus Baptismi. The third reason is, when in many places Bishops had sole
ordination and sole jurisdiction, in Africa they were inhibited, and expressly
forbidden, either to ordain or to exercise jurisdiction, without concurrence of
Presbyters; as appears by the 22. and 24. Canons of the fourth Council of
Carthage.

When Episcopacy was universally established, was as uncertain, as when it
first began. Hieronymus affirms, it was decreed through the whole world;
Ambrosius or Hilarious affirms, it was established prospiciente concilio; but
none could tell, as Bishop Hall objects, what either the one or the other
meaned? but of late it is discovered, that both mean the 4. Canon of the first
Council of Neice. Eutychius Patriarch of Alexandria, in his Books de originibus
(newly published in Arabic and Latin by Seldenus) testifies, that Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, did take the power of ordination from the Presbyters
there, who before that time had the power of ordaining their Bishop. And since
Eutychius affirms, that the said Alexander was present at the Council of Neice,
without all question, he inhibited Presbyters to ordain the Bishop of
Alexandria, by authority of the said 4. Canon of the Council of Neice; neither
could any authority, except that of a general Council, establish any thing
universally; neither was there any general Council, before that of Neice.

CAP. IV. Wherein a Bishop differs from a Presbyter? Conjectures of Aerians
wherefore Episcopacy was brought in the Church?
AFter Episcopacy was established, a Bishop differs from a Presbyter by
ordination: whence nothing is more frequent with Augustinus, Hieronymus,
Ambrosius, Chrysostomus, and other Fathers, then that a Bishop differs from a
Presbyter by ordination, which is all the Argument that Bellarmine and others
produce to prove, that the forsaid Fathers were for the divine right of
Bishops: But since those Fathers expressly dispute against the divine right of
Bishops, since they tell a reason wherefore Episcopacy was brought in, since
they tell the time when, (albeit obscurely) it is evident, that those Fathers
speaks so, according to the consuetude of their own times; that is, Bishops
have ordination, and Presbyters have it not, not by divine right, but only by
consuetude: yea, Hieronymus upon Titus, after he has disputed most vehemently
against the divine right of Bishops, concludes his dispute with these words,
Ita Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispositionis dominicae
veritate Presbyteris esse majores; That is, Bishops should know that they are
greater then Presbyters, more by consuetude then divine right; which passage is
so evident, that not only Medina, but also Alphonsus de Castro, Albertus
Pighius, Petavius, yea, Bellarmine and Bishop Hall, are forced to confess,
that Hieronymus was against the divine right of Bishops: which last, calls him
a waspish man, and that he was irritated by John Bishop of Jerusalem.

The reasons wherefore Episcopacy was brought in, are three, according to those
Fathers: the first reason is of Ambrosius ( or according to some Hilarious) upon
Ephesians. 4. who after he had told, that in the primitive times, a Bishop was no
other then a first Presbyter, or the Presbyter of oldest ordination in any
City; he subjoynes, that Bishops were after that time, not by succession, but
by election; because the first Presbyter was many times unworthy, and therefore
not the first, but the most worthy was chosen bishop. The second reason is of
Ambrosius ( as he is cited by Amalarius) upon 1 Timothy 3. (viz) because
^resbyters, in following times, had not such eminent gifts, as those who lived
in the primitive times; therefore it was not fit, that the Church should be
governed alike by them all any more therefore the most eminent in gifts, of the
number of Presbyters, was chosen Bishop, differing from the other Presbyters by
Ordination; and he who was so chosen, was no more called Presbyter, but Bishop:
and the other Presbyters were no more called Bishops, but only Presbyters: the
third reason is of Hieronymus upon Tit. 1. who affirms, Bishops were brought
in, to take away Schisms, such as when one said, he was of Paul, another he was
of Cephas, another he was of Apollos.

Petavins hierarchiae, lib. 1. cap. 10. number. 8. and in other places,
accknowledgeth, that the Office of a Bishop and a Presbyter concurred in one
Person in some Cities in the times of the Apostles: but he endeavors to prove,
by this passage of Hieronymus, that custom was changed in the times of the
Apostles themselves; ( viz.) when that Schism was among the Corinthians, one
saying he was of Paul; another he was of Cephas, etc. Bellarmine and Bishop
Hall, by the same passage, endeavor to bind contradictions upon Hieronymus;
because he assi^ms on Tit. 1. that according to Paul, a Bishop and a Presbyter
is all one; and in the same place he affirms, that according to Paul they were
made different a long time before, (viz.) when that Schism was among the
Corinthians, which Schism was before Paul wrote his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, which first Epistle, was written long before the Epistle to Titus:
But it is answered, it is very strange, that any eminent person as Bishop Hall,
should own such a Protervum Sophisma; and therefore, to return the sharp edge
of the Weapon, whereas they strike only with the blunt, it is reasoned thus;
Hieronymus affirms, according to Paul, Tit. 1. The Office of a Bishop and a
Presbyter is one and the same; Ergo, it cannot be the meaning of Hieron mus,
that they were made different precisely at that time, when that Schism was
among the Corinthians, since he could not be ignorant, that Schism fell out
long before Paul wrote his Epistle to Titus: the intention then of Hieronymus
is, not to tell precisely the time when? but only the cause why? ^ Bishop was
made different from a Presbyter, ( viz.) Schism, such as that among the
Corinthians, not that very Schism among the Corinthians: which manner of
speaking is not only frequent, but also elegant, as can be made out both by
Scripture, and profane Authors, if it were needful, or any versed in either,
had the Brow to deny it.

CHAP. V. What primacy the Bishop of Rome had before other Bishops, before the
times of Cyprian.
ANd this much of the original, progress and universal establishment of
Episcopacy, of the difference between a Presbyter and a Bishop, and for what
reasons Bishops were brought in. Now it is requisite to declare, what Primacy
was due to the Bishop of Rome during that time, when no Office was in the
Church above that of a Bishop? ( viz) before the time of Cyprian, who lived
about Anno 250. or 60. that is, seventy or eighty years before the Council of
Neice. During then that interval, we find two sort of priorities among Bishops,
neither of which imported any authority or jurisdiction of one Bishop above
another; they imported only a priority of precedence or place. The first was,
priority of Age, that is, he who was first ordained Bishop, had the place of
him who was ordained after him; and in that respect, the primacy of Bishops was
ambulatory in every Province; except the Bishop of the first City of the
Province, where the Roman Governor remained; and that Bishop had the place of
all the Bishops of the Province, although later ordained then any of them, and
was called Primae Sedis Episcopus, or Bishop of the first Seat, which was the
other sort of priority among Bishops. In a word then, the Bishop of the first
City of the Province, had a fixed priority; Bishops of the other Cities had an
ambulatory priority, that is, now one, now another, according to the time of
their ordination: and for that reason, they were all called Secundae Sedis
Episcopi, or, Bishops of the second Seat, not some of them Bishops of the
third, and others of the fourth Seat, because now this Bishop, then another; or
now Bishop of this City, then of another, was Bishop of the second Seat,
according to the priority of his ordination. It is to be observed, that after
Justinianus, the priority of the first Bishops themselves, or Bishops of the
first Seat, was made ambulatory in Africa, by a Constitution of the said
Justinianus; except only the Bishop of Carthage, who still remained fixed first
Bishop, whether he were of older or newer ordination; because Carthage was the
first City of the first Province of Africa. In like manner, the Bishop of Rome
was the fixed first Bishop of all the world, because Rome was the first City of
the first Province of the world; and for that reason (as we said) potentior
principalitas, or, a more powerful principality was attributed to the Church of
Rome by Irenaeus. The Church of Rome in those days was of no further extent
then the walls of the City, as is at large demonstrated by Salmasius; for the
Bishop of Rome then was only a Bishop, and was neither Metropolitan, nor
Patriarch, much less an oecumenick Bishop.

That the Bishop of Rome was first Bishop, because Rome was the first City of
the Empire, and for no other reason, appears not only by what is said, but
also, because for the same reason, he was declared first Metropolitan by the
second general Council of Constantinople, and first Patriarch by the fourth
general Council of Chalcedon, and oecumenick Bishop by Phocas, as shall be
declared hereafter at large: whereby it is evident, That the Bishop of Rome,
had still the priority for civil respects, and by humane ordination, and not at
all by divine institution, or by reason of succession to Peter; for in that
respect, the Bishop of Antioch, would be preferred to the Bishop of Rome,
because he is Bishop of Antioch, or rather founded the Church of Antioch before
ever he saw Rome: and whereas Petavius, and others affirm, that the Bishop of
Rome was successor to Peter, because Peter died at Rome; it is frivolous, 1.
Because Velenus, Salmasius, and others prove by unanswerable reasons, that
Peter neither lived, nor died at Rome, that is, was never at Rome, whose
reasons were summed in the former Book, cap. 24. 2. Because Peter, although he
had been at Rome, yet was never Bishop at Rome, but only in a large sense, (
viz.) as Bishop comprehends the founder of any Church, in which sense Paul may
be called the Bishop of Corinth, Thessalonica, etc. yet in that respect, Paul
is to be preferred to Peter, because he not only founded the Church of Rome, as
all agree, and not Peter as many affirm; but also, although he and Peter had
founded the Church of Rome jointly, he is to be preferred to the Bishopric of
Rome; because Rome was a City of the Gentiles, expressly comprehended under the
Apostolat of Paul, whereas the Jews were only committed to Peter; and for that
reason, in the Seals annexed to the Popes Bulls, unto this day, the Images of
Paul and Peter are jointly imprinted, and that of Paul has the right hand;
many admire why? but the reason can be no other, then what we have told, (
viz.) because although Peter and Paul are believed jointly to have founded the
Church of Rome, and therefore the image of both is imprinted in the Seals, yet
that of Paul has the right hand, because Rome was under the Apostolat of Paul,
and not of Peter, as we said. Likewayes, it is agreed by all, that Paul died at
Rome, but not that Peter, and it is thought, that none of the Ancients knew
where Peter died? one thing is certain, that Clement third Bishop of Rome,
speaking of the deaths of Peter and Paul (to both whom he was contemporary) and
who was called by Paul his fellow laborer, although in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, he speaks more particularly of the martyrdom of Paul, when and
where he died, and under whom; yet, he does not mention the death of Peter so
particularly: which he would have done, if Peter had died at Rome, in the same
day with Paul, as the Romanists affirm. 3. If the Bishop of Rome, have any
priority, by reason of Peter's dying at Rome; the Bishop of Jerusalem is to be
preferred to the Bishop of Rome, because Christ died at Jerusalem: yea, for
that reason, the foresaid Clement seems to call James the Apostle (thought to
be the first Bishop of Jerusalem) Episcopum Episcoporum, or, Bishop of Bishops;
which Epithet, if any had given to the Bishop of Rome in those days,
Bellarmime and Barronius would have blacked many sheets of paper with
repetitions of that Testimony, ingeminating it every where, as they do other
testimonies of far less moment: In what sense Clement calls James Bishop of
Bishops, shall be showed hereafter.

CHAP. VI. The Testimonies of Dionysius and Ignatius, against the Bishop of
Romes Supremacy.
AENeas Silvius, (afterward the Pope under the name Pius second) in his 288.
Epistle (according to the supputation of Bellarmine) affirms that before the
Council of Neice, little or no regaird was had, to the Supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome: which confirms what we said before, viz. that before the times of
Cyprian, the primacy of the Bishop of Rome was only of Dignity, but not of
Jurisdiction, viz. because he was Bishop of the chief Imperial City, as also
because he was Bishop of that particular Church, commonly believed in those
days, to have been jointly founded by those Princes of the Apostles, Peter and
Paul. Yet notwithstanding, since the Doctors of the Church of Rome, endeavor
to prove, by Testimonies of Fathers, and actions of Bishops of Rome, that the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, was acknowledged in the first three Centuries:
in disputing this Question, we will observe this following method; first, we
will prove by Testimonies of those Fathers, who lived in that interval, that
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, was not acknowledged in those days.
Secondly, we will answer what is objected to the contrary from actions of
Popes, and from Testimonies of Fathers. Lastly, we will discover several
forgeries pretended by our Adversary, to prove the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome in that interval.

We will first assault the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, by the Testimonies
of two much magnified by some of that Church: the first is, Ignatius, whom they
affirm to be the Disciple o^ St. John; the second is Dionysius, believed by
them to be the Disciple of St. Paul: and albeit we proved in another place that
the pretended Ignatius was not the Disciple of John, and shall prove hereafter,
that the pretended Dionysius was not the Disciple of Paul, mentioned Acts. yet,
nevertheless, both the one and the other are very ancient: we proved
elsewhere, that Ignatius lived about the time of Victor Bishop of Rome: when
Dionysius lived, is uncertain? Ignatius in his Ep^stle to the Trallians, has
these words, What is a Bishop but he who goes beyond all command and power,
who commands all as far as a man can command? In which words, he expressly
affirms, that there is no Office of the Church, above that of a Bishop: for, if
a Bishop have supreme command (as he expressly affirms) he can be commanded by
no superior Church-ruler, as Metropolitan, Patriarch, or oecumenick Bishop. The
Testimony of Dionysius is taken from his 8. Epistle, his words are these in
substance, Every man should strive to live blamelesly, if he do not, the Priest
should take a course with him: if the Priest deborde, he should be judged by
his Bishop: if the Bishop do amiss, he should be judged by the successors of
the Apostles: if those again do amiss, they should be judged by those of the
same order, and degree.

In which words he quite excludes one visible Head over all; and consequently
it appears, that in his days, the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome was not
believed, as an article of Faith in the Church: since he affirms* that many
hold the chief place of the Hierarchy; whereof any should be judged by the
rest, and not all by one visible Head, or by the Bishop of Rome.

What he means by Successors to the Apostles, whom he places above Bishops,
none can tell, except he mean, Metropolitans and Patriarchs; if he do, its
evident, he lived after the times of Cyprian: because in the days of Cyprian,
and before, there was no Office in the Church, above that of a Bishop, as
appears first, by that passage of Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Trallians now
cited. Secondly, it appears by the Epistle of the said Ignatius, written to the
Magnesians, in the which Epistle, he comprehends all Church-rulers under
Bishops and Presbyters; where he affirms, that Bishops have the chief place
loco Dei, in place of God; Presbyters have the next place concessus Apostolici
loco, that is, they represent the Council of the Apostles; the last place he
gives the Deacons, to whom the Ministry of Christ is committed. Thirdly, that
no Office was in the Church, above that of a Bishop, before the times of
Cyprian, nor in his time, appears by those two following most notable passages
of Cyprian, the one in his Books de unitate Ecclesiae, lib. 4. Epist. 9. the
other from his Oration, to the Council of Carthage; of which two passages in
order.

CHAP. VII. Explication of that place of Cyprian, De unitate Ecclesiae.
THe words of Cyprian are, Unus Episcopatus est cujus a singulis pars in
solidum tenetur; that is, There is one Bishopric, of which every Bishop has
alike full share: by which passage of Cyprian, it not only appears, that the
Bishop of Rome, in his days, was not believed to be visible Head of the
Church; but also, that there was no Office in the Church above that of a
Bishop, since every Bishop had alike full share of that one Bishopric, which
could not be, if in those days, Metropolitans had been above Bishops,
Patriarchs above Metropolitans, and an oecumenick Bishop above all.

This notable passage of Cyprian, puzles the Learned of the Church of Rome very
sore: they vary very much in their glosses upon this place of Cyprian, as
Rufus, contra Molinaeum, Fran. Agricula, cap. 18. varies from him. Hayus,
disput. lib. 1. cap. 11. and Turrianus contra Zadeel, lib. 1. cap. 17. 26.
agree almost in one Exposition, but they differ from the other two. Sanderus,
de visib. Monarch. lib. 7. number. 45. differs from all the former. Bellarmine,
lib. 2. de pont* Romans cap. 16. varies from them all. We will examine the
exposition of Bellarmine; for since they vary in their opinion about the
meaning of Cyprian, and since the meaning of Cyprian can be but one, of
necessity all their glosses must be false except one; and since the gloss of
Bellarmine is most approved by the Church of Rome, we will examine it.

Bellarmine in the forecited place, expones the words of Cyprian thus; There is
one Bishopric ( says he) in the same way that the Church is one. But the
Church is one, as many branches of the same Tree are one Tree; many rivolets
are one Water; many beams one Light: as then in branches there is an unity, by
reason of one Root; in rivolets, by reason of one Fountain, etc. So is the
Church one, and consequently the Bishopric one in its Head and Root, the
Church and Bishopric of Rome. And whereas Cyprian affirms, that every Bishop
has a full share of that one Bishopric; Bellarmine grants its true, but by a
distinction, that is, Though every Bishop have a full share, yet he has not an
equal share, nor in the same manner; for Peter and his Successors the Bishops
of Rome, have that share which answers to the Head, Root and Fountain; but
other Bishops have that share answering to the Branches, Rivolets, etc.

This gloss of Bellarmines quite destroys the Text; for, Cyprian compares
particular Churches to Branches, Rivolets, Beams; that one Bishopric he
compares to an Oak, to Light, to a Fountain, whereby it evidently appears, that
by that one Bishopric he means not the Bishopric of Rome, which is a
particular Bishopric, as well as the rest; and not that great Bishopric, or
one Bishopric, whereof every one has a full share.

Secondly, that by unus Episcopatus he means, not the Bishopric of Peter,
having authority over other Bishops, is proved by his words in the same Book de
unitate Ecclesiae, where he affirms, Whatever the other Apostles were, Peter
was the same; that all the Apostles were equal to Peter, in dignity and power:
whereby it appears, whatever the Bishopric of Peter was, the Bishoprics of
the other Apostles were equal to it; and since the Bishoprics of the other
Apostles were particular Bishoprics, each having a full share of that one
Bishopric mentioned by Cyprian; the Bishopric of Peter was only a particular
Bishopric, and not that one Bishopric mentioned by Cyprian.

Thirdly, That the Bishopric of Rome is not that one Bishopric, appears by
the express words of Cyprian, in his Oration to the Council of Carthage; in
which (as we shall prove in the next Chapter) he makes any other Bishop equal
in jurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome.

Fourthly, Bellarmine and Sanderus, in making that one Bishopric the
Bishopric of Peter, must of necessity grant, that Peter only had his
Bishopric immediately from Christ, and the other Apostles their Bishoprics
from Peter; since Sanderus expressly affirms, that all other Bishoprics flow
from the Bishopric of Peter, as all mankind had their Original from Adam. But,
in averring the Apostles to have their Bishoprics from Peter, Bellarmine
contradicts first Fran. de victoria, who, relect. 2. quaest. 2. conclus. 3. and
4. expressly affirms, That the other Apostles received all their power, both of
order and jurisdiction, immediately from Christ. In which words, he is glossing
upon that passage of Cyprian, de unitate Ecclesiae, which we now mentioned,
Whatever Peter was, the other Apostles were the same, of alike dignity and
power with him. Secondly, Bellarmine contradicts himself, because he affirms,
That all the Apostles were made Bishops immediately by Christ, and had their
jurisdiction immediately from him, lib. 4. cap. 23. de pont. Romans and whereas
the Church of Rome does distinguish, that although the other Apostles had their
Bishoprics immediately from Christ, yet they had them not secundum plenitudinem
potestatis, as Peter had his Bishopric immediately from Christ: Fran. de
victoria exsibilats that distinction, as contrary to the mind of Cyprian,
asserting an absolute equality of jurisdiction of all the Apostles with Peter,
Fran. de victor. ibid. And thus we have proved, that Bellarmine is a bad
interpreter of Cyprian, in affirming, that Cyprian by unus Episcopatus means,
the Bishopric of Peter, or his Successor the Bishop of Rome.

Now let us examine, how Bellarmine comments upon those words of Cyprian, Cujus
pars a singulis in solidum tenetur? That is, of which Bishopric, every Bishop
has a full share: Bellarmine grants, that every Bishop has a full share, but
denies they have an equal share, or in the same manner; he compares that one
Bishopric to a dissimilar body, v. g. to a Tree, he compares the Bishopric of
Peter to the Root, other Bishoprics to the Branches; for as the Root, although
it be a part of the Tree, as are the Branches, yet it sustains and rules the
Branches; and therefore, although the Branches have a part of the Tree in
solidum, yet are they not an equal part of the Tree; neither are they a part of
the Tree, in that manner as the root is. The Root is a part sustaining the
Branches, the Branches again are parts sustained and governed by the Root; So
says Bellarmine, The Bishopric of Peter and his Successors is a part of that
one Bishopric answering to the Root, other Bishoprics are parts answering to
the Branches, ruled and sustained by the Bishopric of Peter.

But it is answered, Bellarmine in this gloss, intangles himself, first in
absurdities, next in contradictions; and first, he intangles himself in
absurdities, because Cyprian expressly compares that one Bishopric to an Oak, a
Fountain, a Light, which are all similar and homogeneous bodies; of which,
every every part has the name and nature of the whole; every part of an Oak is
Oak, every part of a Fountain of water, is water, etc. and therefore,
Bellarmine is absurd in affirming, that Cyprian compares that one Bishopric to
a dissimilar and heterogenious body; the Sophistry of Bellarmine consists in
this, what Cyprian calls Robur or an Oak, Bellarmine calls it Arbor, or a Tree;
the difference is this, any tree may be considered two ways, first, as it is
an organick body consisting of Root and Branches which are dissimilar, organick
parts: Secondly, as it is an homogenius body, as an Oak, all the parts of which
are Oak, both Root and Branches, although the Root, be not the Branches; and so
Bellarmine egregiously sophisticats, in making Cyprian compare that one
Bishopric to a Tree, as it is an organick body; whereas Cyprian compares it to
an Oak, as it is a similar body.

Secondly, the Whole cannot be the same with any one Part; nor any one part the
whole: Cyprian makes that one Bishopric the whole, and every particular
Bishopric a part. But Bellarmine makes the Bishopric of Peter, and his
successors the whole, or that one Bishopric mentioned by Cyprian; he likewayes
makes it a part, in showing, in what manner, comparatively with others, it has
a share of that one Bishopric, which is the whole, according to his own
confession; and likewayes a part, according to his own confession, which is a
manifest contradiction.

Thirdly, he adds contradiction to contradiction; for in explaining the way how
every Bishopric has a share of that one Bishopric, he grants that every
part, has a full share, but not an equal share; which is a flat contradiction,
since all full shares are equal shares, neither can any full share be more or
less then an other full share. It is true indeed, that one Bishopric, may be
greater in riches, splendour, etc. then an other Bishopric; but they are all
alike Bishoprics: Riches, and Poverty hinders not the Episcopal Dignity and
Jurisdiction, as is affirmed by Hieronymus, in his Epistle to Euagrius; where
he affirms, that the meanest Bishop, is equally a Bishop with the Bishop of
Rome, or Constantinople, which equality of Bishops is in essentialls; for the
superiority of an Archbishop, above a Bishop, is in accidentals, and was a
non-ens in the days of Cyprian; and therefore, he speaks absolutely, without
restriction, of the equality of Bishops. And thus we have showed, with what
admirable Sophistry, Bellarmine endeavors to wrest the meaning of Cyprian;
with whose Testimony Rayinundus Rufus is so pressed, disputing against
Molinaeus, that he taxes the saying of Cyprian as erroneous: because, says
he, Ulpianus affirms, that two persons, cannot have dominion in solidum of one
thing; and therefore Cyprian is in an error in affirming, that every Bishop
has a part of that one Bishopric in solidum.

But it is answered, Rufus is in a mistake, both in the These and in the
Hypothese; he is mistaken in the These, because the Lawyers maintain, that more
persons may have dominion in solidum of one thing, as of via aquae ductus, or
any Comunality, as pasturage, etc. Secondly, he is mistaken in the Hypothese:
for Cyprian is not speaking of the dominion of things; he is only comparing
that one Bishopric, toti similari vel universali, the part of which wholes
equally participate their name, and definition, as all men do the humane
nature, and all Kings are equally Kings: so says Cyprian, all Bishops are
equally Bishops.

Turrianus in his defense against Zadeel lib. 1. cap. 17. grants, that Cyprian
compares that one Bishopric to a similar body, but yet he affirms, that
Cyprian is not to be understood literally; otherwise he cannot be defended
from error: because, says he, if every Bishop have a part in solidum of that
one Bishopric, he has that whole one Bishopric: but he is mistaken, in
confounding similar with dissimilar bodies; for, one having the branch of a
tree, has not all the tree: yet every drop of water has both the name and
definition of the whole Fountain, or is called water, and is water as well as
the whole water of the Fountain. Secondly, Turrianus, to shun this pretended
absurdity, interprets that one Bishopric of Cyprian to be the Church;
likewayes, he interprets those words, whereof every one has a full share, to
be, that every one is bound alike to give an account of his administration: but
he is mistaken in both those glosses; he is mistaken in the first, because
Cyprian expressly distinguishes, that one Bishopric from the Church; for
immediately after those words, unus Episcopatus est, etc. there is one
Bishopric, etc. he subjoynes, una quoque est Ecclesia, etc. there is one
Church, etc. whereby it appears he speaks of one Bishopric and one Church, as
different things: He is likewayes mistaken in his other gloss; for it is false
which he affirms, that every one is tied alike to give an account of his
administration, since it is notorious, that some are tied to a stricter account
then others.

We will close by instancing one other answer, mentioned by Chamier, but he
does not name the Author: the said Author grants, that the meaning of Cyprian
is, that all Bishops are alike Bishops, but he distinguishes quo ad ordinem
Sacerdotalem, and quo ad Jurisdictionem, that is the order of all the Bishops
is alike, but not the Jurisdiction; and therefore, albeit all Bishops be
equally Bishops with the Bishop of Rome, yet they are not equal with him in
Jurisdiction. Hayus, disput. lib. 1. cap. 12. gives the same answer, to that
passage of Hieronymus, Epist. 85. ad Euagrium: we shall discuss that
distinction of Hayus, in the following Book, to which it properly belongs, as
concerning the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, in the interval of
Metropolitans: whereas now we dispute only his Supremacy, in the interval of
Bishops. It is sufficient for the present to answer, that the said distinction
between Order and Jurisdiction is contrary to the meaning of Cyprian; for it
shall appear in the following Chapter, that any Bishop is equal in Jurisdiction
with the Bishops of Rome, as well as in order, in the opinion of Cyprian;
because he affirms in his Oration to the Council of Carthage, that the Bishop
of Rome cannot judge another Bishop, no more then he can be judged by him: but
if that be not an equality in Jurisdiction, there is none at all.

CHAP. VIII. Some Testimonies from Cyprians Oration in the Council of Carthage
explained.
IN the former Chapter we observed, by what sophistry our Adversaries
endeavored to pervert the meaning of Cyprian in that famous passage, found in
his Books de unitate Ecclesiae. But, in sophisticating those following
testimonies of his, uttered in the Council of Carthage, their art is admirable.
From the said Oration, are gathered the following Testimonies: 1. Neither does
any of us constitute himself Bishop of Bishops, to compel by tyrannical terror
his Colleagues to necessity of obedience.

2. Because every Bishop, by the license and liberty of his power, has his own
proper judgment.

3. He cannot be judged by another Bishop, neither can he judge another Bishop.

4. Let us all expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has
power to prefer us, to the Government of the Church, and to judge our actions.

These famous testimonies of Cyprian perplexeth the learned men of the Roman
Church very much; neither do they agree in their answers, as appears by what
follows. When Luther, in the conference at Lypsick, objected those
testimonies to Eccius against the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; Eccius
answered, that Cyprian in those words, no man constitutes himself Bishop of
Bishops, speaks against those only, who without a lawful vocation, obtrudes
themselves upon any Church to govern tyrannically: But this answer is naught,
because Cyprian in those words, is not speaking how Bishops should be
constitute? but of the power which constitute Bishops have; as appears not only
by those words of Cyprian we have cited, but also, by his words uttered after
the reading of the Letters of Jubaianus, in the Council: The question stated in
the Council was, whether those who were baptized by Heretics, should be
re-baptised? Cyprian, after the reading of those Letters, and stating of the
question, desires every one of them to tell their opinion freely, and not to
remove from their communion, those who were of contrary judgment to them: and
then he subjoyns those passages we cited in the beginning of the Chapter, no
man constitutes himself Bishop of Bishops, etc. whereby it is evident, that he
speaks of Bishops already constitute, and not of the vocation of Bishops, as
Eccius affirms.

Sanderus, lib. 6. cap. 4. of his visib. Monarch. answers diversely, 1. that
Cyprian speaks so out of humility, since himself in a manner was Bishop of
Bishops, when he presided several times in a Council: But this answer is
nothing worth, for Cyprian by Bishop of Bishops, means one who takes upon him
to compel his Colleagues to necessity of obedience, as having Jurisdiction
over them: but none will affirm, that he who presides in a Council, has that
power; almost 100, years after Cyprian, it was ordained by the 9. Canon of the
Council of Antioch, that Metropolitans should do nothing without the consent of
other Bishops, as inferior Bishops could do nothing without them: much less in
the times of Cyprian, had he who presided in a Council any Jurisdiction above
his Colleagues; since in his days, there was no Office in the Church above
that of a Bishop, as is believed by many learned men: and he who was Bishop
primae sedis, of the first seat, or chief City of the Province, was constant
President in Provincial Councils, as Cyprian, because he was Bishop of
Carthage; neither had the President of a Council more authority over his fellow
Bishops, then the President of a College of Judges, over his fellow Judges.

Sanderus answers, secondly, that Cyprian in those words, no man makes himself
Bishop of Bishops, etc. is only speaking of those Bishops present at the
Council of Carthage, and means not the Bishops of Rome at all; which is also
the answer of Bellarmine, lib. 2. cap. 16. de pont. Romans and likewayes of
Pamelius, in his Annotations upon the foresaid place of Cyprian.

But it is answered, that Cyprian is speaking of all Bishops, comprehending the
Bishop of Rome, as well as other Bishops: his reasons are general, as is
evident by his words; No man ( says he) makes himself Bishop of Bishops,
because every Bishop has proprium arbitrium, that is, he has as much
authority to utter his judgment as any other, and when his opinion is
delivered, no Bishop has power to compel him to alter it; as he cannot judge
another Bishop, neither can any other Bishop judge him: and therefore, all
Bishops should expect the judgment of Christ, who only can judge their actions.

Secondly, it is false which they affirm, that Cyprian in those expressions,
does not mean by the Bishop of Rome; for, Binius, tom. 1. in his Annotations
upon this Council of Carthage affirms, that those words of Cyprian were,
tacit, directed against Stephanus Bishop of Rome. The question agitated in the
Council was, Whether those who were baptized by Heretics, should be
rebaptized? Stephanus Bishop of Rome was for the negative, Cyprian for the
affirmative; Stephanus, as Binius relates, and Cassander also, consult, art.
37, threatened Cyprian and the Churches of Africa with Excommunication, if they
changed not their Opinion: This Council of Carthage is called, consisting of
eighty seven Bishops; Cyprian in his Oration to the Council, affirms, None of
us makes himself Bishop of Bishops, or takes upon him to compel his
Colleagues, by tyrannical terrors to necessity of obedience; which words, as
Binius observes, were directed against Stephanus Bishop of Rome; because he had
threatened the Bishops of Africa with Excommunication, if they did not alter
their Judgment.

Sanderus answers thirdly, that albeit Cyprian did assert the equality of
Bishops in those words: yet, it was only an equality according to their Order
of Priesthood, not according to their Jurisdiction: albeit the Bishop of Rome
be equal to other Bishops, as he is Bishop, yet he is above them in
jurisdiction; he gives this answer, lib. 7. cap. But it is replied, this
distinction is frivolous, and quite contrary to the meaning of Cyprian, whose
intention in those words, is expressly to assert the equality of Jurisdiction:
and since he aims at the Bishop of Rome, it is evident in his opinion, that any
Bishop is of equal jurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome. How can any be so
impudent to deny, that Cyprian asserts equality of Jurisdiction? since he
expressly affirms, No Bishop can judge another Bishop, nor be judged by him;
Christ is the only judge of Bishops; which in right down terms is, that all
Eishops are equal in Jurisdiction, which none but a Sophister will deny.

It is needless to mention the answers of other Romanists, as of Alanus Copus,
lib. 1. cap. 19. and Dormanus in his English Treatise against Bishop Jewel,
cap. 10. since they are not worth the refuting. The most ingenuous answer of
them all, is that of Stapleton, lib. 11. cap. 7. de princip. fid. doctrine.
where he affirms, that Cyprian in those words, to patronize his error, Utitur
verbis errantium, and that he seems wonderfully to protect Heretics (he means
Protestants) against the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: he calls those
expressions O Cyprian pernicious, if they be not defended by a commodious
Exposition.

But it is answered, the authority of St. Augustine is of more moment, then the
authority of Stapleton, who not only commends those expressions of Cyprian, but
also recommends them to the whole Church, to be taken notice of as so many
Oracles, and that in more places then one, as lib. 2. cap. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3.
lib. 6. cap. 7. against the Donatists. Further, that Stephanus Bishop of Rome
himself, understood those words of Cyprian as the Protestants do, against the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, appears by his excommunicating Cyprian, as
Cassander relates, consult. art. 7. neither read we ever of his reconciliation,
as is confessed by Bellarmine, lib. 2. de con. cap. 5. Neither is it of any
moment, what they object, that in that question of re-baptizing those who were
baptized by Heretics, the affirmative maintained by Cyprian was wrong, and the
negative maintained by Stephanus was right: for, the state of the question with
the Church of Rome in this particular, is, Whether Cyprian was for or against
the Supremacy of the Bishops of Rome? or, whether he did right in opposing the
usurpation of Stephanus? It seems he did, for two reasons, first, because those
expressions of his were recommended by St. Augustine to the whole Church: next,
because notwithstanding of his dying excommunicate by Stephanus, he was held
ever since those times to be a Saint and a Martyr, by the Church of Rome it
self, as he is at this day: whereby it appears, that the ancient Church of
Rome, immediately after the times of Cyprian, had not much regard to the
authority of Stephanus his excommunicating Cyprian. The truth is, Cyprian in
that conflict with Stephanus, was a good Patron of an evil cause; and Stephanus
was a bad Patron of an good Cause: Cyprian was wrong, in maintaining
re-baptization of those who were baptized by Heretics, but he defended it
rightly: Stephanus, who maintained the contrary opinion, was right, but
maintained it badly, that is, by usurpation, arrogance and presumption.

CHAP. IX. Of the contest between Victor Bishop of Rome, and the Bishops of the
East.
WE have in the former Chapters proved, by the testimonies of the Ancients,
that the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome was not believed as an Article of
Faith, in the days of Cyprian, nor any time before unto the days of the
Apostles. We have also showed, with what perplexed sophistry our Adversaries
endeavor to elude the force of those testimonies. In the following Chapters,
we will examine what is objected by our Adversaries, to prove the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome in that interval. If it had been an Article of Faith in the
Church, that the Bishop of Rome was ordained by Peter, to succeed to himself in
that Function of oecumenick Bishop, or that the Bishop of Rome did succeed to
Peter in that Function, the evidence of that succession had been greater, in
these primitive times, then it was afterward: but contrarily, we find the
nearer we come to the Apostles times, the less evidence we find, for the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: whereby it appears, that the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, by reason of his succession to Peter, is but a fiction: neither
was it ever urged, as to jurisdiction, till after the Council of Chalcedon, as
shall appear in the following Books, and the more the times were remote, that
opinion of the succession to Peter increased the more.

That there was no great evidence before the Council of Neice, of the supremacy
of the Bishop of Rome, is acknowledged by Aeneas Silvius, Pope himself, in his
288. Epistle, and yet he was the greatest Antiquary of his time: the truth of
his assertion will appear by our Answers to that which they object, which are
so many testimonies against themselves.

To prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in that interval, they object
nothing (beside what we shall prove forged by testimony of their own Doctors)
before the latter end of the second Age, or beginning of the third; and then
their objections are of two sorts, first actions of Popes; secondly,
tectimonies of Popes and Fathers. What regaird should be had to the actions and
testimonies of Popes, appears by the Commentaries which Pope Aeneas Silvius, or
Pius second, wrote upon the Council of Basile; his words are these, Ne^
considerant miseri quia quae praedicant tantopere verba, aut ipsorum sumorum
pontificum sunt, simbrias suas extendentium, aut illorum qui^eis adulabantur:
that is, neither do those miserable men consider, these testimonies they
magnify so much are either of Popes themselves, enlarging their own interests,
or of their Fathers. We will first treat of the actions of Popes, and next
examine their testimonies.

Before the time of Victor Bishop of Rome, there is no Monument of antiquity
for the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome besides some forgeries, acknowledged by
the most eminent Doctors of that Church, and proved to be forgeries by
unanswerable reasons, as shall appear afterward in the last Chapters of this
Book. The said Victor, about anno, 195. had a difference with the Bishops of
Asia, about the observation of Easter, or Pasch; the Churches of Asia,
pretending a tradition from the Apostle of St. John, observed Easter, according
to the manner of the Jews eating their Passover, and for that reason, were
called quartadecemani. The Churches of the West observed it, as it is now in
the Church of Rome: they object here, that Victor excommunicated the Bishops of
the East for not observing Easter, after the Roman and western fashion: Ergo,
say they, the Bishop of Rome in those days, was oecumenick Bishop; otherwise,
he would not have taken upon him, to exercise Jurisdiction in so remote parts
as in Asia.

But it is answered, usurpation is no title of authority, and by this very
action of Victor, it appears, that the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, or
necessar communion with the Church of Rome, was not believed in those days: as
appears by two reasons;

The first is, the opposition made by the Churches of Asia to that
excommunication of Victor: but it is altogether impossible that they would have
mis-regarded it; if the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, or necessar communion
with the particular Church of Rome, under the pain of damnation, had been an
Article of Faith in those days, as it is now. That those Bishops in the East
slighted the excommunication of Victor, appears by Eusebius, hist. Eccles. lib.
5. cap. 23. and 24. who relates, and brings in Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus in
Asia, pleading their Cause, in an Epistle, written by the consent of them all;
that they had the same tradition, of observing Easter, from the Apostle John:
that it was practiced by Philip the Apostle, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, and
Martyr disciple of John the Apostle; and by the other Bishops, and Martyrs, as
Thraseas, and Sagonius, that they had confirmed their own way, of observing
Easter, in the council of all the Bishops of Asia: and for those reasons, they
were not moved, with the terrors of that excommunication, pronunced against
them by Victor: but it is very unlike they would have so contemned it, if they
had believed the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: If there was any such thing,
as the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: their opposition demonstrats, that
either they were ignorant of it, or else wilfully opposed it; they could not be
ignorant, for who dare affirm, that the Apostles John and Philip, and
Polycarpus the Disciple of John, could be ignorant of so necessar a point of
Salvation? if there had been any such thing. Neither can it be affirmed, that
they wilfully opposed it, for it is a thing incredible that so many holy men
Saints and Martyrs (confessed to be such by the modern Church of Rome it self)
would die out of the communion of the Church of Rome, and in so doing, condemn
themselves eternally: for Bellarmine himself, de pont. Romans lib. 2. cap. 19.
affirms, that it is not found, that ever Victor recalled his excommunication.
And since these holy men, neither could be ignorant, that the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome was an article of Faith (if it had been in these days) neither
would they have opposed it, and contemned Victors excommunication, if they had
known it; it is evinced, that in these days, there was no such article of
Faith, as the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, or necessar communion with the
Church of Rome: yea, notwithstanding of the excommunication of Victor, the
whole Churches of the East, before the Council of Neice, observed Easter in
their own fashion: but it were too hard to affirm, that they were all damned;
which must of necessity be affirmed, if the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
had been an article of Faith in those days: and this much of opposition from
the East, to that decree of Victor.

The second Argument taken from the action of Victor, against the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, is the opposition that it had from the West; although the
whole Bishops of the West were of the same opinion with Victor, anent the
observation of Easter; yet they absolutely condemned his way of proceeding.
For, as Eusebius relates, Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 24. Irenaeus, Bishop of
Lions, in the name of the whole Churches of France, in an Epistle to the said
Victor, (recorded by Eus^ebius, ibid.) expostulates most bitterly with Victor,
not obscurely taxing him of ignorance, and arrogance, for his precipitated
proceeding, objecting to him, the example of his predecessors, Bishops of Rome,
as Pius, Telesphorus, Anicetus, etc. who all of them kept communion with the
Bishops of the East, notwithstanding their observation of Easter, otherwise
then it was observed at Rome: yea, the same Bishops of the West, still kept
communion with the Bishops of the East, notwithstanding their excommunication
by Victor: but they would never have done so, if the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, had been believed in those days, or if necessar communion with the
Church of Rome, had in those times been an article of Faith.

Sanderus, lib. 7. of his visib. Monarch. and with him Bellarmine, prove the
supremacy of Victor in this action by a notable cheat, the more opposition it
had ( says Sanderus) the authority of Victor was the more conspicuous; because
the Council of Neice declared in favor of Victor, against all his opposers; in
decerning that Easter should be observed according to the decree of Victor.

But it is answered, that the Council did so, not for the authority of Victor,
but only because they thought that opinion to be right: it was professed by all
the Churches of the West, and by Irenaeus: but Sanderus will not affirm, that
the Council of Neice followed the authority of Irenaeus. Secondly, albeit the
Council had followed the authority of Victor, or persuaded by his authority,
had made that decree; it does not follow, that Victor had any jurisdiction over
the Council, or the whole Church: Paphnutius made a motion in the Council of
Neice, in the defense of married Priests, the Council all followed his opinion,
as Socrates relates, lib. 1. cap. 8. of his history of the Church; and yet the
said Paphnutius had no supremacy over the Council.

Sanderus instances, that the Council of Neice, in a Letter to the Church of
Alexandria (mentioned by Theodoretus) affirms, that all the Brethren of the
East are resolved to follow the Church of Rome, us (the Council) and you of
Alexandria, in the observation of Easter: where Sanderus and Bellarmine espy
out two things for their advantage; the first is, follow, the second is, that
Romans is put in the first place before us (the Council) whereby they prove the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, above the Council, because Romans is put
before the Council, or us, and also because the Brethren of the East are said
to follow the Romans.

But it is answered, albeit Romans were put before us, or the Council, it does
not follow, that the Church of Rome has any authority over the Council: being
first mentioned in an Epistle, does not import a jurisdiction above another:
Constantine in an Epistle (mentioned by Theodoretus, lib. 1. cap. 10.) writing
of the same business, enumerating a number of Churches, with which these
Churches of the East were resolved in time coming, to observe Easter; places
Spain before France, but it does not follow, that the Church of Spain had any
authority over the Church of France.

Secondly, Bellarmine and Sanderus, following the version of Christhofersone,
translates Theodoretus falsely, his words in the Original are, (...); That is,
So that all the Brethren of the East, who dissented from the Romans and you,
and all those who observed Easter from the beginning, are resolved hereafter to
observe it with you. The sophistry of Sanderus and Bellarmine appears in this,
in stead of these words, are resolved hereafter to observe Easter with you,
which is the Original, they translate, they are resolved hereafter to follow
the Roman, the Council and you, putting in follow for with you. Secondly, in
putting in the Romans and the Council, which is not in the Original: which
words us or the Council, they insert to prove the authority of the Church of
Rome above the Council, Romans being placed by them before the Council. And
this much of that contest of Victor, with the Bishops of Asia, which they
produce to prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, whereas in effect, it
has disproved it.

Such an other business as this, is that contest of Stephanus, Bishop of Rome,
with Cyprian, and the Churches of Africa, about the rebaptising of those who
were baptized by Heretics: which they instance also to prove the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, before the Council of Neice. But since we showed, that the
excommunication of Stephanus was not regairded, that Saint Augustine praised
the opposition of Cyprian to it, and recommended these expressions of Cyprian,
against the usurpation of Stephanus to the whole Church, since 87 Bishops in
that Council of Carthage, condemned the proceedings of Stephanus, since
Cyprian, dying excommunicated, was reputed nevertheless a Saint by Augustine,
and other Fathers, and by the ancient Church of Rome, and also so reputed by
the Modern Church of Rome: that Excommunication of Cyprian by Stephanus is so
far from proving, that the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome was an Article of
Faith in those days, that it demonstrates invincibly the contrary.

CHAP. X. Of Appellations, pretended to prove the Supremacy, of the Bishop of
Rome, in that interval, from the Apostles to the death of Cyprian.
TO these actions of Popes usurping Authority, in that interval, are referred
several pretended Appellations, to the Bishop of Rome, by which they endeavor
to prove, his Supremacy in those times: they mention diverse, Bellarmine makes
use of three; the first is, of the Grand Heretic Marcion, who being
excommunicated, for his prodigious opinion, by his own Father, a Bishop in
Pontus, had his recourse to Hyginus, Bishop of Rome, anno, 142, as Epiphanius
affirms, Here Is. 42. The second is Fortunatus, and Felix, being deposed by
Cyprian in Africa, about anno, 252. fled to Cornelius Bishop of Rome; as is
related by Cyprians Epistle, 55. The third is a little after the same time;
Basilides, and Martialis, being deposed by the Bishops of Spain, (as is
reported by Cyprians epistle, 68.) fled to Stepahnus, Bishop of Rome; of which
in order, and first of Marcion.

This Marcion, was a notorious and dangerous Heretic: against whom Tertullian,
and Epiphanius, most bitterly enveigh: he denied the verity of Christ's humane
nature, and the verity of his sufferings; he denied also the resurrection of
the body: he maintained, that men might be thrice baptized. His Father was a
Bishop or Preacher in Pontus, by whom he was excommunicated: he fled to Rome,
desiring to be admitted to the communion of that Church; but he was rejected by
the Clergy of Rome: he asked them a reason, they answered, they could not
admit him, without a testimonial from his Father the Bishop, who had
excommunicated him, as is reported by Epiphanius. It is very strange, that
Bellarmine should call this an appellation, since the Clergy of Rome refused to
hear him; neither did he appeal at all, as appears, both by the reason
wherefore he left his own Country, and also by his demands at Rome.

The first is related by Epiphanius, who tells, he fled from his own Country,
not enduring the scoffs of the common people: his demands at Rome are likewayes
related by Epiphanius, viz. not to take knowledge in his cause, in a second
judgment, which is the demand of Appellants; but only to be admitted to the
communion of that Church; which are also refused him, as is affirmed by
Epiphanius.

When he was rejected at Rome, he associated himself with one Cerdon: those two
hatched an opinion of three gods; the first they called the good God, which
created nothing at all that is in this world; the second they called a visible
god, Creator of all things; the third god was the devil, whom they made as a
mid-thing, between the visible and the invisible god. Cerdon before he was
acquainted with Marcion, asserted only two gods, the one author of all good
things, the other of all evil things: but after his aquaintance with Marcion,
they both taught these three gods: this damnable heresy, wounderfully
increased in many places; as Italy, Egypt, Palestine, Arabia, Syria, Cyprus,
Persia, and other places; which caused Tertullian and Epiphanius inveigh so
bitterly against it in their Books.

Bellarmine his second instance of Appellations, is of Fortunatus and
Felicissimus, the story is this; Felicissimus and Novatian were condemned at a
Council of Carthage; Felicissimus for averring, that those who had lapsed to
Idolatry, in time of persecution, should be admitted to office of the Church,
after pen ance: Novation, for maintaining, that they might not be admitted to
communion at all, no not after penance: the Church of Carthage takes a midway,
decerning, that after penance they might be admitted to communion, but not to
their charge in the Church.

Felicissimus, who had fallen in Idolatry himself, and for that reason was
debarred from his charge, conspires with one Privatus, who was excommunicated
as well as himself: they make a faction, and sets up one Fortunatus, Bishop of
Carthage, in oposition to Cyprian; and immediately goes to Rome, desiring of
Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, to be admitted to communion with that Church,
desiring him to countenance their new Bishop Fortunatus. Cornelius refuses at
first, to hear them; but afterward they use Menaces; whereupon he writes to
Cyprian his intimate friend, in their favor.

It is demanded of Bellarmine, how he finds any Appellation here? The cause is
almost the same with that of Marcion, which we now mentioned, yea, Pamelius
himself in his Annotations, upon that place of Cyprian, denies expressly there
was any appellations, but that these went to Rome, to complain, or to be
judged, not in those things in which they had been already judged by Cyprian,
but in other things.

Secondly, albeit there had been any appellations, it was opposed by Cyprian,
for two reasons; first, because delinquents should be judged where the crime is
committed where witnesses may be had against them. Secondly, because the
authority of the Bishops in Africa was no less, (who had already judged them)
then the authority of the Bishop of Rome, to whom they had their recourse.

Bellarmine answers to both these reasons; to the first he gives a twofold
answer, first, that the meaning of Cyprian is to be understood de prima
instantia, that is, persons should be judged where the crime is committed, the
first time only; but if they appeal, they should be judged in that place, to
which they appeal. But he Sophisticates, for Cyprian is opposing a second
judgment at Rome, after they had been condemned in Carthage, as is notorious
by the History.

Bellarmine answers, Secondly, that Cyprian is against a second judgment or
appellation, when the crime is manifest, and not when it is dubious. But it is
replied, that manifest or unmanifest crime does not take away appellation, if
the appellation be otherwise legal, or it the Judge to whom they appeal, have
jurisdiction over him, from whom they have appealed: Neither does Cyprian
distinguish* between manifest and not manifest crimes at all. Secondly,
Bellarmine contradicts himself, in affirming, that the meaning of Cyprian is
that they may appeal to Rome, when the cause is dubious, but not when it is
manifest; which distinction Bellarmine admits, viz. that there should be no
appellation when the crime is manifest; and yet in this case of Fortunatus, and
Felix, the crimes were manifest: and Bellarmine instances their appellations as
legal, which is a flat contradiction: and this much of Bellarmines answer to
Cyprians first reason, viz. That Crimes should be judged where they are
committed.

He yet instances, that if that reason of Cyprians were valid, it would cut off
all appellations, for there can be no appeal, if crimes be judged where they
are committed, But it is replied, that Cyprian adds, when the authority of
those who have already judged them, is no less then the authority of those to
whom they appeal; for immediately after those words, crimes should be judged
where they are committed, he restricts his meaning by the comparison of
authority, except ( says he) the authority of the Bishops of Africa, be
thought not sufficient by those profligate fellows who were judged by them.

Bellarmine instances, those words of Cyprian, are not comparing the authority
of the Bishops of Africa, with the authority of the Bishop of Rome: but only,
with the cause of Fortunatus, and Felix: that is, the authority of the Bishop
in Africa, is sufficient to judge that case: but it is answered, although that
were the meaning of Cyprian, it cutts off all appellations to Rome: for if the
authority of the Bishops of Africa, be sufficient in that case of Fortunatus
and Felix, they cannot be rejudged at Rome, in a second judgment. Secondly,
albeit ^yprian for modesties sake, does not name the authority of the Church of
Rome, in the comparison: (for he was a great respecter of Cornelius Bishop of
Rome) yet, that this is his meaning, appears more evidently by those speeches
of his, uttered against Stephanus Bishop of Rome afterward, in an other Council
of Carthage, which we mentioned in the former Chapter; where he expressly
affirms, that all Bishops, are of a like jurisdiction: And this much of
Bellarmine. Pamelius answers this passage of Cyprian otherwise, with a world
of Sophistry.

And first he affirms* that Cyprian in those words, is not disputing against a
second judgment at Rome, but against a judgment at Rome, in the case of
Fortunatus, and Felix in prima instantia; and therefore he uses these words,
the crime should be judged where it is committed; alluding to an Epistle
Decretal of Fabianus Bishop of Rome, in which it is expressly ordained, that no
Bishop should be judged at Rome, per Saltum, that is, until he be first judged,
where he is accused to have transgressed. So if ye object to Pamelius, that
Fortunatus and Felix, were already judged in Africa, and went to Rome to demand
a second hearing: he answers, they did not demand a recognoscing of these
things, for which they had been already judged; but desired of Cornelius Bishop
of Rome, that he would be judge in things afterward laid to their charge by the
Bishops of Africa, which were not yet judged by them. But it is replied, it is
false, that Pamelius affirms, for it appears expressly ^y Cyprians Letter, that
he disputes against a second judgment at Rome, and not a judgment in Prima
instantia; whereas Pamelius affirms, that new crimes were intended, which had
not been yet judged: it is his bare assertion, neither brings he any proof of
it; for if any such thing had been, a judgment in prima instantia could not
have been with any shadow of justice countenanced at Rome: neither could
Felicissimus be so ignorant, as to expect any redress that way; the Scope of
Felicissimus complaint was, that he and Fortunatus might be restored, because
the judgment of the African Bishops passed against them was unjust.

Pamelius instances secondly, that it was a first judgment or in prima
instantia, which Felicissimus demanded at Rome, or else it was an appellation;
seeing there can be no mids, but there is no mention made of appellation at all
by Cyprian, Ergo, it was a judgment in prima instantia which they demanded at
Rome; and for which Cyprian so much expostulats with Cornelius, and inveighs
against them.

It is answered first, how this passage of Cyprian puzles them, appears by
their contradictions in their glosses: Bellarmine instances this particular of
Felicissimus, as an appellation, to prove the jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome, over the Bishops in Africa: Pamelius flatly denis, that Felicissimus
appealed at all; which is a flat contradiction of Bellarmine: he takes this
course, perceiving, that if this particular of Felicissimus were an
appellation, Cyprian must of necessity be against the supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome; since he expressly disputs, that Felicissimus cannot be judged at Rome,
and consequently Pamelius confesses, that Bellarmines evasions are nothing to
the purpose.

It is answered, secondly, (whereas Pamelius disputes Felicissimus did not
appeal, Ergo he demanded a judgment in prima instantia) it does not follow,
because there is a mids: Felicissimus did make no appeal, when he came out of
Africa, neither desired he a second judgment at Rome, as it had been a formal
appeal: out only desired, the assistance of Cornelius, that by his moyen he
might have some redress: that this is no evasion, appears by two unanswerable
reasons; the first is this,

Cyprian in his 55. Epistle affirms, that they had solicited the Bishops in
Africa, before ever they had solicited the Bishop of Rome, making the same
complaints: but none will affirm, that they appealed to those Bishops of
Africa, after they had been condemned by the Council of Carthage, over which
the Bishops of Africa had no authority; in which doing they followed the
example of Privatus, who after he was condemned both in the Council of Africa
and at Rome by Cornelius himself, yet he desired a second judgment, in another
Council in Africa, whereby it is evident, that a second judgment in those
days, did not infer of necessity, a formal appellation, since there could be
no appellation from a Synod to its self: neither will Bellarmine affirm, that
Privatus appealed from Cornelius to a Council in Africa.

The second reason proving a mids between an Appeal and a judgment in prima
instantia, is this: we have proved, that Felicissimus did not demand a
judgment in prima instantia from Cornelius Bishop of Rome; but neither did he
appeal unto him for an Appealer is held Pro non judicato or not guilty, till
the appeal be discussed; but so was not Felicissimus, for all held him guilty
in Africa, and refused communion with him: neither did Cornelius admit him to
his communion at Rome, after he was condemned by the Council of Carthage:
neither did Cornelius judge in his cause at all, but only wrote unto Cyprian to
deal favorably with him. Since then, Cyprian disputed so vehemently, that
Cornelius should not meddle in that case of Felicissimus, after the
determination of the Council of Carthage; much more he would have opposed the
authority of Cornelius, if there had been any formal appellation: and all what
Bellarmine and Pamelius allege to the contrary, is proved sophistry, the one
contradicting the other, and this much of Fortunatus and Fellicissimus.

The third example of Appellations (in this interval before the Council of
Neice) instanced by Bellarmine, is this, Cornelius Bishop of Rome dying, Lucius
succeeds; but he not living long, Stephanus succeeds, in whose time the Bishops
of Spain excommunicat Basilides a Bishop, and likewayes one Martialis, for
falling in Idolatry, or sacrificing to Idols, in the time of persecution, for
fear of torture, or death: Basilides becomes penitent, demands absolution,
which they grant him; but withal, they refuse to restore him to his Bishopric,
in which they put another called Sabinus. Basilides and Martialis have their
recourse to Stephanus Bishop of Rome; he takes not so much notice of Martialis,
but he writes to the Bishops of Spain to restore Basilides to his place: they
consult the Bishops of Africa, who meeting in a Council about the business, the
Bishops of Africa send their opinion in an Epistle (which in the edition of
Turnebius is Epist. 35. in that of Pamelius, 68. of Cyprian) in which Epistle,
Cyprian inveighs against Basilides as an Impostor, taxes Stephanus of
credulity, in giving ear to Basilides, and concludes, that the cesire of
Stephanus should not be obeyed, since Sabinus was legally put in the place of
Basilides, and therefore they ought to maintain him in that Bishopric.

Here Bellarmine is demanded, what he sees in this History making for the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome over the Bishops of Spain? or for proving
that Basilides appealed formally? It would seem, that Basilides appealed not,
since he was held pro judicato* excommunicated, deposed, and another put in his
Bishopric; which could not have been done, if Appeals to Rome had been
believed obligatory in those days. Secondly, Cyprian and the Council of Africa
advise the Bishops of Spain, not to obey the desire of Stephanus in rescinding
the ordination of Sabinus, affirmed by them to be legal ( Jure ordinata) but if
Basilides had appealed, the ordination of Sabinus had not been lawful; whereby
it is evident, that no appeals to Rome were approved in those days, albeit
Basilides had appealed.

Bellarmine answers, that Basilides did appeal, because he had his recourse to
Stephanus, and complained: But it is replied, first, that was no appeal,
because he made no intimation of it to the Bishops of Spain, before he went to
Rome. Secondly, because his going to Rome, did not hinder or suspend the
execution of the sentence passed against him, as appears by the placing of
Sabinus in his Bishopric in the interim. Thirdly, when he came to Rome, he
brought no probations with him, but only as Cyprian affirms, Stephanum long
positum and rei gestae ignarum fefellit; that is, he deceived Stephanus Bishop
of Rome, altogether ignorant of the business. Lastly, if Basilides had
appealed, the Bishops of Spain had been cited to plead the cause at Rome, which
they were not, whereby it is evident there was no appeal.

Secondly, to prove the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, Bellarmine
alleges, that Stephanus commanded the Bishops of Spain to repone Basilides,
and rescind that ordination they had made in favor of Sabinus. But it is
answered (to omit, we showed it was no formal sentence of Stephanus, but only
an advice) Bellarmine ^orgets the other half of the tale, quite destroying the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; as first, that the Bishops of Spain (before
they gave an answer to Stephanus) consulted with the Bishops of Africa, whereby
it is evident, they acknowledged not the jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome.
Secondly, the Bishops of Africa, meeting in a Council, advises them not to obey
the desire of Stephanus, in rescinding their ordination of Sabinus, because it
was Rite peracta, or legal, and consequently Stephanus had no authority to
command them. Thirdly, because the Bishops of Spain did not obey the desire of
Stephanus, at least it is not found in any monument of Antiquity, that ever
Basilides was restored.

Bellarmine instances, that Stephanus would never have taken it upon him, to
cognosce in the cause of Basilides, if it had not belonged to him: But it is
answered, first, he did not cognosce formally in it at all, as we showed.
Secondly, albeit he had, it was only an usurpation, which is no title of the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. We do not affirm that Stephanus had not so
much arrogance, since he declared he had, as appears by his proceeding with the
Churches of Africa, mentioned in the former Chapter: we only affirm, that he
did not cognosce formally in this case of Basilides, but only dealt by way of
persuasion: and although he had done so, it is no Argument for the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, as an Article of Faith in those days; since it was
everywhere opposed, as we proved by that passage of Victor, with the oriental
Bishops, and of Stephanus with Cyprian, and this of Stephanus with the Bishops
of Spain: by which passages it appears, that the decrees of the Bishop of Rome
were opposed in all the East, in France, in Africa, in Spain, that is, almost
by the whole Church. And this much of appellations to Rome, before the days of
Cyprian.

CHAP. XI. The testimonies of Ignatius, Irenaeus and Tertullian, objected to
prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, before the times of Cyprian,
examined.
IN the two former Chapters, we answered all what the Learned Romanists could
pretend, to prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, before the middle of the
third Century, by usurpations of Bishops of Rome and appellations: They next
endeavor to prove it by testimonies of Fathers, which are of two sorts; 1.
wrested; 2. forged. In this Chapter and the next following, we will examine the
first sort; and then we will conclude this Book, with examining the last. The
Fathers, whose testimonies they wrest, are either Greek, or Latin: The Greek
Fathers are Ignatius, and Irenaeus; the Latin Fathers, by them alleged are,
Tertullian, and Cyprian: We will speak of the Greek Fathers, and also of
Tertullian in this Chapter, and will answer these testimonies of Cyprian in the
Chapter next following. And first of Ignatius, from whom they allege the
inscription of his Epistle written to the Romans, which is this, Ignatius to
the Sanctified Church presiding in the region of the Romans; thus the place is
alleged by Bellarmine, whereas the Greek has (...); that is, which presides
in the place of the region of the Romans: wherefore they render it so? this is
the reason; Barronius ad annum. 45. number. 10. observes, that the Roman Church,
and the Catholic Church were believed to be the same; and therefore, they
translate Ignatius, affirming the Church of Rome, to Preside in the region of
the Romans, that is (says Bellarmine and Bozius) Presiding in the Catholic
Church.

But it is answered, first, that it was not the custom, in the days of
Ignatius, to call the Roman-church, the Catholick-church: or where they spoke
of the Roman-church, to mean by it the Catholick-church: first, because the
oldest testimony we have of that kind, is in the days of Theodosius junior,
Victor Uticensis, and Gregorius Turonensis: that is, not till 300. years after
Ignatius; and 400. after Christ. Secondly, that manner of phrase had its
Original from the Arians; the said Gregorius Turonensis, in his Book, De Gloria
martyrum, cap. 25. brings in an Arian Prince, calling the Orthodox-church, the
Roman-church: or Orthodox-christians, Romans. Thirdly, that manner of speaking
had its Original, from a politic reason; and not from an Ecclesiastical: In
those days the Goths, Alans, and Vandals made war upon the Romans; the first
three were Arians, the Romans Orthodox: and therefore, because all the Orthodox
Christians partied the Romans in that war, they called them all Romans; their
Faith, the Roman Faith; their Church the Roman Church: as the Turks at this
day, call all Christians Francks, or Frenchmen. Fourthly, as we said, they
translate Ignatius falsely; for his words are, to the Church presiding in Loco,
regionis Romanorum, in the place of the region of the Romans: whereby it
evidently appears, that the meaning of Ignatius is no other, then the Church
presiding in the Town of Rome; since none can affirm by these words, he means
otherwise, or that the Church of Rome presides in the whole Church; since he
particularizes the presidency, and restricts it to a certain-place, of the
region of the Romans: and therefore, they sophisticate egregiously, in
translating Ignatius, Presiding in the region of the Romans. Since the Romans
(say they) at that time commanded the whole world, Ignatius by a Church
Presiding in the region of the Romans, understands a Church Presiding in the
whole world: whereas the words of Ignatus impart no more, but a Church
presiding in a certain place, of the region of the Romans, Which is further
confirmed, because we showed before, from these two Epistles of Ignatius to the
Trallians, and Magnesians, that he acknowledged no Office in the Church, above
that of a Bishop: but he could not be so forgetful of himself, as in this
Epistle, to acknowledge the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as Bellarmine and
Bozius pretends he does; which is further confirmed, by the testimony of
Basilius Epists 8. where he affirms, that Iconium presides in a part of
Pisidia, which is just such an other expression as that of Ignatius.

We could defend the meaning of Ignatius, not to make much for them, although
they had translated him faithfully; that is, if he had said Presiding in the
region of the Romans: for, from these words it can no more be gathered, that
the Bishop of Rome is oecumenick Bishop, then it can prove the Bishop of Ments,
or the Bishop of Carthage, oecumenick Bishop; because they preside in the
region of Carthage, etc. for in the days of Ignatius, as we said, none were
called Romans, but those who lived within the precinct, or particular command
of the City: and this much of Ignatius.

Now follows Irenaeus, from whom they bring a testimony by them much
magnified; the passage is this, speaking of the Church of Rome, ad hanc enim
ecclesiam, propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire
ecclesiam, hoc est eos qui sunt undique, fideles, in qua Semper ab his qui Sunt
undique conservata est ea, quae ab Apostolis est traditio. The substance is,
all Churches should accord with the Church of Rome, for two reasons, first,
because of its more powerful principality; the next is, because Apostolical
tradition is preserved in that Church. But this place makes not much for them,
as appears by Irenaeus scope; this passage is found, lib. 3. cap. 13. in which
Chapter he is disputing against Heretics; which were the perfect Scriptures?
he wills them for their satisfaction, to consult with the ancient Churches,
which successively descended from the Apostles: and for instance sake,
proponeth unto them the Church of Rome; his meaning is then, in those words,
whatever the Church of Rome at that time thought perfect Scriptures, all
Churches about were bound to acknowledge them for such; first, by reason of its
more powerful principality, that Church being founded by the Apostles Paul and
Peter ( as was believed then) Secondly, because it has been thought by
Churches about to have purely preserved that tradition of the Canon of
Scripture, which it had received from the Apostles: so that the meaning of
Irenaeus is no other then this, that all are bound to accord to that Church, so
long as it preserves the perfect Canon of Scripture, and teaches no other
Doctrine then is contained in it, by this testimony of Irenaeus, we are bound
no more to adhere to the Church of Rome, then it adhereth to the Scripture.

But they instance, Irenaeus simply, without such restrictions, affirms, that
all should accord to the Church of Rome, because it observes the apostolic
tradition; which is as much, say they, as the Church of Rome cannot make an
Apostasy. But it is replied, first, although Irenaeus affirmed, that in those
times, the Church of Rome preserved the pure Canon of the Scripture; yet, he
does not affirm, that in all times coming it would do so. The Church of Rome at
this day, observes not that Cannon of the Scripture, which was observed in the
days of Irenaeus; the Council of Trent, under the pain of an Anathema adds to
the Canon of the Scriptures, these Books commonly called Apocrypha, which were
rejected by the Church of Rome, in the days of Irenaeus, as shall be proved in
its own place, by the testimonies of the most eminent Doctors of the Roman
Church; to omit the testimonies of almost all the Fathers, by whose testimonies
it shall be proved, that in the days of Irenaeus, the Churches of Rome, Asia,
Africa, Egypt, etc. rejected those Books canonized by the Council of Trent: and
therefore, they must of necessity affirm, that either the Modern Church of
Rome, or the Council of Trent, excommunicates all these, who accord with the
Church of Rome, in the Canon of the Scripture, in the days of Irenaeus: or
else they have made a defection themselves, from that Church, which was in the
days of Irenaeus: The Council of Trent makes those Books Canonical, with an
Anathema to those who shall not acknowledge them for such, but the Church of
Rome, in the days of Irenaeus, rejected them as Apocryphal, as is proved by
the testimonies of Ruffinus in Symbulo apud Cyprianum, and Hieronymus in his
preface upon the Books of the Kings, and prologo Galeato, tom. 3. That all
other Churches accorded with the Church of Rome, in that Canon of the
Scriptures, is proved by an induction of them all: as the east Church, as is
testified by Melito, the Church of Jerusalem; as is testified by Cyril, of
Alexandria, witness Athanas and Origin, of France; as is testified by
Hilarious, of Asia, Council. Loadicenum, of Constantinople; Nazianz, and
Damascen. These testimonies are acknowledged by Bellarmine himself for the most
part, lib. 1. cap. 20. de verbo Dei.

Secondly, that Irenaeus in these words, means no other according with the
Church of Rome, then in as far as it preserves the truth, appears further, not
only by his keeping communion with the Bishops of the East, notwithstanding of
their excommunication by Victor; but likewayes by his sharply rebuking of
Victor, taxing him of Ignorance, and Arrogance, for his proceeding in such a
manner: by which it evidently appears, that neccessar communion with the Church
of Rome was no article of faith in the opinion of Irenaeus, much less the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and this much of Irenaeus.

Now we come to the Latin Fathers; the first passage alleged is of
Tertullianus de pudicitia, where he calls Victor Bishop of Rome, Bishop of
Bishops: But it is answered, first, albeit he did so, it proves not Victor was
oecumenick Bishop; because we read that James is so called by Clement, Lupus is
so called by Sidonius, lib. 6. epist. 1. Marcus Bishop of Alexandria, is called
also Bishop of Bishops, by Theodorus Balsamon, in his answers to the
Interrogations of the said Marcus: but Bellarmine will not affirm, that James,
or L^pus, or Marcus were oecumenick Bishops.

Secondly, Tertullian in that place; calling Victor Bishop of Bishops, does so
Ironice or in mockery, as appears by the occasion of his calling him so, which
was this: Victor made a decree of admitting fornicators or whoremongers too
easily to the communion of the Church, in the opinion of Tertullian. Speaking
of that decree, Tertullian affirms, Episcopus Episcoporum nuper edidit Edictum,
etc. The Bishop of Bishops has now put forth an Edict, and falls too
immediately and disputes against it: whereby it appears, that he did not
acknowledge the supremacy of Victor: that he is mocking him, appears further,
by his calling that decree of Victor, Edictum, an edict, but Emperors only set
forth Edicts, and so he calls Victor Bishop of Bishops, in the same sense that
he calls his decree an Edict, which none can deny to be in mockery.

They allege another passage from Tertullian in his prescript. 76. against
heretics; this passage is objected by Pamelius, and is this, If ye live in the
adjacent places to Italy, ye have Rome, from whence we have also Authority.
Tertullian himself then lived in Africa, whence they conclude from these words
we have Authority, that the Bishop of Rome had Jurisdiction in Africa in the
opinion Tertullian. But it is answered, this place resembles very much that of
Irenaeus, which we now discussed; his scope in these words, is to arm his
Readers against heresies; among other prescriptions, he prescribs this fore
one, that all should strive to inform themselves what is the Doctrine of those
Churches which were founded by the Apostles, and then to conform themselves to
that Doctrine. And first, says he, If ye live in Achaia consult the Church of
Corinth; if ye live not far from Macedonia, consult the Church of Philippi, and
Thessalonica; if ye live in Asia, consult the Church of Ephesus; if ye live in
the adjacent parts to Italy, follow the Church of Rome; from which (says he)
we also in Africa have our authority, because it is the nearest Apostolic
Church. Observe, he calls Apostolic Churches those who were founded by the
Apostles themselves, as that of Philippi, Corinth, Thessalonica by Paul, that
of Ephesus by St. John, that of Rome by Peter and Paul: whence it is easy to
conjecture, what is the meaning of Tertullian: for by these words, from whence
we have our Authority, it follows no more, that the Church of Rome has
jurisdiction in Africa, then it follows, that the Church of Ephesus, or
Antiochia have jurisdiction over all Asia; or, that the Church of Corinth has
jurisdiction over all Achaia. His meaning then assuredly is, that albeit one be
not under the jurisdiction of the nearest Apostolic Church; yet it is the
surest way, to preserve your self from Heresy, to follow the Faith of that
Church, because it is most like, that those Churches, who were founded by the
Apostles themselves, are least obnoxious to defection.

Secondly, that Tertullian did not dream of any such thing as the infalibity of
the Church of Rome, or supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as a necessar article
of faith, appears, not only by his disputing expressly against that decree of
Victor, Bishop of Rome, which we now mentioned; but also, by several other
passages of Tertullian, in the said prescriptions, and else where. Beatus
Rhenanus in his Argument to the same book of Tertullian, de prescrip, printed
at Basil, anno. 1521. (which Rhenanus was a Popish Doctor, and exquisitly
versed in the Writings of the Fathers, and especially of Tertullian, upon whom
he commented) has these expressions; Tertullian, (says he) does not confine
the Chatholick Church to the Church of Rome, he does not esteem so highly of
the Church of Rome, as they do now a days; he reckons her with other
Churches, and admonishes his Reader to enquire, as well what milk the Church
of Corinth gave, as that of Rome: In which words, he means the same very
passage of Tertullian which we now explained, and vindicated from the Sophistry
of Pamelius: at last he concludes, if Tertullian were now alive, and should say
so much, he could not escape unpunished; and this much Rhenanus avouched, when
he had the use of his tongue: but the index, expurgatorius belgicus, page 78.
has gagged his mouth with a deleantur hec verba, and so they are not now found
in the Editions of Rhenanus, printed since in those places, where the Pope has
jurisdiction. They had reason to purge out those words from Rhenanus, because
the testimony of his was as a Poyniard, sticking in the very bowels of that
article of the Catechize of the Council of Trent, viz. that there is no
salvation without communion with the Church of Rome

CHAP. XII. Several passages objected out of Cyprian, to prove the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome, in that interval; vindicated from Sophistry.
THe last Father they make use of, to prove the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, in that interval, between the times of the Apostles, and the death of
Cyprian, is Cyprian himself. There is not a Father of them all more urged, to
prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, then Cyprian; and yet it is most
certain, that it never had a greater enemy then he: what Cyprians opinion was
anent that contest, appeared in the former Chapters, both by his testimonies,
and his actions: Our adversaries dispute two ways for the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, out of Cyprian: first by sophistry, next by forgery: we will
refute the first in this Chapter, and prove the second in the Chapters
following; and that by the testimonies of the greatest Antiquaries, that ever
the Church of Rome produced.

The first testimony of Cyprian, they bring is, from his 42. Epistle, where
writing to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, he has these words, Some while ago, we
sent some of our Colleagues to compose some differences, or to reduce some
schismatics to the unity of the Chatholick Church, etc. and a little after But
those Schismatics set up to themselves an adulterous head against the Church;
from which place, Bellarmine reasons thus, as those Novatians set up one to be
heaa of their Church, or of the whole Church of the Novatians; so Cornelius was
head of the Catholic Church.

But it is answered, this reasoning is very unbeseeming such a learned man as
Bellarmine: for the meaning of Cyprian is no other, then that the Novatians set
up to themselves a Bishop at Rome, in opposition to Cornelius; so he calls the
Novatian Bishop, an adulterous head, contrary to Cornelius, who was the true
head of the particular Church at Rome, because he was the true Bishop thereof:
and so Cyprian does not mean any head of the whole Church, but only by Head, he
means Bishop of the particular Church of Rome.

Bellarmine instances, that Cyprian affirms, his intention was to reconcile
those Shismaticks to the Catholic Church; by which he means the Church of
Rome, and since the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church, and the Bishop of
Rome head of the Church of Rome, Ergo, he is head of the Catholic Church.

But it is answered when Cyprian calls the Church of Rome the Catholic Church,
his meaning is a particular Church professing the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church; and therefore, they who were reconciled to the Church of Rome, were
reconciled to the Catholic Church also: so any reconciled to a particular
Church, professing the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, is reconciled also to
the Catholic Church, and yet that particular Church is not the Catholic
Church. That this is the meaning of Cyprian, appears, by the preceding
Epistle, or epist. 41. where speaking of some Schismatics in the Church of
Carthage, he affirms they opposed themselves to the Catholic Church: he means,
they opposed themselves to the Church of Cathage, inwhich doing, they opposed
themselves to the Catholic Church; because the Church of Cathage, professed
the same Doctrine, with the Catholic Church, in opposing or renting the Church
of Carthage, they rent and opposed the Catholic Church.

Pamelius, urges, that Cyprian affirms, that those Schismatics refused the
bosom of the root and mother Church: where observe, says he, that Cyprian
calls the Church of Rome, the root and the mother of all Churches, or of the
Catholic Church, which Epithet is given by Cyprian to the Church of Rome, not
only in this epistle, but also in his 45. epist to Cornelius: in which he gives
injunctions to those he was sending to Rome, (to be informed concerning that
schism of the Novatians) that they should acknowledge and adhere to the Root
and Mother of the Catholic Church.

But it is answered, that Cyprian by Root and Mother of the Catholic Church,
means no other thing, but the Catholick-Church it self, as appears by the said
45. Epistle; in which he affirms to Cornelius, that hearing that there was a
schism in the Church of Rome, he sent Caldonius and Fornatus, to be informed of
the truth of the business, and to adhere to neither party, till they were
informed which of the factions was in the right? and which in the wrong? and
for that reason, he did not direct his Letters, either to Cornelius, or to that
Novatian Bishop; but only to the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome, that being
informed by them, they might adhere to those, who held and acknowledged the
Root and Mother of the Catholic Church: whereby it is evident, that Cyprian
did not believe, that Cornelius Bishop of Rome, or those who adhered to him,
were the root and mother of the Catholic Church, since he gave his messengers
injunction, to suspend their Judgments, till they were informed, who adhered to
the root and mother of the Catholic Church, that is, who maintained the true
Faith, or who were members of the Catholic Church, for if Cyprian had
believed, that Cornelius and his faction, had been the root and mother of the
Catholic Church, he would not have enjoined his messengers to suspend their
judgment, till they were informed by the Presbyters and Deacons: so it is
evident, that Cyprian by Root and Mother of the Catholic Church, means the
Catholic Church it self, both in his 45. and 42. Epistle; and in the same
sense, epist. 43. and 44. he exhorts them to return to their mother, that is,
to the unity of the Catholic Church.

The second passage of Cyprian is found in his 55. Epistle, where he has these
words, That the occasion of Heresies and Schisms in the Church is only this,
that the Priest of God is not obeyed, and that it is not believed, that one
Priest, as Judge in place of Christ for a time, is in the Church. This place is
much urged by Pamelius, in his Annotations upon the said Epistle, to prove an
oecumenick Bishop.

But it is answered, Cyprian in this Letter or Epistle, is inveighing against
those, who had set up one Fortunatus (as we showed before) Bishop of Carthage,
in opposition to himself: and his meaning is not, that there should be one
Bishop in the Catholic Church, but only one Bishop in a particular Church, or
the Church of Carthage: because two Bishops, in one place, occasions Schisms,
and Heresies, says Cyprian: so its evident, that Cyprian is pleading his own
cause, disputing against those who had set up a Schismatic Bishop, in the
Church of Carthage, in opposition to himself, and then went to Rome, and
calumniated him to Cornelius: it had been impertinent in Cyprian, in this
question, to bring in mention of an oecumenick Bishop; the whole dispute of
Cyprian consists in these two Sylogismes, the first is, who rise up in
opposition to their lawful Bishop; will assuredly be punished by God.

But those men, Fortunatus and Felicissimus, rise up against their lawful
Bishop.

Ergo, God will assuredly punish them.

The second Sylogisme is this, who are the occa^ion of Heresies and Schisms,
will be punished:

But who rise against their lawful Bishop, are the occasion of Heresies, and
Schisms.

Ergo, etc.

By which disputations of Cyprians, it is evident, that by one Bishop he does
not mean an oecumenick Bishop, but any Bishop of a particular charge; because
if by one Bishop he had meaned, an oecumenick Bishop, the minor of his first
Sylogisme is notoriously false: ^or, Fortunatus and Felicissimus, did not rise
up against an oecumenick Bishop, but only against Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage.

But Pamelius instances, first, that Cyprian cites several testimonies of
Scripture, in this dispute, which did quadrate only to the high Priest of the
Jews: And therefore, those words of Cyprian are more fitly to be understood of
an oecumenick Bishop. But it is answered, Pamelius plays the Sophister three
ways: First, it is false, that these passages cited by Cyprian, are only
applyable to the high Priest of the Jews; first, he cites those words of
Moses, Deutr. 17. what ever man, who out of Pride, shall not hearken to the
Priest and Judge who shall be in those days, that man shall die. But that
Moses is not speaking here of the High Priest, but of any Priest, a very child
may perceive, who reads that Chapter of Deuteronomie, or the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
verses of it.

Secondly, Pamelius Sophisticates, in omitting those passages cited by Cyprian,
which cannot be applied to the High Priest only: as that of Matthew. 8. 4. Go
show thy self unto the Priests, and that of Luke, 10. 16. he that hears you
hears me, etc.

Thirdly, Pamelius Sophisticates egregiously, in concluding Cyprian to mean in
those words, an oecumenick Bishop, by reason of his citation of those
testimonies of Scripture: for Cyprian in his Epistle to Rogatianus, and in
another Epistle to Florentius, cites all those very places, which he cites in
this 55. Epistle to Cornelius, to prove that none should oppose their Bishop:
But Pamelius himself, in his Annotations upon both those Epistles, confesses,
that neither in the one nor the other, Cyprian speaks of an oecumenick Bishop:
in the one, he speaks of Rogatianus, in the other, he speaks of himself, as he
does in this 55. Epistle.

Pamelius objects, Secondly, that Cyprian here speaks of a Bishop who is Judge
in place of Christ. But it is answered, Cyprian in those words, means not an
oecumenick Bishop, but any Bishop whatsoever, as is evident, by these following
reasons: First, he gives Colleagues to that Bishop whom he affirms to be
Judge in place of Christ, and that in the same Epistle, his words are, no man
after divine judgment, suffrages of the people, consent of his fellow Bishops,
would make himself Judge, not now of his Bishop, but of God.

Secondly, because epist. 69. to Florentius, Cyprian calls himself a judge
constitute by God for a time.

Thirdly, it is no marvel, that Cyprian calls any Bishop, judge in place of
Christ, since Ignatius in his Epistle to the Trallians, gives the same Eipthet
to Deacons: he exhorts the said Trallians, to reverence their Deacons as
Christ, whose place they hold.

Pamelius objects, thirdly, that Cyprian affirms, that the cause of schism and
heresies is, that one Bishop is not constitute in the Church, and affirms that
Cyprian by one Bishop ever means oecumenick Bishop, as appears by his epist.
48. to Cornelius, and by his Book de unitate ecclesiae: But it is answered,
that it is false, which Pamelius affirms, for in those places mentioned by him,
there is no such thing to be found in Cyprian, that by one Bishop he means an
oecumenick Bishop. Secondly, it is false which he affirms, that Cyprian in
every place by one Bishop, means an oecumenick Bishop; for in his Epistle to
Pupianus, he has these very words which he has in this 55. Epistle, viz. that
the cause of Heresies and Schisms is, that one Bishop presiding in the Church,
is contemned by the proud presumption of some: and yet Pamelius himself, in his
Annotations upon the place, confesses, that Cyprian by one Bishop means any
Bishop whatsoever, and not an oecumenick Bishop.

Pamelius objects fourthly, that Cyprian in his 55. Epistle, cannot mean
himself alone, because he affirms, if that one Bishop were acknowledged, no man
would move any thing against the College of Priests; because it does not
follow, that they who move any thing against Cyprian, oppose all other Bishops:
But it is answered, Cyprian meaning is, that in opposing himself, they opposed
the College of Bishops which had ordained him Bishop of Carthage: as is
evident likewayes, by the next following words, which we cited before, viz. no
man can make himself judge of his Bishop, after the suffrages of the people,
and the consent of his fellow Bishops: whereby it is evident, that the meaning
of Cyprian is, that who opposed him, opposed the College of Bishops, who had
ordained him.

Fifthly, Pamelius objects, that Cyprian after those words of one Bishop, makes
mention de servo praeposito, or a servant preferred, or set over the rest, and
immediately after he makes mention of Peter. But it is answered none, can
understand wherein the force of this objection consists; for Cyprian after he
had affirmed, that it was no marvel they had deserted that one servant who was
preferred to the rest, since the Disciples left Christ himself: and then our
Savior asked the Apostles, if they would also leave him? then Peter (upon whom
the Church was built by our Lord) answered for them all, Lord, whether or to
whom shall we go? Whereas Pamelius urges, that by servus praepositus is meaned
Peter, it can be no ways gathered out of the words of Cypria; his scope in
those words is only to show, that it was no marvel that those Schismatics
abandoned him their Bishop, who was that servant set over them, since Christ's
disciples abandoned him. That Peter was only that servus praepositus, cannot be
gathered out of the words of Cyprian: for, that the Church was built upon
Peter, and that Peter answered in the name of the Church, it makes nothing for
the supremacy of Peter, as we proved before by the testimony of Cyprian
himself; who in his books de unitate ecclesiae affirms, whatever Peter was, the
other Apostles were the same, equal to him in dignity and power: However, that
building of the Cchurch upon Peter, has nothing ado with that servus
praepositus mentioned by Cyprian; for as we said, Cyprian means only any
Bishop, and in particular himself by that Servant.

Horantius, loc. chathol. lib. 6. cap. 10. and Harding, disputing against
Jewel, art. 4. brings another objection, that Cyprian by one Bishop means not
himself, or any other particular Bishop, but oecumenick: their objection is
founded upon the words of Cyprian, who after he had affirmed, that the cause of
Schisms was, that one Bishop was not acknowledged Judge in place of Christ in
the Church; he adds, if according to divine precepts, the whole fraternity were
obedient to the said Judge, no man would move any thing against the College of
Priests; whence Horantius and Harding concludes, that by whole fraternity
Cyprian means the whole Church, and by one Bishop one visible head of that
Church.

But it is answered, that Cyprian, by whole fraternity, means that multitude of
which any particular Church is composed: as in his 68. Epistle, writing to the
Bishops of Spain, he desires them not to rescind the ordination of Sabinus,
whom they had placed in the Bishopric of Basilides, he affirms, that the said
Sabinus was chosen, by the suffrages of the whole fraternity: But Horantius and
Harding will not affirm, that Cyprian in this 68. Epistle, means the universal
Church, or church of Rome by whole fraternity; since it is evident by the
circumstances, that he means a particular Church, or that Congregation which
chused Sabinus for their Bishop. Likewayes, as we showed before, the said
Sabinus was placed Bishop, and maintained in his Bishopric over the belly of
Stephanus, Bishop of Rome; who desired them to restore Basilides; and the scope
of this 68. Epistle written in the Name of the Council of Carthage, to the
Bishops of Spain by Cyprian, is to maintain Sabinus in his Bishopric,
notwithstanding that Stephanus Bishop of Rome, desired them to rescind the
ordination of Sabinus, and to replace Basilides: That Cyprian by whole
fraternity means a particular Church, appears by innumerable Epistles of his,
as epist. 47. in two several places, and 58. in two several places; likewayes,
and 63. in which last place, he affirms, when we are at Supper at our Banquet,
we cannot convocate the common People, that we may celebrate the verity of the
Sacrament, in presence of the whole fraternity. And thus we have showed, with
what admirable Sophistry, our adversaries endeavor to wrest this notable
passage of Cyprian, epist. 55. in which we have been the more prolix, because
from thence, they bring all which they can pretend to be of any moment, to
prove that Cyprian was for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: they allege
other testimonies, more pungent, but they shall be proved forged* in the
following Chapters.

The third testimony brought from the words of Cyprian, is in the edition of
Pamelius, Epist. 46. in which Cornelius writing to Cyprian, has these words;
We are not ignorant that there is but one God, etc. and a little after, that
there should be one Bishop in the Catholic Church; from whence they conclude
an oecumenick Bishop or the Bishop of Rome, as successor to Peter Head of the
Curch. But it is answered, Cornelius in this Epistle, is informing Cyprian,
that some Shismaticks (who had partied that Novatian Bishop set up at Rome
against Cornelius) desired to be readmitted to his communion, confessing their
error, that they had been seduced, and now they are convinced, that Cornelius
was their true Bishop: amongst other of their confessions, they profess they
were not ignorant, that there was but one God, one Christ, one Holy Ghost, and
that there should be but one Bishop in the Catholic Church; by which it is
evident, that by Catholic Church they mean any particular Church, and here
they mean the particular Church of Rome; of which they acknowledge Cornelius,
to be that one Bishop, and not that other Novation Bishop by whom they had been
seduced, and whom they would acknowledge no more for their Bishop, since there
could be but one true Bishop of that Church, viz. Cornelius himself. That this
is the meaning of Cornelius^, in this Epistle, is further confirmed, in an
Epistle of his to Fabianus, (mentioned by Eusebius, Hist. lib. 6. cap. 35.) in
which he objects ignorance to one, who knew not, that there should be but one
Bishop in the Catholic Church; Here he means one Bishop in the particular
Church of Rome. For a little after, in that Epistle, he affirms, in that same
Catholic Church there were forty six Presbyters, seven Deacons and seven
subdeacons; but he could not affirm, that in the whole Catholic Church, there
were only so many Presbyters, so many Deacons, and so many subdeacons: whereby
it is evident, that by one Bishop, in the Catholic Church, Cornelius, means,
there should be but one Bishop in any particular Church; which is so evident,
that Chrystopherson, in his version of Eusebius, renders these words of
Cornelius, his Epistle to Fabian, thus; he was ignorant that there should be
but one Bishop (in hac Ecclesia Catholica) in this Catholic Church, viz. in
this particular Church of Rome: neither is there any expression, more frequent
in the writings of those Ancients then to to call every particular Church, the
Catholic Church, which observes the purity of the Catholic Faith, or Church
universal.

The fourth passage of Cyprian, is in his 40. Epistle, directed to the people
of Carthage, there is one God, one Christ, one Chair, one Church founded upon
Peter, by Christ's own mouth. But it is answered, it shall be proved in the
following Chapters, that those last words are forged; the rest have no
difficulty at all: for by one Chair and one Church, Cyprian understands that
there should be but one Bishop in every particular Church; as is evident both
by the scope and words of the Epistle: the scope of the Epistle is, to complain
upon some Schismatics, who had made a defection from himself, and the Church
of Carthage; where amongst other reasons, against their defection, this is one;
there is but one Chair, viz. there is but one Bishop in the Cburch of Carthage,
Cyprian himself: and since none ought to be acknowledged Bishop but he, they
were Schismatics in making a separation from him. This reasoning of Cyprian,
had been most ridiculous, if by one Chair he had meaned an oecumenick Bishop,
viz. if he had reasoned thus; they are Schismatics, who made a defection from
their Bishop Cyprian; because there is but one oecumentick Bishop.

Secondly, that this is the meaning of Cyprian, appears by the following words,
where Cyprian affirms, they had made to themselves another Altar, intimating
thereby, that there is but one Altar in the Church: whereby it is evident, that
he speaks not of the Church universal^, but of a particular Church, since none
will affirm, that there is but one Altar in the Catholic Church* Likewise^ in
his 65. Epistle, pleading the cause of Rogatianus, he affirms, that they who
make a defection from the Church, make another Altar unto themselves: but
Pamelius himself, in his Annotations upon that Epistle, observes, that Cyprian
in that place, is speaking only of particular Churches.

Thirdly, that by one Chair cannot be meaned one Bishop of the Church
universal, is evident, because Cathedra or Chair, is not one in the whole
Church, since there are many Chaires in it: as is affirmed by Tertullian in his
prescriptions, cap. 36.

The last passage they object out of Cyprian, is from his Epistle to Pompeius,
where he affirms, no man can have God to his Father, who has not the Church
to his Mother, Costerus the Jesuit, Apolog. part. 3. objects this passage of
Cyprian, to prove that the Church of Rome is the mother Church, and likewayes
to prove the Bishop of Romes supremacy. But the impudence of Costerus is very
great, for Cyprian in that whole Epistle, disputes with such vehemence, and
bitterness against the Church and Bishop of Rome, that Pamelius wishes it had
never been written: and it shall be proved in the last Chapter of this Book,
that the said Epistle of Cyprian to Pompeius, and others also of his Epistles
of the same subject, are left out in some new Roman editions of Cyprians works.
As for the words now alleged, Costerus miserably wrests them; for in them he
is disputing against the Church of Rome, and in the very next words, he
accuses Stephanus Bishop of Rome, not only of Error, but also of Obstinacy:
his dispute is this; Those who are baptized by heretics, ought to be
rebaptized, because the Sanctification of baptism, is only to be found in the
Church, (apud Christi sponsam solam) who can beget and bring forth children
unto God: but they who are baptized by heretics, are not born in the Church,
neither can they have God to their Father, who have not the Church for their
Mother. Ergo, they ought to be rebaptized. And a little after he adds, how
comes it then, that the severe Obstinacy of our brother Stephanus, (Bishop of
Rome) is come to such an hight? he means, by that excommunication of himself,
and the Church of Carthage, by Stephanus, and his harsh carriage. For, as
Cassander relates, consult. art. 7. when Cyprian sent messengers to Stephanus,
he not only re^used them audience, but also inhibited the Clergy of Rome, to
admit any of them to their houses.

By which passage of Cyprian with Stephanus it appears, with what ingenuity,
they object the 67. Epistle of Cyprian, to prove, that he acknowledged the
Supremacy of the said Stephanus: because in it, he writes to him ( say they) to
depose Marcianus Bishop of Arles in France. But it appears by the words of the
Epistle, that Cyprian only exhorts Stephanus, to admonish the Bishops of the
Province to depose him; not to depose him, himself: what was the opinion of
Cyprian concerning the power of the Bishop of Rome, in deposition, and
restition of Bishops? is sufficiently manifested, by his carriage in the cause
of Basilides, and Sabinus mentioned a little before. For in his Epistle 68. he
stoutly opposes, the restitution of Basilides, and the deposition of Sabinus;
notwithstanding, that Stephanus enjoined both the one and the other, to the
Bishops of Spain.

CHAP. XII. Objections from forged Authors answered, pretended to prove the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, before the days of Cyprian.
HItherto, they have endeavored to prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
before the death of Cyprian, by wrested and misapplyed testimonies: that not
serving the turn, they fall to forgery, and that of two kinds; first, they
bring testimonies from bastard, and supposititious, Authors; Secondly, from
true Authors, corrupted by the Popes authority or otherwise: we will discourse
of the first sort in this Chapter, of the second in the following.

In the first place, they pretend the decretal Epistles of several Bishops of
Rome, who lived in that interval, and after, unto the beginning of the fourth
Age. But it is answered, all those decretals are forged, attributed to Popes
before the days of Syrictus, Bishop of Rome, who lived about anno, 380. the
reasons follow.

First, Dionysius Exiguus, a diligent Compilator of all the decretals of Popes,
in one volumne, begins this work with the decretals of the said Syritius, not
mentioning the decretal Epistles of any Popes before him: whereby it evidently
appears, that there was no such decretalls, in his time, or in the sixth
Century, whereby also it is evident, that they have been forged since that time.

Secondly, those decretalls are mentioned by non of the Ancients most exact
enquirers after antiquity; such as Eusebius, Hieronymus, Gennadius, and Pope
Damasus, who lived himself in the time of Hieronymus, and to whom Hieronymus
was Secretar, but all those Authors; made exact enquiry, after the actions of
Bishops of Rome, before the Council of Neice: and yet not one of them, makes
mention of those decretals, which are at least thirty.

Thirdly, the styles of men are almost as different, as their faces: but it
appears to any Judicious Reader, that all those Epistles were penned by one
man, having the same style, but they are attributed to Bishops of Rome, of
diverse Ages, whereof the last lived three hundred year after the first.

Fourthly, the Latin Tongue, before the Council of Neice, was in great purity:
and the Bishops of Rome of those days, known to be most powerful in it: but
the style of those decretals, is most barbarous. Turrianus objects, (who wrote
a defense of those Epistles) that those Bishops of Rome used a humble style, in
imitation of Paul, who shunned the words of humane wisdom. But it is answered,
that although Paul did forbid affected eloquence, yet he did not prescrive
solicismes, and barbarity, which both are frequent in those Epistles. And
first, for Solicismes, Enaristus, epist. 2. Episcopi sunt obediendi and non
detrahendi: Telesphorus in his Epistle has these words, Patres omnes sunt
venerandi non insidiandi, such like expressions are found every where. As for
barbarismes, you have everywhere, such expressions as those following, Rigorosus
tortor, dependere obtemperantiam: agere indisciplinate; jurgialiter stare;
paternas doctrinas injuriare: cuncta charitative peragere.

Fifthly, Isidorus Mercator, who lived in the seventh Age, challenged by
Barronius, ad annum, 336. number. 80. and 60. as a great forger of monuments of
Antiquity: he lived in the 7. Age, at which time, there was great debate
between the Greek and the Latin Church; the Greek Church, refusing to
acknowledge the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, albeit Phocas, in the
beginning of that Age, had taken the title of oecumenick Bishop, from Cyriacus,
Bishop of Constantinople, and bestowed it upon Bonifacius Bishop of Rome; yet,
notwithstanding, the Bishop of Constantinople, still kept the style of
oecumenick Bishop and would not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome. The said
Isidorus Mercator, as Barronius relates, forged several monuments of Antiquity,
to prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome; and he is commonly thought to be
the forger of those decretalls, for three reasons; first, (as we said) he is
detected of several other forgeries; secondly, because it appears by their
style, they are all written by one man; thirdly, because the style is
barbarous, and exactly agreeing with the style of that Age, in which Isidorus
lived.

Sixthly, it is demonstrat those Epistles are forged, not only by the style,
but by the matter contained in them: It were prolix to mention all; we will
only note some few, sufficiently demonstrating those decretals to be forged.
First, some of them are directed to those who were dead long before; as that
Epistle of Clement, to James, in which he writes to him of the death of Peter
and Paul: but James was dead in the seventh year of Nero, as is testified by
Eusebius, Hegesippus, and Hieronymus; but Peter and Paul died not till seven
years after, viz. the fourteenth year of Nero. 2. Anterius in his decretal,
makes mention of Eusebius Bishop of Alexandria, and Felix Bishop of Ephesus:
but Anterus lived in the beginning of the third Century, almost a whole Age
before them both. 3. Fabianus in his Epistle, makes mention of the coming of
Novatus to Italy; but Cyprian, lib. 1. epist. 3. affirms, that Fabianus came to
Italy in the time of Cornelius, who lived at another time. 4. Marcellus writes
a threatening Letter to Maxentius, pressing him with the Authority of Clement
Bishop of Rome: but Maxentius both a Pagan, and a Tyrant, cared nothing for
Clement at all. 5. Zephyrinus in his Epistle to the Egyptians, affirms, that it
was against the constitutions of Emperors, that Clergy men should be called
before the Judge Secular: the same is affirmed by Eusebius, in his Decretal to
the same Egyptians. But in those days, viz. In the third Century, the
Emperors were all Pagans: and it is ridiculous to affirm, that they made such
Edicts, in favor of Christians, who were cruel persecuters of the Christians
6. Its known, that many ceremonies came by degrees in the Church, and that
there were very few ceremonies in the Church, the time of those Bishop of Rome:
but those decretal^Epistles, makes no mention of the grievous persecutions of
the Church in those days, no not one of them; but on the contrary, makes
mention of the Church as it were in pomp, making mention of all those
ceremonies, as holy vessels, of the habit of the Clergy, of the Mass, of
Archbishops, Metropolitans, Patriarchs, none of which things were in the Church
in those days: those Cannons, commonly called Apostolic, mention indeed
Primats: but albeit they contain many profitable things, yet many learned men
among the Papists themselves, maintain, that they were not made by the Apostles
but collected from Cannons of the Council of Antioch, and other posterior
Councils: See Salmasius, and Photius, Bibliothick, cap. 113.

We might allege several other reasons, to prove those Epistles forged, as
their absurd interpetation of Scripture, some of them maintaining community of
wives, etc. But those reasons are sufficient, since Bellarmine, and Barronius
seems not to care much for them; since Contius, Professor at Bruges, maintains
them to be forged; since Aeneas Silvius (epist. 301. according to Bellarmines
supputation, 288.) expressly affirms, that before the Council of Niece, there
are no Monuments for the Popes Supremacy; which he would never have affirmed,
if he had not believed those Epistles had been forged, which ingeminate
everywhere, the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: and yet the said Aeneas
Silvius, was afterward Pope himself, under the name of Pius second. Whence we
conclude, that those Epistles were unknown to the Ancients. And whereas
Turrianus objects, that Isidorus mentions them; It is answered, he is charged
for forging them. He objects, secondly, that Ruffinus turned those three
Epistles of Clement; but it is answered, those Epistles of Clement are very old
indeed, but they do not prove the Antiquity of the rest. The style of these
three Epistles of Clement, is different from the style of those others: and
although Ruffinus, turned them from Greek to Latin, it does not prove, they
are Authentic. He tu^ned also his Books of Recognitions, which are esteemed
Apocryphal, by Gratianus, Bellarmine, and other Doctors of the Church of Rome.

And this much of those decretal Epistles: they allege testimonies from
several other forged Authors, in that interval, to prove the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome in that interval, as Abdias Bishop of Babylon, is cited by
Dorman to prove the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: Linus is cited by Coccius,
for the same reason; Clement by Harding. viz. his books of recognition:
Dyonisius Areopagita, de divinis nominibus, is several times cited by Coccius
in Thesauro, for the same end: but all these Authors, or those books now
mentioned of those Authors, are rejected by Bellarmine or Barronius, or
Possevinus, or Cajetanus, or Grocinus, or Sixtus, Senensis and other lights of
the Church of Rome: and therefore, it is needless to insist upon the disproving
them; we will only answer one passage falsely attributed to Eusebius, or to
Hieronymus, in his additions to Eusebius, and it is this:

Bellarmine, to prove that the Bishop of Rome has a legislative power, and
Posnan also, these. 131. allege a passage of Eusebius, viz. that lent fast of
40 days was instituted by Telesphorus Bishop of Rome, who lived in the second
Age, and this is his first instance: But it is answered, that Scaliger, in his
edition of Eusebius demonstrats, those cannot be the words of Eusebius; because
lib. 5. cap. 17. he expressly affirms, that Montanus the heretic was the first
that prescribed set fasts. Secondly, because cap. 34. of the same Book,
Eusebius affirms from Irenaeus, that in the time of Victor Bishop of Rome, who
lived after Telesphorus, that the fast of lent was not observed one way, some
observing one day, some two, some more, etc.

Bellarmines second instance is, that the said Eusebius affirms, that the
mystery, or celebration of the Mystery of the resurrection of the Lords day,
was first ordained by Pius Bishop of Rome, and universally observed in the
west. But it is answered, that Eusebius, cap. 22. of the said Book, expressly
affirms the contrary, viz. that it was ordained, by the decrees of several
Councels: neither was it ever generally observed, before the Council of Neice;
whereby it is evident, that both the one and the other passage is fraudulently
inserted, in the works of Eusebius, otherwise Eusebius would contradict
himself.

CHAP. XIV. Of the corruptions of Cyprian.
THere is not a Father of them all, of whom they bragg more then of Cyprian, to
prove the supremacy of the Bishop Rome; and yet, there is not a Father of them
all, of which they have less reason to bragg, as we shewedbefore. Barronius,
tom. 1. page 129. Let one speak for all (says he) in time more ancient, in
learning more excellent, in honor of Martyrdom far exceeding the rest of the
Fathers, viz. Cyprian: and then he cites this following passages out of
Cyprian, de unitate ecclesiae, cap. 3. To Peter, our Lord after his
resurrection, says, feed my sheep; and builds his Church upon him (alone.)

2. And although after his resurrection, he gave alike power to all, yet to
manifest unity, he constitute one Chair, and disposed by his authority the
source or fountain of the same, beginning of one.

3. The rest of the Apostles were, that Peter was; in equal fellowship of
honor and power: but the beginning comes of unity ( the primacy is given to
Peter) that the Church of Christ may be showed to be one, and ( one Chair.)

4. He that withstandeth and resists the Church, (he that forsakes Peter's
Chair, upon which the Church is built;) does he trust that he is in the Church?

In these words observe, that all the sentences written within a parenthesis,
are forged, and not to be found in the old Manuscripts of Cyprian, or in the
old printed copies of Cyprian; the reason wherefore the said sentences are
added to the words of Cyprian is evident, because they make Cyprian expressly
dispute for the supremacy of Peter, but take them away, the supremacy of Peter
is quite destroyed; as may appear to any who will read over these words, and
omit those forged passages, written within a parenthesis.

If ye demand how those passages came to be added to Cyprians text? It is
answered, that Pius fourth Bishop of Rome, called Manutius the famous Printer
to Rome, to reprint the Fathers; he appointed also four Cardinals, to see the
work done, among the rest, Cardinal Barromaeus had singular care of Cyprian:
Manutius himself, in his preface of a certain Book to Pius fourth, declares,
that it was the purpose of the Pope, to have them so corrected; that there
should remain no spot, which might infect the minds of the simple, with the
show of false Doctrine: How they corrected other Fathers, shall be declared in
the following Books? how they corrected Cyprian, appears by those words we have
now et down, which are marked with Parenthesis, which being added, perverts the
whole meaning of Cyprian: neither were they content, by adding to Cyprian, to
prevert his meaning: other passages of Cyprian, which could not be mended by
additions, or be made to speak for them, by inserting sentences, unless they
made Cyprian speak manifest contradictions; those other passages (I say) they
razed quite out of Cyprian, in the said Roman Edition of Manutius, anno, 1564.
in which Edition, they razed out Eleven or Twelve entire Epistles, as 1. 2. 3.
15. 21. 22. 71. 73. 74. 75. 83. 84. 85. 86. It were too prolix to declare, for
what reasons they razed out all those Epistles the sum is, all of them were no
great friends to the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, nor to the Doctrine of
the present Church of Rome, anent the perfection of the Scripture. We will cite
a passage or two, out of the 74. and 75. Epistle, which will evidently make
known, wherefore they razed those Epistles: surely there must be some great
reason, since Pamelius himself wishes, those Epistles had never been written:
What the reason is, appears thus? The 74. Epistle was written to Pompeius,
against the Epistle of Stephanus, in which ye have these words, Stephanus
Haereticorum, causum contra christianos and contra Ecclesiam Dei asserere
conatur; and a little after, Reus in uno, videtur, reus in omnibus: That is,
Stephanus Bishop of Rome, defends the cause of heretics against the Church;
who is guilty in one thing, he seems to be guilty of all. The 75. Epistle, was
written by Firmilianus to Cyprian; in which ye have these words, Non intelligit
obfuscari a se, etc. that is, Stephanus Bishop of Rome understands not, that
the truth of the christian Rock is obfuscated by him, and in a manner
abolished. The words of which two Epistles, are very prejudicial to the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: those Epistles are every where filled with
such expressions, too prolix to be answered here; but these we have mentioned,
are sufficient to declare, what the opinion of Cyprian was, concerning the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, or of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. In
the said 74. Epistle, in several places he calls the said Stephanus ignorant,
arrogant, etc. insolent, impertinent, etc. in the 75. Epistle, Stephanus is
called wicked, insolent, a deserter and betrayer of the truth: Likewayes, what
a friend Cyprian was, to the Doctrine of the Modern Church of Rome? appears by
the said 74. Epistle; where tradition without warrant of Scripture, is called
by him Vetustas Erroris, antiquity of Error, and affirms, that all is to be
rejected for such, which is not found in Scripture: so it concern matters of
Faith: whereby it appears, that Cyprian incurres the Anathema of the council of
Trent. And this we have showed how they have corrupted Cyprian, as well in
adding to him, to make him speak what he thought not; and when that would not
serve the turn, except they made him speak contradictions, they therefore also
cutted out his tongue: what reason they had so to do, we have given some
instances; many such other might be given, but it would be prolix, and these
are sufficient. Now let us hear, how they defend those Impostures, and first,
for the razing out of those Epistles, Gretserus answers, Pamelius restored them
in his edition of Cyprian. But it is replied, that this is as much as to say,
that by the testimony of Pamelius, Pope Pius Fourth, and those four Cardinals,
whom he appointed to correct the works of Cyprian, are notorius impostors: It
is a new sort of reasoning, that they did no wrong, in razing out those
Epistles of Cyprian, because Pamelius restored them.

Secondly, they defend those additions by an old copy of the Abbey of Cambron:
2. By a copy fetched out of Bavaria; 3. And by an other old copy of Cardinal
Hosius; and so Gretserus the Jesuit defends the last three additions. But it is
answered, that the first addition upon him alone, is the most important of all;
intimating, that upon Peter alone the Church was built, which is the main Basis
of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: but Gretserus the Jesuit, who defends
this corruption of Cyprian, does not affirm, that those words upon him alone
are found in any of these three Copies, he only affirms, that the second
addition one Chair, and the third, the Primacy is given to Peter, are found in
those old Copies.

Secondly, it is replied, that that Copy of Cardinal Hosius is only mentioned,
but it was never yet seen: If Hosius had any such Copy, how comes he left not
such a Monument of antiquity to Posterity? As for the other two copies, of
Cambron and Bavaria, it is a ridiculous business, to object their Authority,
against the Authority, not only of all the printed Copies of Cyprian, before
that of Manutius, but also against all the Manuscripts of Cyprian, found in the
most famous Bibliothicks of Christendom, and the Vatican it self: and whereas
Gretserus affirms, that perhaps the Wicklephian Heretics, corrupted all those
Ancient Manuscripts, it is a ridiculous objection: how could those Heretics
get access to the Libraries of all Princes, Universities and the Popes own
Library, to corrupt the works of Cyprian, without being perceived? It is far
more like, that the Monks of Cambron and Bavaria, corrupted those two copies,
(If the Jesuits have not forged those two copies also) since there are
innumerable proofs and testimonies, (as shall be proved in the following
Books,) Yea, and of Barronius himself; that the Monks of several Monastries
have corrupted and forged innumerable passages of Antiquity, especially in the
seventh Age, when the contest was hot, with the Grecians about the Supremacy.
The truth is, it is believed, that there are no such Copies at all, as that of
Cambron and Bavaria, and that those Cardinals, appointed by Pius fourth, to
oversee the Edition of Manutius, added those words of themselves, which is very
like for two reasons; First, because it is known, that the Indices
expurgatorii, have added sentences, and razed out sentences at their pleasure
in many Ancient Copies, without the pretext of any other Copy. Secondly, their
impudence was as great, in razing out of those twelve Epistles of Cyprian, as
if they had added those four passages. And since they openly did the first, it
is very probable, yea more then probable, they did the last.

We have showed, how Gretserus defends the first three additions. The Fourth
is, he that forsakes Peter's Chair, upon which the Church is built, it seems
that either those three Copies of Gretserus has not these words, or else if
they have, Pamelius does not much regard their Authority, who in his Edition of
Cyprian, has left them out. It is to be observed, that the second and third
Addition are of no such moment, as the first, and this fourth, and the razing
out of these twelve Epistles of Cyprian. Gretserus defends only the second and
the third; the First he meddleth not with at all; to the Fourth he answers,
that Pamelius has left it out, and therefore it was not added fraudently: But
we answer, as we did before, that Pamelius in leaving out those words, declares
those four Cardinal Impostors, who were appointed by Pius the fourth, to
oversee the Edition of Manutius; whose Copy is followed in the reprinted works
of Cyprian at Rome, Paris, Antwerp, etc.

And thus we have minuted, all which is of any moment alleged, pro and con,
for the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, before the death of Cyprian: where we
have proved, by the testimonies of Ignatius, Dionysius and Cyprian himself,
that there was no Office in the Church, above that of a Bishop, in that whole
Interval: Bellarmine braggs much, that the succession of the Bishop of Rome to
Peter, in the Monarchy of the Church, was an article of Faith in all Ages,
since the days of the Apostles. But since we find no monuments in that
interval, next the Ages of the Apostles, that there was any such Article of
Faith, but on the contrary, since we have produced testimonies, and invincible
ones, that there was no such Article of Faith, it is evident, that the said
succession of the Bishop of Rome to Peter in the Monarchy of the Church, is a
mere cheat: For if there had been any such thing, the Churches of the East, and
West, in the times of Victor, and the Churches of Africa, in the times of
Stephanus, would never have neglected the excommunication of Victor and
Stephanus, and died unreconciled to the Church of Rome: Neither would the
middle Church of Rome, have placed them in the Catalogue of Saints and
Martyrs, if it had been believed as an Article of Faith, that the Bishop of
Rome succeeded to Peter Jure divino in the Monarchy of the Church, as is
believed now in the Modern Roman Church, as an article of Faith necessar to
Salvation.

And thus we have concluded the first Part of the grand Impostor, and have
proved by Testimonies of Antiquity, (notwithstanding all the bragging of our
Adversaries, that all Antiquity is for them) That the Ancients, Councills, and
Fathers, believed neither the Supremacy of Peter, nor that Peter was Bishop of
Rome, nor that the Bishop of Rome succeeded to him, in the Monarchy of the
Church; and consequently, did not believe any necessar communion with the
Church of Rome: To prove which, they bring nothing from Antiquity of the first
three Centuries, which is not perverted, mutilated, falsely translated or
forged. In the Second Part shall be proved, they have as little shelter for
their Tenets, from the death of Cyprian, 260. to 604. when Bonifacius the third
was made oecumenick Bishop, by Phocas.

FINIS. Partis primae.
Errata of the PREFACE.
Page 9. line 17. for given Phocas, read given by Phocas, p. 10: l. 3. for hom.
r. whom. p. 10. l. 29. for add there reasons, r. add other reasons. p. 13. l.
27. for Stephanus, r. Adrianus. p. 23. l. 32. for Du plesis, r. Du plessis. p.
28r l. 20. for lib. 2. r. lib. r. p. 29. l. 27. for suppositious, r.
supposititious. p. 36. l. 3. for related, r. resuted. p. 34. l. 7. for
Testimonies of antiquity at all, r. Testimonies of antiquity of any moment.

Errata lib. 1.
Page 17. line 28. for antiquitated, r. antiquated. p. 22. l. 23. for lib. 4.
r. part 2. lib. 2. p. 23. l. 32. for lib. 5. r. part 3. lib. 2. p. 23. l. 32.
for Hom* 55. 5. r. Hom 5. 5. p. 36. l. 13. for lib. 3. r. part 2. lib. 1. p.
36. l. 15. for lib* 4. r. part 2. lib. 2. p. 36. l. 16 for lib. 5. r. part 3.
lib. 2. p. 39. l. 17. for of Peter, r. to Peter. p. 40. l. 22. for confidence,
r. confidents, p. 49. l. 7. for mundos, r. multos p. 55 l. 30. for colunas, r.
columnas. p. 56. l. 17. for (...), r. (...). p. 70. l. ^5. for but to whom
also, r. but to whom: also. p. 77. l. 4. for Hilarious de vi^ctad. r. Hilarious
de trinitat. p. 101. l. 21. for Paul 5. r. Paul 4.

Page 189. line 22. for were proved to be head, r. be called head. p. 19^. l.
16. for Cyrullus, r. Cyrillus, p. 199. l. 8. for our adversaries, r. whereas
our adversaries. p. 200. l. 16. for Apostolus, r. Apostolis. after page 171,
Immediately follows, 187. which is a mistake in the Press, nothing is wanting.

Errata lib. 2.
Page 8. l. 12. for lib 5. r. part 3. lib 1. p. 16. l. 5. for distinction, r.
definition. p. 86. l. 2. for constitute one Chair, r. (constitute one Chair) p.
87. l. 22. for causum r. causam.


