Advertisement.
THe Reader is desired to take Notice, that the Press in Boston is so much
under the aw of the Reverend Author, whom we answer, and his Friends, that we
could not obtain of the Printer there to print the following Sheets, which is
the only true Reason why we have sent the Copy so far for its impression.

GOSPEL ORDER Revived, Being an Answer to a Book lately set forth by the
Reverend Mr Increase Mather, President of Harvard College, etc.

ENTITLED, The Order of the Gospel, etc.

Dedicated to the Churches of Christ in New England.

By sundry Ministers of the Gospel in New England.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his
Neighbor comes and searches him. Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them. Printed in the Year 1700.

ERRATA.
ADvert. l. ult. r. it is Printed. Ep. Ded. side 3 l. 29. r. ground. S. 4 l. 7
r. wills. l. 10. r. impose one. l. 19. r. Anti-Synodalia. S. 5 l. 3. r.
voluminous. S. 6 l. 6, r. banner. S. 7 l. 5. r. sell. l. 22, r. inartificial.
S. 8 l. 13. r. publicly Preached. Gosp. Ord. p. 9 l. 3, r, that when. p. 9 l.
16. r. invention. p. 10 l. 9. r. notions. p. 15 l. 33. r. stumble. p. 17 l. 14.
r, altogether. l. 32 that at p. 21 l. 11, r. of their ways. p. 22 l. 14. r.
Synodical. l. 33. r. we leave the Author to be chastized p. 23 l. 10. r.
without this. p. 28 l. 27. r. Apostolical. l. 28. r. one only excepted. p. 29
l. 25. r. their persons. p. 32 l. ult. r. we will for once give our. p. 34 l. 14,
r. his book. l. 16. r. were greater. p. 37 l. antep. r. far. p. 40 l. 10. r.
^^ Exemplary.
The Epistle Dedicatory, To the Churches of Christ in N. England.
IT can incur no just Censure that we address our selves to the Churches of
Christ here in the following Sheets, inasmuch as they are but a Reply to a Book
lately dedicated unto them. Nor does our zeal, (we hope) for Truth, the Honor
of God, and the Safety, Peace and Flourishing of these Churches come short of
what our Reverend Author may be inspired with in his performance We make the
same glorious Pretense with him to maintain and defend the Order of the Gospel,
although we cannot allow what is suggested in the Title page, That every
Principle so strenuously contended for in that Treatise, is either professed or
practiced by the Churches of Christ in New England. One part, at least,
therefore of his Book the Reverend Author ought to have published in his own
Name, and not have obtruded it on the Churches here, whose Practice never gave
grounds to suspect them leavened with so gross thoughts, as particularly his
Doctrine of the Ordination of Ministers is.

We will not guess at the Authors secret aim, or whom in particular he raises
his Batteries against We'd charitably hope he has no private Interest to bribe
him in this Affair; and we hope for a like favorable and candid Construction
of this Reply. Indeed the Name prefix't to that faulty Treatise, may be
presumed, with a multitude of prejudiced People, to weigh down all the Reasons
and

Arguments which can possibly be brought for their Conviction. And we have no
such advantage to boast of; yet are happy in this, that we are not overawed by
any Name, and the Truth we know is greater, and more venerable than all things.

Its well known how liberal some men are of the odious brand of Apostates, for
every one who cannot digest the late published Orders: but, without arrogance,
(...)sum, as more due, the Title of Proficients, and doubt not to make it out,
that our dissent from many of them is so far from a going back from any Gospel
Truth or Order, that it is rather a making progress, and advancing in the
Evangelical Discipline.

It is a groundless Calumny which is suggested, That a latitude beyond what our
Author contends for, is but a betraying the liberties and privileges which our
Lord Jesus Christ has given to his Church, or the Brethren of the Church. These
we profess to prize and stand for, and would by no means lose. But wherein do
they consist? not in the Brethrens challenging any part of the Ministerial
Work! Not in imposing upon others any thing which Christ has not imposed! which
is but a debarring Christians of the Privileges they have a right to. But they
consist (as we conceive) in such things as these, That our Consciences be not
imposed on by Men or their Traditions, Christ being the alone Lord of the
Conscience, 1 Cor. 7. 23. That Believers are through Christ, freed from the
guilt and dominion of Sin, from the curse of the Law, and from the sting and
terror of Death. That we have the liberties of Gods House and Ordinances, and
therein communion with God. That we may have the benefit of the gifts of his
Ministers for edification, and such like, according to the Apostles Doctrine, 1
Cor. 3. 22.

Nor is that Objection less frivolous, when if we appear less Rigid than others
of the Reverend Authors severity, we are reflected on as casting dishonor on
our Parents, and their pious design in the first settlement of this Land No, we
reverence our Ancestors, and the Memory of their divine Zeal and Constancy, and
would derive it as a Truth sacred to our Posterity, that it was a religious
Interest which carried them through all the amazing Difficulties and
Discouragements in that Undertaking. But yet, the particular design or end has
been somewhat differently conveyed unto us.

Some have carried it as if the great end were the Conversion of the Heathen;
and there have been great Complaints by some of late, how this has been
neglected and contradicted, and another course taken up, whereby instead of
bringing the Heathen into the Church of God, many whose Fathers and themselves
were once of the visible Church, are now strangely left out, scarce any face of
Religion remaining among them.

As for this, we bewail it, and look upon it as a Reproach to the Land, and
would therefore countenance no such Principles or Practices as have any
tendency to such Apostasy.

Again, some have made this the great Design, to be freed from the Impositions
of Men in the Worship of God, wherewith they were sometimes burdened; and as
they sought freedom for themselves, we cannot suppose they designed to impose
upon others In this we are risen up to make good their grounds.

The Reverend Mr. Willard in his Sermon of the sinfulness of Worshipping God
with Men's Institutions, p. 27. gives this as the errand of our Forefathers
into this Wilderness, namely, to sequester themselves into a quiet corner of
the World, where they might enjoy Christ's unmixt Institutions, and leave them
uncorrupted to Posterity; and the gainsaying or counter working this, is, as
he intimates, to cast dishonor upon them, or call them fools.

This Charge falls heavy on those who are for imposing their will on others. We
crave no more but to enjoy the Institutions of Christ unmix't. And it appears
very strange that those who fl^d from an Act of Uniformity, should presently
impose on themselves, on their Neighbors, and entail the Mischief on their
Posterity.

Some indeed would make the design of our first Planters to consist in some
little Rites, Modes or Circumstances of Church Discipline, and those such as
the Word of God no where requires These are the men who dishonor their
Country, and their Fathers Memory, by making their great design to lie in so
small matters. And it is notorious there has been no agreement in these points
from the beginning. Its known there was Anti-Synodatia printed, and who had a
hand in it, and how modest his Dissent was, and in what terms they contradicted
what the Synod had established, though the like is criminal and insufferable in
any other.

These Principles in Church Discipline are also wrote against in English by the
Assembly of Divines, by Mr. C^^dry, Mr. Ratherford, Mr. Ba^ly, etc. In a word,
if it be the Truth, according to Gods Word, we stand for, it would not be
grievous to any of our pious Ancestors, were they now on Earth; neither will it
be grievous to them now in Heaven: nor should it be grievous to any good Man to
receive Conviction. We refer all therefore to the Word of God, to the Law and
to the Testimony.

In the Preface or Epistle to said Book, we find several things that might be
justly excepted against, but designing neither to be contentious nor
volumnious, we shall speak but to one or two.

In page 8. the Reverend Author is pleased to number up seven or eight
erroneous Doctrines, as he apprehends them to be; and the consequence from all
is this, that if we espouse these Principles, we give away the whole
Congregational Cause at once. Whence we perceive now the professed cause which
the Author engages in; though we hope it is not the Name or the Party, but the
Truths they delend. We shall have occasion to examine these Principles
hereafter; it may su^ti^e here to say, they are craftily and unfairly worded,
and in the Dress they are here clad, we do not espouse them; yet according to
their most fair and genuine construction there is a great deal of Truth in most
of them. And this is but a block the Author politickly casts in the way, which
at last we fear may but discourage some from embracing the Congregational way,
seeing it must needs fight for its life against some Truths. Its hard kicking
against the pricks, Acts 9. 5.

Another thing Remarkable in the Preface is the Authors heat and (...), page 9.
Shall we then by Silence betray the Truth? shall we re^ort, therefore we are
bold to speak too. Who is on the Lord side? Who? shall we answer, we are, we
trust (through Gods Grace) together with you; and all other siding (...) would
have in contempt Is there no one that will stand up for the Churches of Christ*
God orbid but we should, had others declined it! The good People in them then
may well think their Watchmen are all either dead or a sleep: or if they talk
light and heady, they may conclude them in a trance, or not quite awaked. (...)
which cause it is that I dedicate this ensuing Dissertation. And for the same
cause we address you in the following answer. It is not my cause, but yours.
Nor is it ours, but the Churches. and every good Christians in common. Did I
say yours? nay, it is Christ cause. We list under the same Banners, and would
to God we were all as really, as we would seem to be divested wholly of carnal
self........ for truly our present Defense is become the peculiar concern of
these Churches.

But why all this heat? we would not interpret too hard; but these Expressions
seem plainly to carry this sense, That every one who obeys not the late
published Orders, is an opposer of Truth, not on the Lord side, Enemies to the
cause of Christ, and the Churches of New England. Whereupon the Reverend Author
roules himself, and sounds an Alarm to the Churches, To put down all such If
this be not involved in it, we would beg his Pardon, and be informed better.
But truly, Sir, it is a mistaken Zeal, ^dly lavished away, and not kindled from
above; ^or we know no such conspiracy against the Truths of our Lord Jesus
Christ, or against the good of the Churches in New England, although we are not
proselyted to some of your particular Opinions. It appears to us, that the
Reverend Authors infirmity in this matter, is the same with the Apostle John's,
Mark 9. 38. Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and he follows
not us; and we forbad him, because he followed not us. Which too forward zeal
ou^ Lord checks, and reconciles the matter, Verse. 39, 40. And jesus answered,
forbid him not; he that is not against ^^ is on our part. But in this case, as
in many others we ^ould instance in if need were, the Reverend Author, though
very zealous for a time, yet is not very steady and constant; for before he
ends his Book, he comes about again, in page, 139. where he proposes his
Brothers Essay for Union wherein he shows how inconsiderable the Differences
are between those of the Presbyterian and Congregational judgment, that they
need not set Truth to purchase Peace. And yet by the cry just now, you would
have thought all the Truths of Christ trampeled under foot, the Cause of
Religion deserted. and and a formidable War commenced by the Presbyterians
against the order of the Gospel.

It is observable, that the Reverend Author in the Dissertation of the
following Questions, makes use of abundance of Quotations from several famous
Persons in their Generations; but in some the sense is perverted to a wrong
end, beside the obvious intention of the Writers; in some he brings them in
contradicting at one time what they said at another, and sets some in
opposition to others. And where he endeavors to confirm his Tenets by the
Testimony of some he might, if he had pleased, have brought many others to
contradict the same thing. But this is a good way to amuse the Reader, and to
cloud his mind, and to terrify him, by mustering a legion of (...)artifica^
Arguments. We shall be sparing in Quotations, and pass by many cited by the
Author, though we approve them not. Only we crave leave to present one Quotation,
which may be of use to us all along, being we are unwilling to be imposed on to
believe what God never spoke, or to do what God never required. It is that of
the Reverend Mr. Willa^a, in his fore-quoted Sermon, page 23. 24. Hence it
follows, that there ^s nothing to be received by us on this account, but what
has Gods Seal affixed to it. Its therefore enough to set us down resolved
against any such thing, if we can say there is a silence about it in the
Scripture, that God has no where commanded it in his word, either expressly, or
by just and necessary consequence, its no Order of his devising. Scripture
silence about any Tradition gives a full condemnation, what ever ^leas men may
bring for it, as, That it is profitable, many have been edified by it, it is a
prudent way to secure the Interest of Religion; many wise, holy learned Men
have pleaded for it and practiced it; that there is much of decency in it and
the thing it self is no way: harm^u^. A^l this is fully answered with that one
word, God has spoke nothing about it, Heb. 7. 4. It never entered into his
heart to enjoin it. Jer. 7. 31. Thus he.

This being publicly practiced and printed so long a go by so eminent a
Minister, and never since contradicted, we take it for granted, that none have
any thing to say against it. And we are thankful to him for furnishing us with
a Doctrine so fully laid down, to bear off the Institutions, Traditions and
Impositions that men would lay upon us.

But it is high time now to consider the Questions which the Reverend Author
propounds, and the Answer he gives to each of them. In which attempt we shall
offer no other Apology for our brevity, save that our Author himself (...)ight
have been as brief, and yet full as clear and (...)iv^.

Gospel Order Revived, etc.
THe two first Questions might have been wholly spared, yet may serve as a good
Introduction to others of a^^ ill aspect.

Quest. 1. Whether particular Churches ought to consist of Saints and true
Believers in Christ?
It is granted that the matter of a particular Church (for the Question is not
stated with reference to the Catholic) is visible Saints. And though the Answer
is not given in the words, yet we would charitably hope his sense is the same,
with the united Ministers in London. That none shall be admitted as members in
order to Communion, in all the special Ordinances of the Gospel, but such as
are knowing and sound in the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion,
without scandal in their Lives, and to a judgment regulated by the word of God,
are Persons of visible Godliness and honesty, credibly professing cordial
subjection to Jesus Christ. Had our Reverend Author only said thus much (and
indeed more is needless) he had saved us the labor of any Reflections on this
part of his Essay. But there is one passage in p. 15 which we cannot but except
against. A Scripture, says he, which has respect in the times of the Gospel,
severely rebukes those Ministers, which shall bring men that are uncircumcised
in bear^ (unregenerate persons) into the sanctuary, into the Church of God, to
eat the Bread and drink the Blood, which (...)y that are there, partake o^,
Ezekiel. 44. 7, 9. A hard saying, and w^o can ^ear it. The Text is here mangled,
and the principal things left out. What God has joined, our Reverend Author has
separated, to drive on his design. The Text says Uncircumcised in heart, and
uncircumcised in flesh: but here we have it only uncircumcise in heart,
interpreted unregenerate persons. What a rebuke is this to the best of
Ministers because (forsooth) they are not heart searchers, and dare not invade
the prerogative of God. Did the Reverend Author or the Church with him, never
admit any un(...)^erate Person to communion with them? He will not dare to
pretend to it, and therefore the rebuke is to himself. We know our Lord Jesus
Christ admitted Judas uncircumcised in heart, an unregenerate Person to holy
things; and in the purest Ages of the Church there were Hypocrites crept in,
many of whom turned Apostates. Nay, our Author is so sensible of this, that p.
19. he quotes the opinion of the Reverend M. Co^ton, That its better to admit
diverse Hypocrites than to keep out one sincere Child of God. It is obvious
then that Hypocrites may be admitted, and yet the Minister incur neither the
rebukes of Conscience, or of this Scripture: nay, he may be approved of God, as
doing his Duty, though Hypocrisy may too well consist with sufficient
Knowledge found belief, a blameless Life, a credible Profession, etc. To
conclude, Its very observeable, the Reverend Author closes this first Enquiry,
by saying, That the Churches here are free to admit those into their communion,
who are thus qualified. We marvel then his Zeal is not stirred to rebuke them
afresh.

But what will the Reader think if we should make an Apology after all for the
Reverend Author, and assure him he means no more, than that Ministers ought not
to admit known Infidels or Profane; for, for his part, he pretends not to know
men's hearts. We only can entreat the Reader not to rebuke the Author too
severely for his inconsistency, for he may mean well, and all parties are
agreed. Unless he should imagine himself attacqued by the Reverend Author of
the Doctrine of instituted Churches.

Q 2. Whether there ought not to be a Trial of Persons concerning their
qualifications and fitness for Church communion, before they are admitted
thereunto?
We shall not here examine the force of the Authors arguments, whether they
unresistably conclude, or not; and whether the consequence is good from the
trial of the Apostles, the Porters at the Temple, or the 12 Angels at the Gates
of the Mystical Jerusalem, to the trial of Church Members. It suffices that the
Reverend Author has modestly stated this Truth, and cited us to a merciful Bar,
the judgment seat of a rational Charity, where the Judge avoids severity, and
the trial is managed with abundant tenderness: the bruised Reed is not broken,
nor the smoking flax quenched: the tender Lambs find the kind Shepherds Arms
to fold them, and a gentle carriage in his bosom. This is indeed the part of
the good shepherd, and we could now gladly commit our selves to the Reverend
Authors Pastoral care. So many good words remove all jealousy of a rigid
Trial. But alas! the Clouds return upon us, and a black doubt is started, as
follows.

Q 3 Whether are not the Brethren, and not the Elders of the Church only, to
judge concerning the qualifications and fitness of those who art admitted into
their Communion?
The Reverend Author allows there may be a difference of apprehension, as to
this point, and yet no breach of Union. We think so too, and therefore as we
continue to honor the Person, though we expose his opinion; so we ^o^^ the
negative will not dele^ve the popular cry, Oh Apostasy! Apostasy! The
difference, as the Reverend Author tells us, is between the Brethren of the
Presbyterian and the Congregational way, the former giving this power only to
the Eldership, the latter joining the fraternity with them. He takes up for the
latter; but whether he proves it, the world may see when we have considered his
Arguments.

In the foregoing Chapter, when he would prove there ought to be a trial of
Persons, he tells us of the Porters that were set ut the gates of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19 but those Porters were Officers 1 Coron. ^6. 1. so he Instances
in the Twelve Angels at the Gates of the Mystic(...) Jerusalem, which though it
may imply that the G^^es were kept, yet not that the fraternity were the
keepers. He instances also in Phillip and John the Baptist, which if it argues
any thing, is applicable only to the Officers, and not in the Brotherhood.

But to examine his strength in this Chapter what he calls argument, may more
truly be styled dogmatical affirming, or a more mean begging the Question. Till
page 24, 25. he quotes a cripture or two in proof of his assertions, ^^i^. 1 Corinthians. 5. 12. 2 Cor. 2. 6. in both which places the Apostle is writing to the
Church at Corinth, about excommunicating the l^cestuou^ Person to h^^ ^^n, and
the restoring him again upon his Repentance. And w(...)t the Reverend Author to
the same holy Aposti^ for an ^^swer. (...)t is that known place, 1 Corinthians. 1^.
chap. where he compares the Church to a man's Body, and shows the distinct
offices and operations of the respective Members, as the Eye and Ear, the Hand
and Foot. And to render the allusion the more intelligible, he names the
Officers God had set over his Church, as more immediately referred to v. 28.
God has set some in his Church, first, Apostles, secondarily, Prophets,
thirdly, Teachers -- and in the close of the 14. chap. he adds, Let all things
be done decently and in order. The result of all is this.

The Apostle would have every one to keep his proper place and sphere, and do
his own work, soil in the Censure of the faulty Person, the Eldership were to
do theirs, the Brotherhood not to usu(...)or arrogate any thing above their
Province. For as the Apostle queries, v. 19 are all Apostles? are all Prophets?
are all Teachers? i. e. in a governed Body we cannot expect all should be
Governors, vid. Pool's Annot.

There is another Text also produced to prove the power of the Brethren, scil.
Mat. 18. 17. and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church. This
Text has been often brought on this account, and sometimes on other accounts
and as often answered, yet here brought again, but it will not answer the end.

The Context supposes an Offender, and the wronged party proceeding against
him; and here are three steps the dissatisfied Person is directed to take, in
order to heal the wound given, 1.) To tell the Offender his fault in private.
2) To tell him before 2 or 3 witnesses, and if the end be not obtained; 3.) To
tell it to the Church. Suppose now a Person acting according to this Rule (as
we could give instances if need were) when the first step did not gain his
Brother, nor the second answer the end, at last the dissatisfied Person carried
the case to the Pastor, and now he reckened he had told it to the Church. The
Pastor sending so the Offender presently convinced him, brought him to
Repentance, and to give satisfaction, and the thing was issued. Here the Rule
was attended, the Church told, the offender healed, the wronged Person
satisfied, and the matter issued, when the Brotherhood all this while knew
nothing of it. It is evident from the next verse, that by the Church must be
meant those who had Power to bind and loose, which Power Christ had given to
the Apostles. Moreover let the sense be that the Offense is to be told to the
Rulers first, and then by then to the multitude; not for the multitude to judge
of it, but for their warning and example, for their prayers for the offender,
and their approbacion of the Elders Censure, and that they might take care to
avoid the familiarity of such an insectious sinner, vid. Pools Annot.

But if Scripture will not prove the Power of the Brethren, possibly some
venerable Maxim may do the feat. Quod ^angie omnes debet ab omnibus approbari.
But alas! this Maxim gives so much to the Sisters, as to the Brethren. Surely
it is no divine Oracle, it neither came from Heaven, nor is it according to the
manners of men upon Earth. If a master of a family take in a so^ou^nor or a
servant; all are concerned, but their vote is not asked. If a Captain list a
Soldier, all the Company is concerned, but it is done by his Authority,
without asking their leave. And pray carry this m^x^m to the College, and see
if the President and fellows will stand by it in their admissions. If it be
objected, that even in all these cases if there be any sufficient reasons
presented by those concerned, a prudent Ruler will yield to it; we easily grant
it, and therefore its not unfit that men be proposed to the Congregation, if
there be any thing to object against their lives, etc.

Another argument for the Brethrens Power in admission, is, lest the whole
Power should sometimes reside in the hands of a single Minister, and that this
is unreasonable we have a Speech quoted from the Presbiterian Ministers in
London. But it is strangely perverted from their true meanning, as appears not
only from the whole series and scope of the Book, but also from what is
expressed in the page quoted (p. 71.) where they say, That the Power cannot be
placed in the whole Church collectively taken. The Scripture makes an exact
distinction between Rulers and ruled. They only plead that there should be more
Rulers in a Church then one; or that, when there are more, then the Power
belongs to the whole meaning, the ruling Elders as well as the Teaching. And
what is that to the Power of the Brethren? One officer has Power in plain cases
to act in the Kings name.

Indeed our Savior did frequently send forth his Disciples two and two But yet
Phillip was sent alone to baptize the Ethiopian Eunuc(...) It will not excuse a
Minister in the neglect of Christ's work, because he has no fellow laborers
with him.

But the strongest argument comes last. The way to keep Popery our of the
World, says our Author, is for the fraternity to assert and maintain that
Power, which does of right belong to them. In answer to which, we need only
blot out the word fraternity, and in its room write the word Ela^rship. An
excellent argument that will equally prove either way; and by the change of a
word serve, also to answer Doctor Owens long Speech, which ends that Chapter.

In short, all Power is firstly in Christ's ^a^ds, and our Reverend Author
produces no commission or order from Christ, for the ^rethren ^^ ma(...)ge the
affairs o^ his House in his name; for he has appointed Officers of his own to
that end.

Q. 4. Whether is it necessary that Persons at their admission into the Church
should make a public relation of the time and manner of their Conversion?
The Reverend Author answers in the Negative, and adds, that the Churches of N.
E* do not impose it, ^or ought it to be required or desired. He gives four
substantial reasons why it ought not And had he stopped here, he had done well,
or had he added more reasons to those four, as he could have done, it had been
an acceptable performance.

But about he wheels again, and seems to plead hard for it, or something like
it, which he calls the Practice of the Churches of New England.

This he would recommend from a story received from the Reverend Mr. Eliot, but
we have heard another story from the same Reverend Person, how when one of the
Brethren was highly commending his neighbors Relation, and prefer^^^g it to
others, the said Mr. Eliot turned upon him, and said, A^ Brother! don't be so
much taken with fine words, but look to the man's conversation. The Author
relates another story from the Reverend Mr. Ho^, of one who through importunity
was brought to make a relation, and made the Congregation weep, when he did it;
but whether for joy or grief, we are left in the dark.

The Author gives us his arguments, but they do not reach his end. He pleads
for them in that they are edifying; but we have known some that have been no
ways so; or granting they were always so, can that justify the instituting and
imposing them? would it ^ot be edifying if every Sabbath day evening, some well
disposed (talkative) Brethren should stand up and relate the experiences of the
week past? yet shall we make it a law or custom? will not some people assure
you, they have been wonderfully edified by a woman's preaching in Public? and
yet will our Reverend Author be induced to prostitute his Pulpit to them, or
part with a Sallary to cherish their zeal.

Again, the Relation of Experiences is pleaded for, in that God may be Honored
by them. But we have known some to Gods dishonor, being in^^pid, senseless
things, to use our Authors own words, mere formalities, too scandalous and
superstitious. He says, they are a means to gain love with the Children of
God. But we have known some that have lost love and credit by them.

But the Question is, Whether they are an instituted means for any of these
ends? Whether appointed by God, to promote his glory, edisie the Congregation,
or gain love? If not, they are but the Institutions of men, and therefore to be
rejected, as the before quoted Mr. Willard instructs us.

God has appointed the preaching the Gospel, the Sacraments, etc. for
edification, and the promoting Christian love among his people; but we read
nothing of these imposed relations, neither when Christ himself, nor when his
Apostles after him, administered this holy Sacrament. Nor is there any
appearance of such a Custom in the primitive Church.

Indeed, there are some occasions, as our Author observes, on which a Person
who has had a remarkable Conversion, may declare it: but there is neither
precept nor rule in the Word of God, that it should be done at this set time,
and in public. And with what sace can we impose it, when our Fathers fled from
the impositions of men? whether arbitrary Impositions are insufferable in
themselves, or not; yet certainly they are ^old and insolent in New England,
where the greatest outcry is made against them in others.

But it would make a man smile, were he never so serious or displeased, to read
the Texts that are brought for this Custom; as that Psalm. ^0 10. I have not
concealed thy Truth from the great Congregation. And indeed the Royal Prophet
had been inexcusable if he had, as a Minister would now, that should not
declare to his flock the whole counsel of God.

Again, Psalm. 66. 16. he says, Come and hear all you that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my soul. We imagine the Reverend Author supposes
the Psalmist thus calling aloud in some vast religious Concourse, and that in
order to his partaking of the privileges of the Jewish Church. But should we
grant a supposal so ridiculous and extravagant, yet this makes nothing for
imposing Relations, for then it should have been spoken and challenged by the
People. Do you come, and stand forth, Sir, and tell us what God has done for
your soul, and then we admit you to all the privileges of the Temple. Another
Text strangely perverted to scare some good people is, that, Mat. 10. 33.
Whosoever denies me before men, him will I also deny before my father which is
in Heaven. As if there were no confessing Christ, without making formal
speeches in the Church.

And as if a credible profession of our faith in Christ, the taking his Name
upon us in Baptism, and the renewal of our Baptismal Vow, and a devout
attendance on the Ordinances of the Gospel, were not the true confession our
Lord expects! Woe be to the world, if all were to be rated, denyers of Christ;
who whether from inability, modesty or a just indignation, refuse to make a
quaint Speech in the Church. The last Scripture we shall name, which has been
equally abused with the rest is that in 1 Pet. 3. 15. That Christians should be
ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them, to everyone that asks it,
to wit, in a proper place and time, for a fit end, and on sufficient Reasons,
where there is Authority to command, or it is desired with modesty. The sense
indeed is, that we should be ready to defend our Faith against the scoffs and
cavils of Infidels and Persecutors: and that it is a shame to Christians not to
be able to argue for their Religion, and confute gainsayers. So that if you
would infer hence any public Speech in the Church, it must be rather an
Apology for the Christian Religion, or a Sermon to prove its reasonableness and
evidence; but neither is it in the least intimated that this should be made a
stated term of Communion; and we are sure the Church has no more power to debar
the resuser from any Christian privilege then to require Oaths, Subscriptions,
and Conformity to a Thousand more Ceremonies.

We have but one Remark more to make here, and that is, the Apostle requires
this reason of our hope to be given with meekness and fear. The true sense
whereof is, that which we are contending even with Infidels, yet we must not
argue with an intemperate Passion or Zeal. Or if we construe it, as in
opposition to Pride and Presumption of a man's own g^f^s and abilities; It is a
severe Rebuke to many of our bold and forward Zealots, who have been famed for
their promptness to speak in the Church, and the first that have fallen under
its deserved ^ash. We should indeed be better reconciled to this custom of
Relations, were this prescribed meekness and fear more visible in them. But
this is the misery, the more meek and fearful are hereby kept out of Gods
House, while the more conceited and presum^tuous never boggle at this, o^ any
thing else.

But it seems there is a gross Corruption of this laudable practice which the
Author does well to cen^ure; and that is, when some, who have no good intention
of their own, get others to devise a Relation for them. The Author may be
satisfied there is something of truth in such reports; neither Charity nor
Interest should make us too incredu^^us. But then he passes a severe sentence
on such Liars to the holy Ghost. Which they truly deserve, i^ in their
relations they pretended to tell the time and manner of their Conversion, or if
they so much as suggested it to be their own devising; but if it be only a
profession of their Faith and Repentance, it is not material who composes it,
if they can conscientiously subscribe to it. And indeed a general. form might
be best of all in the case, if they must needs be made us. To sum up all, we
not only believe (with our Author) that such as delude the Church, by bringing
relations not of their own devising, do exceedingly provoke the Lord; but also
that the imposers of them as a term of Communion, do so too.

Q^. 5. Has t^^ Church Covenant, as commonly practiced in the Churches of New.
England, any Scripture foundation?
In reference to this Question, the Reverend Author and others of his opinion,
in their discourses about it, love much to keep in the dark. We confess our
selves at a loss about those words ( as commonly practiced) and Solomon has
long ago told us, that he that answers a matter before he understands it, it is
a folly and shame to him.

The Reverend Author knows we suppose, or if he don't, we do, that in some
Churches of N. E. they have no Church Covenant at all, and that in other
Churches it is differently p(...)* Some understand by it only a Covenanting
with God to perform by his Grace the Duties we owe to him, and our Christian
B^e^^^en, and accordingly ^o propose it; others mean by it a Covenant with a
particular Church, whereby they are bound to walk in Communion therewith, till
by their consent dismissed. Others will have it to be a necessary Qualification
in order to a persons partaking of the Lords Supper, either there or else
where; And others have Notions of it quite different from all these.

The Reverend Author first bears us down with a formidable Authority, telling
us the Question was considered at a General Convention of the Ministers, May,
1^98 and that all the Ministers then present save one, did concur in the
Affirmative, but we have heard q^^te otherwise, and that it was then proposed
and urged to have the Church Covenant more distinctly opened, though it was not
hearkened to. It is a good policy to hurry on a vote their cause depends on,
and like a first Principle, it must not be deliberated or debated; and such, as
we hear, was the mannagement of that vote. And it is observeable the Reverend
Author avoids (whether indust^iousty or no, we shall not guess) to state the
nature of this Covenant, but confusedly says, as it is practiced by the
Churches in N. E.

In the Preface we have the Authors own description of this Covenant, where he
calls it explic^t Covenanting with God and his Church, and sometimes with God
and his People. But we renew our Complaint, that we are yet most miserably in
the dark. It might be enquired here, whether it be two distinct Covenants, one
with God and the other with his People? i^ so, which of them is the proper
Church Covenant? If but one, whether it binds the person that enters into it,
to perform the same Duties to God, and to the Church* and in case a person be
dismissed, whether it is from his whole duty or from a part of it? and whether
God and his Church Promise ^he same thing to the party covenanting? These
Queries are offered only to provoke a clear state of the thing debated, which
should be cleared to the understandings of people, before its imposed on their
Consciences, as a term of Communion.

But before our Author ends this Chapter, he puts another disguise, and a more
taking face on this matter. He would inf^^uate that the Church Covenant, as
practiced in New England, is nothing more than the public Profession of Faith,
and promise of a holy L^^^; for which he quotes both Synods and several private
Reverend men's Names. But this unfair dealing may be stripped of its disguise, by
showing in what sense we allow a Church Covenant, and in what sense we allow it
not.

1 st. We own and plead for a Covenant with God, whereby a Person or People
become his, and b^nd themselves to walk in all his ways. This was the Covenant
that constituted Israel of old to be a Church and People of God, and which God
made with Abraham and his Seed after him, by which ^^ became, in a special
manner, their God, and they his People* This is the Covenant that Israel
renewed with God in the Wilderness, ^^cut. 26. 17, 18. To this God annexed his
Seals, Circum^^sion in the days of old, and Baptism under the Gospel. Its by
this Covenant that a Person or People are united to Christ the head, and do
become Members of his Body. By this the Catholic Church is constituted, and we
have an Interest in all those Privileges that belong to believers, as such.
This is the Covenant we own, and which we renew every time we attend the
public Wors^i^ of God, Psalm. 50. 5. and this Covenant ought to be explicit,
openly professed and published to the World. It is a false and abusive in
nu^tion (but frequently made in an awful Desk) that People are against all
explicit Covenanting, or the open renewal of it; for there is no pretense for
such a C^lumny, that we can hear of: It must therefore arise either from idle
Fears, or some mischievous Policy.

2 ^ly. We also highly approve of a Covenant of Reformation. A great (...)uty
in times of Apostasy, and gross corruption of Manners; to covenant to put away
these and those reigning sins, to return to the Lord, and perform such
particular Duties as have been visibly neglected. O^ this we have frequent
instances in Scripture, Ezra 10 3 5.

3dly. We may also allow a Covenant between Minister and People, whereby they
^i^^ themselves to th^se respective Duties, that the Word of God has made
incumbent on them, on account of that Relation.

But we altogether deny a Church Covenant in the following sense, and say, Our
Lord Jesus Christ has no where appointed in his Word, that there should be a
Covenant ent^^'d into by some Persons of a Christian Society, exclusive of the
rest, whereby they being in Covenant one with another, should thereby call
themselves a Church of Christ, making the Ordinances of Christ, or any of them
to depend on this Covenant, so that those who scruple it, or refuse to join in
it, shall on that account, not enjoy them. And that those who are thus
covenanted, or the major part of them, have power to make or unmake Officers,
to admit or reject Church Members, to manage Discipline, to order the affairs
of Christ's House in his Name, as if they had warrant and commission from him so
to do. Of such a Church Covenant neither Moses, nor Christ himself, the
Prophets nor the Aposties have spoke any thing. None of the Scriptures,
Arguments or Quotations of our Reverend Author prove any thing of it. We will
take leave therefore to call it Man's Covenant, and no^ Gods, for it has nor
Gods Seal affixed to it; and though good, wise or learned men may endeavor to
obtrude it, and plead, its harmless, ^^ifying, or for the Interest of Religion,
yet according to the afore-quoted Rule of the reverend Mr. Willard, we are to
reject it, and shall do so, till it comes with a divine Stamp.

But possibly this may be called a Misrepresentation. You will say, Who owns
it, or will plead for it in this Dress? We Answer, by querying, Whether there
be not several that own and plead for the things contained in it? We wish there
were a less Number. But to evince it, let us take it into the several parts.
Are there none that plead for a separate Covenant, which some (and generally
the lesser part) must enter into? and if it be good, and for good ends, why
must so many be excluded? If it be to reform Manners, if to maintain the
Ministry and Worship of God, if to lay stricter Bonds of Duty, if to bring men
more effectually to submit to Discipline, why then are not the whole brought
in? for the whole Congregation are obliged to these Duties, and why must the
Covenant be separate?

Again, do not some plead, it is requisite, in order to a Persons partaking of
the Lords Supper? But did our Lord Jesus Christ require any such thing when he
first instituted that holy Sacrament? Did the Apostles when they administered
it? Was it the term of Communion in the primitive Church? or where i^ the
Scripture that commands it? and why should Gods holy Ordinances be annexed to
Men's Covenant? Again, do not some plead, that those who thus covenant, have the
Power to make and unmake Officers? The Reverend Author will not escape here,
whose Opinion in this matter we shall see hereafter. And, finally, do not some
pretend, ^^at these are the Persons commissioned by Christ, for the admitting
and rejecting of Church Members? This the Reverend Author defends with all his
Might, under the third Question, though, as we showed, he could find no Proof.
And so much for the Church Covenant, which is a stranger to the Scripture, and
has no foundation in the Word of God.

Q. 6. Is public Reading of the Scriptures, without explication or exhortation
therewith, part of the Work incumbent on a Minister of the Gospel?
The Author does not mean, (as we suppose,) if there be no explication or
exhortation throughout the whole time of exercise. If he does, he fights with
the air, for we know no Sect of Men but have some explication, though many among
us neglect reading. We therefore take his sense to be this, If no explication
follow immediately without the interposition of Prayer, or any other part of
divine Worship. For we conceive that the ordinary preaching the Word may very
properly be called exposition, explication and exhortation, and that in every
Sermon there is a competent portion of Scripture for one time explicated and
applied. No^ can we imagine, the Reverend Author means that every clause a
Minister reads in public should be in a formal manner explicated: Methinks it
should satisfy, if after one or more Chapters read, some select clause, verse
o^ paragraph be insisted on and expounded, i. e. chosen as a Text, and preached
on.

We are obliged to the Author, if but for quoting the Text in Timothy, where it
is given him in charge, as his Ministerial Work, To give attendance to Reading,
as well as to Doctrine and Exhortation That the Jews were wont to read the
Scriptures in their Synagogue, says the Reverend Author, we all know; and that
it was their Duty to read the Scripture at some set and solemn Times, we also
know; for so it was appointed, Deuteronomy. 31. 11. Again, he grants that in Just in
Martyrs time the Scriptures were read, and thereupon followed a Sermon.

We should have been thankful if he had added more Proofs, by way of
Encouragement (as he could easily have done) and thereby confirmed some that
are apt to stagger. He could have to^d how the Assembly of Divines at West
minster, do order and advise to i^: He could have quoted the many famous
Churches that do practice it at this day: He could have named several famous
Ministers in England, and some in New England, that plead for it, and practice
it. He could have told of more than the Bishop of Derry that complain of the
neglect of it, and that (to use the wo^ds of a most eminent Divine not far from
us) as the most just Reproach that the Churches of New England labor under. He
could have told, for encouragement, that it is a clause in our public
Confession of Faith in New England, chap. 22. which treats of Religious
Worship, and the Sabbath day, Sect. 5* The reading the Scriptures, Preaching
and hearing the Word of God, singing of Psalms, as also the Administration of
Baptism and the Lords Supper, are all parts of the Religious Worship of God, to
be performed in Obedience to God with Understanding, Faith, Reverence and godly
^ear. Finally, He could have told us (had he searched all our New England
Antiquities on this head) how in the Preface to our Version of the Psalms, the
reading of David's Psalms as other Scriptures) in Churches, is taught to be one
end of them, as well as singing of them, which is another end. It is ridiculous
to say, that reading, with exposition is here meant; for then why was it not so
said?

However, it looks very oddly, that they who neither read nor exp^u^d, should
talk so much, and quote so many Name^, as our Author has done, for a Practice
which they never intended to come up unto.

We have heard what our Author has said, and much more that he could have said
to encourage this good Practice: His Discouragements follow:

And first, he brands it with a hard uncouth Name, and twice tells us, that
some call it Dumb Reading* We wish he had named those that so term it. There is
so much Venom in the Epithet, and so complicated a Mali^nity in the Phrase,
that we fear its infectious, and may propagate a Spirit of Pride, and contempt
of his Neighbors, and irreverence to his Maker. The Author well thought, so
odious a Mark on the Front, would give all honest People a disgust to ^^
villainous and stigmatized a Practice. But his Policy has failed him, for it
raises a just Indignation in all sensible and ^n^enuous Christians. We will for
once inform the Reverend Author, that the Scriptures are read in Churches
audibly and intelligibly. Nor can we guess what Dumb reading should mean,
unless when men sleep over their Books; and in charity to the Author, we wish
he had been a sleep when this unlucky word dro^t from his Pen.

We are further beholden to the Author for his judgment, that the reading of
one Chapter, with a brief explication, wi^^ edify the Congregation more than
the bare reading of twenty Chapters. But this is only his single Opinion, and
as it will not weigh against the daily experience of thousands of People, who
must judge for themselves; so neither does it favor of modesty, to think any
one of his Sermons o^ short Comments, can edify more than the reading of
twenty Chapters. We would not charge on the Reverend Author all the hard
consequences of his own words, or we should say, that it is audacious so vilely
to disparage the Inspirations of God. Alas! Sir, the Scripture wants nothing of
ours to make it Perfect. We have the Confessions of many who have come to hear
the Word read with prejudice, that God gives it authority from the lips of the
Minister* And we know, that as all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, so
it is in it self profitable (without any help or advantage from us) for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness -- ^o
perfect the Man of God, the Minister as well as his People; and if it were not
so in it self, it could not be so by being explained. Here let our Confession
of Faith speak for us, chap. 1. Sect. 7. All things in Scripture are not alike
plain in themselves, nor alike clear unto all; yet those things w(...) are
necessary to be known, believed and observed for Salvation, are so clearly
propounded and opened in some place o^ Scripture or other, that not only the
learned, but the unlearned, in a due use of the ordinary means, may attain unto
a sufficient understanding of them.

There is one Argument in pag^ 47, 48* brought by the Reverend Author against
this Dumb Reading, but so picious a stu^^ble, so miserable an incon^equence,
that we are loath to name i^.

To issue this Head, we are more and more confirmed, that the reading Gods Word
in the great Congregation, is so far from being offensive to God, that it is
the greatest Reverence and Honor we can do it, and the most suitable
acknowledgment we can make to him, who in mercy has given us his Word, and will
judge the World by it at the great Day.

Qu. 7. Is Baptism to be administered to all Children, whom any professing
Christians shall engage to see educated in the Christian Religion?
The Reverend Author, according to his wonted Bounty, a^ first dash concedes to
us, that he will not oppose the adoptive right. We then declare our selves
satisfied, and crave no more; for we do not conceive that any man can engage or
undertake for the Education of a Child in the Christian Religion, unless he has
the Authority of a Parent devolved on him, for the government of the Child. Nor
would any conscientious Minister accept the engagement of one who has no power
or ability to perform his Vows. So that this engagement necessarily implies the
care and authority of a Father, and consequently there is an adoptive Right to
Baptism.

But the Author stumbles at the phrase, professed Christians, and seems to
think that the Question, if carried in the Affirmative, would conclude for
Papists, Socinians, and the groslest Heretics, as also for the most notorious
Prostigates, and profane Persons; as if it ever entered into the heart of a
Protestant Divine to accept the Engagement of some lewd Debauchce or professed
Papist to institute his Child for the Devil or Popery. Our complaint here is
the same that the Reverend Mr. How once made of his Adversaries, That ^e
gravely falls a combating with his own Man of Straw, and so we are to be
tortured in Effigy. But to pacific him, we would inform him what a charitable
Man would understand by a professed Christian, vi^. the some that our Catechism
does, when it instructs us, That Baptism is not to be administered to any till
they profess their Faith in Christ, and obedience to him. We leave our Author
therefore to fight it out with that Reverend Assembly, for truly his Argument
is form^dable against them, in as much as Papists, Socinians, Heretic; the
Profane, etc. do all profess their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him. Such
is the Power of Interest, Faction, Passion and personal Opposition, that it
blinds a Man on a sudden to fight with those Truths which he has learned and
reverenced from his Infancy.

Qu. 8. Is Baptism in a private House, where there is no Church Assembly,
allowable?
The Question seems to grant, there may be a Church Assembly in a private House
(as we read, Romans 16. 5. Phil. 2.) so there may be a public place, and no
Assembly*

We agree with the Reverend Author, that Baptism is a part of the public
Ministry, nor may it be administered by one who is not called to the public
Ministry; neither should it usually and o^^ina^^ly be administered but in a full
Congregation, and in the most public manner, nor would we drop a word to
discourage so pious a Practice.

Yet, let the Congregation be never so great, if the Administrator be not a
public Minister, commissioned by our Lord Jesus Christ, it may be called
private Baptism, and altogether unallowable; and if the number of people be
small, and the place otherwise private, yet if the Administrator be a public
Officer and Minister of Christ, the Baptism may in a sense be called Public,
and in some cases (as that of dangerous sickness) not only allowable but
necessary, and a duty. When a Justice of the Peace acts in his Office, though
but few are present, yet they are acts of public Authority, as truly as those
done in higher Courts, and with greater solemnity. Although among us, where
Churches are orderly settled, there is little occasion either for private
preaching or Baptism, it being certain the more public both are, the more God
and his Ordinances are honored, and the general profit of his people consulted.

But yet (as was hinted before) there are some cases of necessity, wherein its
ones duty to seek a more private Baptism; the providence of God not permitting
a more public attendance, and no Minister ought to refuse their desire.

As for instance, in apparent danger of death, it would be cruelty to deny such
a request, if privacy be the only Objection. We need not suggest, that all what
we call private Baptism there may be a competent number of people present; the
neighborhood being called in, and notice given to some of the Brethren of the
Church. We observe a good Medium herein between the two dangerous extremes. We
avoid all unnecessary and common Baptizing in private, for which our Brethren
in England are so very faulty; and we would correct our own defects here at
home, in refusing to Baptize in private, be the extremity never so great, or
life never so ^azardous. Not that we are at all ti^ged with the error of St.
Austin, namely, a pe^swasion of the absolute necessity of Baptism to Salvation:
^ut we ^^^eem i^ the most public owning of God which the state of the person
admits of or the providence of God a^ present allows, and (...) good to ^e
found in the way of blessing, and we may expect that (...) his own Instit^tions.

(...) the lawfulness of private Baptism, in cases of necessity, abundantly
appears from that One instance of the Jailer, Acts 15. 33. To ^^^ch our Author
answers, St. Paul was an extraordinary Officer. But by his leave, that is
nothing to the purpose; for the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel succeed the
Apostles in those thing in ta^e of an ordinary and standing nature in the
Church, as baptism i^* ^ndeed, his other reason is good, that it was difficult,
if no^ impossible to get a Congregation of Christians; and therefore necessity
was put upon the Apostle to Baptize the Jailer and family in private; which
plainly holds forth thus much, that in like cases of necessity, as in times of
persecution, danger of Death etc. the same practice is allowable and a duty;
wherein we have the promise of Christ's gracious Presence with us, as well as
when it i^ administered in a larger Congregation Mat. 18. 20. For where two o^
th^^e are gathered together in any Name, there a^ I in the midst of them.

Q. 9 O^ght all that contribute toward the maintenance to have the privileage
of voting in the Election of a Pastor?
The Reverand Author in the very first line of his answer to this question,
t^r^sts in a most ^^kind in^^nuation, and not altogether free from Calumny, as
if the affirmative could not be maintained, but the change of Simony must be
incurred.

We therefore once for all profess, that we abhor as much as he pretend to do,
the thought that Money should purchase us Church privileges; but this is so
wide a Ramble that it is not worth while to say more to it.

All the Authors arguments under this head infer only that it is the Churches
privilege to choose their own Minister. And ^^der his 4th argument he tells us,
that nothing is more evident, then that in the first Ages of the Church,
Pastors were chosen by all and only their flocks. Which we verily believe, no^
could he have expressed the truth in more apt words. For long since he has
caught us, I ^as adult baptized Persons are of the Church, and (...) proved it
in his Treatise annixed to the first Principles of New England, under which
denomination they claim the privilege of voting in the election of a Minister.

Indeed there is one argument at first blush seems pretty plausible, p. 68. for
them who have no rig^^ to the Lord Supper themselves, ^o ap^on^t ^^^ shall be
the Dispencer o^ that Ordinance to others, is ^ig^ly irrational.

We Answer; The administration of the Lords Supper is but one part of a
Ministers work, and but a little part, compared with all the rest. Let us turn
the argument then, and say, For some few to appoint who shall be the Preacher
to the whole Congregation, is as highly irrational.

Suppose we what is frequent in this Country) thirty or forty Communicants, and
it may be two hundred to be admitted in convenient time; is it not every whi^
as absurd, that not one of these who are to be examined, prepared and admitted
to this holy Ordinance, shall have liberty to choose the Person who shall do
this Work for t^em; but the Person must be altogether chose by others, wh^^ he
has not this Work to do for. A hopeful argument that will help both sides!

The Reverend Author calls it A privilege purchased for the Communicants Only
by the Blood of Christ; but he gives no proof a^ all of any such Appropriation,
and leaves ^^ yet in the firm belief, that the Privilege is purchased for the
whole Flock, who had need stand for their own.

We might here borrow of the Author the Maxim he gave us in another case, Quod
tangit omnes ^^b^t a^ o^^^b^s app(...)ar^ It was exploded in the other case,
but if he will give u^ leave to put in Aequaliter (Quod tangit omne^
aequaliter, etc.) then ^t would suit the cas^, and afford him some conviction.

The Reverend Author also gives us another Maxim in page 87. with this Elogium,
That it has its foundation in Nature and Reason, though we are sure it makes
strongly against him here, namely* That which Pertains to all is not valid, if
some of all sorts have not a consent in it; for some places have no
Communicants, and there all grant this Right and Privilege belongs to the
whole: if afterward they come to have some Communicants, by what Rule or
Reason do they take away that Privilege which belonged to others before? In
short, let our Author find one Text that limits or confines it to the
Communicants alone, and then deprive the Majority.

But since Scripture fails him, he has another Refuge, viz. the Authority of
the Synod, and the Law of the Land. The last of these we think excepts Boston,
and of both we need only say, that as they were done by men, so they may be
altered and undone by the same men, when they please.

It is also hinted, That this may prove fatal to the Churches. But there is no
danger, Truth does no harm; and we rather think it may be retorted on the
Author and his Practice. There was lately a grievous Complaint made by a
principal Man of Swanzy, before some Ministers and others, That the Law which
gives the Power to the Communicants only to call a Minister, is like to ruin
them and their Posterity forever, by excluding them from an able and orthodox
Ministry, and the Ordinances; for the Baptists taking advantage thereby, have
set up a gifted Brother, and spoil the place of the public Ministry.

Qu. 10. Is it expedient that Churches should enter into a Cons^ciation or
Agreement that matters of more than ordinary ^^^ortance, such as the gathering
a new Church, the Ordination, Deposition, or Translation of a Pastor, be done
with common consent?
The Reverend Author answers, That it is both expedient and necessary; though
he had answered as well, had he said, It is altogether needless. But le^t we be
mis-understood in this matter, let the Reader carefully observe, We do not mean
that the Communion, or Fellowship, or Prayer, or Assistance, or Duties that the
Church or People of God owe to one another, are needless. But for particular
Churches, that are parts, and result from the Catholic, and are united to the
Head, and in Covenant with him, and bound to perform all Duties both to the
Head and to all the Members respectively; for such to talk of entering into an
agreement on this account, seems very idle and needless. To i^^ustrate the
matter; if a Servant has bound himself to a Master, he need not go to make new
Covenants to carry it dutifully to the Mistress, lovingly to the Children,
faithfully to the fellow Servants, this being all contained in the Masters
Covenant. So, if a Person marry a Husband, she has no need to make a new
Covenant with his Father, that he shall be her Father, or that his Brothers,
Sisters or other Relations shall become hers, this being all ^mplyed in the
M^^^i^g^ Covenant: The respective Duties must be performed, but there is no
need of new agreements or covenants to be entered into Mr. Buroughs, as quoted
by the Reverend Author, expresses this well. They are bound in Consc^ince to
give an account of the ways to Churches about them, or to any other who shall
req^ir^ it; and this not in an A^bitra^^ way, ^^t as a Duty they owe to God and
Man. The united B^eth^e^ in London speak yet more fully in the Chapter of
Communion o^ C^ur^^es, ^. 1. We agree that particular Churches ought not to
walk so dist^^ct and separate from each other, as o^ to have care and
tenderness to one another. But their Pastors ought to have frequent Meeting
together, that by mutual advice, support, encouragement and b^ot^^^ly
intercourse, they may strengthen the ^earts and hands of each other in the ways
of the Lord. We may add here the whole Chapter of occasional Meetings of
Ministers, and so dismiss this Question.

Qu. 11. May the Brethren in Churches, and not the Pastors only, be sent unto,
and have their Voice in Ecclesiastical Councils?
It is to be observed, that by this means the Brethren in a Synod will surpass
the Elders in Number, and by a Cabal may easily out vote them* Wherefore we can
never believe that our Lord Jesus Christ has left every private Brother an
equal Vote with any of his Officers, in ruling o^ ^^^^agi^g his Church. It will
be granted that the advantage is of the Elders side, as to Learning, Prudence,
Par^^, Piety, Zeal and Devotion, at least, taking the whole Synod together; yet
that men of mean Parts, no Education, nor under the awe of an Office that
obliges to the care of Souls peculiarly, should be equalled to the former in
all Decisions, though not Debates, whereof they are incapable, is very
unaccountable. Indeed, had our Lord in his Word positively required this, we
might expect that his Spirit of Counsel would more abundantly reside on the
weaker Vessels; but otherwise, to fill a Council from the Plough, and the
^^all, is a tempting Christ, and betraying the Church. Neither are we ignorant
what Tools they are in the hands of any one designing Man of a Reverend and
August Name, let his Opinions be what they will; these are Bigg^^s, and the Man
is himself a Synod. We co^s^ss such a Man would be tempted to stand up for the
Brethrens Authority, which is his own support, and the mean while the Church is
like to be well governed.

But what is a further Outrage to the sacred Office, the Author will not let
Ministers fit as Officers of Christ, or as Persons authorized by him; for thus
he expresses himself, page 80 Its not their Office, but the Churches
Delegation, that g^v^^^ Power to th(...) Members of Sy^^^^* the specificating
Act in which Synod all Power, and so the rig^^ o^ a decisive Vote ^^ ^o^nded,
is the Churches Delegation. And to prove this, he instancet^ i^ the first Synod
that ever sat, as ^e terms that Acts 15. a Copy and Samplar left to all
succeding Generations. But how Comical is this? as if that was so constituted,
or its Members delegated by particular Churches. Or, how long had this inspired
Synod sat before that case was brought before them? or were they summoned upon
this single occasion? Truly the Author beg^ the whole, and proves nothing of it.

Indeed, the Reverend Author tells us in the same page, That of these Delegates
from the Churches, the ^l^ers o^g^t to be the principal, or principally
concerned. A mighty grace ineed! yet even this cannot be allowed, and he
consistent with himself; for in the next page he tells us, There are some
Brethren in the Churches, whose Gifts and Abilities are beyond their Pastors,
and some again are more Noble and Honorable. Now if they are alike delegated,
and those can act no more in the Name of Christ than the other, pray why should
they be the principal? Why may not a ^rother of equal Authority as^ume and
arrogate the first place to himself, which if he chance to do, we leave the
Author to be catechized by him, and to do Penance patiently by his own
Principles.

Qu. 12. Does the Essence of a Ministers Call consist in his being Ordained
with the imposition of hands by other Ministers? Qu. 13. May a Men be ordained
a Pastor, except to a particular (...), ana in the presence o^ that Church?
We join these two together, partly because they are of near affinity, and
partly because some things the Reverend Author asserts under one of them, may
indifferently be referred to the other. Our chief Exceptions may be reduced to
these five.

(...). That he asserts, she essence of a Ministers Call consists in a mutual
election between him and his People, page 91. If we under^tand the Author, he
means, that a person cannot be a Minister without his mutual Election, and that
with it he may, and is. He had just before no^ed, that some think the essence
of the Ministry to he in Orai(...)on; others, in its being done by a Bishop;
Which last No^^o^ ^^ts off (says ^^) m^st of the Ministers in France,
Switzerland, Denmark, (...)d, Scotland, etc. But, to retort you words, Sir, we
think that your assertion cuts off more both for Number and for Eminence. It
cuts off the Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists! It cuts off all the
Bishops that are and have been. And though these in general, may signify
l^^tie with our Reverend Author, yet some of them he mentions as great and
eminent Lights. He cuts off Thousands of Presbyters, famous Ministers, who
apprehending the Essence of their Ministerial Call to ^ie in their being
ordained and sent of God, do who^y wave this mutual Election, as a little thing.

The Scipture speaks ^ery highly and honorably of the Ministerial Calling.
They are ^a^ed Ministers of God, of Christ, of the New Testament, of the
Gospe^: Ministers in the Lord, Ambassadors for Christ; Angels, Lights, Stewards
of the Mysteries of God, etc. All whi^^ th^ws, that not only the ^^^enc^, but
the Excellency of the Ministry con^^sts in their Relation to God and our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to that separate and sacred Work that the holy Ghost has
called them unto, Acts ^3 2. But what scripture in^i^^tes to us, That their
Essence or Emmency lies in their Relation to this or that particular People?
The Prophets of old never pleaded their Election by Man, but that they were
called, sent, ordained and commissioned by God.

The Authors chief Argument here is a Supposition of Shipwreck upon some
desolate Island: and we easily grant, that one of the Company being elected,
may become a Minster of God unto them, but it is more from the Providence and
Call of God, than their Election. Its God must furnish (...) It^ God must
incline him to undertake it: Its God that ^^i^s up the People to receive and
entertain him as a Minister: God gives success to his Ministry, etc. But
besides this, it is to be considered, that God does not tie himself to those
means which he has tied us unto in ordinary cases; according to that usual
saying, Jus divinum p^s^tivum cedit juri divino Natural^. The case is who^^y
extraordinary, and God that makes the Necessity wi^^ also dispense with our
unavoidable Compliance.

Were our Author in the right, the sinful Will of Man, whereon the Election
does depend, might frustrate the whole Ministry that Christ has instituted.
But, alas! whether men will hear, o^ whether they will for bear, our Lord will
send his Ministers; and whether Men will call them or no, they shall beforced
to confess, Verily, we had Prophets among us, Ezekiel. 33* 33.

We wonder also, that they ^^o insist upon it, That it is Christ's peculiar
Prerogative to state his own Worship, should s^oil him of another part of it,
to make his own Officers. If the People may do one, why not the other? And it
increases our Wonder, that the Reverend Author should revive this Assertion at
this ti(...) of day, Forty six years after it has been so learnedly and so
fully refu^ed in Jus Divinum Ministerij Eva g^li^i, published by the Provincial
Assembly of London, chap. 9. without taking Notice of their Answers and
Arguments.

2dly. We shall p^ss by several things in these Chapters, which in a severe
Disquisition, we might justly except against. Our second Charge is, That he
makes imposition of hands a little unnecessary Ceremony. Though we can
distinguish between Ordination and I ^position of Hands, and approve what the
aforementioned Assembly says, page 157. We must distinguish between the
Substance, Essence and formal Act of Ordination, and the Rite used therein. The
Essential Act of Ordination is the constit^ting or appointing a man to be a
Minister, or the sending him with Power and Authority to preach the Gospel* The
Rit^ is Imposition of hands. Yet we can see no reason why this Rit^, being of
divine Institution, 1 T^m. 5. 22. used by the Apostles, the primitive Church,
and generally since the Reformation, should now be run down as so triffling a
Ceremony* We know the Reyerend Author could have quoted a whole L^af of famous
Authors, who speak highly for it. If the Provincial Assembly at London
displease him, the New England Platform may satisfy him, That Church Officers
are not only to be ^^o^^n by the Church, but ab^^ ordained by Imposition of
hands, and Prayer; or the Answer to the 32 Questions, that says expressly,
Ordination is necessary by divine Institution. But, i^ the Author indeed
disquieted it the imposition of hands, because but a Ceremony? It is out
looking back to page 80 and we shall see he as much magnifies and contends for
as mere a Rite, to be sure, s^^l. the right hand of fellowship.

The Reverend Author not only speaks meanly of the laying on of hands of the
Presbytery, but ^^ too ^^ch countenances the Imposition of hands by Brethren,
or Persons out of Office. His Text of Scripture, Numb. 8, 9, 10. respecting the
Children of Israel*s putting their hands on the Levites, is so fully and
punctually answered by the Provincial Assembly of London, page 188. that we
remit the Reader thither, for ^^ love ^ot to transeribe. In the New Testament
he owns there is no instance of Persons out of Office imposing hands. And
notwithstanding all his instances, the Apostles assertion stands good, Heb. 7.
7. and without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater.

The Authors next Essay is, to remove the weighty Objection, That none can give
what himself has not. And this he does by some Simili^udes. To touch upon one,
page 99. A Woman (says he) by giving her ^el^ in Marriage, causes the Man, to
^^o^^ she gives her self, ^^ have the power of a Husband; but no man will be
so absurd ^^ to say, that a Woman has formally the power of an ^^^sh^^d.

A poor Return ind^^d, to so weighty an Objection! An unmarri^d Woman has power
over her self, to rule and govern her self and her Actions, as fully as the
Husband has, when she is married: though a particular Church, without any
Officer, has not power to ^eed, teach, govern themselves, and ad(...)
Ordinances. Here ^^ a plain Disparity! Moreover, it is gro^^, ^^^u^d to affirm,
that the Wife gives the Power to the Husband. Indeed, she gives her self, but
it is the Institution and Command of God, that gives the Power; and could we
suppose that to be laid aside, they would be equal. To be sure, it Women once
get this Notion by the end, that they give the Power to their Husbands, we
should soon have them indenting, limiting and reserving in part to themselves,
by a Marriage Contract, as well their Power and Authority, as their Estates.

4ly. The Author asserts, That no man ought to be ordained a Pastor, except
unto a particular Church, page 101. Which kind of Doctrine does indeed startle
us, because it manifests the Reverend (...) to be very u^stable in his
Judgment. It is credibly reported, That at a general Convention of Ministers at
Boston, May 26. School. (and there are enough yet living, who knew the truth of
^t, to whom we appeal) this Question was discussed, Whether a Minister might be
ordained, though he had, as yet, no particular Church, in order to (...)
Administration of Baptism, and the gathering and settling a Church? This, as we
are told, had a more peculiar reference to Mr. Clap's Nation at Rhode Island,
and it was voted and carried in the Affirmative; and what is yet stranger, was
lead on and put to the Vote by the Author himself, he being the Moderator of
the Assembly. Upon this conclusion Mr. Williams was ordained in the College
Hall, in order to his Voyage to Barbados. Now it is wonderful to us, how the
contrary to that which was a truth two years ago, should obtain now. Possibly
the Reverend Author'^ modesty will not suffer him to think the Balance equal, or
we would put the late Vote of May, 98 in the Scale against the Council of
Calcedon, p 105.

5ly, We crave the Readers patience, and will offer but one Remark upon these
two Chapters. In page 102* its said, Pastar and Flock are Relates, and
therefore one cannot be without the other. It is contrary to the Rules of
Reason (as Logicians know) that the Relate should be without its Correlate. To
say, that a wandering Levite, who has no Flock, is a Pastor, is as good sense
as to say, to the who has no Children is a Father, and the Man who has no Wife,
is a Husband

This is worn threadbare, and answered long ago by the Assembly at London, and
others, and sometimes by the Author himself. A Minister may be considered under
a double Notion, as a Minister of C(...)t, or of this or that particular
Church. In this latter sense they are Relate and Correlate, and no otherwise.
Hence, if he leaves them, he ceases to be their Minister and they cease to be
his Flock* but still he may be a Minister of Christ, and they a Church of
Christ. And thus in that little Book that is en^it^led, The judgment of several
Divines of the Congregational way, concerning a Pastors Power occasionally to
exe^t Ministerial acts in another Church, besides that which is his particular
Flock; the Reverend Author expresses himself after this manner, page 1. The
Ministerial Power which a Pastor has received from the Lord Jesus Christ, ^^
not so ^o^fined to his particular Flock, as that he shall cease to be a
Minister when he shall act in the Name of the Lord else where. And a little
after, I am, as to this particular, fully of the same judgment with the learned
Dr. J. Owen in (...) judicious Treatise concerning a Gospel Church, Page 100,
101 where he has these words, Although we have no concer^^^us in the sig^ent of
an indelible Character accompanying sacred Orders, yet we do not think the
Pastoral Office is such a thing as a man must leave be^^nd him every time he
goes from home; for my own part, ^ I did not think my self b^^nd to preach as a
Minister authorized, in all places, and ^^ all occasions when I am called
thereunto, I think I should never preach more in this World. Thus Dr. Owen.

We see then, that our Reverend Author and the famous Dr. Owen plainly hold,
that though there be a Relation to a particular flock, yet a Minister is so
au^hro^zed by Jesus Christ, that he is capable in his Name to perform
Ministerial Acts in other places, and upon all occasions. And were not our
Author sincerely of this Opinion, we cannot but think he would highly condemn
any Minister that should be absent from his Flock four years together, upon any
service whatsoever. ^ure, if he be no way capable to act as a Minister of Jesus
Christ, he is all that while but as a stray Bird, idly wandering from its Nest.

Yet at this time, our Author would bear the World in hand, that a Minister has
no power to act as such, but to his particular Flock* and therefore quotes the
words of the Platform, chap. 9. sect. 7. He that is clearly loosed from his
Office Relation to that Church whereof he was. a Minister, cannot be looked on
as an Officer, nor perform any act of O(...)e in any other Church, unless he be
again called unto Office. But a more eminent Assembly of Divines at London,
have quoted this very Paragraph, page 1^5 and severely, but justly answered it
as a great ^bs^rdity, and contrary to sound Doctrine.

The answer to the other part of the Question, Whether a Minister should be
ordained only in the presence of that Church where he is ^^serve ^ Will result
from what has been already laid down.

The presence of Christ must be supposed, when ever a person is separated to
his Ministry; but seeing our Lord Commissions none immediately, such must be
present as have Power to authorize, Commission and give the charge in his Name.
When ever a Call is given, received and accepted, whether it be by Words,
Message or letter, both Minister and People are conceived, as present face to
face. But the Circumstances of Times, Places, Persons, Distance, etc. must
determine this matter; which as they m^^ fall out, may sometimes render it both
prodent, regular and necessar^, (and then its the Voice of Providence) for a
Min(...) to be ordained on one Land, and to serve in another.

Q. 14. Is the Practice of the Churches of New England in granting Letters of
Dismission or Recommendation from one Church to another, according to
Scripture, and the Example of other Churches?
The Reverend Author refers to many Scriptures to prove the Affirmative, but
not one of them reaches the Question, or proves ^^ dismission for this end,
soil to take a person off from being a Member of one Church, to be made a
Member of another. The Epistles or Letters he refers to, are all Apo^ta^^cal or
Ministerial; not the Letters of one Church to another, some only excepted,
which is mentioned as writ by the Brethren; but Apol^^, on whole behalf they
wrote, was not a Member of their Church; nor do they write to those in Achaia
to receive him as a Member, but rather as a Minister, or as a Christian of
eminence and singular goodness.

Indeed there may be a good use of Letters of Recommendation, and especially
among strangers and where a Member removes from one Church to another, a mutual
satisfaction may be labored after. But we cannot but think such Letters
frivilous, when in the same Town, and at two streets distance, a Person known
over all the Town for an exemplary Conversation, prefers another Ministry.
Civility will constrain such persons to acquaint then Ministers of their
purposes, and the same Christian Civility obliges such a Minister to acquaint
the other Pastor (if need be) to whose Ministry they repair, that they have
carried themselves well in his Communion, and that he hopes they may prove
blessings in all other.

But as for the Brethren, We need not go to them, to make a second Speech, now
to ask leave to withdraw, and to render an account to every impertinent Talker
who thinks the man Married to him, and that his bed is broke into, or that
there is no just reason for a divorce.

Moreover, some people are forever dissatisfied; neither conveniences of
Habitation, liking the others Ministry, profiting under it, or dislike of some
Customs and Practices which he would willingly be rid of the light of, can
satisfy. And what must the grieved person do further in this case? Why, truly
he has done his duty, and may hear and communicate, where God and his own sober
Conscience directs him. No^ ought any Minister of Christ, to reject his claim
to the Lords Table with him.

To say no more, our Reverend Author having in a former Treatise proved that
persons baptized are thereby subjects of Discipline, We think they all ought to
be accountable to the Society where they are; there persons being dismissed by
the Providence of God, whether they have letters of dismission or not. Else by
their principles, an ordained Minister in London, formerly of Communion with a
Church in Boston, being called to Office in a particular Church, and having
accepted the Pastoral Care thereof, must first send over a Packet to
New England for a Letter of dismission. And don't you think he would be well
employed?

Qu. 15 Is not the asserting that a Pastor may administer the Sacrament to
another Church besides his own particular Church, at the a^fire of that other
Church, a declension from the first principles of New England, and of the
Congregational way?
The Reverend Author Answers, No, not at all. Had the Question been, whether
this be a deci^^sion from the Tru^^, we had fully joined with him in the
Answer. It being true Doctrine, that a Minister upon desire, may as well
Minister to another Church, as to ^^^ own: both being Churches of Christ, and
he a Minister of Christ, there being but one Faith, one Body, one Baptism.

But had we been of the Authors Principles, which he pleads for in this Book,
we must have answered, that ^^ is a great A^^stacy and Declension. And when the
Reverend Author first put out this in the year 1693* some of the old men and
women did express themselves after this Rate -- That it was not thus from the
beginning, and that he had pull'a such a Pin out of the good ole ^ay, as would
in a little w^ile bring the whole abri^k to the ground. No^ was this complaint
without reason, for if particular Churches are specifically distin^^* if Pastor
and Flock are Relate ^^^ Correlate, that give being to one another, as Husband
and Wife; if the ^ssence of a Ministers Call lie in a mu^^^l Election between
the Church and him; then we can by no means allow the Authors assertion, That a
Pastor may administer, etc T^^ in vain to plead, I were may be at well
commu^^^^ of Officers, as of Members; for these Principles will not allow so
much as a Member of one Church to communicate in another. Hence the ac^^e Mr.
Hooker (^^ the Author (...)isles him) could never get over that difficulty, but
looks upon it as unwarrantable or private Members to communicate in another
Church. Neither can Dr. Oven or Dr. Goodwin (whom he (...) pillars among the
Congregational) though they twist and squeze and strain hard, maintain this
(...) on these Principles, no^ satisfy a ^ational mind about it. Though they
plead they are transient Members for that time, yet this no more excuses it,
than if an A^ult^^^s ^o hi(...) ^^^ shame and folly, should excuse it by saying
-- She made the Man her Husband for that turn and act. For if we run it to the
narrow, the Administrator must deliver the Sacrament as an Officer, or not,
there is no Medium: If as an Officer, then he his Power from Christ, as such,
to administer the Sacrament where he i^ occasionally called. And then down go
the Authors Principles at once, of the Churches being specifically distinct, of
the Essence of the Ministerial Call lying in the mutual Election of Minister
and People, of Pastor and Flock being Relate and Correlate, so as to give being
to each other, as such; or else on the other hand, it must be said, That a
Minister, when he administers to another Flock, acts not as an Officer, but as
a private Man; and this lays all in common, and destroys the Ministerial Power
at once. And to attempt to reconcile it with our New England Platform, will be
but (as Mr. Hooker has the expression) to make the Platform to speak Daggers
and Contradictions. Neither can it be pretended, that the generality of the
Ministers in New England were of that mind in the beginning. In the Answer of
the Elders of several Churches in N. England, unto the Nine Positions, it is
said, Position 8. If you mean by a Ministerial Act, such an act of Authority
and Power in dispensing Gods Ordinances, as a Minister does perform to the
Church whereunto ^^ is called to be a Minister, then we a^ny that he can
perform any Ministerial Act to any other Church but his own, because his Office
extends no farther t^a^ his Call. And now we appeal to the Reader, if the
Reverend Author must not either Renounce these his darling Principles, or own
himself guilty of that Declension from the first Principles of New England,
which in another he would call Apostasy.

And indeed, we know well enough, that a few years ago, no young man could have
escaped that odious Brand, that durst have printed such a Principle. But all is
well that we do our selves, and every other Congregational Tenet had been
laudably rejected, had some men the doing of it. Let another presume, he is a
Back^^i^er, an Apos^a^^, ^^^u^, ^a^b, Contemptuous, and Despis^^ of his
Fathers. The same thing* (to a^ude to the Authors words, page 71.) in one man,
is a modest inoffensive Dissent in another, a daring Contradiction to Synods.

Qu. 16. Is it a Duty for Christians in their Prayers, to make use of the words
of that which is commonly called the Lords Prayer?
Though the Authors answer hereto be very large, yet we shall say very little
to it, or against it. He yields and allows, it may be lawfully used, as well as
other Prayers and Passages in Scripture, in our Addresses to Heaven: That it
has been used in ancient Times, he does not deny; and we know that it is most
frequently used by the most famous Divines in these days. And he gives us an
instance of Mr. Je^. Buroughs, which we thank him for, having never heard it
before. That it has been abused to Superstition, and the Trial of Witchcraft,
we also know; but the abuse of a thing does not take away the proper lawful Use
of it; nor is it fit so far to gratify those that made it a Charm, as ^o^ ^h^t
reason to ^^^rain to use it.

But verily the Author would have us more superstitious that we are willing to
be; for he quarrels ^^ the varying but of one word or clause in this excellent
form of Prayer: If instead of Debts or Sin^ we say Trespasses, it is a fearful
Crime. For why? says the Author, It smells rank of the Li^^^gy, its le^^n'd ^^^
of the Common Prayer Book. He might have said rather, That we learn first to
read ^^ so in our Horn-Books, and are mis-taught from our infancy. But truly,
we account this difference of Translation a petty thing. And if instead of
Hallowed, the Author would say sanctified; and instead of daily Bread, he would
choose to say convenient Food, we should not full foul on him.

No, says the Author, page 123. why then you give up the Cause. In truth, then
the Author has no adversary in the world, where the Lords Prayer is used in any
Language beside the Greek; for who bind^ himself to a Translation, as to an
Original? but the Author's meaning is apparent, he would insinuate into the
heedless Reader, That whoever uses the Lords Prayer, ought not to vary one
word from the words Christ gave it in* and truly, then they must, like
Barbarians to the People, tone it in the Original Greek.

We would offer here one Query more. Does the Author mean, in stating this
Question, to enquire whether it be an indispensible Duty to use the words of
the Lords Prayer in all our Addresses to God, so that as often as we bow our
Knees in Prayer, we should think it necessary to repeat this Form? Here again
he would have no Adversary under Heaven Yet the Question may be strained to all
this, and he has taken no care to bound it.

But to detain the Reader no longer, it is enough and enough that the Reverend
Author justifies it as lawful; for then doubtless it may be sometimes proper:
for that would be a strange thing indeed, that is always lawful, and never (in
no Circumstances, not in that of Mr. Buroughs himself I can be proper. But
since it is lawful, IN(...)or once give my sense when it is proper, s^il, When
People have been long taught and made to believe, that the Use of it is
Superstitious, To place a great part of their Religion in the dislike of it; To
think this a principal ground of Nonconformity, and a distinguishing Badge of
a Dissenter; or, that it is too vain a Formality to comport w^^h the Spirit of
Devotion. Then, if ever, it is high time to correct such a Prejudice, and to
show the People it may be used without Superstition, and that neither the
Spirit of Religion, nor yet the Arguments for Episcopacy, Presbyteria^^sm nor
Independency are any ways concerned in this affair.

Here we would crave the Readers patience for one Quotation, and the rather
inasmuch as the N^^^ of Mr. Philip Henry may be of more Authority with the
Reverend Author, than many arguments, when barely offered by us. It is said in
the 97th page of Mr Henry's Life, That he looked upon the Lords Prayer to be
not only a Directory or Pattern for Prayer, but (according to the advice of the
Assembly of Divines) proper to be used as a Form. He thought it was an Error on
the o^e hand to lay so much stress upon it, as some do, who think no solemn
Prayer accepted, nor ^o solemn administration of Worship complete without it;
and he thought it an Error on the other hand not to use it at all, since it is
a Prayer, a compendious comprehensive Prayer, and may be of Use to us, at
least, as other Scripture Prayers; but he thought it a much greater Error to be
angry at those who do use i^, to judge and censure them, and for no other
reason to conceive Prejudices against them and their Ministry. A great strait
(faith he) poor Ministers are in, when some will not hear them, if they do not
use the Lords Prayer, and others will no^ hear them it they do! What is to be
done in this case? We must walk according to the light we have, and approve our
selves to God, either in using or no^ using it, and wait for the day when God
will mend the matter, which I (...) he will do in his own due time. -- -- Thus
spoke the holy and heavenly Mr Henry, and with ^i^ the late Reverend Dr. Bates,
who writ^s the Dedication of his Life, and as h^ has fully expressed our sense
in this matter, so we would wait and pray with him, for the Happy Day.

Well, but if the case be so circumstanced, says the Author, page 135. that it
cannot be done without Offense, it is rather a Duty, and will be most pleasing
to Christ, not to use it as a ^orm. But then such Offense must be manifested,
and appear to be conscientious. This confirms what I before suggested, That
there is a riv^^ed Prejudice people are educated in against this Practice, that
they start at it as a thing in it self sinful and scandalous.

But to show we are in Charity with the Author, and all those who omit the Use
of this excellent Form of Prayer, we shall close this Chapter in the words of
St. Paul, Rom 14. 3. Let u^^ him that ca^^th de^p^^^ him that ^a^e^^ no^; and
let not ^^m that ^a^eth no^, judge him that ^ateth.

Qu. 17. May the Churches under the Presbyterian and Congregational Discipline
maintain Communion with one another, notwithstanding their different
Sentiments, as (...) Church Government?
The Author answers, That they may and ought to do so. And truly, had this Book
contained only this one Question and Answer, it might have turned to more
Edification than the whole. He tells us, There was greater Differences than
these in the Apostolic Churches (...) thinks then we of latter Days may the
better ^ear with one another* the effusions of the Spirit of Peace and Truth
being since much restrained

The Reverend Author observes further, That both Persuasions have been
Confessors and fellow Sufferers, and he thinks this should endear them. We
think so too, but to our sorrow, some of us have heard ho^^ it has been in
England, and now, alas! we see it verified in our ^uthor* that when their own
Persecution ceases, they carry on the Tragedy on others* We do not wonder at
what the Author says Mr. Baxter told him, That if all Independants were like
N. England Independants, he would soon be (...)* For we can easily guess what
deceived that excellent Person (whose Moderation s^ited his Pie^y and Devotion)
into so endearing an Expression. He formed his Idea of New England Independency
by the Authors Plausible carriage when in London, which though for that time
might be very sincere, yet either the difference of the Climate, or that his
Dominion here is more rightful, quite a^e^^ him. We are assured, the Author is
esteemed more a Presbyterian than a Cengregational Man, by scores of his
Friends in London* (...) is loved and reverenced for a moderate Spirit, a
peaceable Disposition, and a Temper so widely different from his late Brothers
in London. He was most conversant at the Presbyterian Board, and of^^^est in
their Pulpits, and professed the greatest Reverence for their Persons. And no
wonder Mr. Baxter should be so e^amoured of such Independents! Did our Reverend
Author appear the same here, we should be his (...) P^oselites too. But we are
loath to say how he forfeits that venerable Character, which might have
consecrated his Name to Posterity, more than his Learning, or other honorary
Titles can. To confirm what we have here said, the Author deelar^s how
Instrumental he was to promote the Union betwixt the United Brethren in London.
We only wish he would be as cordial and active to keep it, as he was to make
it; or else the World will think his Zeal (...) it was, because far enough from
home, where Interest was not touched.

As for the three Articles of Union, which the Author transcribes, we would
endeavor to maintain them, and all the rest. But there are some Cases and
Times, when Ministers of some particular Opinions will not bear to be consulted
with. Or if there is a necessity of disobeying their Opinions for once, it is
best not to consult them, merely to do their Counsels the more Despite. We
think this modest and ingenuous. Nor can it be reasonably expected that a
Congregational Classis (if such there be) should be consulted in those things
which are properly Presbyterian, their Prejudice, in favor of their own
Opinions, rendering them unfit to advise with in that matter; and the more
serious the application to such is, the more severely would they think
themselves ^antered.

As to his Query, Whether the embodying into a Church state be not a mighty
matter? We must needs profess, we want some better account what that is, before
we can so esteem it. We read nothing in Scripture of gathering a Church, or
embodying it into a Church state, unless it refers to the converting and
baptizing of Heathen, and then administering the Ordinances of the Gospel in a
stated way to competent Numbers, whose convenience will permit them to meet
constantly at one and the same place of Worship. All further Solemnity in this
matter is ex abundant^, and therefore the matter seems not so very weighty.

WE now humbly take leave of the Author and his Book, wishing there had been
no occasion for these Reflections, and accounting it a sufficient Apology, that
we have been contending for what we apprehend to be the Truth; and it became
the more necessary to vindicate it, lest it should suffer more by the Reverend
Author's Name and Authority, than by (...) arguments. So far is the Presidency
of the College from being a Protection, that it is the lo(...)est argument in
on (...) for a zealous us Con^u^^tion.

Not can the Reverend Author much resent this our search after Truth, if he
remembers the liberty that the humble and ho^y Mr. Baxter once Prayed him to
take, in (...) and re^uting any Errors he should find in his Books, or should
the Author (...) angry, it would but cause us to suspect (what a bundance of
people have (...) obstinately believed) that the contest for his part is more
for Lordship and Dominion than for Truth.

It Is possible some good people may blame us, for carrying on the C^^t^^tion,
wherein, as one says, though there be but little Truth gained yet a great deal
of Charity may be (...). We hope the best, as to both these; but however it
happens, we are willing to promise the Reader, that scarce any thing shall
provoke us further to concern our selves in these disputes: no, not so much as
to make any Return, should a Thousand pretended Answers be published; for we
love not to be contentions, b(...)s the Reverend Author is wont to say in like
cases* it suffices that (...) have born our Testimony.

And here we must do justice also to those who have first openly asserted and
practiced those Truths among us. They deserve well of the Churches of Christ,
and though at present decryed as Apostates and back^^^ders, the generations to
come will bless them. So a score of years or more p^st, the Enlargement of
Baptism was cried out upon, as a woeful declension* but the present generation
feels the happy effects of it, and rising up at the Reformers names, do call
them blessed.

To concluds all it is the Answerers sincere desire and design, if it be
possible, and as far as in them is, to live peaceably with all men. (...)is
then prayer, that God would grant peace and Truth in our days, rebuke the evil
Spirit of pride, uncharitableness, co(...)on and contempt of others, and pour
forth on us all his Spirit of Grace and Love.

And now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in us that
which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
forever.

Amen.
Postscript.
IT is strange that our Review should be assaulted before it can be P(...). Yet
so it happens in a late Pam(...), en(...), A ^o^t Answer to the Do(...)o
instituted Churches. Let them can it soft who have lo^^ their feeling! For th^'
it is confessed there are no very ^^rd Arguments, yet Jealousy, Censures,
Contempts there are, which great hard enough.

In page 12. the Reverend Authors seem jealous of some Injurious Treatment in
this our Review; whereas their soft Treatise is in(...)* us not to us only, but
to whole Synods and Nations of Presbyterians. They dare to say, that their
Gospel Order, which is here answered, is vindicated in every point, from the
Concessions of the Reforming Presbyterians beyond Sea; and that not only from
particular Authors of great fame among them, but W(...)le Synods, Whole Nations
of them. O injury to Truth and Modesty! Tell us ( Sirs) we beseech you, what
Synods, what Nations of Presbyterians do oppose reading Gods Word in public
Worship, ^o^ the using the Lords Prayer, that excellent, perfect and most
comprehensive Fo^m? That limit the Right of choosing a Minister to a particular
Church Covenant? That say, the ^ssence of the Ministerial Ca^ co^fist^ not in
the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, or that the Brethren may lay on
hands, or that there should be no Ordination but to a particular Church. You
reasonably add, Optimus ille qui ^urre novit injurias plarim^^ --, Though the
best men in the world (...) hard bear all this Could (...) Authors persuade us
to believe, this we would obey him, and name our selv^^ no more Presbyterians.
We appeal (in our Authors words, page 16.) To all the Presbyterians in the
World, say, O ye Men of God, and of Order! What Reparation can our Authors make
you for this Wrong* in making your Name the Vmbrage of these their Errors.

We are, moreover obliged to the Reverend Authors for their Ci(...)ies, page 7
'(...) a g^^ding, unstudyed, unstable Generation, full of ^^vity, bleating* and
lo^i^g An^i^a^^, Raw ^out^, page 15. They me(...) (fo^^o^th!) this contempt for
calling themselves Presbyterians* but even let the Calf be known by its
bleating. Too late that (...) came to mind, page 50. Being reviled, we bless,
being defamed, we entreat.

In page 14. the Authors complain* That we pay not due Deference to the Classis
of the Pastors in the Vicinity, and yet they assume not any Power of a Classis,
any further than to forbid us to be Presbyterians.

We highly approve of many particulars in page 17. That the Proponant for the
Lords ^able be examined of his Baptismal Vow, his sense of spiritual Wants*
Sinfulness and Wretchedness, his Hope, Faith, Experiences, Resolutions through
the Grace of God But then come two words, Covenant and Brethren, in Capital
Letters, as a Lion Rampant, insulting a couching Classis, a bleeding
Presbytery. But if we look over the Answer to the last Question in The young
Man's claim to the Sacrament (whereto these words in our Author do refer) we
shall find, that the Proponant promises nothing more than to be subject to the
censures administered unto him by the Poster of the Church and its Officers. So,
Sirs, the Brethren are dropped, wittingly, no doubt, by the quick-sighted Author.
And indeed, for the Brethren to be named in the Question, and neglected in the
Answer, is a fair Negative on them. The Proponant promises no subjection to
them, and the Reverend Authors sagacity is wonderful in that Answer, for the
Question takes the Congregational Brother, the Answer satisfies a Presbyterian.

It seems also that the Adversaries of this Gospel Order multiply a pace; for
in page 22. They are merely a few gentlemen at Boston and New York. But by that
time you come to page 30. our Brethren of Connecticut exceed all the rest of
New England in proclaiming their Indisposition to it. And by the following
Exclamation, O Tim^^ and Manners! ^t seems that Cicero must be called from the
Grave to i^^^^gh against these Raw-Yo^^^s, th^se licentious Ca^al^es.

We cannot pass over page 61. without a Remark. The Apostasy of our Young Men
(say our Authors*) is great before the Lord. The Apostasy (it seem) respects
the Examination and Qualifications of Comm^^^^^nts at the Lords Table, which is
suggested to be in d^^^ying the Necessity of men's coming to the holy Table with
Repentance, Fait and Love. God forbid we should so accuse, or not vindicate our
Brethren. This is to a^ledg a Crime abhorred by the Generation (...). -- Well,
but they zealously disperse unhappy Pamphlets. If the Doctrine of Instituted
Churches ^^ referred to, that is but one; and what other the Reverend Authors
mean, we cannot guess; and that Tr^ati^^ in most parts is a Mine of Gold, and a
rich Treasury of right Thoughts.

The next Surmize is a mere Defamation, That Go^ge, Roberts, Dolittles Books
must be h^^s'd back to Europe again. A pre^^^ device to praise the Gentlemen
beyond Sea, and at the same time condemn those here that conform to their
constant Practice.

Had the Attestation in page 63* been only to recommend the following Treatise
of the excellent Mr. Quick's to our perusal and Practice, no Minister in New
England, that c^^^s himself a Presbyterian, but would cheerfully subscribe it;
but we believe few would confederate in its Reflections on the Reverend Mr.
S^^ddard, or favor that worse Report, That under the Vmbrage of the Name of
Presbyterians some would bring in Innovations, ruinous to our Churches, and
contrary to the Doctrine and Spirit of Mr. Quick'^ Book.

And to add one Guess h^re, Its twenty to one if any one of the Attestators
knew what a soft Answer was to be prefixed to their Attestation. For this would
not be the first time that men have subscribed a Paper, which had they known
would have been placed to such advantage, as to the less discerning R^ad^^ to
seem an Attestation to the whole Book, they would have refused their Names with
Indignation.

What remains is to Recommend that Treatise, The Young Man's Claim to the
Sacrament, to the serious and diligent perusal of our Youth. A Performance, for
its kind, very perfect, and highly profitable. But the Reverend Author and his
Treatise are both abused in this impression* Mr. Quick is here betrayed in a
specious show of Reverence and Friendship; while his Name is used to Combat
those very men and their Principles, which he most values and honors. And were
Mr. Quick here among us, and should continue what is his stated Practice in the
Worship of God, he would be decryed among the Presbyterian Formalists, in page
9. as much as he is now magnified for a Reformer. For our parts, we do
sincerely believe him to be our Exemplary Reformer, and wi^h our Reverend
Authors would credit their Character of him, and follow his Example; for he is
conscientious to have the Scriptures reed ^very Sabbath in the public Worship
of God, together with (...) Ten Commandments, and he as often uses the Lords
Prayer. Nay(...) few years since this Reverend and holy Person took leave of a
reverend Minister, returning to us, in words to this effect, Sir, (...) our
Reverend Brethren in New England that they must come over to the Presbyteri^^*
Government, if they would perserve their Churches.

And would it not now provoke a just Indignation to see People so deluded, and
a Gentleman's Name (so dear and venerable as it is with us) advanced against his
own Principles? And will it not turn unto us for a Testimony to use the Authors
words* page 5^^) not only that we have endeavored to vindicate the Truth, but
also to do (...)* Quick justice?

FINIS.

