KNEAZE ALEXEY MICHAILOVITZ Great Duke of Moscovie Aged XXXIV Years. 1664.

Cross Sculpsit



THE Present State OF RUSSIA, In a Letter to a Friend AT LONDON; Written by an
Eminent Person residing at the Great Czars Court at Mosco for the space of nine
years.

Illustrated with many Copper Plates.

O utinam Ars mores animumque depingere posset, Pulchrior in terris nulla
Tabella foret! LONDON, Printed by John Winter, for Dorman Newman at the Kings
Arms in the Poultry, A. D. 1671.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe Author of this subsequent Relation was a Gentleman of large Parts, and had
an esteem proportionably amongst those to whom he was willing to impart his
Sentiments of things, and those were many, not only in his native Country
England, but in France, Italy, Holland, Germany, Flanders, Russia, etc.

In which last place he continued nine years in an honorable employ under that
Great Emperor.

His Genius led him to be curious and inquisitive, mostly, after those things
that were difficult to be attained to; and perhaps he found the means of
gathering these few Papers together, as hard and uneasy as any thing that he
endeavored after in all his Travels.

He had the happiness to be a Favorite to the Great Tzar and his Patriarch
(things not usually competible) and (it may be) has made a farther discovery of
^he Russ affairs then any Stranger has been capacita^ed to do before or since.

These few Sheets he col^^cted when he was in Mos^, and designed (since his
^^ming from thence) to me^odize, and Print them ^^der the Title of The Life
(...) Ivan Vasiloidg (part of which I saw:) But an acute (...) unkind disease
put a ^^riod to that and his life: What you here find was given to one of his
Attendants; who was loath the world should lose the reading of so much truth
concerning that Nation (although it were unfinished, and altogether rough) I
must suppose you will find many faults, some of the Correctors, and some of
the Printers; and if there be any of the Authors, I hope your candor will
pardon his as well as theirs.

Farewell. N. D.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Russians nature in general. Their contempt of Learning. Their
Clergy. Liturgy. Churches. Ceremonies in Devotion. Hours of Prayer. The Priests
names. Habits. Wives. Baptism. The unnatural death of Apostates, CHAP. II. Of
their Marriages. The Clerks ceremony toward the Bride. Her manner of conduct.
The Epithalimum sung by Boys and Girls. The old Woman's advice to the Bridefolk.
The Bridal Room. The Bridegrooms boots pulled off by the Bride. Their severe
Discipline to their Wives censured. No process in Law against it. The Parents
contract with their Daughters Husbands. Witchcraft used at Weddings, Abstinence
from Venery. The penalty for marrying a second or third Wife. The Emperors
second Son. The manner of the Emperors electing a Wife. His disappointment how
punished. His Sallary to the wronged Virgin. The Queens Relations. Of the
Czaroidg not seen publicly till Fifteen. Of the Russian Children. When and how
weaned. Of their Fasts and Pennances. CHAP. III, Of the Patriarch in general.
He is supreme head of the Church. Of his Palace. The Ceremony of Palm Sunday.
His Mitre. Of the Russian Bells. The Patriarchs Present to the Emperor. His
Action on Good Friday. His charge to the People. The Story of a Country
Fellow. Their salutation on Easter Day. The Patriarchs Presents to the Czars
Servants and Nobility. Their entertainments. The Ladies Complements one to
another. CHAP. IV. Of their Burials. The women are obliged to mourn. Their
Dirges. The Ceremony used to the dead. Those that are killed or frozen to
death, buried at Mid-sommer. Of their Carnaval and excessive drinking. The sad
consequence thereof. CHAP. V. Of their Imagery. Pictures exchanged in the
God-market, saved in Conflagrations; they highly prize them, bestow Jewels on
them. The punishment of a Woman who stole her pearl from an Image, though in
case of necessity. Heresy punished. Of their Friars and Nuns. CHAP. VI. The
Tragical Relation of a Monkey. His several tricks. How he threw down the
Images, and scared the Priest. His apprehension, and final condemnation. The
Authors Reflections. CHAP. VII. Of their Music. A story of one of their
Ambassadors. Beggars in Russia beg in Tunes. Their Drums, Trumpets and
Hunting-horns. CHAP. VIII. Of their nuptial proceedings, soon consummated. They
act by Brokers. The man's friends see the Bride naked. How a young fellow was
cheated. The punishment of those Women who kill their Husbands. CHAP. IX. A
merry story of a great Fish, which the Friars took to be a Devil. The contrary
being discovered, they are ashamed, and make an Entertainment. Another story of
a Fish, but more Tragical. What ensued upon it. CHAP. X. Of the Chircasses.
Their Religion, Complexion, Drinking, Dancing, Government, Soldiery and
Witchcraft. CHAP. XI. Of the Russian Government. Laws. Manner of writing. Their
Clerks how called. Their Characters whence borrowed. Their Petitions. His
Imperial Majesty's person and character compared with his Fathers. The Empire
miserably impoverished and depopulated by the Tartarian Invasions. CHAP. XII.
The Emperors rise. His Ancestors but Dukes of Volodimir. His Palace how
called. Of Juan Vasilowidg, and his diverse odd humors, his Petition to one of
his Diacks. His Conquests. How he was loved. How he fined Vologda. How he
served the women that laughed at him. Of the Vayods mistake. Another Vayod how
punished for taking a Goose. Juan a great lover of Queen Elizabeth. How he
served the French Ambassador. How Sir Jerome Boze came off. A Shoemaker
presented the Emperor with a Turnep, how rewarded. What the Emperor did with
the Turnep. How a poor man entertained him. His associating with Thieves. How
he was served by one of them, and how he preferred him. CHAP. XIII. Of the
present Emperor or great Czar. Czar from whence derived. His Titles and Arms.
He marries not out of his own Dominions. His Diet. Lodging. Recreations.
Visits. The Czaro^dges Birth. CHAP. XIV. Of the Emperors Revenues, great
Privileges, Trading, Provision, Traffic, allowance to his Household. Of his
Palace, high Tower. Of his Boyars. Of the Monasteries and Nunneries. Officers
of State. The Czars temperance. Of his entertaining the Nobility. A story of
General Leshly. CHAP. XV. Of the City of Mosco. Of the Czars Jewels. Of his
Clothes, Of the Queen and her maids of honors attire. Their journeys in
Wagons. How they rode formerly. The mode and language of the Russes all one.
They differ in their actions from all other Nations. Of their Clock Dyals, and
contrariety to other people in several things. And of other Customs they have
CHAP. XVI. Of their Judiciary proceedings. Of murder how punished; the accused
must confess the fact. Of their Executioner and cruel Torments. The punishment
of Coyners. A Fellow that shot at a Jackdaw how punished. Conspirators banished
into Syberia, etc. Hanging lately used amongst them, and how. CHAP. XVII. Of
Syberia and its Inhabitants. Chay and Bour Dian brought from thence, their
qualities. Tambul the Metropolis of Syberia. A discourse of Sables, how killed.
The excessive coldness of this Country. How they feed their Cows. Of the River
Ob. What Caviare is made of. Of Samogeda, their Diet. Sledges how drawn.
Hunting. Indistinct habit. Of their manners. And oother remarkable observations
concerning these Northernlings in general. CHAP. XVIII Of the Southern parts of
Syberia. The Wilderness called Step, full of Cherry-trees and fine Flowers. Of
Elks. Of the Koorick and Perivoshick. The Country of Squirrels. Of a little
Bird like a Woodcock, Another like a Hawk. A third as big as a Swan. The story
of the Vegitable Lamb refuted. CHAP. XI A brief account of Tartary. It Is
Metropolis. To whom the Tartars pay Tribute, The Muscovite formerly tributary
to the Crim-Tartar. How far they march in a day. They eat horseflesh, but no
bread nor salt, the reason why. They are very quick-sighted, excellent
horsemen. Of the Colmack Tartars. The Crim's described they deride the Russian
worship. The grounds why they do it. CHAP. XX. What the simpler sort of
Russians are their Idolatry and ignorance, what they think of St. Nicholas,
their high conceit of good works. They are great Rogues. Some are good among
them. The Poles are not so barbarous as the Russes. The Poles uncharacterized,
their Laws; their King how styled, he is very magnificent. King Henry weary of
the title. How he made shift to get away out of Poland. CHAP. XXI. Of Lues
Venerea. Of the Polonian Plica, a familiar distemper, and very infectious, yet
they highly esteem it. When hair first began to be powdered. The Poles more
honorable in keeping Articles than the Russes. A comparison of the Polish and
Russian Languages. Their salutations are stately. How the Tartars and
Chircasses salute. The Chircasses Religion. CHAP. XXII Of the Present Czar his
Father. Grave Wolmer how disappointed in Marriage. Czar Michaels death. The
story of Boris Juanoidg. How the Czar elects a Wife. Whom Boris preferred. His
height makes him envied. Eliah exalted. The Russians extol Marriage. Eliah
disabled. Who succeeds him. Nashokin a great Reformer. Highly commended, His
words concerning the French and Danes supporting the Hollanders against
England. He is a great lover of the English. How he censured a Bill of
Mortality, and some other discourse which he held. CHAP. XXIII. The Czars
description. His answer to a Stranger. How he appears in public. He never
visits any Subject. His Court without noise. He seldom dines publicly. At
Easter his Subjects kiss his hand. How he pays his Strelsies. What he has done
to employ the poor. The Czaritza governs the Women. From whence the Emperor's
chief Revenues proceed, CHAP. XXIV. The Czar goes every year to a house of
pleasure called Obrasawsky. Of the curious tents erected there. How cautious
the Emperor is of letting the vulgar sort behold his pastimes. This commended
for several reasons. None are to petition the Czar in the fields. What happened
to a poor Russian Captain for so doing. The Emperors resentment for his death.
Peter Solticove turned out of Office, and banished the Court; the cause why.
Nashockin put in his place. The Czar in the night time visits his Chancellors
desks. He has Spies in every corner. It Is death to reveal any thing spoken in
the Court. The Russians answer to inquisitive persons. The Czars children how
attended; they are bound to keep secrecy. CHAP. XXV. The story of a Jew turned
Mohammedan, he falsely accuses Nashockin, and is lashed for his pains. Jews how
crept into the Court. A Discourse of Bogdan Matfeidg (the Czars great
Favorite) his Pandor and Amors. His Ladies jealousy, how she was made away.
The Czar reproves him. He and Nashockin no good friends. Of the Czars Religion,
wherein he is very zealous and constant. He fasts at several times eight
months in a year, disposes of all Ecclesiastical Preferments. His high
commendation. CHAP. XXVI. Trading in Russia very low. English Cloth a drug, why
slighted. The Authors Reflection. If Persians trade there, what English are
like to suffer. What the Russians are in general. Concerning the Dutch, what
the English must do to out-vye them. How much they abuse us to the Emperor.
'Twere convenient for England to undeceive the Czar. How things should be
represented to Nashockin and Bogdan. The Russians mightily pleased with their
peace with Poland. CHAP. XXVII. Of Caviare, how and where made. The length of
the Fish Belluga. Caviare of two sorts. The Belluga swallows abundance of
Pebbles; it is an excellent meat. Isinglass is made of his Sounds. CHAP. X^X^^^
Of several sorts of Mushrooms which grow in Russia, their forms and qualities,
they are divided by Botanists into two kinds, viz. Lethales and Salutiferae.
A SURVEY Of the present State of RUSSIA,
CHAP. I.
Of the Russians nature in general, their contempt of Learning, their Clergy,
Liturgy, Churches, Ceremonies in Devotion, hours of Prayer, the Priests names,
Habit, Wives, Baptism: The unnatural death of Apostates.

AS for the Situtaion of Russia; it is so well known, that it would be a
needless labor for me to set it down; my design at present is to Survey ^^e
Religion and Manners of the Inhabitants. And to this purpose, I have made a
slender Essay, the truth whereof, I hope, will excuse the plainness of the
dress; the stuff is course, and the thread not fine* but the matter I conceive
will be both pleasant and profitable. Having had therefore fair opportunities,
and good intelligence, I am the more willing to give you an account of this
Empire. Indeed, hitherto no man of parts or abilities has been suffered to
travel the Country. For the people are very jealous, and suspect those who ask
them any questions concerning their Policy, or Religion, they being wholly
devoted to their own Ignorance, and Education; (which is altogether illiterate,
and rude, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Affairs) look upon Learning as a
Monster, and fear it no less than a Ship of Wildfire; and thus they verify the
old Saying, Ars nullum habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.

In the year of our Lord, 1560. the Art of Printing was brought in amongst them
(as Thevet relates in the life of Basil) and a Latin School also was erected,
but the Tribe of Levi soon destroyed it, Vi and Armis. I shall therefore
commence my discourse with them, who are not set apart for this Function, as in
other Nations, but any Layman of a good life and conversation may take upon
him the Priesthood.

This Nation received the Christian Faith about six hundred years since, from a
certain Priest of Chioff, who is said to cure one of the Dukes of Musco by
prayer, upon which Miracle he and all his people were baptized. They borrow
their Liturgy from the Greek Church, which is written in the Sclavonian
Language, and used in their devotion with as much knowledge, as the Latin
amongst the Papists. They follow the Greeks, though lamely, in the Architecture
of their Churches, whose chief ornaments are Images, adorned with rich Stones
and Pearls, wherein they admit no Sculpture but only painting; for they look
upon the Romish Statue-worship as Idolatry. They kneel not in their devotions,
but lie prostrate* and upon some great Vigils they stay all night in their
Churches, at certain times prostrating and crossing themselves, and knocking
their heads against the Ground. At certain Intervals they discourse of
business, and most commonly the Emperor dispatches the Affairs in the time of
their Service, where he is attended with all his Nobility; and if he miss any,
he makes inquiry after them. At Whitsontide they fall prostrate upon Sycamore
branches (our Maple, which they call Sycamore with us, but falsely) wherewith
their Churches are strewn, upon a fond persuasion that the holy Ghost descends
upon these leaves, as Manna upon Oakeleaves. They have no Instrumental Music,
for the last Patriarch abrogated it, because the Papists used it. In their
Prayers, three hours after Sunrising, they call Obedny, at Sunset Vecherney;
about one a clock in the morning, Zaoutrinys. Miserere mei Domine (which they
call Hospody p^mele) they repeat an hundred times; and that Priest is counted
the best fellow that can mumble most in a breath. You shall have five or six
reading confusedly together, one a Chapter, another a Psalm, a third a Prayer,
etc.

A Parish Priest they call a Pope; as Pope Petro, Pope Iuan; a Bishop
Metropolite; a chief Pope Protopope. The Popes go most commonly in Purple, some
in Green, others as they fancy, only distinguished with two flaps on both sides
their breast, and a purple Scul-cap to cover their shaven crowns. They never
cut the hairs of their heads or beards; a thing not observed by any other
Clergy in the world. A Pope must be a married man, and the Husband but of one
Wife; grounded on that Text, a Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife. Hereby
it appears, the Popes Priesthood is wrapped up in his Wives Smock; for when she
dies he must officiate no longer, which makes them indulge their Wives more
then ordinary for their Office sake. They marry young, that they may come early
into a livelihood, their Wives are also distinguished from others by a flap on
each side their breast. Their Baptism differs not from the Romish, but only in
dipping all over. He that takes up the Russian Faith, be he Lutheran or Papist,
must first renounce his former Baptism, curse Father and Mother, and spit
thrice over his shoulder. It was a custom to hire Strangers to christen the
Russians, but now they are grown wiser than to buy souls at that rate. It Is
observed by some old Standers here, that of two hundred English, Scotch and
Dutch, who have renounced their Religion, few, or none, have died a natural
death.

CHAP. II.
Of their Marriages; the Clerks ceremony toward the Bride, her manner of
conduct, the Epithalamium sung by Boys and Girls; the old Woman's advice to the
Bride-folk; the Bridal Room; the Bride-Grooms Boots pulled off by the Bride;
their severe Discipline to their Wives censured; no process in Law against it;
the Parents contract with their Daughters Husbands; Witchcraft used at
Weddings; abstinence from Venery; the penalty for marrying a second or third
Wife; the Emperors second Son; the manner of the Emperors electing a Wife; his
disappointment how punished; his Salary to the wronged Virgin; the Queens
Relations; of the Czaroidg not seen publicly till Fifteen; of the Russian
Children; when and how weaned; of their Fasts and Pennances.

THeir Marriages are not very solemn; a few attend the Bride about three a
clock in the afternoon, and at their coming out of the Church, the Pannama, or
Clerk, strews Hops upon the Bride, and wishes her children as thick as Hops;
another with a Sheep-skin coat turned outward meets her, and prays she may have
as many children as there are hairs on his coat.

The Bridegroom is led home by young Fellows, and the Bride (being covered all
over) by an old Woman, and the Pope marches before with his Cross. They sit a
while down at Table with Bread and Salt before them, but eat nothing; In the
mean time a Quire of Boys and Girls standing aloft, sing Epithalamiums, or
nuptial Songs, so bedawb'd with scum of bawdry and obscenity, that it would
make Aretines ears glow to hear them. After this they are conducted by the Pope
and Old-women to a Room, where she advises the Bride to be debonair and buxom,
and exhorts the Bridegroom to bestow due benevolence, and here they are shut up
for two hours; the old Woman in the interim attends for the tokens of
Virginity, which having gotten, she goes triumphantly, and demands Albricias of
the Parents, first tying up the Brides hair which before hung over her ears.
The married couple must have no earth over their heads (a Ceremony strictly
observed, as if mortality then ought not to be the object of their meditations)
for you must know all warm Rooms are covered with earth half a yard thick to
keep in the heat.

The Bridegroom has a Whip in one Boot, and a Jewel or some Money in the other,
he bids the Bride pull them off, if she happens upon the Jewel, he counts her
lucky, and bestows it upon her; but if she lights upon the Boot with the Whip
in it, she is reckoned amongst the unfortunate, and gets a Bride-lash for her
pains, which is but the earnest-penny of her future entertainment. The Russians
discipline to their Wives is very rigid and severe, more inhumane in times past
then at present. Yet three or four years ago a Merchant beat his Wife as long
as he was able, with a Whip two inches about, and then caused to put on a Smock
dipped in Brandy three or four times distilled, which he set on fire, and so the
poor creature perished miserably in the flames: Certainly this person was a
Monster, not a Man, born of a Tygress, not a Woman, and in no wise deserved the
Epithete of good or wise. For the Heathens themselves condemn such unchristian
^illany.

Hom. II. (...)
(...).
And yet what is more strange, none prosecuted her death; for in this case they
have no penal Law for killing of a Wife or Slave, if it happen upon correction;
but it is a strange chastisement to kill, seeing the design hereof was never
intended to end people, but to mend them. Some of these Barbarians will tie up
their Wives by the hair of the head, and whip them stark naked. But this
severity is not commonly used, unless it be for Adultery or Drunkenness: And I
perceive it begins to be left off, or at least the Parents endeavor to prevent
it, by their cautious contracting their Daughters; For in their Joyntures they
oblige their Husbands to find them with clothes suitable to their quality, to
feed them with good wholesome meat and drink, to use them kindly without
whipping, striking or kicking them, many more terms and tautologies they use;
not unlike the Common Laws of England. Upon Forfeiture they put this in
execution, which is determined in one Court, but not without bribery, as all
other Suites are. I wish the English had more of the former (I mean their
expedition) and less of the latter, viz. their corruption. Seldom a Wedding
passes without some Witchcraft (if people of quality marry) chiefly acted as
it is thought by Nuns, whose prime devotion tends that way. I saw a fellow
coming out of the Bride-chamber, tearing his hair as though he had been mad,
and being demanded the reason why he did so, he cried out: I am un^one: I am
bewitched: The remedy they use, is to address themselves to a white Witch, who
for money will un^avel the Charm, and untie the Codpiece-point, which was this
young man's ^ase; it seems some old Woman had ^yed up his Codpiece-point. The
Ec^lesiastical Law commands their absti^ence from Venery three days a week,
viz. Monday, Wednesday, Friday. After ^oition they must bath before they enter
^he Church. A man that marries a second Wife is debarred the Church, but ^ot the
Church Porch: If a third the Communion: If a man thinks his Wi^e ^arren he will
persuade her to turn Nun, that he may try another; if she refuses he will
Cudgel her into a Monastery. ^f the Empress had not brought a second Czaroidg
or Prince, born June 2d. 1661. after four Girls together, it is thought she
would have been sent to her Devotions. His Imperial Majesty intending to marry,
had diverse young Ladies brought before him, at last he liked one (which they
say is very beautiful still) but his chief Confessor had a mind to persuade him
to another, who had an younger Sister, so when this fair Lady was brought, they
found his Majesty's inclinations so strong for her, as they feared she would
get the Crown, and indeed so she did; it being a Ceremony, upon his liking, to
tie the Crown upon her head, but the plot was so laid, that the Women should
tie up her hair so hard as to put her into a Swoon, which they did, crying out
she had the Falling Sickness: Upon this her Father was accused of Treason for
proposing his Daughter, whip't, and sent with disgrace into Syberia, where he
died. The Maid remain^ still a Virgin, and never had any fit since The Emperor
being conscious of the wrong: he had done her, allows her a very great Pension.
The King's Father in Law, Eliah the Son of Daniel, dares not say the Empress is
his Daughter, nor dare any of her Kindred own themselves to be so; non dare
Iuan Paoloidg Martischca say he is his Uncle. None are suffered to see the
Czaroidg* but at fifteen years old he is exposed to public view, though not
seen by any before, but his chief Tutor, and some Family-Servants: only
Relations may see young children among the Russians, for they will seldom
permit any Strangers to look upon them, for fear they should cast some ill
aspect upon them.

Their Children are commonly strong and hardy, they give them suck not above a
month or two at the most; after which they feed them with an Horn, or Silver
Cup made Horn-wise, with a dried Cows-dug tied to the small end, through which
they suck. At two years old they observe their Fasts, which are severe: They
have four in a year, and in Lent, upon Wednesdayes, Fridays and Saturdaies,
they eat no Fish, but feed on Cabbage and Cucumbers, and course Rye bread, and
drink Caenasse, which is a Liquor one degree below our small Beer.

They will not drink after a man that eats Flesh. If a Medicine has Cor. cervi,
ungul. Al. or pil. lepor. in it, they will not take it, though to save their
lives, so precise are they in observing their Fasts: Their Penance commonly is
so many bowings, and knockings of their heads before an Image, and sometimes to
eat nothing but Bread and Salt and Cucumbers, and to drink Water for a season.
That which is Pogano (or unclean) may not be eaten at any time; as Horseflesh,
Mares-milk, Asses-milk, Hares, Squirrels, Coneys, Elks: Theriaca or Treacle, is
Pogano, because it has Vipers flesh in it. Castorium, Musk and Civet are not to
be used internally amongst them. Sugar Candy, and Loaf-Sugar are Scarumna, or
prohibited in Fasting-dayes; a Knife that has cut Flesh is Scarumna for a
Sootky, or twenty four hours. It Is good policy, as it happens, that they are so
strict, else the Flesh in the Country would soon be destroyed; For the Russian
Boors being perfect Slaves, are careless of more than what serves from hand to
mouth; and as for the surplus, the Lord or his Steward takes it away.

CHAP. III.
Of the Patriarch in general, he is supreme Head of the Church: Of his Palace:
The Ceremony of Palm Sunday: His Mitre: Of the Russian Bells: The Patriarchs
present to the Emperor: His Action on Good Friday: His charge to the People:
The Story of a Countrey-Fellow: Their salutation on Easter Day: The Patriarchs
Presents to the Czar's Servants and Nobility: Their entertainments: The Ladies
Complements to one another.

THe Patriarch is supreme Head in all Church Affairs, highly honored by his
Majesty: But upon some pett he retired himself to his Countrey-house about two
years ago: Some say he began to innovate certain things, or rather reform them;
for he is no lover of Images, to which the Russes are grossly devoted. The Sea
continues vacant, and they cannot choose another in his place.

His Palace joins to the Emperors, built of Stone, and stately enough for its
bigness; his place is supplied by a Metropolite in the Ceremony of Palm Sunday:
After this manner.

The Emperor accompanied with all his Nobility and Gentry, richly clad in
cloth of Gold (having sent an hundred Scavingers before to clear the way) walks
a foot, led by to Princes or Knezis, just before him walks his Hand
kerchief-Bearer, with a rich embroidered Handkerchief on his right Arm, then he
goes to a Church, called Jerusalem, and by the way prays at a place made up of
Stone, and round like a plate-form, here he bows toward the East, and after
enters into the Church hard by, from whence after an hour he returns with the
end of the Patriarchs Bridle upon his right Arm, whose Reins are four yards
long, supported by three Noblemen behind his Majesty: The Patriarch sits side
long upon an Horse covered all over with fine white Linen, in his hand he
holds a rich Cross, and blesses the people: He wears no Mitre, but a low
crowned Cap all plated with Gold, and richly beset with depiction of building.
^ewels, the brim is narrow, lined with ^rmines, not much unlike Elmo di
Mam^^ino, Mambrino's Helmet which Don ^uixot got from the Barber; but in ^ain
English it was nothing but his Ba^^. All the Metropolites, Popes, Pro^^-Popes
wear Copes; a company of ^oys carry diverse pieces of cloth, about (...) or 5
yards long, of red, green yel^^w, blew, etc. and spread them before ^^e
Patriarchs stately Palfrey. The No^^lity and Chancellors carry sprouted ^llow
in their hands instead of Palm; great guard of Soldiers lie prostrate ^ith
their faces to the ground: Boys ^othed in white are carried upon a Pa^^ant, on
which is a Tree, with Apples ^^stned to it, at which the boys catch. ^he great
Bells toll enough to deafen ^^e hearers, for here are the greatest ^ells in the
world, and his Majesty de^^ghts in them; one of these are said to ^eigh above
thirty Tun weight. The ^eremony being ended, the Patriarch ^nds his Majesty a
purse of Money, con^ining an hundred Rubbles: If his Ho^^ness would give me
such daily wages, would gladly be his Groom.

On Good Friday the Patriarch goes into an Hole in the Church, and there he
stands to bless the People, and gives them this charge. Go your way, neither
eat nor drink for three days space; at night he lies prostrate, and prays till
Easter day.

A Country Russ, that waited on an English Gentleman, went out of curiosity to
see this Ceremony, and unexpectedly hearing the charge of three days
abstinence, returned home very melancholy; but as he sighed to himself, his
Master demanded the reason of his sadness, to which he answered, I am commanded
by the Patriarch to fast three days, and having eaten nothing to day, I fear I
shall die for hunger. But however, in this hungry posture he was fain to
continue with great affliction and reluctance, bewailing his unfortunate
curiosity, till Sunday relieved him. On Easter day they greet one another with
a kiss, both men and women, and give a red Egg, saying these words, Christos
vos creesh. In the Easter week all his Majesty's Servants and Nobility kiss the
Patriarchs Hand, and receive either This Hand shows how the Russ ought to set
their Fingers when they Cross themselves.

This Hand shows how the Russ Priests ought to set their Fingers when they
Bless or Cross the People.

gilded, or red Eggs; the highest sort three, the middle two, and the most
inferior one.

Their greatest expression of joy upon Festivals is drinking, and the greater
the day is, the greater are their debauches. To see Men, Women, and Popes
reeling in the streets is counted no dishonor. After a very great
Entertainment or Poctivat among the grand Ladies, the Lady of the Feast sends
her chief Gentleman the next day with an Howd'ye to her Guests, to enquire of
their health, and if they got well home, or slept well. The Lady answers: I
thank thy Lady for her good cheer, which made me so Merry, [pian-drunk,] that
indeed I know not how I got home! A fine commendation indeed for her Ladyship.
The Mother many times gives her Child a Love-name, by which he is called: As
Almaus my Diamond: The Diack of Prosolsky Precaus, is called Boris Iuano^dg;
but his right name is Eliah Iuano^dg.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Burials: The Women are obliged to mourn: Their Dirges. The Ceremony
used to the dead: Those that are killed or frozen to death, buried at
Midsommer: Of their Carnaval and excessive drinking: The sad consequence
thereof.

THeir Burials are strange, as soon as the breath is out of the body (as we
commonly express it) they carry the Corpse into the Church, where it abides not
long before it be buried in the Churchyard. The Wife of the deceased is
obliged to howl most pitifully, and hire others to do the like, but little
reason have they to do it, considering their severe usage; but custom, not
love, may possibly incite them to do it: Ut fleren^ oculos erudiere suos, is
Ovid's genera^ observation on the whole Sex. The Russians count that the
greatest Funeral where are most Women-mourners; such were the Praeficae among
the old Romans. These therefore in a doleful tone cry out (as the wild Irish
do, O hone) Timminny Dooshinca; Alas my Dear, why have thou left me, was I not
obedient to to thee in all things? was I not careful of thy House? did I not
bring thee fine Children? had thou not all things in abundance? Or thus; Why
would thou die? had thou not a fair Wife, pretty Children, much Goods, good
Clothes, and Brandy-wine enough? As soon as any one is dead they open the
windows, and set a Basin of holy Water for the Soul to bath in, and a Bowl of
Wheat at the head of the Corpse, that he may eat, having a long Journey to go.

After this they put on his feet a pair of black-shoes, and some Copeakes, or
pieces of money in his Mouth, with a Certificate in his hand (from the
Metropolite of the place) to St. Nicholas, of his life and conversation.

If any one dies without Confession and Extreme-Unction, he is denied Christian
burial. Such as are killed or frozen to death, are brought into the Zemzky
precaus, an Office for that, and many other trials, and there they are exposed
to view three or four days; if any own them they are carried away, if not they
are sent to the Bosky or Boghzi Dome (i.e. God's House) which is a great pit in
the fields arched over, wherein they put an hundred or two hundred, and let
them rest till Midsummer, and then the Popes go and bury them, and cover them
with earth.

Thirty days after burial, they read the Psalter over daily upon the Grave,
having a little Booth made up of Mats to shelter them from the weather, but
what their meaning is in this, I cannot understand.

In the Carnaval before Quadragessima, or Lent, they give themselves over to
all manner of debauchery and luxury, and in the last week they drink as if they
were never to drink more. Some drink Aqua-vitae four times distilled, until it
fire in their mouths, and kindle a flame not unlike that of Bocca di inferno,
which issues out at their throat; if they have not milk given them to drink,
they presently die. Much wiser in my judgment are our English Bully-rocks, who
love to keep fire at its due distance, no less then a Pipes length off their
Noses. These drinking bouts are commonly attended with quarrels, fightings and
murders. This custom the Jovial Poet looked upon no less then barbarous: Inter
potandum pugnare Thracum est, barbarum tollite morem, verecundumque rixis
prohibete Bacchum. Some of these going home drunk, if not attended with a sober
companion, fall asleep upon the Snow (a sad cold bed) and there they are frozen
to death. If any of their acquaintance chance to pass by, though they see them
like to perish, yet will they not assist them, to avoid the trouble of
examination if they should die in their hands: For those of the Zemsky precaus
will extort something out of every bodies purse, who comes to their Office.
It Is a sad sight to see a dozen people brought upright in a Sledge frozen to
death, some have their arms eaten off by Dogs, others their faces, and others
have nothing left but Bones: Two or three hundred have been brought after this
manner in the time of Lent. By this you may see the sad consequence of
drunkenness, the Epidemick distemper not only of Russia, but of England also.

CHAP. V.
Of their Imagery: Pictures exchanged in the God market, saved in
Constagrations; they highly prize them, bestow Jewels on them: The punishment
of a Woman who stoll her pearl from an Image, though in case of necessity.
Heresy punished* Of their Friars and Nuns.

THeir Imagery is very pitiful painting, flat and ugly, after the Greek manner;
I asking why they made their God's so deformed, they answered me, they were not
proud. When a Picture is worn out, they bring it into the God-market, where
laying it down, they choose out a new one, and deposite money for the exchange
(for they must not be said to buy it) if the money be not enough the God-maker
shoves it back, and then the Devoto adds more, till the other be satisfied.

An obliterate Image they put into the River, and crossing themselves, bid it
Prosti, i. e. Farewell Brother. And if any of their Brethren meets with Jove,
he turns into Neptune, and they crossing themselves, cry, Prosty Bradt, God be
with you Brother. In time of fire they strive above all things to save their
Images: but if they escape not the Conflagration they must not be said to be
burnt, but gone up. If a Church be burned, they say it is ascended, they must
not say burned. These are their pretty ridiculous distinctions, it is wonder
they do not, with Anaxagoras, affirm Snow to be black.

Sometimes they will hold their Gods to the fire, trusting they can help them,
if they will. A Fellow thinking to have staid the fire by that means, held his
Micola so long, that he had like to have been burnt himself, and seeing he did
him no good, he threw him into the midst of the fire, with this curse. No
Chart. i. e. The Devil take thee. They bestow Jewels upon them of a great
value. This year a Woman, who had formerly adorned her Micola with some Pearl,
being necessitated, came to the Church, and prayed Micola to lend her some of
his Jewels, for she was at present in great want, the dumb brute not speaking
any thing to the contrary, she (thinking silence gave consent) made bold to
take a Ruby or two off him: but the Pope spying her, complains to the Justice,
who commanded both her hands to be cut off, which was done three months since.

In their private houses they do ordinarily give and take, as they thrive in
their business; for if they have any great losses, they will come home and rob
Micola to his shirt. Herosie among the Russes is punished with fire. The
Heretic goes up to the top of a little house, and so jumps in, and upon him
they throw straw and Luchines, which are dry splinters of Fir-wood, these being
fired soon soffocate him. Satis superque severa est hac animadversio.

The Friars and Nuns are not so strict as in the Roman Church. The Friars are
great Traders in Malt, Hops, all sort of Corn, Horses, Cattle, and whatsoever
else may but enrich them. The Nuns go abroad, some begging, others visiting the
great Ladies, where they get a Fox before they return home. These are fine
Votaresses indeed*

CHAP. VI.
The Tragical Relation of a Monkey. His several tricks. How he threw down the
Images, and scared the Priest. His apprehension, and final condemnation. The
Authors Reflections.

NOw that I am discoursing of the Russian Church, it will not be amiss to
relate a sad Tragical story, which was acted in the time of our English
Resident, who it seems had a Monkey famous amongst the Muscovites to this day,
for he would take money in his mouth, and go into the Market, and show it to
the Costard-mongers, who in kindness would give him Nuts and Apples; many such
apish pranks he was wont to play. But we come now to the Catastrophe of his
mirth. Being not content to act a merry part in Foro, he begins lu dear cum
Sacris, and goes into a Church hard by the English House, where he crept in and
tumbled down their Gods. The Priest amazed to see what was done, crosses
himself a thousand times, and sets their God-ships in their places again,
exorcises the foul Fiend, taking his Horse-tail dipped in holy water, he dashes
the doors and windows, that this Devil might not re-enter. But for all this,
one morning early Pug came in at a window, and began with St. Nicholas and the
rest of the Gods and Goddesses in order, as they stood in his way; down he
throws Dagon and the wares of Rimnon as zealously as if he had been bred up in
new England, and ever and anon he grinn'd in the Popes face, who standing armed
with a Cross and holy Water, therewith besprinkled Pug, who (hating it as bad
as the Devil,) fled home.

Presently the Pope goes to the Patriarch, and complains most bitterly against
a Nincheen (or Stranger) living in the English house, for throwing down many of
their Gods, breaking their Lamps, pulling off their Jewels and Chains of Pearl
wherewith they were adorned and lastly for profaning the holy place. Hereupon
an order was sent to search and examine the Ambassadors house; all his Retinue
was brought forth. No, it was none of them, but a little Ninicheen; so the
young children were brought out, and by chance the Monkey came jumping in with
the Children: O that is the Nincheen, quoth the Pope, apprehend him, which was
done accordingly, and the Patriarch finding out the folly, was ashamed, and
sent away the Priest with disgrace for a Fool. But however, poor Pug (to
pacify the angry Gods) was delivered over to the secular power, who chastisd
him so severely that he dyed upon it. Now Chronology would be inquired into,
Whether Ben Johnsons Zeal of the Land, or Country man of Banbury, who in a
Fanatic fury destroyed the Ginger-bread-Idols in Bartholomew Fair, for which
he suffered persecution, and was put into the stocks: Or this American
Reformer, who threw down the Russian Ginger-bread (for if you saw their Images,
you would take them for no better than gilded Ginger-bread) I say whether of
these two is the Proto-Monkey, Martyr, and ought to have precedence in their
Canonization. But I leave the determination of this nicety to those who are
professed Critics, and well versed in Controversy.

This special piece of the Russian Church History was forgotten to be inserted
in its right place, and therefore is set down here by way of Corollary. I
pretend not to be an exact Historian, or Methodist, and so must beg my Readers
pardon. However I relate the truth as it comes to my memory.

CHAP. VII.
Of thheir Music. A story of one of their Ambassadors. Beggars in Russia beg
in Tunes. Their Drums Trumpets and Hunting-horns.

BEfore you go out of this holy Church (which I never desired to enter) pray be
pleased to hear some of the Russian Music: Ever since Orpheus his time these
Beasts have delighted therein.

If you you have heard the Music of the Spears
Pray stay and hear the Music of the Bears.
Which do at pleasure force both smiles and tears.
They modulate so sweet you would admire um,
Their piping's just as if Pan did inspire um,
And for the Harp They Are Asini ad Lyram.
The Swedes call the Russes Bears, or Ursae septentrionales. By the way suffer
me to tell you a story of Eliah when he was Ambassador in Holland. This man
being treated with all Dainties both of Flesh and Fish, said, he had rather
have a piece of Paultusse, or Turbet half salted, which begets such an Hogo as
best suits a Russian pa^^at, but strong enough to destroy a whole Guild of
squeasy stomach'd Cockneys. The Hollanders willing to gratify his ears with
the best Music in all Holland, both Vocal and Instrumental, asked him how he
liked it, to which he replied; very well, for the Beggars use to beg in such
Tunes in Russia. What tunes they were I know not. But all the Beggars here beg
singing, as well Prisoners as Cripples, and a strenuous voice loses nothing
by its harsh notes. For the Russians love nothing soft or smooth but their
women's fat sides. But I come to their Music, least I should tire you with
tuning it. You must know they have Musick-Schools, where Children are brought
up with great diligence, and in much severity. Their notes are very strange,
borrowed, I suppose, of the Greeks, or Sclavonians. Their Gamut has small
variety; instead of Fa, sol, la, they sing Ga, ga, ge, warbling them out, as if
they were indeed either gagged or throttled.

Their Cadences and Closes are so unexpected, that they seem frighted into
them, as our Fiddlers are when a Constable comes in the midst of a Lesson.
Sometimes they will run hard upon a scent, as though they meant to imitate the
Italian Recitative Music. Finally, when they have brought up these children to
a perfection, what with Bases, Tenors, Contratenors, and Trebles, you shall
hear as good a Consort, as ever was sung a at Cats Vespers. They have but
little Instrumental Music, it being prohibited by the Patriarch in opposition
to the Romish Church. And it has also been thought State policy to forbid all
Music or Jollity among the Commons, to prevent Effeminacy. They have Bagpipes,
and small Fiddles with bellies like Lutes, wherewith they play four or five
notes.

As for their Warlike Music they have Kettle Drums, whose dull sound does well
agree with the Russian Saturnine Genius. And the Trumpet, which I think has not
been long used, for they can hardly blow it so well as a Sow-Gelder does his
Horn. In their hunting they use brass Bugles, which altogether make an hideous
noise. In short, if you would please a Russian with Music, Get a consort of
Billings-gate Nightingales, which joined with a flight of screech Owls, a nest
of Jackdaws, a pack of hungry Wolves, seven Hogs in a win^y day, and as many
Cats with their Corrivals, and let them sing Lacrymae, and that will ravish a
pair of Russian ^uggs, better than all the Music in Ita^^, light Airs in
France, Marches of England, or the Gigs of Scotland.

They are great strangers to Dancing, as esteeming it beneath their Gravity.
Sometimes in their wine they will cause their Slaves, both Tartars and Polacks,
to dance after their way, which is as rude as our Trenchmore.

This I had pricked down by one of the Patriarchs Choristers, being Anthems of
the several times of Prayer, viz. Morning, Evening, and Midnight.

1. Obedni Anthem.
Deliver me, O Lord of thy abundant mercy.
For thy mercy sake cleanse me of my sins; O Lord my Savior.
2. Tzaoutrinys.
We trust in Christ our Savior: and our hope is in him. Hallelujah, etc.
3. Vecherny.
Lord hear my prayer; And hear me when I call: And let my cry come unto thee.
CHAP. VIII.
Of their nuptial proceedings, soon consummated. They act by Brokers. The man's
friends see the Bride naked. How a young fellow was cheated. The punishment of
those Women who kill their Husbands.

THeir way of proceeding in their Marriages puts me in mind of Terence, where
the Father abruptly tells his Son he must be married. Uxor tibi ducenda est
Pamphile hodie praeter^ens modo apud forum. They give their children but short
warning, and they must not refuse the Parents choice; nor their Lords neither:
For example, at this time Boris Juanoidg Morosof, the second man in the Empire
propounds one of his Retainers in marriage to a rich Widow of Dutch extract,
but Rebaptiz'd into the Russian Faith. The Widow falls down at Boris Juanoidges
Ladies feet, Sister to the press, and entreats her to interceed for her to her
Lord, for she was minded to remain a Widow during life. No request would be
granted: What, said she, will thou Bischest, i.e. dishonor my Lord so far as
to refuse that man, to whom my Lord has given his word that he shall marry
thee. A great disgrace it is to offer the least affront or denial to that which
may tend to the breach of my great Lords word.

They do most by Brokers,, and the Young Man seldom sees his Wife till they
come into the brides Chamber; if she be ugly she pays for it soundly, it may be
the first time he sees her. To prevent future mistakes, the Bridegrooms
Friends, viz. five or six Women see the Bride stark naked, and observe whether
she has any defect in her Body, if but the least Pimple appear, she must be
cured of it before she marries.

One at Vologda intending to marry his Daughter, employed a Broker to a young
man, who would not have her till he had seen her: Hereupon it was ordered she
should pass through such a Street at Noonday, the fellow was placed in an
house, and was to see her through an hole; now the wench (you must know) had
but one eye, and he was set on the right side, where she appeared handsome, and
passed for current; so the Indentures were drawn, and Sureties given that he
should not beat, but how they were kept, I have not yet learned. A Woman that
kills her Husband is buried alive, put into the ground up to the neck, and
there suffered to die, which is soon done in Winter. Here the crime and the
punishment are well accommodated: For it is fit she should die without mercy,
who had no bowels nor affection left for her Husband.

CHAP. IX.
A merry story of a great Fish, which the Friars took to be a Devil. The
contrary being discovered, they are ashamed, and make an Entertainment. Another
story of a Fish, but more Tragical. What ensued upon it.

BEfore I leave the Churchmen, I must tell you a merry story of the Monastery
of Rostone, which stands upon a Lake, and not far from this Friar^ there is a
Nunnery also, for commonly they are near together. In this Lake, about twenty
years since, a Fish was seen of such a magnitude, that they supposed it could
not be a Fish, but rather some spectrum, Leviathan, or Water-Devil. It would
often appear half above water, which made an Eagle stoop at it with such
violence, that piercing his Talons into the Flesh, he could not pull them out
again; but Leviathan plunging to the bottom with his enemy, carried him into an
unknown element, and so overcame him, but could not be so rid of him, for his
Talons still stuck fast, which made him repair to the shore, where being seen
by the Friars with feathers on his back, he confirmed their Fears; and
therefore to prevent further mischief, they fell a ringing the Bells, went on
procession with all the instruments and weapons of defense, wherewith these
Friars-militant wont to resist the foul Fiend, but all this did little avail to
profligate the supposed enemy of Mankind. At last one Mr. Roger Eaton a
Merchant coming by, hears this sad Relation, and being curious to see with the
rest, who stood upon the shore, he undertook to encounter the Monster; an
attempt no doubt as perilous by Water, as that of St. Georges was by Land; the
worst was, he could not find a Russ so bold and hardy as to row the Boat for
him, till he had made one courageous by drinking. In short, he shots the Beast
with a screwed Gun, who being taken up, proved to be nothing else but an
overgrown Pike* a yard and an half long, and as big as a Man. The Fraternity
ashamed of their Processions made against a silly Fish, did nevertheless to
gratify their Champion, make themselves and him drunk, and so the Play ended.
But a worse Tragedy was acted, when they took another Pike not so large at
this, intending to entertain one Mr. White an English Merchant; for the Cook
cutting it open, found a newborn Infant in its belly, which was suspected to
be thrown in by one of the Nuns: This accident spoiled their intended mirth,
and the farther entertainment of Strangers.

CHAP. X.
Of the Chircasses. Their Religion, Complexion, Drinking, Dancing, Government;
Soldiery and Witchcraft.

THe Chircasses hold the same Greek Faith with the Russians, but are not
altogether so superstitious; for they permit Strangers to come into their
Churches. One of their Protopopes had appointed one in the Parish to come to
him about midnight unto private confession, but as the story goes, she failed
of her promise. Next morning in the Church she stands aloof by her self, and
after the Protopope had incensed the rest of the good women, he comes to her,
and instead of a Benediction, he demands why she kept not her promise; to which
she replied. Chichaco Boyallis, I was afraid of Chichaco (a cursed Cur which he
had) then he incensed her again, and said he was tied up, Then (quoth she) Moya
Dooshinco, My Dear, Ah what a sinner was I, that I knew not so much before.
Excuse this Drollery, which only serves as a Farce to fill up the Scene of a
jejune story; for I shall hardly make the Description of this barbarous place
worth the pains and trouble of Reading.

Now we are in Chichass Land, it will not be amiss to tell you what people they
are, viz. A kind of Tartars, a rude swarthy looked people; their Women are very
unhandsome, gross, and grossly given to drinking; so that at an Entertainment
they will be drunk before meat comes on the Table, and with eating recover
themselves, and after Dinner be drunk again, and then recover themselves by
Dancing, which they love so much, that they count him a mean man who does not
keep a Fiddler in his house. Their Government is perfectly Anarchical, for upon
an Insurrection they destroyed all their Nobility and Gentry, and are now
governed by Colonels of their own choosing, with whom the meanest is Hail
Fellow well met. Soldiers they call in their Language, Cossacks, which makes
some mistake, and think them to be a Nation. These people are much devoted to
Witchcraft, and count it an extraordinary piece of learning practiced by the
chief Women in the Country. They are more hospitable to Strangers than the
Russians, and their Country or Land is better and warmer.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Russian Government Laws. Manner of writing. Their Clerks how called.
Their Characters whence borrowed. Their Petitions. His Imperial Majesty's
person and character compared with his Fathers. The Empire miserably
impoverished and depopulated by the Tartarian Invasions.

THe Russian Government is perfectly Monarchical, it has offices called
Precauses; the dispensation of their Justice is commonly Arbitrary, for they
have very few written Laws, they go much upon Presidents (but money is their
best President, which overthrows all the former) They waste abundance of Paper
in writing down things at large (as our Common Law Clerks do) all in Rolls of a
great length, and although they have a Table before them, they cannot write but
upon their knees, after the old fashion that St. Jerome is pictured. Their
Clerks they call Podiacks, and he that is Lord Deputy, Diack. They borrow most
of their Characters from the Greeks, (in number. 42.)

All things are transacted by way of Petition, which is rolled up like a Waser,
and the Petitioner holds it up before the Boyar, who if in a good humor puts
forth his hand to receive it, and either reads it presently, or gives it to his
Diac, who commonly must be bribed for a Remembrancer. His Imperial Majesty is a
goodly person, two months older than King Charles the Second, of a sanguine
complexion, light brown hair, his beard uncut, he is tall and fat, of a
majestical Deportment, severe in his anger, bountiful, charitable chastely
uxorious, very kind to his Sisters and Children, of a strong memory, strict in
his Devotions, and a favourer of his Religion; and had he not such a cloud of
Sycophants and jealous Nobility about him, who blind his good intentions, no
doubt he might be numbered amongst the best and wisest of Princes* His Father
was a great lover of English men, and a man Cyrillic alphabet. A Auz Booki B
Geadi Glaghole Dobro E Yeast Shiveate ^ Selo zembla Isha ^ ^ Kako Ludy M
Meslate Nash One Pokoy Rutse Slou T Twerda y ^ Eke Fer Kher ^ Ote Tsi Cherve
Sharv Tshaw ^ Year Year Ere ^ yea ^ you yous ^ ^ ya ^ O (...) ^ Pse ^ ^eta ^
Eshitsa ^ (...)


of peace: but this Emperor is of a warlike spirit, engaged against the Crim,
Polacks and Swedes, with what success let time declare. Thus much I know: This
Empire is impoverished, depopulated and spoiled so much in ten years, as it
will not recover its pristine prosperity in forty. Seven years ago the Plague
carried away 7 or 8 hundred thousand people: And three years since the Crim
carried away captive out of the Borders 400000 souls into perpetual Captivity,
besides 300000 were consumed and killed by dint of Sword in several Armies; the
best of the Land is harassed, the rest untilled for want of men. For in five
hundred Versts, travel up the River, you may see ten women and children for one
man. All things are there become scarce; every thing six times the rate that it
was formerly; and Copper-money is not valued.

CHAP. XII.
The Emperors rise. His Ancestors but Dukes of Volodimir. His Palace how
called. Of Juan Vasilowidg, and his diverse odd humors, his Petition to one of
his Diacks. His Conquests. How he was loved. How he fined Vologda. How he
served the women that laughed at him. Of the Vayods mistake. Another Vayod how
punished for taking a Goose. Juan a great lover of Queen Elizabeth. How he
served the French Ambassador. How Sir Jerome Boze came off. A Shoemaker
presented the Emperor with a Turnep, how rewarded. What the Emperor did with
the Turnep. How a poor man entertained him. His associating with Thieves. How
he was served by one of them, and how he preferred him.

REturn we now to our Great Emperor, who is an absolute Morarch, but has a
Council both general and particular to advise with. His Dominions are enlarged
by his Forefathers; for at first they were but Dukes of Volodimir, and
increasing in strength possessed themselves of Mosco, or (as they write)
Moscua. The Emperors Palace to this day is called, Crimlena Gorod, or
Crim-Castle. Juan Vasilowidg (that is called the Tyrant) was a stout Prince,
but had many strange humors. One day he came to his Diac, and gave him a
Petition, desiring him that he would be pleased to make ready 20000 Men and
Arms by such a time, and he should be very thankful to him, and pray for his
health, and so he subscribed himself, Thy humble Servant, Jocky of Moscua. In
this Expedition he conquered Casan, a thousand Versts down the River Volga, and
Astracan (quasi civitas) the Imperial City two thousand Versts hence; Took
Syberia three thousand Versts distant, and one of the best flowers of the
Empire. The people loved him very well, for he treated them kindly, but
chastised his Boyars. He had a Staff with a very sharp Spike in the end
thereof, which in discourse he would strike through his Boyars feet, and if
they could bear it without out any flinching, he would highly prefer them.

He once sent to Vologda for a Colpack of Fleas, and because they could not
bring him full measure, he fined them.

On a Festival he played certain mad pranks, which caused some Strangers, viz.
Dutch and English Women to laugh; he taking notice hereof, sent for them all to
his Palace, and had them stripped stark naked before him in a great Room, then
he commanded four or five bushels of pease to be thrown down before them, and
made them pick them all up, when they had done he gave them some wine, and bad
them take heed how they laughed before an Emperor again. He sent for a
Nobleman of Casan, who was called Plesheare, which is Bald, and the Vayod
mistaking (as the Russians say) thought he had sent for an hundred and fifty
Baldpates: Polteraste sounding like his name signified so many. He therefore
got together about eighty or ninety, and sent them up speedily, with an excuse
that he could find no more in his Province, and desired pardon. The Emperor
seeing so many Baldpates, wondered what it meant, and crossed himself; at last
one of the chief delivering the Letter, he asked his Diack what he wrote to the
Vayod, who showed him the copy, by which he found out the mistake, and so
making the Bald-pates drunk for three days, he sent them whom again. Another
Vayod had taken a Goose for a bribe stuffed full of Ducats, and being
complained of, he took no notice of him, till one day passing through the
Poshiarr (an open place like Smithfield, where execution was used to be done)
he commanded the Hangman to cut off his Arms and his Legs; and at every blow
the Hangman asked him whether Goose was good meat.

He courted Queen Elizabeth very much to marry her, and was a great friend to
the English. Once upon a suspicion of Treason, he fortified Vologda, and drew
all his Treasure thither, and as some think upon extremity, intended his flight
for England. This Emperor erected the best buildings in all Moscua.

This Juan Vasilowidg nailed a French Ambassadors hat to his head. Sir Jerome
Boze a while after came as Ambassador, and put on his Hat, and cock't it before
him, at which he sternly demanded how he durst do so, having heard how he
chastis^d the French Ambassador. Sir Jerome answered, he represented a cowardly
King of France, but I am the Ambassador of the invincible Queen of England, who
does not vail her Bonnet, nor bare her Head to any Prince living; and if any of
her Ministers shall receive any affront abroad, she is able to revenge her own
quarrel. Look you there (quoth Juan Vasilowidg to his Boyars) there is a brave
Fellow indeed, that dares do and say thus much for his Mistress; which Whoreson
of you all dare do so much for me your Master? This made them envy Sir Jerome,
and persuade the Emror to give him a wild Horse to tame; which he did,
managing him with such rigor, that the Horse grew so tired and tamed, that he
fell down dead under him; this being done, he asked his Majesty if he had any
more wild Horses to tame. The Emperor afterward much honored him, for he
loved such a daring fellow as he was, and a madd blade to boot.

When Juan went his progress, many of the Commons as well as Gentry presented
him with fine Presents: A good honest Bask-shoemaker, who made shoes of Bask
for a Copeak a pair, consults with his wife what to present his Majesty; says
she, a pair of fine Lopkyes, or shoes of Bask; that is no rarity (quoth he);
but we have an huge great Turnip in the Garden, we will give him that, and a pair
of Lopkyes also. Thus they did; and the Emperor took the present so kindly,
that he made all his Nobility buy Lopkyes of the fellow at five shillings a
pair, and he wore one pair himself. Thus put the man in stock, whereby he began
to drive a Trade, and in time grew so considerable, that he left a great estate
behnd him. His Family are now Gentlemen, and called Lopotsky's. There is a tree
standing near his quondam house, upon which it is a custom to throw all their
old Lopkyes as they pass by, in memory of this Gallant.

A Gentleman seeing him so well paid for his Turnep, made account by the rule
of proportion to get a greater Reward for a brave Horse; but the Emperor
suspecting his design, gave him nothing but the great Turnep, for which he was
both abashed and laughed at.

Juan in a disguise sought a lodging in a Village nigh the City, none would let
him in but a poor man whose wife was then in Travel, and delivered whilst he
was there; away he went before day, and told the man he would bring him some
Godfathers next day; accordingly he and many of his Nobility came and gave the
poor Fellow a good largess, and burned all the houses in the Village but his,
exhorting them to charity, and telling them, because they refused to admit
Strangers into their houses, they should be forced to seek their Fortunes, and
try how good it was to lie out of doors in the Winter.

Sometimes he would associate with Thieves in a disguise, and once he advised
them to rob the Exchequer; for (says he) I know the way to it; but one of the
Fellows up with his Fist, and struck him a hearty good blow on the Face,
saying, Thou Rogue, will thou offer to rob his Majesty who is so good to us;
let us go rob such a rich Boyar who has cozened his Majesty of vast sums. At
this Juan was well pleased, and at parting changed caps with the fellow, and
bid him meet him next morning in the Duaretz (a place in the Court where the
Emperor used often to pass by) and there (said he) I will bring thee to a good
cup of Aqua vitae and Mead. The Thief came accordingly, and being discovered by
his Majesty, was called up, admonished to steal no more, preferred in the
Court, and served for a discoverer of Thieves.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the present Emperor or great Czar. Czar from whence derived. His Titles
and Arms. He marries not out of his own Dominions. His Diet. Lodging.
Recreations. Visits. The Czaroidges Birth.

THis present Emperor comes of Juans Race by the Mothers side: He had an elder
Brother, an hopeful Prince, although he would take Pigeons, and pick out their
eyes, saying to one, thou art a Traitor, and to another, cutting off his head,
Thou art Ivan such an one, a Rebellious Traitor to my Father and me. But he
dyed young.

All the Emperors Sons are called Czarowidges, that is to say Czar's Sons, As
for the word Czar, it has so near relation to Caesar (as Thevet observes in
Basils life) that it may well be granted to signify Emperor. The Russians
would have in to be an higher Title than King, and yet they call David Czar,
and our Kings, Kirrols, probably from Carolus Quintus, whose history they have
among them.

The present Emperors name is Alexie Michalowidg Romanove. viz. Alexis the Son
of Michael the Roman. He puts in many Titles into his broad Seal as the
Spaniards do. And thus he styles himself.

BY the Grace of God We the Great Lord Tzar, and Great Duke Alexei,
Michailorich of all Great, Little, and White Rosia. Self upholder of Mosco,
Kyore, Vladimer, Norgorod. Tzar of Cazan. Tzar of Astrachan. Tzar of Siberia,
Lord of Plesco, and Great Duke Smolensko, Twersko, Vgorsko, Permsko, Veatsko,
Bolgarsko. Lord and Great Duke of Norgorod in the lower Countries of
Chernigove, Rezan, Rostoue, Yeroslave, Beloozer, Odooria, Obdoria, Condinea,
and all the Northern parts Commander. Lord of the Land of Iveria, of the
Kartalinian and Groozinian Dukes: And of many other Dominions and Countries,
East, West and North Heir thereof, From Father and Grandfather Lord and
Monarch. The Emperor in his Arms gives the spread Eagle, as descending from
the Roman Emperors, but he carries a distinction, for he bears between the
double head of the Eagle a mitred Crown, and in the Eagles breast St. George on
Horseback; which some say was added upon Queen Elizabeth's bestowing the Order
of the Garter to Juan Vasilowidg.

The Czarowidg (as I said elsewhere) is not seen of the people till he is about
fifteen years old, nor of many Noblemen; but then he is exposed to public
view, carried upon men's shoulders, and set on high in the Marketplace, which
is to prevent Impostors, wherewith this Land has often been deceived.

The Czar marries not out of his own Dominions, but takes a wife where he
pleases, though seldom out of the Nobility. When she dies, all the interest of
her Kindred and Relations dies with her. Eliah the present Emperors Father in
law was of so mean account, that within this twenty years he drew wine to some
English men, and his daughter gathered Mushrooms, and sold them in the Market.
The other which he should have had was a Captains Daughter. The Imperial
Palace is built of Stone and Brick, except some lodgings wherein his Majesty
sleeps and eats all the winter: For they esteem wooden Rooms far wholsomer than
Stone; and they have some reason to think so, because their stone Rooms being
arched thick reverberate a dampness when the Stove is hot. The Emperor lodges
three story high. His drink is Brague made of Oats. His bread is made of Rye,
which the Russians esteem a stronger nourishment than Wheat. The Czar lies in
no sheets, but in his Shirts and Drawers, under a rich sable Coverlid, and one
Sheet under him. His Recreations are hunting and hawking. He keeps above three
hundred Falconers, and has the best Ger-Falcons in the World, which are brought
from Syberia; he flies at Ducks or other Fowl. He hunts the Bear, Wolf, Tiger,
Fox, or rather baits them at his pleasure.

Whenever he goes forth, the East Gate of the inner Wall of the City is shut
till he returns. He seldom visits any Subject, yet the last year he did, but
went not in the common way, for the side of a wall was pulled down. At the
birth of the Czaroidg the Commons for joy bring him great Presents, which he
returns back again, but if he likes any of them, he gives the full worth. On
the Saturday after Good Friday, he goes into some of the Prisons, examines the
Prisoners crimes, and delivers many of them. An English man put in for coining,
was lately released. They put very few to death here, only whip them, which is
worse than the pains of death.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Emperors Revenues, great Privileges, Trading, Provision, Traffic,
allowance to his Household. Of his Palace, high Tower. Of his Boyars. Of the
Monasteries and Nunneries. Officers of State. The Czars temperance. Of his
entertaining the Nobility. A story of General Leshly.

AS the Emperors Territories are great, so is his Revenue; For (First) he is
master in a manner of every man's Estate, the Son does always petition for his
Fathers Land. They all hold in Capite. He is heir to all who dye intestate,
criminally or without heirs.

Secondly, his Customs are very considerable.

Thirdly, The Cabacks (or places where in are sold Aqua-vitae and strong Beer)
are his Royalty, and farms out foam for 10000 Rubbles per annum, and some again
for 20000 Rubbles.

Fourthly, His Bath-Stoves, which are very frequent here, are a great Entrado,
for their Religion obliges to free-Baths, both Men, Women and Children. When
they are hissing hot, they cast cold water upon them. Some come out into the
Snow, and tumble in it stark naked, and then go into the Stove again.

Fifthly, He is the chief Merchant in all the Empire.

Sixthly, His Sable Trade in Syberia yields a vast treasure, brought in by the
exiled Slaves sent thither in disgrace.

Seventhly, The Caviare made at Astracan, as also the Ithyocolla and Agarick,
all which he monopolizes.

All his Provision is brought in by those who hold Lands in Villenage. This
year a Fire happening in his Storehouse burnt and broyl'd sixty thousand
Flitches of Bacon. By which you may see the Russians are no Tartars, abhorring
Swines flesh. Yet they retain some of the Mosaical Law about Hares, Squirrels
and Coneys: Yea, they hold it Pogano to eat Veal, but not Lamb; such a flock of
blind Owls are they, more in love with their own Twilight, than with our
Noonday, because the weak eyesight Ivan Velacky John the Great

sight of their understanding is dazzled with the bright beams of truth. When
the Greeks or Persians come the Emperor ingrosses all their Commodities at a
price. To Archangel, he sends great quantities of Hides, Wax, Potash, Hemp and
Flax, and so furnishes himself with their Commodities, which serve him to give
away amongst his Subjects; for most of his Graces are bestowed in Silks,
Sables, Cloth, Velvet, or cloth of Gold. To his Household Servants he gives
allowances of Meal, Honey, Fish, Nut-oyl, Oats, Beer and Mead. His Imperial
Palace is encompassed with an high brick Wall, larger by half than the
circumference of the Tower, herein are twenty four Churches and Chapels, most
of them have gilded Cupola's, and great Crosses, which make a splendid show
altogether. The high Tower, called Ivan Velicky, was built by Juan Vasilowich.
It stands by its self, and serves for a Belfry, wherein are thirty or forty
Bells. The Cupola of this Tower is guilt, the body of Brick and Stone, and the
height as great as St. Marks Tower at Venice. Some of the chief Boyars have
Palaces of Stone within the walls of the Court, as Knez Jacob a Chircasse
Prince, Boris Juannoidg, Morosof* the Emperors Guardian in his minority: Knez
Alexis Master of the Fur-Office, Mehectowidg Trebotsky a General, Eliah
Danelowidg, Meluslafsky the Emperors Father in law, Knez Juan Vasiloidg
Adofsky.

There are also five Monasteries, and two or three Nunneries together, with
most of the Precauses, or Courts of Justice, the Apotheca, or Ammunition
Gallery. The Czar has Officers of State as other Princes have, but not of so
great value. His Gentlemen of the Bedchamber come not into his Chamber, but
wait in the next Room to it, and at the Table also, some two or three Rooms
off. The Czar is temperate in his Diet, drinks very little Wine, sometimes he
drinks at meals a little Cinnamon water, or oil of Cinnamon in his small beer.
For Cinnamon here (you must know) is the Aroma Imperiale,; the scents of Musk
and Ambergreece are not much esteemed, but Rose water is much used at Court,
and so is holy Water in the Church.

At the entertainment of his Nobility, the Emperor sits in his Chair, and
delivers out of his hand a Chark of treble or quadruble Spirits, which are able
to take away his breath who is not accustomed to them. His Majesty will laugh
to see his Subjects handsomely fuddled, and sometimes he will put Mercury into
their Liquor. Old General Alexander Leshly a Scot aged ninety nine years; now
alive at Smolensko, had discourse with the Emperor about the storming of
Smolensko, who being earnest to hear would not dismiss Leshly, then afflicted
with an uncessant Diarrhaea* his modesty kept him a little too long, but at
last being necessitated, he got away abruptly: The Emperor wondering at it,
demanded the reason of his sudden departure; but understanding how the case
went with the old man, who had lost nothing but the bolt of his back-gate, he
fell into such a laughter as sufficiently declared he was not displeased with
the Generals abruptness.

CHAP. XV.
Of the City of Mosco. Of the Czars Jewels. Of his Clothes, Of the Queen and
her maids of honors attire. Their journeys in Wagons. How they rode formerly.
The mode and language of the Russes all one. They differ in their actions from
all other Nations. Of their Clock Dyals, and contrariety to other people in
several things. And of other Customs they have

THe City of Mosoua (as the Russians write it) stands upon a great deal of
ground, encompassed with three Walls, besides that of the Imperial Castle. The
innermost is a red Wall of Brick, the next to this is the white Wall, and the
third is wooden Wall filled up with earth, which I suppose to be fifteen or
sixteen Miles compass, and it was made up in four or five days, upon the
approach of the Crim-Tartar; there is as much Firr in it as would make a row of
Lendon Paper-houses fifteen miles long. Since his Majesty has been in Poland,
and seen the manner of the Princes houses there, and ghess'd at the mode of
their Kings, his thoughts are advan^ed, and he begins ^o model his Court and
Edifices more stately, to furnish his Rooms with Tapestry, and contrive houses
of pleasure abroad. As for his Treasure of Jewels, I think no Prince ^oth
exceed him, yet he has many ^^ul Stones, but the Russians affecting greatness
in Jewels, will upon that score ^ispense with small faults. The fashion of the
Emperors clothes is like that of (...) Nobility, but only richer. That of ^he
Empress is the like, only the tire of (...) head is higher, and her
smock-^^eeves longer, about ten or twelve yards English, and her upper most
Gown has wide sleeves like our Batchelors of Arts, which all her women of
honor wear also. Commonly her Imperial Majesty makes her Journeys in the night
with most of her women (in Wagons covered with red cloth) viz. Chamber-women,
Ladies and Embroideresses. Not long since they were use to ride on Horseback
with white Hats, a skain of silk about their Necks, and As^ride. Ri^um teneatis
Amici.

The mode of men and women, rich and poor, are all one, all over the Empire,
from the highest to the lowest, and their Language one, yea and Religion too,
which certainly must hugely tend to their peace and preservation.

Here I might make some Reflections upon our own unhappy divisions and
differences in opinions, but this perhaps might be censured as an unhistorical
Action, and therefore, Cynthius aurem. --

The Russians are a People who differ from all other Nations of the world, in
most of their Actions.

Their Shirt they wear over their Drawers, girded under the Navel (to which
they think a Girdle adds strength) None, neither male nor female, must go
ungirt for fear of being unblest. They whistle not with their lips (that they
count profane) but through the Teeth* a strange way of whistling indeed. When
they spit on any thing to wipe it (as Shoes, etc.) they do use an action no^
unlike sneezing. In cases of admiration or incredulity, instead of a shrug,
they wave their heads from one shoulder to another. Their very speech and
acce^^ also differs from other Nations. It Is (...) grand Sin with them to omit
lotionem ^^st mictum. As we use paper in our ^acking-Office to clear accounts,
so Ju^^ de Rusco uses a little Spade made of (...) thin shaven, like the Ivory
Spatula's which Merchants and Scriveners use to ^^ld up letters, and smooth
them.

In our Clock-Dyals the Finger moves (...) the Figure: In the Russian e contra,
(...) Figures move to the Poynter. One Mr. Holloway, a very ingenious man,
contrived the first Dyal of that fashion; ^ying, because they acted contrary to
(...) men, 'twas fitting their work should ^e made suitable. Because the Roman
Catholics kneel at their devotion, they will stand, for they look upon
kneeling ^s an ignoble and barbarous Gesture. because the Polonians shave their
^eards, they count it sinful to cut them. Because the Tartar abhors
Swines-flesh, ^^ey eat it rather than any other flesh, ^^though its food is
most Pogano, or un^lean of any Beast. They count it a ^^eat sin for a Russ to
lie with a Dutch woman or English Woman; but a ve^ial Piccadillo for a Russ
woman to prostitute her self to a Stranger, for they say her issue will be
educated in the true ancient Faith, but a Russ gets an uncircumcized child of a
Stranger. The pre^e^ Rye above Wheat, and stinking Fish above fresh. They count
their miles b^ninties, and not by hundreds. Their New years day is the first of
September^ From the Creation they reckon 706^ and odd years. To things
improbabl^ they easily give credit, but hardly believe what is rational and
probable.

In their salutes they kiss the woman^ right cheek. Lands 25 of Inheritance are
entayl'd upon the youngest Brother.

They write upon their knees, thoug^ a table stand before them.

They sow with the needle toward them, and thrust it forward with their
forefinger; it should seem they are ba^ Tailors.

They know not how to eat Pease an^ Carrets boyld, but eat them shells an^ all,
like Swine. They do not pick their Pease, but pull them up by the roots and
carry them into the Market to b^ sold*

They know not the name of Cornuto: ^ut of a Cuckold they say, He lies under ^e
Bench.

They will sooner take the word of a ^^an who has a Beard, than the oath of
^^ne who is Beardless.

The beauty of Women they place in ^^eir satness, juxta illud ^^alicum, Dio ^^i
faccia grassa, to mi faro bella. God ^^ake me ^at, and I Will make my self
beau^^ful.

Their painting is no better than that ^f our Chimneys in the Summer, viz. ^^ed
Oaker and Spanish White.

They paint or stain their teeth black, ^^on the same design that our Ladies
^ear black patches: Or it may be their ^^eth being spoiled by mercurial
paint^^g, they make a virtue of necessity, and ^^y up that for an Ornament
which is ^^ally a Deformity. Low foreheads ^^d long eyes are in fashion here;
to which purpose they strain them up so ^^rd under their Tyres, that they can
(...) ill shut them, as our Ladies lift up ^^eir hands to their heads. They
have secret amongst them to stain the very ^lls of their eyes black. Narrow
(...) and slender Wastes are alike ugly in the sight.

A lean Woman they account u^ wholesome, therefore they who are i^clined to
leanness, give themselves ov^^ to all manner of Epicurism, on pu^pose to fatten
themselves, and lie a be^ all day long drinking Russian Bran^ (which will
fatten extreemly) the^ they sleep, and afterward drink again list Swine
designed to make Baco^ These are their odd customs, which (...) may justly
censure as the Satyrist d^^ the debauched Romans in his time, saying. Dum
vitant stulti vitia in contrar^ currunt. And indeed to say truth the^ madness
is so great, that all the Hel^bore in Anticyra cannot purge it away*

CHAP. XVI.
Of their Judiciary proceedings. Of murder how punished; the accused must
confess the fact. Of their Executioner and cruel Torments. The punishment of
Coyners. A Fellow that shot at a Jack^aw how punished. Conspirators banished
into Syberia, etc. Hanging lately used amongst them, and how.

I Cannot at present give you an account of their Judiciary proceedings, which
are very confused, and yet they have a method, and every Province its Precause
or Office, wherein is a Bayor, or Lord, and a Chancellor called a Diac, who
has many Clerks under him: He represents the Boyar, who is the Representative
of his Imperial Majesty. If there be a Suit in Law, and no bribes on either
side, most commonly the Plaintiff gets the better for they presume he has most
right.

Murder is here to be bought off with money; If a Man kill his Slave or his
Wife in correcting them, there is no law against them. Or if a man is
murdered, and no body prosecured his murderer, the law takes no notice of his
death.

The accused cannot be condemned although a thousand witnesses come in against
him, except he confesses the Fact; and to this end they want not torments to
extort Confessions; For first, they put them upon the Strappado, if this does
not, they secondly whip them, and herein their Hangmen are very exquisite: For
it is said at six or seven lashes they are able to kill a man. Sometimes the
consederate will see the enemy to execute such a piece of his office, to
prevent farther mischief.

They can strike to an hairs breadth, and with a sharp kind of Iron pierce
through the very Ribs; they will slice down a man's back like a Chine of Pork,
and when that is done, they will salt the raw place, bind his hands and legs,
and putting a Cowlstaff through them, hold him over the Fire, and Carbonadoe
him. If he persists (for may be the party has nothing to confess) they let him
loose, and the Hangman sets his shoulders, and lets him rest twenty days, till
he be almost well, and then repeats the former Torments, and perhaps pull out a
Rib or tow with a pair of hot Pincers; If all this will not do (for some will
outstand all these Tortures) they will then shave the crown of his Head, and
drop cold water upon the bare place, which some that have felt, acknowledge to
be the quintessence of all Torments; for every drop strikes like a dart to the
very heart. All this is done where the Hangman is not bribed, for he will then
cut deep. I have seen some whose backs have been scarifi'd like the bark of a
Tree, which afterward were healed, but they could never wear out the scars and
marks thereof.

The punishment of Coyners is to melt some of the coin, and pour it down their
throat. Neque enim lex ^ustior ulla est, quam necis Artifices Art perire sua.

A Fellow two years ago, being foolhardy, shot at a Jack-daw in the Imperial
Court, but the Bullet glanced, and fell into one of his Majesty's Rooms, for
which fact he lost his left Leg and right Hand. If there be secret conspiracy
contrived and disclosed in the acting, the Traitors are secretly tormented, and
afterward sent toward Syberia; and in the way an hundred or two hundred
Versts off, softly put under the Ice. Others having their Noses cut off, and
their eyes pulled out, or their Ears cropp'd, are banished into Syberia, three
thousand Versts distance.

Hanging has not been in use but of late years; for the dull Russ thought if
the Malefactor were strangled, his soul was forced to sally forth at the
Postern-gate, which made it Pogano, viz. defiled. The Hangmans place is
hereditary, and he teaches his children to strike upon a leathern Bag.

The Malefactor puts his head into the Noose, and turns himself off when the
Hangman commands him.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Syberia and its Inhabitants. Chay and Bour Dian brought from thence, their
qualities. Tambul the Metropolis of Syberia. A discourse of Sables, how killed.
The excessive coldness of this Country. How they feed their Cows. Of the River
Ob. What Caviare is made of. Of Samogeda, their Diet. Sledges how drawn.
Hunting. Indistinct habit. Of their manners. And other remarkable observations
concerning these Northernlings in general.

SYberia is a vast unknown Province, reaching to the Walls of Cataya. I have
spoken with one that was there, who traded with the Chinesses, and another also
who said he saw a Sea beyond Syberia wherein were Ships and Men in strange
habits, like the Chinesses by their description, rich in cloth of Gold and
Jewels, no Beards but on their upper lip. From hence this latter brought Chay
and Bour Dian. The Chay is that which we call Teah or Tey, and Bourdian. is
Anisum Indicum Stellatum, the Merchants say they use it (as we do in England)
with Sugar, and esteem it a rare Remedy in diseases of the Lungs, flatus
Hypochondriaci, and distempers of the Stomach; it is brought over in papers
about one pound weight, written on with Chinese Characters. They who travel
into these parts are six years in their Journey, staying for winter way in some
places, and summer in others. The Metropolis of Syberia is Zambul, the
Residence of the chief Vayod. They trade in Furs, and chiefly in Sables, which,
as some say, are found in no other part of the world beside. They feed on a
Berry or Nut, which here grows plentifully upon trees, what it is I cannot
learn, but am promised some of them, with further information. They hunt six or
seven weeks together, and are drawn by Dogs, whom they feed with Fish,
wherewith their Lakes and Rivers abound,: they put forty or fifty Dogs in a
Sledge, and are clothed with treble Furs; they lie out all night in the coldest
season, and make fires, with which they dress their Fish. The Dogs are expert
in finding out the Sable, and the Men as dextrous in shooting them in the nose
with a bolt, which makes them become a prey to the hounds. Except they hit the
Sable in the nose they lose him, for he is an hardy Beast, and will run away
with an Arrow in his Body; besides, it spoils the Fur.

It Is so excessive cold here, that water thrown up into the Air will descend
congealed into Ice. The most Northern parts afford no Bread, but Fish in
abundance, which they eat dried instead of bread, and yet they live to a great
age. They feed their Cows with Fish during the frost, which makes the milk
taste fishy. The River Ob is a vast River, whose end is as yet unknown: there
is great store of Fish called Bebuga, much like a Whale, but better meat, out
of whose spawn and the Sturgeons together, they make Caviare at Astracan, which
they lay in great heaps of salt, and after a little fermentation press it, and
barrel it up. We have some here unpress'd; it is a great dainty, but will not
keep.

The North of Syberia is called Samogeda, or Tsamoeida, which signifies
Canibals, or Men-eaters, for they eat those whom they conquer in battle. Their
food is most Fish, their riches Deer, of which they have great herds, and so
tame, that at whistle they will appear at hand, and suffer themselves to be
harnessed, and put to the sledges by pairs, which they will draw swiftly as
wind eighty miles a day. When they hunt for new Deer, they consult the Priest,
who, after many ceremonies and conjurations, tells them in what quarter they
must go, and most commonly they find his predictions true. There is no
distinction in the clothes of Male or Female, but both are made of Deer skins,
with the hair side outward, which by experience they find the warmest. You can
hardly distinguish the men and women by their visage, neither wear Beards, and
both have faces like Baboons.

Their Manners, Language and Religion are brutish, for they worship the Sun and
Moon, and good reason have they to adore the one, and make good use of his
light, which they enjoy so little in the winter. They are excessively jealous
of their Wives, which puts me in mind of the strength of fancy and custom: One
being ask't if he thought not an English Woman (then present, young and
handsome) as pretty and fair as his Lady ugly; answered, no surely, thy Wives
complexion is pale, like the belly of a Fish, our Women's colors are natural
and genuine. Their Daughters are esteemed great Riches, and must not be seen by
young men, till contracted in Marriage, which they are at six or seven years
old, that they may be sure to have them Virgins: they buy them of their Parents
for so many head of Deer, and take them home to their houses, and lock them up
al Italiano. The men likewise serve their wives so, when they go an hunting,
and it is as ordinary as strings to a purse. For they have a Proverb, He that
leaves his purse open invites a Thief to it; such as have seen their Engines,
say they come not short of the Italian ones.

Their houses are only round tents made of Deer-skins and Matts, with a fire in
the midst, and a hole at the top for the smoke, about which they lie round, and
find themselves warm enough. In the Summer they remove near the Rivers to fish,
which they dry, and preserve against Winter, they kill their fishes with
arrows, and most commonly eat them raw: they eat young Puppies, and count them
a rare dish. They are not thought worthy of a Governor by his Imperial
Majesty, nor so considerable as to be taxed, only voluntarily they pay a few
Deer. None understand their barbarous language but themselves, nor yet their
Laws which they execute secretly. When they sell a Deer to Strangers, they are
sure to indent to have the garbage, which they eat after a slight squeezing out
of the excrements. He is best qualified amongst them who knows most in Magic,
wherein they are excellent, especially before Strangers, but amongst the Russes
they dare not play any feats, least they should be accused. At Archangelo
diverse of them being treated by an English Merchant, one in the company being
very drunk, besoul'd himself, and was as rude as a Bear, or Tom a Bedlam.

Hereupon an old Woman was called in, who whispered in his ear, touched his
forehead, and the man became as sober as if he had drunk nothing.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Southern parts of Syberia. The Wilderness called Step, full of
Cherry-trees and fine Flowers. Of Elks. Of the Zoorick and Perivoshick. The
Country of Squirrels. Of a little Bird like a Woodcock. Another like an Hawk.
A third as big as a Swan. The story of the Vegitable Lamb refuted.

GOing toward the more Southern parts of Syberia, you shall see a Wilderness
called the Step, which is six or seven hundred Versts long, most of it ^s
Champain, it has but few Rivers, ^et the ground is incredibly fruitful. There
you may ride a days journey through a field of Cherry-trees, not above three
quarters of a yard high; the reason why they are such dwarffs, is, because they
are so often burnt down by Strangers or Travelers, who making fires in the
Autumn catelesty depart, and the grass being long and dry takes fire, which
sometimes has pursued them to death, two or three hundred Furlongs have been
burnt at a time. These trees yield a sine red Cherry, but very tart: Such as
have been transplanted have proved very good. I have spoken with those who have
seen here variety of Tulips, Damask and red Roses. Asparagus exceeding large,
Onions, Marjoram, Time, Sage, Chicory, Endive, Savory, etc. and what else we
carefully nourish in our Gardens; Liquorish also in great plenty, which invite
thither Ursa major and Ursa minor: lastly Pars^ips and Carrets. Merchants fetch
from thence much Salgemmar, and Nitre.

Their Elks are the largest in the world; they have also a little Beas^ called
a Zoorick, about the bigness of a Badger, but not of that make; it has ^ dark
brindled fine smooth hide, short legs, a little head, a back almost a spa^
broad, and is indeed a pretty plump creature. They dwell under ground like
Coneys, When Colonel Crafords Regiment quartered near their cells, they came
out wondering at them, and standing upon their hinder legs, they made such a
shrill and unexpected noise, as put the men into such a fright, and the horse
grasing by them, that some ran away ten Versts before they could be overtaken.
The Russes relate strange stories of their mutual Wars, taking Prisoners, and
making Slaves to bring in their winter provision, as Hay and Roots; ^his may
pass for a Russian Fable. But, ^or certain they say, that their Buroughs are
very finely contrived, and that they are so neat and curious in their houses,
that if any of them dye in the Borough, they will carry them out and bury
them. ^n these parts there is another Beast called Perrivoshick, whose furr is
brown yel^ow, mixed with a little white and black, which shows well in a coat,
though little valued here, because the ^urr is short, and of little warmth;
this beast ^s said to be very civil in carrying Squirrels and Ermines over
Rivers, and this is the reason why he is called Perrivoshick, i. e. the Ferry
man or Transporter; and the same word in the Russian tong^^ signifies a
Translator. The Russes say these Beasts take great delight in transporting
other creatures. I never heard it from any eyewitness, but this I have, that
whole Countries of Squirrels having spent their provision on the one side the
River, will adventure over to the other, using their tayls for their Masts,
Rudder and Sails, and a small chip or stick for their Boat, with a fore-wind,
which veering about hazards the whole Fleet; for they cannot ^tack about, and
if once their sails take wet they are utterly undone and defunct.

About Cazan and Astracan there is a little Bird about the bigness of a
Woodcock, his legs and bill not unlike a Snipe, but the feathers and neck like
a Cock of the Game, being cut and trimmed they fight like Cocks, sparring at
one another, and yet they have no^ spurs. They are in continual war, i^ kept in
the house, and will lie on their guards with their bills on the ground, and at
first advantage run a tilt with their single Rapiers, as violently as any
Duellist, brusling up their neck-feathers (a guissa di gallo) they are meat
beyond Quails, and are also f^^nd about Archangelo, with another B^^l as great
as an Owzle, made like an Hawk, who flies at smaller birds, catches them,
sticks them on a thorn, and picks them very clean before she eats them. There
^s a Bird brought hither from Astracan ^as big as a Swan, not unlike in his
body and his feet, but has somewhat shorter and thicker neck; he has also a
very ^ide throat able to swallow down a fish ^ine inches adout. Perhaps in some
histories of these parts, you may have ^eard of a vegitable Lamb, which de^ours
all the grass about it, and then flies; but this is as true as the story of
Monocular people in Sir John Mande^ils Travels, and such like Fables, which
^ave not the least shadow of truth.

CHAP. XIX.
A brief account of Tartary. It Is Metropolis. To whom the Tartars pay Tribute,
The Muscovite formerly tributary to the Crim-Tartar. How far they march in a
day. They eat horseflesh, but no bread nor salt, the reason why. They are very
quick sighted, excellent horsemen of the Colmack Tartars. The Crim's
described, they deride the Russian worship. The grounds why they do it.

HAving fetched this compass, I thin^ it fit to touch upon Tartaria, an^ tell
you what account I have had from thence, which though incomplete tak^ as you
find it, and be pleased to excus^ the brevity of this Narration.

The Metropolis of Tartary is calle^ Crim, it is a strong walled Town upon the
Tartarian Sea, from whence the great Cham is named the Crim-Tartar. The^ say
the City is built of Stone and Bri^ very stately. The people are tributa^ to
the Turk, and Moscua was formerly tributary to them, and paid ten thousand
Sheep-skin coats yearly to the Duke of Moscovi's homage, which was to feed the
Crims horse with oats out of his Cap, to this also he was sworn by a strict
dath. But within this ten years the tribute has been refused, because the
Tartar broke the League by invading the Confines: And indeed they are
troublesome neighbors, like Flies when they are routed, they fly in a moment,
dispersing themselves one by one, but at night rendezvous again; and it is
almost as impossible to got one of their led horses, which will not leave their
companions.

They will march an hundred miles a day with changing their horses once or
twice; for every man is furnished with three at four at least. If any of them
tire o^ dye, they share them among the troop, and being sufficiently chased
under the saddle, they make an hearty meal of them. If any of them fall sick,
they give him some Mares milk, or fresh blood from an horse which they bl^^d on
purpose.

They bring no Salt nor Bread along with them, nor do they eat any at all,
alleging that Salt makes them dimsighted, and Bread breeds a dull and heavy
nourishment.

They are certainly as quick-sighted as any people in the world, and will
descry upon the Step or Wilderness (where a man has nothing to hinder his
prospect thirty or forty miles round) I say, they will descry a single man,
when a Russ cannot see a whole troop of Tartars.

There are no better Horsemen in the world, at full speed they will raise up
themselves upon their stirrops, and shoot behind them with their arrows, which
sufficiently gall their enemies Horse.

The Colmack Tartar-women are as good soldiers as their Husbands, many of them
acknowledge the Emperor for their Sovereign.

This year an an army of Women to revenge the taking of some Children and
Captives by the Crim's people, encountered the Tartars Army, took many
prisoners, and routed the rest. O brave Virago's! worthy to be numbered amongst
the Amazonian Worthies.

The Colmacks have a vast Country, and live in Tents, where they use grasing,
Tamberlane was born here.

They are larger sized than the Crim-Tartars, and of an other feature, but more
swarthy. The Crim-Tartars are flat-fac'd, small eyed, have their eyes deep set,
narrow foreheads, and low broad shoulders; they are of a middle stature, so
shaped, that it is hard for them to conceal themselves in any place wheresoever
they show their faces.

They break the noses of their children being new born; saying, it is a foolish
thing to wear a nose, that stands in a man's sight. They are all Mahometans, and
laugh at the Russians for worshipping a painted piece of board, and say it is
better to worship the Sun, because he has a glorious body, does the world much
good, and none can injure him as they may a wooden Idol. Your Gods (say they to
the Russes) in a short time grow blind, (i. e. obliterate) and then you throw
them into the River with a Copeak or two, and a piece of Olibanum tied up in a
string, and so commit them to the Volgian stream which runs into the Caspian
Sea; and we take them up, and broil a piece of Horse flesh upon them. What is
that for a God? which is no better then a Gridiron, and cannot resist the hands
of them that destroy it. Most rationally spoken. Mosovitae non possunt
respondere Argumento.

CHAP. XX.
What the simpler sort of Russians are, their Idolatry and ignorance, what they
think of St. Nicholas, their high conceit of good works. They are great Rogues.
Some are good among them. The Poles are not so barbarous as the Russes. The
Poles uncharacterized, their Laws* their King how styled, he is very magnificent.
King Henry weary of the title* How he made shift to get away out of Poland.

TRue it is the simpler sort of people in Russia are mere Idolaters, and in the
Northern parts, as Archangele and Cola, they know no other God but St.
Nicholas, whom they really imagine to to rule all the world. They say he came
to St. Nicholas (a Port-town by Archangel^) swimming from Italy upon a
Millstone; if any Russ should question the truth of this story it is as much as
life is worth. They celebrate the Festivals of their own Saints with greater
honor than the Apostles. For they say of St. Nicholas, he is Nasha Bradt, one
of our Brethern, and has a greater kindness for us his Contrymen, than St.
Peter or St. Paul who never knew us. When they have extorted a vast Estate out
of the bowels of poor people, and grinding the faces of Strangers, they think
to expiate all their wicked actions at last by building a Church, and endowing
it with abundance of Images adorned with Jewels, and furnishing it with a Ring
of Bells; this they account a meritorious work, and indeed it is so when the
glory of God is chiefly aimed at, and not selfinterest and vain applause sought
thereby. Greater Rogues there are not in the whole world, yet there is many
good people also. Such as have improved their parts by conversing with
Strangers, are more civilized; yea those who have seen the Polish way of
living, which though I cannot much admire, yet surely it is not so barbarous as
the Russian; for they have a way to improve their wits by Learning, which they
are debarred in Muscovia; and may travel out of their own Country, a thing
prohibited to the Russians.

Poles*
Notwithstanding all these improvements, they are a scurvy nasty Nation as as
ever I conversed with, proud and insolent, hugely self-conceited, always
extolling their own Country above all others, vain and prodigal in their
expenses before company, gaudy in their Apparel, rich in their Horses and
Trappings, civil and hospitable to Strangers, till they have seen all their
pomp, and have been drunk twice or thrice, and then like Welshmen they are
willing to be rid of them. They are greater Drinkers than the Russes, and so
quarrelsome in their drink, as few Gentlemen are seen without some eminent
scars, which they wear as badges of honor gotten in the wars of Bacchus.

Their Laws are the most barbarous of any people living, for homicide is
satisfied by a pecuniary mulct, a Crown (as I remember) for killing a Peasant,
and so higher according to the quality of the person.

Their King may be styled Rex Bacchatorum, for in their Comitia, when a vote
has passed all but one peremptory Coxcomb, he will rise up in the spirit of
contradiction, and laying his hand upon his Cimitar saucily protest against it,
though not able to give a reason for what he says, and perhaps the business is
demurred for that time; next day being half drunk, he will be the first in
passing the very same vote. Their King is little better than a painted Rudder,
which seems to steer, but does not. Henry the Third, afterward King of France
was (as I take it) King of Poland, and so weary of his Kingship, that he would
willingly have changed it for a pair of Shoes of good running Leather. On a
certain day he made an entertainment for many of the Nobility, whom he made
drunk, having for his own wine nothing but fair water colored red: One of
these drunken Lords he laid in his own Royal Bed, the Curtains were drawn, and
Waiters stood by the bed side, who knew nothing of the design. In the mean time
the King slip't away, and by horses laid on purpose made his escape out of the
Confines.

The Son of Bacchus being in the interim well attended, at last awakened, and
betrayed the plot, whereupon they made all possible have to catch their King
again, but being gone into another Country they treated with him, beseeching
him to return, and they would for the future be very civil unto him; but he
answered, No.

That bird deserves to be a prisoner all its days, that will return again to
the Cage when he is once got loose: As for mine own part I had rather be a
Peasant in France, than King in Poland. Stultissima optio --

CHAP. XXI.
Of Lues Venerea. Of the Polonian Plica, a familiar distemper, and very
infectious, yet they highly esteem it. When hair first began to be powdered. The
Poles more honorable in keeping Articles than the Russes. A comparison of the
Polish and Russian Languages. Their salutations are stately. How the Tartars
and Chircasses salute. The Chircasses Religion.

MY Lady Lues Venerea is as well known in Poland as in the place where she was
born; not a mushy panny (Lord) nor a pannya (Lady) but are intimately
acquainted with her, and so is the Court and the Country.

The Russes in the conquests of Vilna, and many other Towns and Provinces on
the Borders of Poland, have taken her Ladyship prisoner, whom they are like to
keep longer than their Towns. For till this War she was not known here this
thousand years: But when she gets into such a cold Country as this, she earths
like a Badger so deep, that there is no driving of her out without a Pickaxe or
Firebrand; juxta illud, les Veroles de Rouen et la boue du Paris ne jamais
sortont la pais sans oster la piece. The Pox of Rouen, and the Dirt of Paris
never go away without taking a piece out.

But what is worse, the Poles have the Plica as familiar among them, as the
French have the Itch; and so infectious too, that few in a house escape it when
it is once crept in amongst them. Certainly there cannot be a greater plague in
the world, for besides its many dreadful symptoms, the nasty elfish lock stinks
like an old Ulcer, and yet they wear it as a badge of Nobility. Some you shall
have with hair full of brayds or knots, as I saw a Monks, which looked like
Medusa's, who for this monstrosity was accounted a man of more than ordinary
sanctity. The like esteem they have of Horses, who are troubled herewith in
their Manes, or Foretops, for they think them Steeds of good courage and
service, If an envious person cuts off never so little of the Plica, the Horse
either dies, runs mad, or becomes blind and lame.

They say the first use of Hair-powder came from the Poles, who were fain to
perfume the Plica to abate its odious stench. It Is hard escaping this disease
if you pass through the Country, where Arsenical Mines poison the water, for
it comes on a sudden; Unico aquae Arsenicae haustulo, etc,

The Poles are more honorable in keeeping their Articles and Covenants than
the Russians, who seldom keep faith with an enemy, if the breach thereof be but
advantageous. Yet in private concerns the Russ fears an oath, because it is
seldom administered, which makes it the more to be reverenced.

Their Languages differ not much, just as English and Scotch, the Polish is
said to be the more copious and complemental, but to my ears, which judge by
outward sounds, it seems the more harsh in pronunciation, and worse than a
medly of Welsh, Irish and Cornish.

They spit in your face when they talk. Their Orthography is like the Welsh,
six Consonants to one Vowel. Their salutations are in lofty terms, they bow not
so much as the Russians. The Tartars salute with their forefinger upon their
mouth, and a little nod, and embrace their Superiors about the knees. The
Chircasses salutes are blunt and rude, as, how do thy Children and thy
Servants, thy Cows and thy Sheep, thy Horses and Goats and Swine, thy Cocks,
Hens and Turkeys, are they all in good health? This they punctually repeat
every morning they meet. They are of the Greek says, but not so superstitious
as the Russians, who think their Churches defiled if a Stranger sets his foot
into them, and therefore wash them after that pollution, and the Stranger must
either turn Russ, or satisfy his folly with the loss of his life; in which
they imitate the Mahometans, as also in many other fooleries.

CHAP. XXII.
The Court of Russia.
Of the Present Czar his Father. Grave Wolmer how disappointed in Marriage.
Czar Michaels death. The story of Boris Juanoidg. How the Czar elects a Wife.
Whom Boris preferred. His height makes him envied. Eliah exalted. The Russians
extol Marriage. Eliah disabled. Who succeeds him. Nashokin a great Reformer.
Highly commended, his words concerning the French and Danes supporting the
Hollanders against England. He is a great lover of the English. How he censured
a Bill of Mortality, and some other discourse which he held.

IT would be too tedious and impertinent at this present time to recount the
rise of the Family of the Romanoves, how they assumed the name of Czar, how
Basil about one hundred and forty years since reduced the lesser Dukes of
Russia, and Juan Vasilowich prosecuted what his Father began, and subdued the
Kings of Cazan, Astrocan and Syberia; this would become the history of the
Czars life, which I wish I had opportunity and ability to write: For certainly
since Kings reigned upon earth, there never was a man heard of more
prodigiously Tyrannical, and yet a more fortunate Prince than he.

The Father of this present Czar was was Michael, a Prince of incomparable
clemency and magnificence, a lover of peace and amity with all Christian
King's, kind to Strangers, and very Religious. Grave Wolmer, the late King of
Denmarks natural Son should have married his Daughter, but the Clergy objected
he was an Heretic, hereupon (...) proffered his Chaplains should main^ain the
truth of his Faith, which the Russian Priests refusing, the Czar breaks ^ut
into passion; saying, What Faith (...) this that we profess, that you are
unwilling to bring to a trial. Some few days after going well to bed, about
midnight he was taken with a vomiting, and dyed in the morning, and (after the
Russian fashion) was carried into the Church the next night. So the dispute
ended. His Czaritsa did not long survive him, and Grave Wolmer was fain to
leave his Mistress, and shift for himself as well as he could.

This Czar often charged his Son to follow his Governors counsel in all
affairs, who was Boris Juanoidg Morosove by name, of whose Father the Russes
relate this story, That he being a favorite of the great Tyrant, presumed
(being a Widdower) to beg one of his handsome Concubines for a Wife, which was
granted him, but whilst they were at their amorous enjoyments shut up in the
Bathstove, he secretly conveyed (...) wild Bear, which fell upon them, and
devoured them both. He had two Sons Boris and Chleab, which the Emperou^^
educated. Boris being a kind of Lord Protector, diminished the number o^
household Servants, brought the rest t^ half wages, raised the Customs, and gav^
Ambassadors half allowances, sent a^ the old Dukes to Governments afar off;
Ripnine to Belgorod, and Corakin to Cazan.

The Czar being to take a Wife, all the choice beauties in the Country are
brought before him, one he fancies, and gives her a Handkerchief and Ring, she
appears again in a Royal dress; but Boris ordered the Crown to be tied so hard
about her head, that she fell into a swoon, this was presently construed an
Epileptick fit,; her Father being examined with torments, was, alas poor old
Gentleman, sent into Syberia, and died by the way with grief, and left his
Family in disgrace. The maid is still alive, but never known to have had any
more fits. She has been offered many Noblemen, but refuses all, and keeps the
Handkerchief and Ring. The Czar allows her a pension to expiate the injury done
to her Father and Family.

Boris Juanoidg proposed Mary the Daughter of Eliah Daneloidg of obscure
Gentility, raised by the death of his Uncle Grammatine the Chancellor of the
Ambassadors Office, to whom he filled wine in his minority, The present
Ctzaritsa has often gone into the woods to gather Mushrooms. She was a
tolerable beauty. adorned with the precious jewels of modesty, industry and
religion. She was married prrvately for fear of Witchcraft, which is here
common at Nuptials. Boris petitioned for the younger Sister Anna, and obtained
her, and from thence concluded his interest well rivetted. But the Lady was not
so well pleased with him being an old Widdower, and she a succulent black young
Lass; so instead of children jealousies were got, which produced a leathern
lace about a finger thick, a complement that often passes between the Russian
Lords and their Ladies, when their Amors are extravagant, or the Brandy wine
too strong in their heads. One William Barnsly an English man (born at Barnsly
Hall in Worcestershire) was sent to Syberia by this Boris's instigation for
being suspected too familiar in his house. He has been their above twenty
years, and at last he turned Russ, and was richly married.

This height of Boris draws envious eyes from the ancient Nobility, whom he
daily makes to decline, and brings in creatures of his own. The people murmr
at their new Taxes, accuse Boris, and peremptorily demand him of the Czar, who
finding himself surpised, desired the life of Boris might be spared, and
kissing the Cross, swore he should never come to the Court again. The old
Nobility are countenanced for a time: In the mean while the commons are
complemented underhand to petition for Boris his Restoration, which was easily
granted. Boris hereupon gratifies the people, and becomes their Favorite, and
a patron also to Strangers. He died six years since, in a good old age,
successful he was in his Counsels, beloved of his Prince, lamented by the
People, but not of the Nobility, who cannot yet accomplish their designs. For
Eliah Daneloidg is made Generalissimo. He is a goodly person, has limbs and
muscles like Hercules, a bold man, of great parts, and such a vast memory, that
he knew all the Commission Officers of an Army eighty thousand strong, where
they quartered, and what their qualifications were; the Czar rather Cizaritsa
has often gone into the woods to gather Mushrooms. She was a tolerable beauty.
adorned with the precious jewels of modesty, industry and religion. She was
married prrvately for fear of Witchcraft, which is here common at Nuptials.
Boris petitioned for the younger Sister Anna, and obtained her, and from thence
concluded his interest well rivetted. But the Lady was not so well pleased with
him being an old Widdower, and she a succulent black young Lass; so instead of
children jealousies were got, which produced a leathern lace about a finger
thick, a complement that often passes between the Russian Lords and their
Ladies, when their Amors are extravagant, or the Brandy wine too strong in
their heads. One William Barnsly an English man (born at Barnsly Hall in
Worcestershire) was sent to Syberia by this Boris's instigation for being
suspected too familiar in his house. He has been their above twenty years, and
at last he turned Russ, and was richly married.

This height of Boris draws envious eyes from the ancient Nobility, whom he
daily makes to decline, and brings in creatures of his own. The people murmr
at their new Taxes, accuse Boris, and peremptorily demand him of the Czar, who
finding himself surpised, desired the life of Boris might be spared, and
kissing the Cross, swore he should never come to the Court again. The old
Nobility are countenanced for a time: In the mean while the commons are
complemented underhand to petition for Boris his Restoration, which was easily
granted. Boris hereupon gratifies the people, and becomes their Favorite, and
a patron also to Strangers. He died six years since, in a good old age,
successful he was in his Counsels, beloved of his Prince, lamented by the
People, but not of the Nobility, who cannot yet accomplish their designs. For
Eliah Daneloidg is made Generalissimo. He is a goodly person, has limbs and
muscles like Hercules, a bold man, of great parts, and such a vast memory, that
he knew all the Commission Officers of an Army eighty thousand strong, where
they quartered, and what their qualifications were; the Czar rather feared him
than loved him; but the Czaritsa always kept up his Interest. He is made Lord
Treasurer, and six or seven Offices more are conferred upon him, all which he
manages with great vigor, but not without Bribery. Which the Czar did the more
connive at, because he knew full well that this Silver stream at long running
would fall into the Ocean. Notwithstanding all these expectations, at last
perceiving Eliah too kind to some of his handsome Tartar and Polish slaves, he
urged him (being an old Widdower) either to marry or refrain the Court. For the
Russians highly extol marriage, partly to people their Territories, and partly
to prevent Sodomy and Buggery, to which they are naturally inclined, nor is it
punished there with Death. A lusty Fellow about eight years since being at this
beastly sport with a Cow, cried to one that saw him Ne Misheay, do not
interrupt me; and now he is known by no other name over all Muscovy, then Ne
Misheai.

Eliah at present having had an Apoplectick fit, is disabled in body and mind,
and knows no body without being told. His miss had been the greater, had not
that great Statesman Nashockin, succeeded and supplied his place in many
Offices.

It was this Nashockin who concluded the peace with Poland upon honorable
terms, and finished the League with Swedland. He is now made Chancellor of the
Ambassadors Office, Treasurer, Lord of Russia minor, and has several other
Offices. He contrived the Silk-trade through Russia, and it is thought all the
Indian Trade will be drawn that way. He is now about reforming the Russian
Laws, and new modelling all the Czardom. There shall be no delatory Suites; all
Governors with their Assistants shall have power of life and death; for before
all Criminals were brought to Mosco, with no less trouble than charge to the
Czar. This same counsel Jethro gave to Moses. This Nashockin is one who will
not be corrupted, he is a very sober abstemious man, indefatigable in business,
an admirer of Monarchs: Speaking about the French and Dan^ siding with the
Hollander against England, he brake forth into these words. I wonder that these
two King's should have no more prudence or reason, than to support or
countenance such Boors against the Monarch of England, who should rather join
together with the rest of the Princes in Europe to destroy all Republics,
which are no better than the Nurseries of Heresy and Rebellion. I have heard
him say, that it is the Czars interest to keep a good correspondence with the
King of England above any other Christian Prince. He is the only Patron the
English have. Being solicited to admit of English goods, he produced the
London Bill of Mortality, wherein very few dyed of the Plague; notwithstanding
(said he) how do we know but the Goods may be brought out of some of the
infected houses, and one spark of fire will kindle a whole sack of Charcoale.
It Is a strange custom to publish your infirmities. Beggars indeed expose their
ulcers to to raise commiseration, and get relief. But they who proclaim the
P^st, give a caveat against all commerce of them, as men set up lights to keep
ships off their coasts. Another thing seems strange unto us, that Royal Letters
are often sent privately to us in in behalf of private men to demand Justice,
as if our Czar had not made sufficient provision for Strangers as well as
Natives. We seldom have any such applications from any other Prince but that of
Denmark, where we hear they are purchased at a cheap rate: What they cost in
England we know not, but what have we to do with the customs of other Nations.
Their clothes will not fit us, nor our cloths them: thus he ended his discourse
abruptly, and if he had spoken more then he had mind should be repeated. But by
this you may judge (tanquam ex unque leonem) that he is a great Politician, and
a very grave and wise Minister of State, not inferior peradventure to any one
in Europe.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Czars description. His answer to a Stranger. How he appears in public. He
never visits any Subject. His Court without noise. He seldom dines publicly.
At Easter his Subjects kiss his hand. How he pays his Strelsies. What he has
done to employ the poor. The Czaritza governs the Women. From whence the
Emperor's chief Revenues proceed.

I shall now give you a further description of the Czar. He is a goodly person,
about six foot high, well set, inclined to fat, of a clear complexion, lightish
hair, somewhat a low forehead, of a stern countenance, severe in his
chastisements, but very careful of his Subjects love. Being urged by a Stranger
to make it death for any man to desert his Colors; he answered, it was a hard
case to do that, for God has not given courage to all men alike. He never
appears to the people but in magnificence, and on Festivals with wonderful
splendour of Jewels and Attendant^* He never went to any Subjects house but his
Governors when he was thought past all recovery. His Sentinels and Guards
placed round about his Court, stand like silent and immovable Statues. No
noise is heard in his Palace, no more than if uninhabited. None but his
Domestics are suffered to approach the inward Court, except the Lords that are
in Office. He never dines publicly but on Festivals, and then his Nobility
dine in his presence. At Easter all the Nobility and Gentry, and Courtiers kiss
the Emperors hand, and receive Eggs. Every meal he sends dishes of meat to his
Favorites from his own Table. His stores of Corn, and dried flesh are very
considerable, with these he pays his Strelsies or Janzaries, giving them some
cloth, but very little money; for they have all Trades, and great Privileges.

The Emperor with his Pottash, Wax and Honey, he buys Velvet, Satin, Damask,
cloth of Gold and Broad-cloth, with which he gratifies his Officers for their
service.

He has now seven Versts off Mosco, built Workhouses for Hemp and Flax, in
that good order, beauty and capacity, that they will employ all the poor in his
Kingdom with work. He has allotted many miles of wast Land for that design.

The Czaritza is to govern the women's side for her use and profit. Thus the
Czar improves the Manufactures of his Country, feeds all the Laborers as
cheap as we do our Dogs. And lays up the money that comes out of the Cabacks,
Bath stoves, Tart, Pitch, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Wax, Caviare, Sturgeon, Bellusa,
and other salted and dried fish from Astracan, Cazan, the Lake Belsira, and
many other Lakes and Rivers with which the Country abounds, especially Syberia
in the latter.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Czar goes every year to a house of pleasure called Obrasawsky. Of the
curious tents erected there. How cautious the Emperor is of letting the vulgar
sort behold his pastimes. This commended for several reasons. None are to
petition the Czar in the fields. What happened to a poor Russian Captain for so
doing. The Emperors resentment for his death. Peter Solticove turned out of
Office, and banished the Court; the cause why. Nashockin put in his place. The
Czar in the night time visits his Chancellors desks. He has Spies in every
corner. It Is death to reveal any thing spoken in the Court. The Russians answer
to inquisitive persons. The Czars children how attended; they are bound to keep
secrecy.

EVery year toward the latter end of May the Czar goes three miles out of
Mosco, to an house of pleasure called Obrasausky: In English Transfiguration,
being dedicated to the Transfiguration in the Mount. And according to that,
Master it is good for us to be here, let us make three Tabernacles; So the
Emperor has most magnificent Tents, his own is made of cloth of Gold, lined
with Sables. His Czaritsa's with cloth of Silver, lined with Ermines. The
Princes according to their degree. His and Czarritsa's, with those of his
eleven children and five Sisters, stand in a circle with the Church-Tent in the
middle, the most glorious show in its kind that ever I saw. There are Rails and
Guards set Musket shot from them, beyond which no man may pass without order:
For the Czar will have none of the vulgar people to be eyewitnesses of his
pastimes. Indeed the too near approaches of the common Rabble make discovery of
Princes infirmities, not to say vanit^es, Majesty is jealous of Gazers. This
made Montezume King of Mexico keep his Subjects at such a distance that they
^urst not behold him, familiarity breeds contempt, when Princes expose
themselves too much unto public view, they grow cheap, and are little
regarded. Therefore in a Theater, the Stage is railed in, that the Spectators
may not crowd upon the Scenes, which show best at a distance. And so it fares
with Princes, the more they are reserved the more they are observed, the more
implored the more adored; otherwise they run a great hazard of being contemned,
and reckoned no better than their Subjects, seeing an equal mortality and
frailty of flesh attends all men. When the Czar goes into the Country or
fields to take his pleasure he gives strict charge that none should interrupt
him with Petitions. A Captain of white Russia, and native of that Country
being three years without pay, and finding no restress from Peter Solticove
Lord of that Province, came and pressed too near the Czars coach; the Czar
perceiving no petition in his hand, suspected he might ^e an Assassinate, and
with his staff ^once Cxar Juans) not unlike a dart, in^ending to push the
fellow away, he ^ruck him to the heart, and he died. The Nobility rid up to the
coach, and ^^arching what arms the man had, found nothing but a wooden spoon,
and a petition for three years Arrears, Whereupon the Czar smote his Breast,
saying, I have killed an innocent person, but Peter Solticove is guilty of his
blood, whom God forgive; and immediately sending for him, after a severe check,
he turned him out of his place, banished him from the Court, and appointed
Nashockin that great Minister of State to take his Office, and examine and find
out the misdemeanors thereof. This happened in June last, and this action was
but whispred, and that too with much peril of a man's tongue.

In the night season the Czar will go about and visit his Chancellors Desks,
and see what Decrees are passed, and what Petitions are unanswered. He has his
spies in every corner, and nothing is done or said at any Feast, public
Meeting, Burial or Wedding but he knows it. He has spies also attending his
Armies to watch their motions, and give a true account of their actions: These
spies are Gentlemen of small fortunes who depend on the Emperors favor and
are sent into Armies, and along with Ambassadors, and are present on all
public occasions.

It Is death for any one to reveal what is spoken in the Czars Palace. I being
curious to see the fine buildings for the Flax and Hemp, ask't to what end they
were built, but not a Workman durst tell me, though they know it well enough;
but they replied, God and the Emperor know best, this was all I could get from
them. The Czars children are attended with children of their own bred up with
them, and there is none of them but know their distance, and their degrees of
bowing to all sorts of persons. None dare speak a word what passes in their
Court.

CHAP. XXV.
The story of a Jew turned Mohammedan, he falsely accuses Nashockin, and is
lashed for his pains. Jews how crept into the Court. A Discourse of Bogdan
Matfeidg (the Czars great Favorite) his Pandor and Amors. His Ladies
jealousy, how she was made away. The Czar reproves him. He and Nashockin no
good friends. Of the Czars Religion, wherein he is very zealous and constant.
He fasts at several times eight months in a year, disposes of all
Ecclesiastical Preferments. His high commendation.

THis Summer a Jew turned Persian Mohammedan, and an Interpreter to the Persian
Merchants, came in their behalf with a loud complaint against Nashockin for a
business depending in the Ambassadors Precause, or Court. To whom the Czar
replied, saying, I have left Nashockin to determine all affairs of Merchants,
let him do you Justice, but if I find your Interpreters complaint impertinent,
I shall place all my displeasure on his back; and so it proved, whereupon he
was graced with thirty good ashes laid on in order like red tape upon tawny
leather, and doubtless they will out-last the best Garment he has: For their
whippings are very keen, and cut to the bone.

The Jews of late are strangely crept into the City and Court, by means of a
Jewish Chyrurgion (pretendedly baptized Lutheran) who assists Bogdan Matfeidg
(Steward of the Household) in his amors, and supplies him with Polish
handmaids, he being bred up in Poland. But his Lady (as she had good cause)
being jealous of these handsome Slaves which her Husband kept, some in his
Gardens, and some in his House, became a burden unto him; they therefore one
night last Winter brought her some Dainties, which she eat, and was merry after
it, but in the morning was found dead in her bed. Others say 'twas a poisoned
glass of wine they gave her, which cured her of all diseases. This caused much
grumbling among the Commons, and since that time the Czar has urged him to
marry, and abandon that wicked life he led with his Polish Doxies, or else he
should his place. 'Twas said he would take one of his Mistresses for his wife.
This Bogdan is the Czars great Favorite, Lord High Steward, and regulates all
domestic Affairs. He was bred up from a child with the Czar, and is of the
same age. They call him the whispering Favorite, because when ever he comes to
Council, he acts behind the Door. Nashockin is no friend to him, nor he to the
English, being better supplied with money from the Dutch.

As to the Czars Religion, he is of the Greek Faith, and very strict in the
observation thereof. He never misses divine Service, if he be well he goes to
it, if sick it comes to him in his chamber. On Fast-dayes he frequents midnight
prayers (the old vigils of the Church) standing four, five or six hours
together, and prostrating himself to the ground sometimes a thousand times, and
on great Festivals fifteen hundred. In the great Fast he eats but three meals a
week, viz. on Thursday, Saturday Sunday; for the rest he takes a piece of brown
bread and salt, a pickled Mushroom or Cucumber, and drinks a cup of small beer.
He eats Fish but twice in the great Lent, and observes it seven weeks together,
besides Maslinets (or cleansing) week, wherein they eat milk and eggs. Out of
the Fast he observes Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and will not then eat any
thing that comes of flesh. In fine, no Monk is more observant of Canonical
hours, then he is of Fasts. We may reckon he fasts almost eight months in
twelve, with the six weeks fast before Christmas, and 2 other small fasts.

Those that instituted so many Fasts advanced fish to spare flesh, which else
would be destroyed, because they are forced to house their Cattle all the
winter, sometimes five months space. The Czar does not disdain to assist at the
Processions bare-headed, and on foot if it be not rainy. He is a great Patron
of the Church, yet restrains the profuse bounty of dying men to the Clergy.
None can found a Monastery without his license. He makes bold with the Church
Treasary upon loan in time of war, and pays it again ad Graecas Calendas. For
indeed should he not do so his contribution would fall short, seeing the Church
holds almost two third parts of the Czardom. In his Palace he has an Hospital
of very old men, 120 years old, with whom he often discourses, and delights to
hear them tell what passed in his Ancestors time. Once a year, viz upon good
Friday, he visits all the prisons in the night, and taking personal cognizance
of all the Prisoners, buys out some that are in debt, and releases others that
are criminal, as he thinks fit: He pays great sums for such as he is informed
are really necessitated. His Czaritza buys out Women. He disposes of all
Ecclesiastical preferments, but has left the election of the Patriarch to lot,
having (as he thinks) had ill luck in using his Prerogative for the late
Patriarch Nicon.

To conclude this Chapter, without doubt this present Emperor of Russia is as
pious, conscientious, clement, merciful and good a Prince as any in the world.
As for his People and Ministers of State, they are like other Nations, ready to
act any thing for Bribes or Money, and to deceive as many as they can.

CHAP. XXVI.
Trading in Russia very low. English Cloth a drug, why slighted. The Authors
Reflection. If Persians trade there, what English are like to suffer. What the
Russians are in general. Concerning the Dutch, what the English must do to
out-vye them. How much they abuse us to the Emperor. 'Twere convenient for
England to undeceive the Czar. How things should be represented to Nashockin
and Bogdan. The Russians mightily pleased with their peace with Poland.

THe Trade last Summer was very low in Mosco, by reason of their late war,
which had dreyn'd them of two Fifths, besides the raising of their Customs, and
taking their Goods by force for copper money, which fell from an hundred to
one, till at last it was called in, to the undoing of many men. Diverse hanged
themselves, others drunk away the residue of their States, and dyed with
drinking,

English Cloth is a Drug, because dearer than the Dutch, which though slight,
and shrinks a sixth part in wetting, yet the Russians like it, because they say
none but new cloth will shrink, but we are too blame for not fitting them with
the like. Again, we keep our old trade of Cloth, but they bring Silks, and all
manner of pedlary ware, which vends better than cloth, the which grows now much
out of Fashion. Sed si populus vult decipi, decipiatur.

If the Persian and Indian Silk trade prevail in Russia, the Czar, I fear will
think it too great a boon to restore the English Immunities, and 'twill be as
hard for them to regain their privileges, as it was for Pharoahs people to
drive their Charriots through the Red Sea, when their wheels fell off.

As I have nothing to say against the magnificence, splendour, clemency and
^^rtue of the Czars own person, So I have no reason to recommend the Russes
integrity, for the generality of them are false, Truce Breakers, subtle Foxes*
and ravenous Wolves, much altered, since their traffic with the Hollander, by
whom they have much improved themselves in villainy and deceit,

The Dutch, like Locusts, swarm in Mosco, and eat bread out of the English-mens
mouths, they are more in number, and richer, and spare no gifts to attain their
ends; whereas the English depending on their old privileges, think it is enough
to say with the Jews, We have Abraham to our Father, we are English men, do us
right, or we will complain: But the Russians are of Solomon's opinion, that
money answers all things.

If we would outdo the Dutch Trade, it must not be driven on by such as take
up Goods upon trust and time, as it has been these twenty years last past. At
present they come like Locusts out of the bottomless pit, and so they do all
the world over, where there is a Sunshine of gain. In Russia they are better
accepted than the English, because they gratify the Nobility with gifts, which
they will have if they lend any assistance.

The Hollanders have another advantage, by rendering the English cheap and
ridiculous by their lying pictures, and libelling pamphlets, this makes the
Russian think us a ruined Nation. They represent us by a Lion painted with
three Crowns reversed and without a tail, and by many Mastive Dogs, whose ears
are cropped and tails cut off. With many such scandalous prints, being more
ingenious in the use of their Pen^ils than Pens. These stories take much with
barbarous people, when no body ^s present to contradict them.

It would not be impertinent, in my opinion, if some intelligent person in
Moscua should represent the state of his Majesty of Great Britains Kingdoms,
Forces and Territories to the best advantage, and also his Colonies in the
West Indies, with all their Revenues, and drawing a Map of the aforesaid
places, present it to Afanasy Nashockin, to breed in him an opinion of his
British Majesty's real greatness, which the Dutch have so much extenuated.
Bogdan Matfoidg the Chamber-Favouritie should not be neglected neither. He
fancies Rarities, and therefore should be presented* with some. For as
Nashockin maintains reason of State, so Bogdan must be the man to procure the
Czars personal affection toward his Majesty of Great Britain.

The Russes are very proud of, and much pleased, with the honorable peace they
have made with Poland, and now think no Nation superior; for they are never
good natured but when they are either beaten or bribed. No master (to them)
like Mars nor mistress like Luna, these indeed are the only Planets, which rule
the world.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Caviare, how and where made. The length of the Fish Belluga. Caviare of two
sorts. The Belluga swallows abundance of Pebbles; it is an excellent meat.
Isinglass is made of his Sounds.

HAving elsewhere mentioned Caviare, I shall now give you a full account
thereof; It is made at Astracan, of the Rows of Sturgeon and Belluga. The
Belluga is a large Fish, about twelve or fifteen foot long, without scales, not
unlike a Sturgeon, but more ^ushious and large; his flesh is whiter than Veal,
and more delicious than Marrow. Of these two Fishes they take great numbers
only for their Rows sake, which they salt and press* and put up into Casks,
some they send unpress'd, and a little corn'd with Salt being accounted a great
Dainty. Caviare is of two sorts, the first made of the Sturgeons spawn, this is
black, and small grained, somewhat waxy, like Potargo, and is called Eekra by
the Russians, the Turks make this. The second sort is made of the Belluga's
Row, in whose belly is found an hundred and fifty, and two hundred weight of
spawn, it is a grain as large as a small pepper corn of a darkish gray. The
Belluga lies in the bottom of the River, and swallows many large pebbles of an
incredible weight to ballast himself against the stream of Volga, augmented by
the snows melting; when the waters are asswag'd he disgorges himself. His spawn
is called Arminska Eckra, perhaps the Armenians were the first makers of
Caviare. This they cleanse from its strings, salt it, and lay it upon shelving
boards to drain away the ^yly part, and the more unctuous fat^y substance; this
being done they put (...) into casks, and press it very hard, ^ill it become
indurate.

Near Astracan they kill many hundred of Belluga's for the spawn, and thr^^
away the rest; but it is pity, seeing (...) Fish is one of the greatest
Dainties th^^ comes out of the watery Element, especially his belly, which
surpasses (...) marrow of Oxen. That glue wh^^^ they call Isinglass is made of
the B^^luga's sounds.

depiction of mushrooms.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of several sorts of Mushrooms which grow in Russia, their forms and qualities,
they are divided by Botanists into two kinds, viz. Lethales and Salutif^rae.

IN describing the Vegetables which grow in Russia, I shall only give you an
account of some few Mushrooms very remarkable for their shape and qualities.
Being seven in number. Fig. 1.
1. Rizhices black and red, they are small, and grow in Marshes in one nights
space. 2. Volnitzi's black and brown, with some red and copped. 3. Gribbuy's
are brown and darkish yellow, with a stalk like a Pi^aster. 4. A Groozshdy
grows hollow like a Simnel, and being full ripe is white like a well ordered
Tulip. 5. Dozhshovick is white, large and spongy. Lethalis habetur. 6. Fungus
faviginosus, Honey-comb-Mushrooms, in Russ Smorteshkyes are the first that
appear above ground, Gribbuys next, and the rest toward the Autumn. 7.
Maslenicks, Butter-Mushrooms, signifying the fat of the earth.

Fungos dividunt Botanici in Lethales and salutiferos sive ediles. Lethales
apud Ruthenos pauci sunt, ediles varii and nullibi meliores, pauperum sunt
cibus, divitum cupedia-Mille carri Moscoviti^i fungis onerati in ipsa Moscu^
quotannis expenduntur. Servantur autem muria conditi.

Carri autem sunt parvi and sicut Hybernici unico equo tracti. Qui primo
succrescunt mense Maii vel Aprilis numerantur inter Lethales and a Gerrardo
nostro Faviginosi nuncupantur. Hic vero Magnatum fercula adornant: Et charo
vaeneunt.

Fig. 2.
Ruthenici Smortezshkys, Artocreata and Juscula ingrediuntur.

Sub fine Mensis Maii and initio Junii (modo pluit) prorumpunt unica nocte
Rizshickys minores fungi quidam nigricant, alii rubescunt, praecipue in locis
paludosis.

Fig. 3.
Volnitzi sunt fusci coloris russique magis cacuminati.

Fig. 4.
Gribbuy's Junii mense primum apparent praedictis majores fusci, russi, duri
stipite in forma medictatis Collumellae tumescentes.

Fig. 5.
Groozshidys fungorum maximi: palmam lati, instar Omasi bubuli sunt Crassi and
candidi. Dum crudi sunt succo abundant, eos sicut Tithymallum muria corrigunt
Rutheni, aliter fauces and guttur inflammabunt. Ipse semel nimis inconsiderate
assatos comedere tentabam, non sine suffocationis periculo.

Fig. 6.
Mastenickys quasi pinguedo terrae, nam Masla apud Moscovitas, butyrum, oleum,
sevum, omneque adiposum vel oleaginosum significat: nam dicunt Masla Carrova
Oleum vaccinum, Derravanna masla olcum olivarum, vel potius oleum Arborarium,
nam Derrava arborem sonat.

Hi Maslinickys mense Julio nascuntur, and colori Butyri rectissime
assimilantur. Sed de Fungis satis.


Herbarists divide Mushrooms into poisonous and wholesome, or edible. The Russians
have but few poisonous, many wholesome, then which there are none better, for
these are the poor man's food, the rich man's dainties. A thousand Cart-loads of
Mushrooms are yearly spent in Mosco, depiction of mushrooms. they are preserved
in brine. Their Carts are small ones, like the Irish drawn with one horse.
Those which spring first in April or May are reckoned poisonous, and by Gerard
are called Honeycomb Mushrooms; but in Russia they adorn great men's tables,
and carry a good price. The Russian Smorteshkyes are put into pyes and pottage.
Fig. 2.


Fig. 3.
In the end of May, and beginning of June (if it rain) the Rishickys break forth
in one night, these are a lesser sort of Mushrooms, some are blackish, others
reddish, especially in Fennish places.

Fig. 4.
Volnitzis are of a brownish tawny color, and more copped.

Gribbuys first appear in June greater than all the rest, brownish, reddish,
hard stalked, swelling in the middle like a pillar.

Fig. 5.
Groozhdys, the greatest of Mushrooms, an hand breadth, like a Cow-tripe thick
and white, whilst raw very iuycy; the Russians correct it (as they do
Sealettice) with brine, else they will inflame the chops and throat, once I
rashly adventured to eat them roasted, not without danger of choking.

Fig. 6.
Maslenicks signify the fat of the earth. For Masla amongst the Russians
denotes butter, Oil, Tallow, or any fat or oily thing, as masla Corrova,
Cow-oyl: Derravana masla, oil Olive, or oil of trees; for Derrava signifies a
tree.

Maslinickys spring in July, and resemble the color of butter: but this shall
suffice touching Mushrooms.

Thus Reader thou have had a brief and pleasant Narration of Russia, and which
indeed was never perfected by any, for reasons assigned by the Author at the
beginning of this Treatise.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THis Copy I received from the hands of a Gentleman that attended upon the
learned Dr. C. all the time of his being with the Emperor of Russia, It was
then in the form of a Letter written with the Doctors own hand to an eminent
Doctor of Physic here in London. Afterward I was advised by several Persons
of Quality to put it into the hands of some that were learned and skilful, to
distribute it into Chapters and Sections, for the more easy finding out
anything contained therein, and the better methodizing it, that it might answer
the Title designed for it. And in regard the Author died before it came to the
Press, which prevented his looking it over, or correcting any thing that might
be occasioned through his hasty writing of it, I was necessitated to get
another worthy person to Transcribe it, who being altogether a stranger, not
only to the Doctors style and way of writing, but also to the style and
language of this Country of Russia except by reading. The Reader I humbly
conceive will not wonder if some litteral and other small errors in that
Language have escaped his hand, which is most in the proper names of Men and
Office, and indeed not so much to be attributed to the Transcribing as the
Printing, Russ being a language not ordinarily printed in England. All which
mistakes are carefully and faithfully collected, by comparing the Book with the
first Copy: And whereas in p. 6. it is said it was a custom to have strangers,
to christen the Russian, read to be christened Russ; and in p. 84. l. 21. the
word being is to be left out: The Russian words that are to be corrected, are
as follows.

Page 13 line 17. for Caenass r. quass. p. 19. l. 21, r. Almaus and l. 22. r.
Posolsky. p. 28. l. 23. and 296. r. Nimcheen. p. 36. l. 9. for press, r.
Empress, p. 38. l. 3. read Rostove, p. 41. l. 8. read Boyalsa, and l. 19.
Chirchass. p. 46. l. 18. r. Pleasheve. p. 54. l. 16. for in r. him. p. 55. l.
3. read Michailouich, l. 5. r. Kyove, l. 6. r. Nougorod, p. 77. l. 19. r.
Beluga, p. 112. l. 16. r. Beluga, p. 119. l. 15. r. lashes, p. 121. l. 4. add
the word loose.

FINIS.
Books sold by Dorman Newman at his Shop at the King's Arms and Bible in the
Poultry.
Folio.
THe History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most Illustrious King
Edward the First, wherein the ancient Sovereign Dominion of the Kings of Great
Britain over all persons in all causes is asserted and vindicated: with an
exact History of the Popes intolerable usurp^tion upon the Liberties of the
Kings and Subjects of England and Ireland. Collected out of the ancient Records
in the Tower of London. By William Prinn, Esquire; of Lincolns Inn, and keeper of
his Majesty's Records in the Tower of London.

A Description of the four parts of the world, taken from the works of Monsieur
Sanson Geographer to the French King, and other eminent Travelers and Authors;
to which is added the Commodities, Coins, Weights and Measures of the chief
places of traffic in the world, illustrated with variety of useful and
delightful Maps and Figures. By Rich. Blome Gent.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings and Deaths of those excellent
Personages that suffered for Allegiance to their Sovereign in our late
intestine Wars, from the year, 1637, to 1666 with the Life and Martyrdom of
King Charles the First. By David Lloyd*

The Exact Politician, or Complete Statesman, briefly and methodically resolved
into such Principles, whereby Gentlemen may be qualified for the management of
any public trust, and thereby rendered useful for the Common-welfare. By
Leonard Willan, Esquire;

A Relation in form of a Journal of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles
the Second in Holland.

The History of the Cardinals of the Roman Church, from the time of their first
Creation to the Election of Pope Clement the Ninth, with a full account of his
Conclave.

Doctor John Don's Sermons in Folio.

Stapletons Juvenal large Fol.

Quarto.
The Christian man's Calling, or, a Treatise of making Religion ones Business;
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all religious duties, natural
actions, particular vocations, family-directions, and in his own recreations in
all relations, in all conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the choice
of his company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a weekday, from morning
to night, in visiting the sick, and on a dying bed. By George Swinnock.

Mr. Carils exposition on the Book of Job.

Gospel Remission, or a Treatise showing that true blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Buroughs.

An exposition of the Song of Solomon. By James Durham late Minister in Glasgow.

The real Christian, or a 'Treatise of effectual calling; wherein the work of
God in drawing the soul to Christ being opened according to the holy
Scriptures, some things required by our la^e Divines as necessary to a right
preparation for Christ: and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respects to those worthy men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is added a few words concerning
Socinianism. By Giles* Firmin sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven, being an exposition on the fourth
chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Tho. Case
sometimes student in Christ-church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel.

The virtue and value of Baptism. By Zach. Crofton.

The Quakers spiritual Court proclaimed; being an exact narrative of a new high
Court of Justice, also sundry errors and corruptions amongst the Quakers which
were never till now made known to the world. By Nath. Smith who was conversant
among them fourteen years.

A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence occasioned by the 12. months fasting of
Martha Tailor the ^^med Darbyshire Damosel; proveing, that without any mi^acle
the texture of humane bodies may be so altered that life may be long continued
without the supplies of meat and drink. By John Reynolds.

Octavo and 12.
Vindiciae Pietatis, or a vindication of Godliness from the imputation of folly
and fancy; with several directions for the attaining and maintaining of a godly
life. By R. Allin.

Heaven on Earth, or the best* Friend in the w^rst times; to which is added a
Sermon preached at the funeral of Thomas Mosley Apothecary: By James Janeway.

A token for Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and
exemplary lives, and joyful deaths of several young children, By James Janeway.

Justification only upon a satisfaction, By R^b. Ferguson.

The Christians great interest, or the trial of a saving interest in Christ,
with the way how to attain it. By William Guthry late Minister in Scotland.

The virtue, vigor and officacy of the Promises displayed in their strength
and glory. By Tho. Henderson.

The History of Moderation; or, the Life, Death, and Resurrection of
Moderation, together with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred and
Character, Friends, and also her Enemies.

A Guide to the true Religion; or, a Discourse directing to make a wise choice
of that Religion men venture their salvation upon. By I. Clappam.

Rebukes for* sin by God's burning anger; by the burning of London; by the
burning of the World, and by the burning of the wicked in Hellfire, to which
is added a Discourse of Heart-fixedness. By Tho. Doolittle.

Four select Sermons upon several tex^s of Scripture, wherein the VVill-worship
and Idolatry of the Church of Rome is laid open and confuted. By William Fenner.

The life and death of Dr. James Usher Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of
Ireland.

A most comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul: by
William Cooper Bishop of Galloway.

The Canons and Institutions of the Quakers agreed upon at their General
Assemby at their new Theater in Gracechurch-street.

A Synopsis of Quakerism; or, a Collection of the fundamental errors of the
Quakers. By Tho. Danson.

Blood for Blood, being a true Narrative of that late horrid mur^her committed
by Mary Cook upon her chi^d. By Nath. Partridge; with a Sermon on the same
occasion, by James Sharp.

The welcome Communicant in Octavo.

The present state of Russia, by Dr. Samuel Collins, who resided nine years in
that Court, (...) Octo.

1. The discovery of natural corruption. 2. The remedy of natural corruption.
3. Meditations of mortality: 4. The description of a Friend. 5. Gods Troops
invading man. 6. The helpfulness of faith in great trials.
These six several Treatises by Nicho. Locki^^ Minister of the Gospal.

FINIS.

