THE Protestant Mask Taken off from the Jesuited Englishman; BEING, AN ANSWER
To a Book, Entitled, [GREAT-BRITAIN's Just Complaint.]

Imprimatur,

December. 12. 1692. EDMUND BOHUN.

LONDON, Printed by William Wild, for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock, at the
West End of St. Paul's, 1692/3.

THE Protestant Mask Taken off from the Jesuited Englishman. OR, etc.
THere are no sort of Men who can so dexterously put on all Shapes as the
refined Followers of Ignatius, and none so apt to be imposed upon at this time
by these Masqueraders, as King James's Protestant Friends. The last Revolution
gave as great a Blow to Popery, as another would do to the Reformed Religion:
so that they who wish well to the Roman, and ill to the English Church, must
rail at the past Revolution, and advise us to another; they must cover the late
King's real Faults, and brand the present with feigned Crimes; they must strain
their Wits to represent King James as one who never did any Evil, and King
William as if he never did any Good. This, with a few Harangues of Loyalty, and
some show of Concern for the Protestant Religion, the disguised Author hopes
will suffice to make those Church-of- England-men, who are not satisfied with
the Present Government, venture into Arms to restore King James, wherein should
they prosper, it can serve the Interest of none but Papists; and if they be
unfortunate, it must end in the Ruin of the deluded Undertakers. In pure
Charity to them therefore, and tender Compassion to my Country, I will examine
the late Pamphlet, styled, Great Britain's Just Complaint, etc. and briefly
show the Sophistry and Weakness of his Arguments, the Falsehood of his pretented
History, and the Malice as well as Danger of his Design. To which purpose I
must pass by his Flowers of Rhetoric, his innumerable and needless Repetitions
and Tautologies, (which make up one half of the Book) and reply only to that
which seems material.

He stumbles on a Contradiction very ominously at his first Step, Page 1.
affirming that our last Revolution never had a Parallel in ancient or modern
History; yet immediately grants, there are Instances in every Country of
Subjects who have been forced by Arms to defend their Religion and Liberties
against such violent Acts of their Princes, as visibly endangered the Frame of
the Government; and that many Princes have lost their Crowns by their Cruelty,
and being obstinately deaf to their Subjects Petitions and Complaints. Which
Instances are all Parallels to our Revolution, excepting only that most of them
have been more bloody and violent upon less Occasions; and in few places, where
a free People were so long and highly provoked, did the Criminals come off so
easily.

The next Exploit of this bold Writer is to arraign the whole Nation, Page 2.
and the wisest Men in it, for Fools and Madmen, as being imposed on by the
Prince of Orange's Ambition, and refusing all Offers of Accommodation, and
Expedients for Redress: Whereas our greatest Statesmen did examine these Offers
and Expedients; and in the midst of their Deliberations, the late King went
away privately for France, and so broke off the Treaty. With equal Truth and
Modesty he affirms, that all the Reasons of this Revolution are baffled, and
the Actors in it ashamed of the Grounds they went upon. Yet still there remain,
it seems, two famous Pamphlets, which have put him to all his shifts to answer:
one is called, The Pretenses of the French Invasion Examined; the other, A
Letter to a Friend concerning the French Invasion. And not to take notice of
his blind Guesses at, and rude Censures of the Authors, and the Papers
themselves, we will try how well he has confuted them.

After all the Reproaches of Folly and Fallacy cast upon the first Author, Page
3.
he grants the Points he has treated upon, are very weighty; and our profound
Politician humbly follows the Steps of his contemptible Adversary. And to
prepare Men to revolt from this Government, and join with a French Invasion, he
undertakes to show they ought to venture their Necks for another Revolution.

1. To repair the Injury done to King James. 2. To settle the Government upon
its old Basts. 3. To deliver our selves from the present Sufferings we lie
under. 4. To secure the Protestant Religion.
1. To make out the Injury done to King James, he takes leave of the Papers he
was answering, and runs back near 20 Years to make up a most ridiculous and
improbable Invective against the Prince of Orange, hoping to hide the just,
real and honorable Causes of his Descent, (which were his Love to us, and to
our Religion and Laws, then in extreme Danger by K. James's Administration) by
a false and groundless Charge of his ambitious aiming at our Crown, before he
could well write Man, and by accusing him of all the Troubles of K. Charles the
2d's Reign, which he aggravates by that Uncle's Tenderness for him. Which last
Insinuation shows the Truth of the rest: for Sir W. Temple (who best knew)
observes that K. Charles the 2d was so deep in the Interests of France, that he
shamefully neglected his brave Nephew, when his Life, and the Safety of
Christendom lay at stake.

But why does this nameless Libeller dig so deep for hidden Causes of the
Troubles of that Reign? Page 4.
The Growth of Arbitrary Power and Popery, the Duke's declaring himself Papist,
the Breach of the Triple League, the Dutch War, the Intrigues with France, and
the Popish Plot, were open and known Causes of these Troubles: And a few of
them were sufficient to make a People, so tender of their Liberties and
Religion as the English are, to be uneasy. Besides, how came it to pass that K.
Charles, who was so very sagacious, never discovered this, but to the great
Satisfaction (not of his People, but) of his own Mind, as he declared in
Parliament, married this Prince to his Niece, who was then generally supposed
likely to succeed to the English Crown? And to show this Match was no Force
upon that King, the Noble Peer who advised the Match, was most dear to his then
Master, and had a better Post in his Reign than that he now enjoys. The Duke
perhaps might be averse to this Match, as being likely to spoil his Designs of
converting us, which would be difficult in the prospect of a Protestant Heir.
The Bill of Exclusion, and the refusing K. Charles's Concessions, are next
imputed to the P. of O. and his Friends, but very falsely; for the Popish Plot
gave the pretense to that Bill, and the Zealots for it inclined to set up
Monmouth or a Commonwealth.

As to the Concessions of a Fence against a Popish Successor, if the P. of O.
really had any Friends in that Parliament, and any such Prospect as is
pretended, there would not have been a fairer Opportunity to put him then into
the greatest Trust and Power; but the Truth is, the Duke's Creatures in the
House, who knew he had rather not Reign, than be hampered and unabled to
restore Popery, joined with the Republicans to throw out those Offers.

As the Pagans of old were wont to put all the Curses due to a City upon some
hated Person, Page 5.
and then make him a Sufferer for them all; so this spiteful Railer uses this
most Heroic Prince, loading him with all the ill Things that were done here,
in hopes to expose him to the Peoples Rage; Even the Quo-Warranto's designed to
usher in Arbitrary Power, and crush his Friends, (if he had any) and Monmouth's
Invasion, the Success of which had cast out his Title, are laid at his Door.
The first of these has no Proof but his Conjecture, and the latter is promised
(none knows when) to be proved by some Dispatches not safe to be published now:
But we may be sure there are no such Dispatches; otherwise, he that dares
publish this Libel, hates the Prince mortally, and wants Evidence for every
thing, would not have been restrained by either Fear or Modesty, to print such
useful Testimonies as those would have been to his Design. His Appeal to Sir
William Temple's Memoirs we admit, who gives the Prince so just, and yet so
high a Character, that it manifests no little Share of Confidence in this
Author, to cite so unlikely a Book in justification of those odious Slanders:
He begins K. James his Reign where it ended, at the Abdication; yet his Method
is as good as his Chronology, for he makes an old Latin word found in Festus,
Livy, etc. to be first used at Naples in the last Century, hoping to fright us
from the Word by the terrible Exit of that War; but he conceals that Ferdinand
King of Naples, to whom this Word was applied, when he saw a Conqueror break in
upon him, and that he could not stay without bringing Ruin upon his Subjects,
before his private Flight and Desertion generously absolved all his People from
their Oaths of Allegiance, and never returned till they unanimously recalled
him. Guiccardini Histor. l. 1. p. 130.
And if the late King had imitated that Prince in his Care of us, when he went
away unconcerned for any but himself, his peaceable Return had been more likely
than now it is.

But he will prove K. Page 6.
James did not desert, because he was driven from us; and here he conceals that
the late King was the Aggressor, and had generally disgusted the Nation by his
Attempts on their Religion and Liberties, and despising their Petitions for
Redress: yet these were the true Causes of the Prince's mighty Success, who had
no other, and needed no better Agents than King James his Bigotry, and his
Popish Counselors Fury: These prepared England to receive a Deliverer, and one
who would see these Evils remedied very kindly, and made as many as could, fly
to him for Protection. And if this true apparent Cause had been mentioned, the
Scene would not appear so strange as his Oratory paints it out: these
destructive and dangerous Counsels and Practices of the Prince's Foes, did,
without a Miracle, force Protestant-Children to forsake a misled Father. This
drove his Servants, the Clergy, and other Subjects, to fly for shelter to him
who came to their Rescue: But it is evident they sought only their own Safety,
not the King's Hurt, since when he was in their Power, none offered any Harm to
his Person.

Well, but he made fair Promises to some Officers of his Army: and they made as
fair Promises to him; but they saw no Inclination in him to redress any thing,
unless he were compelled to it; and this obliged some of them to leave him. The
Treaty he speaks of, was not moved till he had quitted the Field, and saw he
could not fight: Yet even then it was accepted by the Victorious Prince with
all imaginable sincerity, as the Articles he sent show Histor. of Desert. p. 91.
: To which King James promised (by Advice of his Council) in the main to agree,
the very Night before his first departure in Disguise. As to the Danger he was
informed of, there was nothing real in it; and the Prince knew nothing of it,
as appeared afterward when the King was in his Power: and they who knew the
Intrigue, say it was a Sham, invented by a Commissioner of his own, who knew
his Temper, feared his Obstinacy, and devised this to terrify him into an
Agreement. But suppose he were in Danger, that will not prove his Desertion
could not be voluntary, otherwise the Mariners in St. Paul's Ship ( Acts 27.)
might pretend their going off in the Boat was no voluntary Desertion, since
they apprehended Danger to their Lives by staying. Or thus, A General might
excuse leaving his Soldiers, because they Mutinied and threatened him.
Ferdinand of Naples did not freely Abdicate, if nothing can be free which is
our Choice in a Prospect of Danger. It is not necessary to a voluntary Act,
that there be no Pressures to incline the Will to one Side: for he who chooses a
lesser Evil to avoid what he counts a greater, acts voluntarily. Wherefore if
the late King chose rather to desert and save himself, than to stay for his
Peoples Safety, it was a voluntary Desertion. This Author says very gently,
Upon this the King thought fit to withdraw. But impartial Judges must call it a
Desertion, for the King in the midst of a Treaty to quit the Kingdom in
Disguise, leaving neither any Deputy or Directions, and this after he had
disbanded his Army, dismissed his Chancellor and other great Ministers, thrown
away the Great-Seal into the River of Thames, and left his abandoned People to
shift for themselves, exposed to the Insolence of the Rabble on the one hand,
and the worse Rabble of a disbanded Army on the other hand; this the Parliament
called Abdication.

The Treaty being thus broke off by King's James's Desertion, Page 8.
and the Administration (before he was heard of) put into the Prince's Hands,
he was at liberty whether he would renew the Treaty or no. Yet still he hindered
not the King's Return to London, where instead of going to call a Parliament,
he burnt all the remaining Writs, and endeavored to make a Faction in the
City, by drawing off a Party there from the Prince. Upon which it was necessary
to desire him to retire to Ham, or some other Place near London, in order to
reassume the Treaty, and to keep him from doing or receiving any harm. But King
James who still resolved to fly rather than treat, refused to go to Ham, and
chose Rochester to retire to, secretly designing for France, to raise Forces
there to expel the Prince by Force; so that his Messages were only to amuse
till he could escape; as accordingly he did, shipping himself a second time for
France, whither he came safe.

And now what Occasion is there for all our Author's tragical Outcries, Page 9.
of the imprisoning and illtreating a Monarch, who was at Liberty to go where
he pleased, and not an Hair of his Head hurt? Had that Monarch been Victorious,
and the Prince been as long and as much in his power, he would scarce have
given him leave to go back safe to Holland, but have sent him out of the way by
the Axe, with as little Scruple or Ceremony as he did Monmouth. And if his
former Dealings with the Prince be considered, it must be owned, he treated him
with a Civility more becoming a dutiful Son than a provoked Enemy, and showed
(to the Satisfaction of all good English Protestants) more of the Christian
than of the Politician in this whole Affair: yet this Rabshakeh arraigns him
for his Charity.

He accuses the Prince for sending him by Water at an unseasonable time,
thereby endangering his Health; forgetting that K. James went in the Night by
Water the very Week before of Choice, when he crossed the River in order to his
first Attempt to get into France, and this without any Damage to his Health; so
that he used himself as ill as the Prince used him. As to his writing to the
Bishops, his speaking to the Bishop of Winchester, or to Sir R. Clayton, or
other Citizens; all this is an impudent Fiction; the Bishop of Winchester
protests that no such Proposition was ever made to him; the same is averred by
Sir R. Clayton. His Letters from Rochester and St. Germains, are full of Wrath
and Revenge, complaining of every one but himself, (the first Cause of all
those Evils) and are so far from promising Amends, that they do not own he did
any Fault: Nor has the Nation seen any thing from him since, that shows his
desire to be restored, any other way than by French Arms, which he hopes will
both force him upon us again, give him opportunity of Revenge, and assist him
in the pious Works of Dragooning and Enslaving us.

The Convention had declared the Throne void; Page 11.
and being told that he writ from St. Germains in the Style of a King, they
could not receive nor read the Letter writ from thence, which offered no
Redress, but required an absolute Submission. Wherefore tho these Letters might
show his Desire to be in his Throne, they gave no Hopes of his taking better
Measures for the future. He would have staid, if he might have set up Popery,
and ruled us Arbitrarily; and he seems not willing to return upon other Terms.
Therefore when a King will not govern in a limited Monarchy, unless he may
change it into an absolute Empire, if he desert with such Principles, and
continue in them, the Parliament judges this to be an Abdication. He objects,
that by a Maxim of the Author of the Pretenses examined, K. James could not
desert: but the Place is not truly cited out of that Paper, which rightly
supposes the People of England are not willing to part with K. William and Q.
Mary. And therefore now they have sworn to protect us, and we to bear
Allegiance to them, they are not at liberty to give up their Power; that is, it
would be an ill thing in them to leave us now in time of Danger, they cannot do
it fairly. Solumid dicimur posse face^^, quod justesacere possumus. Great. Gl.
22 qu. 2.
And it is supposed we cannot do that at all, which we cannot do justly: Now
this rare Logician insers, Therefore when K. James does desert, he cannot
desert; tho the People are not unwilling he should go, since it was his Mind.
But the only true Consequence of this Maxim is, not that there is any
Impossibility in the thing, but that he did not well, to choose rather to leave
us than stay and govern by Law. It Is true, by disbanding the Army he broke no
Statute, but he broke his Oath to protect us, and declared by that Act he would
no longer defend us; and then it was time for the Bishop of Canterbary and
other Lords to seek out for another Governor.

Wherefore this mighty Champion sings before the Victory; Page ^^.
the Desertion still lives, after his Dream of knocking it dead. However, he
goes on to cope with another Foe, the Male Administration: And here our Author
says not he is a Protestant, the he brags he is an English man; I doubt he is
neither, since tho Matters are too plain to be denied, and too odious to be
justified, yet he falls to extenuate and excuse them with all the Artifice that
an ill Cause needs: And hoping to wheedle the Nation with more Rhetoric than
Honesty, he insinuates, that Errors alone will not justify such horrid Crimes
as he charges upon this Revolution. And if the Maladministration were only
some little Irregularities, and the Revolution so horridly wicked as he paints
them both, this Assertion would be true enough. But in our Case the Faults
were, taking Methods to destroy the Form of Government it self here
established, and breaking in upon Religion, Liberty, Property; in all which our
King is bound by Oath to defend us. Such Faults (when Petitions are rejected)
must be cured some way, or a total Ruin must follow. And no History can show
an Instance where so great Evils were averted without Battle, Noise or
Executions.

If I may defend my self against an unjust and fatal Assault, I may begin
before I am mortally wounded: Page 13.
And if we had staid to see the Effect of the Dispensing Power,
High-Commission-Court, etc. our unavoidable Ruin had been the certain Price
for that cautious Delay: The Design was as plain, and the Methods as likely as
could be; and if no Check had been given by any body, the Event had been e're
now as fatally certain, as the Causes were evident. It must be granted K. James
is a zealous Catholic, and has a Passion for the French Government; and
therefore why should we not believe his aiming at establishing Popery, and the
French way of Governing, proceeded from his own Inclinations? Or if his
Ministers put him upon these Projects, (as he insinuates) since he would let
none of them be called to Account, it was all one to the Sufferers whether he
or his Ministers devised their Ruin. Again, he requires some Author's Name to
the Particulars charged upon K. James's Government; but the Charge is so true,
and known to so many thousands, that there is more need to inquire into his
Name that dares to outface a whole Nation: for if his Authority be not more
weighty than his Excuses, he will never carry his Point.

The examining of Particulars will show this; Page 14.
some of them he denies, extenuates the rest, and varnishes all over. But (1.)
were there no Severities in the West? Yes, he grants it, and seems sorry for
it, but says they were Rebels, and had forfeited their Lives and Estates. Let
that be granted; yet still there have been greater Rebellions in former Reigns,
yet no King (after the Danger was over, and the Party broken) did ever execute
so many of his deluded Subjects in cold Blood: None were condemned upon their
bare Confession, extorted with assurance of Pardon, nor hanged up with Healths
drank, and Huzza's. He throws all this upon the Ministers: but we have not
forgot the Triumphs at White Hall upon the News of these Barbarities, which K.
James himself repeated to the Foreign Ministers with much Joy, and called that
bloody Circuit, Jefferies his Campaign: Nor how that Butcher was put into the
King's Bosom, and advanced for executing these merciless Orders he had
received. Pollexfen was only put into that Commission, to grace the bloody
Scene with some Color of Law, of which heavy Employment he acquitted himself
so well, that Complaints were made of him: And this Government promoted him
only for his Skill to a Post where there were no Lives concerned. The bloody
Temper of Kirk could not recommend him to K. William, whose Life, as well as
his Reign here, show, he is merciful perhaps to excess.

(2.) That illegal and terrible High Commission, set up to trample upon Law, to
turn out all honest Clergymen, and put Popish Priests in their places, to Fine,
Imprison, Banish, and what not, the Innocent as well as the Guilty; this is
hastily passed over with this sorry Excuse, that one of the Actors in it is now
after four Years, but only in a fair way to be preferred by K. William, and
this too after begging Pardon for his Faults.

(3.) He catches at the word [all], and denies that all good Protestants were
turned out, and that all Places of Trust and Profit were filled with
unqualified Men. But the Phrase may be justified, since tho some who called
themselves Protestants, kept their Places, yet they could neither be zealous
for, nor sound in that Religion, who promised to comply with a Catholic King
in all the Methods he took to destroy it. And if any one of them scrupled at
any thing, immediately he was cashiered, and an unqualified Man generally put
in his Place. All that he can say to the rest in a Lump, is, That the E. of S.
and L. C. forced K. James against his own Inclinations to prefer Father Peter's
to the Privy Council, to model the Irish Army and Government, to elect
Magdalen-College-Fellows, to regulate Corporations, closet Gentlemen, and to
imprison and try the Bishops. Well, English Men are good-natured, and must
believe King James had no Zeal for Popery, no Love for Father Peter's, no Desire
to get a Popish Army, no hankering after Arbitrary Power, no Intent to have a
Parliament preingag'd to take off Penal Laws and Tests, no purpose to bring
Friars into Colleges and Churches, no Anger against the Bishops for petitioning
-- Risum teneatis Amici. Alas, he was tricked into all this by the P. of O. his
trusty Agents, and poor Gentleman never smelt the Plot: He had many Catholics
in his Court and Council, but never heard or trusted any of them, but was
wholly guided by pretended Protestants. -- But if any be so void of common
Sense, as to believe and admit this Stuff, yet it must be granted this unlucky
Apologist throws more Dirt upon K. James than he wipes off; and to make him
seem innocent, describes him as the easiest and most unthinking Creature alive,
pretending he was drawn in by two bantring Sycophants to do the most illegal
Acts, and the most ungrateful to his People, and all this against his own
Inclinations as well as true Interest: Were this true, he might be indicted as
a Non Compos, and his Capacity to govern questioned; but being horribly false,
it will follow, the People of England were in danger of losing the Liberties
and Religion by a Prince of such a Temper, such Inclinations, and one that was
set upon such destructive Methods. And thus our Excuser runs upon one Rock to
avoid another, and can no way bring his Master off safe.

Yet he goes on, Page 15.
without blushing, to call K. James's Heat to advance Popery, nothing but the
natural and eafy Passion of showing some little Favor to them of his own
Religion. -- And feigns that two Lords, hired by the P. of O. forced him to do
that which above all things he desired. Now I wonder this Prince should be so
prodigal of his Money, to squander it away upon Agents, to persuade a Man to
gratify himself, to drive him on to that, which his Priests would certainly
make him do gratis. He thinks we never heard how K. James led F. Peter's into
the Council by the Hand, and made a Speech in his Commendation to that Board;
or he durst not say he was averse to his Admission into the Council. We know he
was the first Adviser and Promoter of Quo Warranto's in his Brother's time, and
furiously drove on Regulations in his own. And does this Dauber think to prove
K. James was against those Measures, by his telling an easy Peer, (who had
drudged for him in that vile Employment) that these Methods were against his
Judgment: If he did say this, it was Protestatio contra Factum, and shows the
Credulity of the Peer, not the Sincerity of that Prince, who had convinced
Mankind, that to serve a Turn, he could say one thing, and mean another. His
Proof from some Men's Brags since the Revolution, is equally weak, because when
Reputation or Interest alone are considered, many will boast of more than they
ever really performed; nor did I ever hear that any one has boasted of this.
But (he says) the Prince promised diverse Places here before he set out from
Holland; and this he takes for an infallible proof that he aimed then at the
Crown: But it must be noted that he came to redress Grievances, and especially
the filling Places with unqualified Men; so that if the Treaty had gone on, and
K. James stayed, many places must be supposed to be made void. And he who had
done the Nation this Service, might justly expect the Favor to recommend some
of his Friends to those Vacancies, tho he never expected to be King of England.
But besides all this, it is positively affirmed that no such Promises were made
to any Persons; some were disgusted, others quite lost, because no such
Promises were made to them. As for his Order to the French Ambassador to depart
the Kingdom, this was not till the Administration was put into his Hands; and
the Trust reposed in him; required him to discharge one who was likely to be a
Spy upon his Counsels, and one whose Interest it was to betray him, and hinder
the Nation's Settlement.

His Parallel is yet a bolder Step than his Apology, Page 16.
for he undertakes to show K. William to be as guilty of Misgovernment as K.
James. And first he says, his Inclinations to Arbitrary Rule are as great as
the late King's, because K. William sent a Message to the Parliament not to put
too many Limits upon the Prerogative, lest they forced him to leave us. But as
no such Message was ever sent, so suppose it had been, is this Check to the
Republicans, so arbitrary as K. James's declaring he would have no Bounds set
to the Prerogative but his Will, and his constant Actings accordingly? For he
told his Judges what he would have to be Law, but this King enquires of his
Judges what they think legal. He grants, the late King used a Dispensing Power,
and that too in other Instances besides Liberty of Conscience; which Liberty
our Author (contrary to the Opinion of his Friend K. Lewis) calls, That
desirable and necessary Good of Mankind. -- Well, let it be so, where then is
the Parallel? Why K. James granted this against Law, and without a Parliament;
and K. William grants the same Liberty, not by a Dispensing Power, or by
Prerogative, but by Parliament: (that is) K. James he granted it arbitrarily,
K. William settles it by Law. -- A most exact Parallel no doubt, and a good
proof of K. William's Design to be arbitrary. To get off this Difficulty, the
Prince's Agents are topt upon us again, and all the blame laid on him and them;
they managed poor K. James with invisible Wires, who followed them blindfold to
his Ruin. And if he were so easily wheedled by corrupted Protestants, may he
not more easily be wheedled into illegal Acts by fierce and dangerous Papists?
And is it not then our wisest way never to wish for the return of a Prince so
apt to be misled? If he be in the best Humor in the World with the Bishops
upon his Restoration, how soon may some Popish Emissary incense him once more
against them, and run them again into the Tower, and from thence to the Bar?

It was truly urged against King James, that his Affection to Catholics was
too strong for the Law: And he will prove King William guilty of the same
Crime, because in time of War he hires a few Foreign Papists into his Army, Men
who stay no where, have no Interest to serve, no Design but on their Pay, and
no Concern about the Religion of any Country which employs them; which with
inexpressibly Effrontery (he says) is worse than K. James Cashiering (in Times
of Peace) great Numbers of Military and Civil Protestant Officers, and putting
English and Irish Papists in their Places, whose Interest obliged and inclined
them, to assist their King in changing the Laws and Religion of their Native
Country. Again, he asks if Catholics (so he calls them falsely in most places,
not Roman Catholics) be not countenanced as much, and do not exercise their
Religion as freely now as ever. I reply, they are permitted, but not at all
countenanced. Do their Friars walk in their Habits? Do they ring Bells, and
invite all People to see and hear their Foppery? or make public Shows? Are
they promoted to Churches and Colleges, and to be Privy-Counsellors? If not,
how absurd is his Query? and where is his Parallel? But he fancies we were
safer when his Catholics held their Liberty merely by the Favor of English
Protestants, (that is, surely he means in King James his Time) than now when
Foreign Princes of the Romish Communion desire this King to tolerate them. Now
I dare appeal to the Papists, Whether they did not believe it was King James,
not English Protestants, who gave them the Liberty in that Reign? And whether
they did not think their Religion more likely to be restored by a Prince of
their own Faith in League with France, than by a Protestant King, Confederate
with the House of Austria? And if they think their Religion likely to be
restored by King William, let them make it evident by fighting for him against
the late King and his French Allies, otherwise all these Suggestions are as
groundless as they are malicious.

Yet upon a review of these Bug-Bears of his own dressing up, Page 18.
he is terribly affrighted, and falls to pray to avert these imaginary Evils;
using at the same time all his Rhetorical Amplifications to excite us to run
into certain and real Mischiefs, by destroying this Government, that can and
will defend our Religion and Civil-Rights, to set up another which will destroy
both. But the Cheat is so visible, and his Parallels so ridiculous, that no Man
of Sense can be deluded by such Stuff. Wherefore I conclude this Point, and
have showed that King James was the Aggressor, and hurt himself: we injured no
Body, and only warded off the Blow which aimed at the very Vitals of our
Church, and our Ancient Government; and which would have turned it from a
Limited to an Absolute Monarchy; a Change infinitetly worse for this Nation
than our Author can pretend has been made by this Revolution.

Which brings me to his second Pretense for restoring King James, Page 19.
viz. the settling the Government upon its old Basts. And here, while he seems
to cite a long Passage out of his Adversary, See the Pretenses examined, p. 10.
he jumbles the Sense, alters the Phrases, puts in his own Comment, and leaves
out some of the Author's Words; and then accuses the Writer (whom he blindly
and falsely guesses to be the Earl of Nottingham) of Ignorance, in the History
and Affairs of England, want of Judgment, Disingenuity, Impudence, and what
not? But it will be easily proved, to all that know that accomplished Peer, and
read this Libel, this is not his Lordship's, but this Libeller's own Character.
And his Reply to this Passage, confirms the Observation; for he owns that the
Convention declared the Throne void; therefore he mistakes in saying they made
it void. Declaring, supposes a thing done already; and he may as well charge a
Judge with committing that Fact which he declares to be Treason, as to say the
Convention made the Throne void. But we utterly deny his infallible Mark, viz.
That a Vacancy certainly proves a Monarchy Elective, and that in an Hereditary
Monarchy the Throne cannot be without a Possessor one Moment. For Scotland is,
and ever was accounted to be no Elective, but an Hereditary Monarchy; yet upon
the Death of Alexander, there was a Vacancy for above five Years, while the
Hereditary Titles of six several Pretenders were under Examination. And there
was a Vacancy in England, See Spotsw. History of Scotland, An. 1279.
from the two and twentieth of August, when King Richard, the Third was slain,
till Henry the Seventh was declared King. Yea, there was more than a Moment
between the Resignation of Edward and Richard the Second, and the Entrance of
Edward the Third and Henry the Fourth. I grant, that where there is no Doubt
(concerning the next Heir) upon Cession or Death, there the right Heir succeeds
immediately: But while the next Heir is ambiguous in an Hereditary Monarchy,
till the Title be examined, cleared and declared, none of the Pretenders can
assume the Royal Dignity. And his other Maxim of our Kings never dying, is not
literally true in any other Case, but where there is a certain, known and
undoubted Heir. So that an enquiry into, and declaring the right Heir, does not
make an Hereditary Monarchy Elective. But he denies that the present Queen was
the right Heir; and here he sets up his Bristles, and hectors his Adversary,
the Convention, and the Prince of Orange, for not proving the Prince of Wales
Supposititious. Now he neither proves it a real Birth himself, nor answers half
the Arguments have been urged against it; yet is very angry that others will
not prove a Negative.

The Convention had seen the Depositions, Page 20.
knew the Credit of the Witnesses, and all the Circumstances of the Delivery,
yet after all did not believe it a real Birth; they had examined it as far as
was necessary to their own Satisfaction, and after all declared the Princess of
Orange to be the right Heir. The Papists, (whose Religion was to be brought in
by the Father, and established by this pretended Son) and all their Wellwishers
should have brought better Proof of their New Heir, than a few depending,
partial, interested People; it was their Business to have produced their
Evidence. The Convention judged according to all the Proofs they had, and
unanimously declared for the Princess's Right; who being the next Heir, in
their Judgment, and in the Opinion of the whole Nation, (some few excepted)
they sufficiently showed they did not intend to make this Monarchy Elective, in
that they declared the true Heir (as they verily believed) to be Queen. But
suppose they had spent Months or Years in the Inquiry, and left the Nation to
sink in the mean while, what would all this have signified to Jesuits, and
Nose-led Protestants? Unless they had pronounced for the Prince of Wales right
or wrong, this sort of People would not have acquiesced in their Determination;
and therefore they did wisely, after they, and almost the whole Body of English
Protestants were satisfied, not to trouble themselves any further.

Besides, Page 21.
if King James did believe it, why did he not put it upon a Trial in Parliament
in his own Time? He understood the People of England generally suspected there
was Artifice used to exclude a Protestant Heir; and therefore why did he not
call a Parliament long before the Prince of Orange came over, and submit it to
their Inquiry? Yea, when the Prince was come, He, the Bishops, Nobility and
Officers, yea all England desired King James to call a Parliament to settle
this and other Matters, yet he would not call one, but fled from this way of
Trial. If it be said, King James had proved it by the Depositions; it is
answered, These were Witnesses all of one side, chosen by a Party, sworn before
partial Men, and in too private a Place for an Hereditary Monarchy. The People
doubting about the true Heir, ought to have Satisfaction given to their
Representatives in Parliament, which was not done: yea, King James did not call
these Witnesses till fourteen Days before the Prince landed, viz. October 22.
thereby showing he did not intend to give the Nation any sort of Satisfaction;
but Fear, and the serving a Turn, extorted this Condescension from him.
Wherefore when King James would not try this Matter by his Parliament, when he
might have done it, why should the Convention do his Business for him, and
neglect the Nation's Safety? But he urges, that none were denied Satisfaction
who desired it: I reply, the Princess of Denmark formerly complained she had
not the Satisfaction given her which was fit, and it is generally believed she
was sent out of the way on purpose: The Dutch Ambassador (who ought to have
satisfied Princess Mary) was not called, the Bishops by design were sent to the
Tower, the good Protestants were all at Church; and this lucky Juncture, with a
Place suddenly resolved on, seem plainly designed for Privacy: And indeed none
were at the Birth it self but interested Friends, and Well-wishers to a Popish
Heir, whose Design and Hopes made some of them willing to affirm, and others
easy to believe any thing. Nor is the late Daughter's Birth among Foreigners,
and such as would top this Prince of Wales upon us, a sufficient Evidence that
a Son was born before; the Reckoners there were as often shifted as they had
been here, and as few Witnesses were called: and after all the Letters that
were writ hither, and after all the Promises of a Birth that should be so well
attested as to confirm the former, the one was managed as much in the dark as
the other had been; nor have we yet heard of any of those Attestations with
which we were so much threatened.

Having therefore not proved a Prince of Wales, Page 22.
the Argument from his Innocence and the Injury done him, falls, Non entis
nulla sunt Accidentia. Had the Convention believed there was such a Son, they
would have owned him as Heir; but believing there was no such Person, they
cannot properly be said to intend or do him any Injury. Queen Mary's Resolution
to have the Prince joined with her, is known to many: The Injury done to
Princess Ann and her Children is none at all, but a Benefit; for what was her
Title or theirs worth, if the Prince of Orange had permitted the Papists to set
up a Prince of Wales, and perhaps Dukes of York and Gloucester, to exclude them
all for ever? Is not her Succession and her Issues, both nearer and surer than
it was under King James? King William, it is true, is made King for his Life;
but if he die before the Queen, (which the Hazards he runs in defending both
Sisters Titles, makes too probable) then the Princess Ann and her Children have
no Injury at all: and if he should survive Queen Mary, I appeal to any
impartial Man, whether this King who rescued the Princess's Title from being
extinguished, do not merit to keep the Sovereignty for the rest of his Life,
especially since she and her Heirs precede his by any other Wife? From
Aggravations he falls to History; and while he blames his Adversaries Ignorance
therein, he evidently shows his own, in affirming, that no such Breach was ever
made in our English Succession before. Whereas we have had but 27 Reigns from
the Conquest to this Revolution, and in that time there have been several
Breaches in the Succession, most of them greater than this, viz. William the
Conqueror, William Rufus, Henry the First, King Stephen, King John, Henry the
Fourth and Seventh; to which some (who deny Henry the 8th's Marriage with his
Brother's Widow to be lawful) add Queen Mary; and the Papists put in Queen
Elizabeth. Now upon such Breaches, the Sentence of the People was had to
confirm the Pretender's Title, yet this Kingdom still remained Hereditary, in
common Account, and never was reckoned (as by his Argument it would have been)
an Elective Monarchy. But to keep to his Instances, there was a greater Breach
than is now, by King Henry the Seventh's coming to the Crown; for though
Richard the Third was slain, and left no Child, yet he left an Heiress,
Elizabeth Daughter of King Edward the Fourth; and some of her Sisters were then
alive, as was also a Son and a Daughter of George Duke of Clarence, all of the
House of York, to whom the Right of Succession certainly belonged: yet Henry
was crowned in October, 1485, and assumed the Crown in Right of the House of
Lancaster; Bacon 's History of Hen. 7. p. 6, and 11
and when he did marry the Heiress of York, he would not suffer her Title to be
mentioned, nor allow the Parliament to settle the Crown any further than on his
own Heirs. So that here were four or five Persons excluded at his assuming the
Crown, and no Care taken of them in the Settlement afterward: Yet still the
Monarchy remained Hereditary.

His Adversary did not instance in Edward the Third, Page 23.
because the only Breach then was in the Person of the reigning King; but then
he was worse dealt with than the late King, being forced to resign first his
Crown, and soon after his Life, and to thank his Deposers for declaring the
next in Succession King. But in Henry the Fourth's Case there were great
Breaches made, which he would conceal by saying, King Richard the Second left
no Son, and by falsely affirming, Henry was the next Heir, because the Pretenses
of the House of York were not yet set on foot. But the Truth is, King Richard's
right Heirs were the Mortimers descended from a Daughter of Lionel Duke of
Clarence, elder Brother to Henry the Fourth's Father: And Edmund Mortimer Earl
of March, his Brother Sir Roger, his Sister Ann, (by whom came afterward the
true Title to the House of York) and Elianor, were then and long after all
alive, and utterly excluded, when Henry assumed the Crown, though the Bishop of
Carlisle in open Parliament declared, that Edmund aforesaid was true and
undoubted Heir to the Crown. So that here was the reigning King deposed and
murdered, a remote Branch of the Royal Family advanced, and four Princes of the
Blood, with their future Issue, excluded from their Right, and kept out for
three Reigns: Which is a much greater Breach than is now; and our Author's
Outcry for a Parallel shows his Ignorance or his Dishonesty. We can show him
Acts of Parliament, which have not only excluded the Collateral Line, but the
right Heirs, even when they were not (as it is in our Case) of a Religion
different from the established one, and inconsistent with the Safety of England.

In short, Page 24.
considering the Reason and Necessity, our Revolution has made the least
Breach that ever was made in such a Change. The late King was not deposed, but
deserted us; his next Heir (the present Queen) of whom there is no doubt, was
put into the Vacant Throne, and the Crown settled Hereditarily upon her and her
Sister, and their Heirs successively: there is no Breach made at all, except
one Contingency happen; and if it do, it is Personal, Temporary, and
highly-merited: and if greater Breaches never made this Monarchy Elective, this
lesser one cannot do it. The Succession is taken due Care of in the right Line,
as the Convention believes, and settled on the true Heirs; so that they were no
Republicans, but true Friends of the Old English Monarchy, which the People of
England (I hope) will never change for French Slavery, the certain Consequent
of that Restoration into which he would decoy us.

The next Bugbear he sets up to fright us into Rebellion against the present
King, is the Fear that the Title of Conquest should alter the Government. But
by the way, since the late King cannot return but by Force, is there not more
danger that he proving victorious, should urge this Title in prejudice of our
Liberties, who was so arbitrary when he was here? And if so, we leap out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire, by his recovering his Throne. King William I am sure
never pleaded this Title, nor do either of the Authors he cites, maintain that
he conquered the People of England, (though in Fact he did conquer the late
King.) We freely submitted to him, and he as freely swore to govern us by our
Laws. Which one Observation spoils all his impertinent Declamation upon the
Mischiefs of Conquest, viz. Slavery, Loss of the Subjects Rights and
Properties, and Change of Laws, etc. Sure he is dreaming of some wretched
Country, conquered and ruled by the most Unchristian King. Our Prince treats
his very Enemies who stay here, better than King Lewis does his own Subjects:
and the Conquest those Authors speak of, relating only to the late King, is
very consistent, (1.) with the Prince's Declaration; (2.) with the Convention
settling the Crown on him; and (3.) with our Rights and Freedom.

When the Prince put out his Declaration, Page 25.
he could not foresee King James would finally refuse to call a Parliament; or
that he should first resolve to fight, and being conquered, to fly rather than
to treat. He brought no more Force with him than sufficed to protect himself,
and the English who joined with him, in requiring their Grievances might be
redressed: which shows he did not aim at Conquest. Yea, when the late King's
Army was routed and disbanded, he yielded to treat, according to his
Declaration; which showed no Design to take advantage as a Conqueror. And when
the late King fled from this Treaty, he did not meddle either with the
Administration or the Crown, till they were successively offered him by those
who represented the People of England, and he granted them all their Liberties
at first; and since he has had Power, he has redressed all the Grievances,
which the Trouble his Enemies give him will permit him to help: nor has he
refused any Acts of this kind which the Parliament has offered him. So that as
far as he could then foresee, his Promises in his Declaration and his Actions
do agree. He might safely say he came not for the Crown; but did not say he
would not accept it, if there were no body else to wear it, or if it were
freely offered him. And as to the Convention's Gift, they and King William
believe, after the Throne was vacant, that they ought to have declared his
Wife's Hereditary Right. As to himself, he will own that the Crown was the just
Gift of a free and grateful People, who so little believe his having infringed
their Liberties, (as Conquerors use to do) that I dare say, if it were needful,
the Parliament would add any further Confirmation to his Title. Nor will the
Body of the English Nation suffer a Mercenary Pen, hired with a few Luidores,
to alienate their Affections from so kind and gracious a Prince, who perhaps
might have seized the Crown by his Power, but chose to accept it in his dear
Consort's Right, and as a Reward of his personal Services; and never did bear
himself like a Conqueror, or treat us like a conquered People.

His Declamation upon the woeful Condition of a Conquered Nation, the Value of
our Liberties, Page 26.
and the Zeal other People have showed, and we ought to show to shake off
Slavery and Arbitrary Power, I highly approve, and would have transcribed it,
had it not been too long, being a just Satyr upon King James his Effects to
rule us Arbitrarily, a true Description of the miserable Condition of the poor
French, who, as he grants, page 54. are all made Slaves. And truly this whole
Discourse is useful, both as it arms us against our late Arbitrary Monarch's
fresh Attempts by that Tyrant's Assistance, and as it is a clear Vindication of
the late Revolution, and a deserved Encomium on those brave Englishmen, who
after the Example of their Ancestors, nobly shook off the Shackles K. James was
putting on them.

However, Page 27.
this can be no Motive to any body to rebel against K. William, who, as this
Enemy confesses, never yet pretended to this Title of Conquest, and knows
nothing what Books his Secretary licenses: and that Book which moves this
Author's Jealousy, speaks only of a Conquest over K. James, not over the People
of England: so that it makes nothing to his purpose. K. William, as his
Declaration for Scotland assures us, came to hinder the late King from taking
away his Subjects Liberties: and it was high time, when that King in his
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in Scotland, Feb. 12. 1686. said, (in the
very Phrase of the French Tyrant) he would have his absolute Power obeyed
without reserve, -- and made them swear to assist and defend him and his Heirs
in the exercise of this his absolute Power against all Deadly. Now he that
claims absolute Power, and Obedience to it without reserve, leaves his Subjects
no Liberties; he owns that his Will is not bounded by Laws or Privileges, and
no Law can exempt a Subject in that case from obeying an illegal Command. --
Yea, he makes that enslaved People swear to put this heavy Yoke on their own
Necks, and to help him to destroy all that stood up for their Laws and
Liberties. And they were following this Copy in England, when Jefferies would
suffer no Lawyer to plead in the High-Commission-Court; and without hearing the
Cause, gave Sentence in these Words, It is the King's Pleasure that such and
such be suspended, fined, deprived, etc. And the late King himself at Oxford
would not hear the Magdalen-Fellows plead their Cause, but in a Fury told them,
He would make them know he was their King, and would be obeyed. Now let this
Gentleman declaim as much as he will against a King's infringing his Peoples
Liberties, it hurts not K. William, but falls very heavy upon his own Master.

And so does this eloquent Description of the Mischief of a Prince's assuming a
Dispensing Power, Page 28.
which fatally threatens the Liberties of a People, and (as he says) makes
them Tenants at Will for their Privileges, wherein the Law gives them a
Freehold. And was it not time for the English to look about them, when the late
King claimed and exercised this Power in a thousand Instances? But to avoid
that natural Application, he pretends to wonder that our Convention and
Parliament since the Revolution never set Bounds between the Prerogative and
the Peoples Rights -- Which is a notorious piece of Dissimulation; for he knows
when the Convention tendered the Crown to their Majesty's, in that very
Declaration solemnly approved, Feb. 12. 1688. these Bounds are set, and the
Subjects Liberties and Rights declared, (especially such as the late King had
invaded) to which K. William consented: and this was enrolled both in the
Parliament-Rolls, and in the Chancery Hist. of Desertion, p. 127.
. Yea, this Author cites this Declaration three or four times by name, 33, 34,
35. yet here he would insinuate there was no such thing, only that he may
slander the present King and Parliament. With equal Confidence he accuses K.
William, upon the Reduction of Ireland, for acting Arbitrarily, because to
spare the Effusion of his Subjects Blood, he granted some Privileges to the
Irish who laid down their Arms, by his own Authority, tho he confesses he got
them afterward confirmed by Parliament: Which is no more Power than a General
is often wont to assume, in signing Capitulations without consulting his
Prince. And is this Criminal in a King, that is allowable in some of his
Officers? He knows the late King in time of Peace granted both Privileges and
Dispensations more contrary to Law, and despised a Parliament's Confirmation,
affirming his Will to be sufficient Authority for the most illegal Grants. From
this he passes to harangue upon the Injustice of illegal Imprisonment, and the
Worth of Freedom, which he sets off as the choicest part of our Magna Charta,
forgetting that K. James, contrary to Law, imprisoned many hundreds in all
parts of England upon Monmouth's Invasion; and clapped up seven Bishops, Peers of
the Realm, most unjustly, and almost daily broke in upon this dear Piece of our
English Privileges in time of Peace.

But he that excuses this, and will not see it, Page 29.
roars out at our present King for clapping up a few Jacobites, and aggravates
the Matter extremely, but says not one word of the Occasion. But it is well
known, that while the French King and King James prepare to invade us from
without, the Papists, and their Protestant Accomplices of that Party, have laid
diverse treasonable Plots at home to destroy this Government; and by railing, by
Libels, and all other Methods, have labored to disturb the public Peace, to
seduce their Majesty's Subjects from their Allegiance, and to take away their
Majesty's Lives and Crowns: for which under any Government but this, many
hundreds of them e're now had paid their Heads: But our Prince, who, like the
brave Antoninus, punishes all Offenses more gently than the Law ordains Vide
Jul. Capitolin. in Vita, page 206.
, has been content only to confine some of the chief of them to prevent their
doing Mischief, as the Safety of the Nation absolutely requires when Invasion
was threatened; and this is the Occasion of all this Noise. As for the Benefit
of Acts of Parliament, which he says they were denied, I must observe they
were Men (generally) that deserved no Protection from, or Benefit by the Laws,
because they have not only refused to swear Allegiance to this Government, but
by Words and Actions, declared, they are sworn Enemies to it, and resolve to
overturn it as soon as they can: Nor could the Government want Informations
against them, who had so often and openly discovered their Intentions. But it
was K. William his innate Clemency (which would soften any but such ungrateful
Creatures) that made him forbid any Prosecution: And most of these Men were set
at Liberty so soon, that his Majesty's Friends thought his good Nature
prevailed over that Caution which seemed necessary while so many Plots had been
laid, and were actually carrying on: Yea one of them, upon whom actual Treason
in the highest Degree was proved, has been pardoned after Conviction and
Condemnation; and of many hundreds guilty of Treason, two only have suffered
for it in this Reign; yet he rails at the Parliament for suspending the Hubeas
Gorpus Act; as if this were betraying their Trust, and giving up all our
Liberties: Whereas, first, they had full Power and Right to suspend an Act made
by the same Body not many Years ago. And, Secondly, there was Reason, yea,
Necessity to suspend it then, when the French were about to invade us, and so
many ill Men at Land ready to join them: The Disappointment of which unnatural
Design of betraying his Native Country, is the true Cause why this Writer: (one
of the Criminals) falls into a Rage like that of the evil Spirit in the Gospel,
Matthew. 8.29. who counted it a Torment not to be suffered to do Mischief: For
they who would bring in that King by Force, that without any Parliament
suspended all Laws, cannot be concerned for English Laws or Liberties: But as
one of the Accomplices writ to the French King in a Letter that was seized,
their being in Prison made it impossible for them to serve him as they desired.

The raving Fit holds him all the next Page, Page 30.
wherein with much Fury, and no Sense, he inveighs against the Parliament, who
had full Power to repeal this Act, only for suspending it till the Danger was
over, and as it proves, it was pity this Author was kept in Prison, and hindered
from appearing in Arms, for then he would have had his Desert e're now, and
this Libel had been strangled in the Birth. I am sure all good Subjects of the
Government have their Liberty, and had during the Suspension of that Act: none
but Rebels and Plotters, Enemies to the Government, and such as renounce its
Protection can complain. And if these bloody Men had been let loose, the
Parliament had betrayed the Liberties of all the King's peaceable Subjects, and
sacrificed many of their Lives, and the Government had not protected those who
bear true Faith and Allegiance to it. Yet he has one true Observation in his
Anger, viz. That K. James never dreamed of such a Method; No, for he hanged up
the Innocent with the Guilty, he proclaimed diverse Peers and Gentlemen
Traitors, for intending to join with Monmouth after he was defeated. My Lord
Macclesfield's, Brandon Gerrard's, Delamere's, and others Cases are not forgot.
He scorned to play at the small Game of suspending one Law for a few Months on
just Reason in a legal way; he without any Parliament suspended what Laws he
pleased for ever: And can it be the way to secure our Liberties, to send for
this Prince again?

He in times of Peace cashiered all Officers and Soldiers that were qualified,
Page 31.
and got a whole Army of unqualified Tories in Ireland, and put out most of the
qualified Officers, filling their Places with illegal Men here: yet this Writer
(who has the Forehead to excuse all this) arraigns K. William for having a
very few Foreigners in a great Army in times of War, and this after they are
gone out of the Nation, and can do us no harm. It was no Crime in King James to
set up a barbarous Court to take away Men's Liberties and Livelihoods without
Law or Reason; and yet it is very criminal in this King to pardon one of the
Members of it upon his Repentance: yea he seems angry he does not hang all K.
James his Evil-Ministers, among which probably he had come in for his share. K.
James in times of Peace executed many by Martial Law, for deserting, before any
Law enabled him so to do. And if K. William have used this Method in time of
War, it is very justifiable. Yet this is brought in to excuse that violent
invading of the Properties of the richest College in England, without any
Color of Law, only because the Fellows of it were by their Oaths obliged to
deny an unreasonable Request of the King's. A dreadful Precedent to all the
Nation, that their Estates were all at the Mercy of that Arbitrary Prince! But
the Water runs very low with him, when his utmost Malice against K. William can
find nothing to accuse him for but what was answered before; and when he can
meet nothing in this Nation blameworthy, but is forced to run as far as
New-Englaud for a trifling Complaint.

He goes so often into Scotland for Instances of the King's Arbitrary and Illegal
way of Government; Page 32.
that this, together with the whole Thread of his Style, made me conclude him
to belong to that Nation. We who feel the Justice and Gentleness of the
Government, cannot be easily led to think that Matters are managed otherwise
elsewhere. We find, it is true, the Soldiers are apt upon many occasions to be
irregular; but we see that upon Complaints, Redress is given, and care is taken
for the future: And of this the Nation is so sensible, that Men are willing to
pass over several things, which otherwise could not be well digested, and could
not at all be born with, if we were not sure that the Government did not
encourage them. For after all, Soldiers are no Philosophers. Yet this in
general did not satisfy me: So I writ to a Friend that is nearer the Scene,
and knows matters better, and I will give you this account which I had from
him. The Author of this Pamphlet is so nearly related to Sir Ja. Man -- ry.
that when the Character of the one is given, the other will be best known by
it. He was of a Presbyterian Education, and entered into some Confidences with
K. James's Ministers. But upon this Revolution he got to be a Member of the
Convention in Scotland, in which he bare great Sway, and was a main Stickler
for the Abdication, and their present Majesty's: He was a constant Haranguer
during that whole Debate; which he did not manage as some others did. Upon the
Extremity to which K. James had driven Matters, and the Warrant that
extraordinary Occasions gives for extraordinary Proceedings, he went wholly
upon Republican Principles, and she wed so violent a Fury against all the
Episcopal Party, that his being like to pretend to a great Post, upon the Merit
of those Services, gave them very sad Apprehensions: This was signified by many
of them to the King: For it was he that stood upon the taking away of
Episcopacy, and carried it to be made a main Article of their claim of Right;
tho it standing then established by Law, many who agreed to place it among the
Grievances that were to be redressed, could not think it reasonable to claim it
as a Right. Since there was then no Law in force for it, and a great many
against it. He was one of the Three that were sent up with the Tender of the
Crown of Scotland to Their Majesty's. But when he sound that the King intended
to try him first in a lower Post of the Ministry, before he would raise him up
so high as his Ambition carried him: He upon this began to cabal against the
Government; and upon his return to Scotland, he sowed such Jealousies and ill
Impressions of the King, in some Peoples Minds, that Matters could not go on;
but all things were at a stand for above a year, notwithstanding the Dangers of
that time. But not content with this, he came back to London the following
Winter, on pretense indeed to justify himself; but in truth to enter into a
Treaty with K. James. He resolved to be a Secretary of State; and it was
indifferent to him who should be King, provided he might govern. He began his
Negotiation under Nevill Pain's Conduct, and drew in a great many with him to
enter into a Treaty with K. James; the main Point to be carried, was to make
sure of the Plurality of Voices in the Parliament. So the Jacobites were
applied to, to take the Oaths, and qualify themselves, that by swearing to
this Government, they might betray and over-turn it. Many were persuaded to
this unexampled piece of Treachery; and Sir Ja. was very industrious in it. A
Foreign Force was likewise to come from Dunkirk. But this was happily
discovered; some that were in the Plot disliked the Answers that they had from
K. James, then in Ireland and Q. Mary at St. Germans: The breeding the Pr. of
Wales in the Protestant Religion was flatly refused; and no Security was
offered for the Protestant Religion; even the Dispensing Power was not parted
with, only promised that Presbytery should be continued in Scotland; and Money
was sent over, together with large Promises to all the Plotters, in which Sir
Ja. had the best Share: Yet the whole Business was by that watchful Providence
that has never yet failed this Government in its greatest Straits, both
disappointed and discovered: Most of those who were concerned, have confessed
their share in it, and have sued out their Pardons. When this was first
discovered, Sir Ja. M. denied his knowledge of it in a Strain of the deepest
Imprecations that could be invented; yet afterward he confessed all, and was
favorably recommended to the Queen for her Pardon in Summer 90. But when he
found he could not have it unless he would frankly discover all he knew, he
kept himself out of the way, and has absconded ever since: But being a Man of a
virulent Temper, and noted from a Child for a peculiar Talent of Impudence, he
has now given us a very full Essay of his Abilities that way: And tho such as
knew his Notions and Style, were not long to seek in their Conjectures for the
Author of so black a Libel; yet I am confirmed in this, by the knowledge I have
of the Evidence already given in this Matter. This is the Account that is sent
me by one that I have no reason to distrust, and who gives me leave to publish
the Advertisement he has sent me. I had sent away the other parts of this
Discourse before I received this, which fills up a Blank that I had made, and
in which I must retract every part that contradicts this: on which my Reader
may soon be satisfied how far he can rely. Such Men, and such Practices are fit
to be employed for bringing us again under the Tyranny from which God has so
graciously delivered us. It is no wonder if those who went in the late
Revolution without any regard either to the Interest of Religion, or of their
Country, but only to raise their own Fortunes, should prove false to it, when
they do not find their own account in it: And impotent Rage must always
support it self by Calumny, for let him study to persuade this Nation, that
they are fallen under a Tyrannical Government as much as he will, he can never
hope to succeed in it, as long as they do plainly see that it is not so: And as
long as the Dutch Troops are kept under so good Discipline, and are so
inoffensive in their Quarters; none of the Strains of his false Rhetoric will
be able to raise a Spirit in the Nation against them.

As little Success will all he says have to persuade us of the poverty of the
Nation, as long as we feel our selves in so full a Plenty; while our Enemies
are reduced to the last extremities.

But one Particular he mentions, did, I confess, raise my curiosity a little:
He says the Government ordered a Military Execution of all the Males in
Glencou, which was executed upon them without any legal Trial, Jury or Record.
This had so strange an appearance, and was so unlike all the other parts of the
King's Government, that has been often taxed with an excess of Clemency, but
never till now of Cruelty, that I was in some pain, till I had learned what
truth there was in it. And in this I have received such full satisfaction that
I desire the Reader will by this Instance, consider how far our Author is to be
depended upon in all the rest. It is well known that there was a Rebellion kept
up in the High-lands of Scotland long after the rest of the Country was quiet,
and though it had been an easy thing to have reduced them to the utmost
extremity, if cruelty had been the King's Inclination; yet he sent a Person of
Honor and Credit among them, with a considerable Sum to be distributed, as the
most powerful Argument to work upon them. A Negotiation was set on foot, and
they all agreed by such a day to lay down their Arms, and take the Oaths: Yet
many of them not keeping to this Capitulation, but continuing in Arms still,
the day was prolonged twice or thrice. In conclusion, the King ordered them to
be held to their Capitulation, and gave private directions, that if any
Examples were to be made of such as still stood out, it should be of such as
had been eminently guilty of Robberies and Murders. A milder and juster Order
was never given. This was executed upon none but known Robbers and Murderers,
and such as were still in open Rebellion. If the Officers who executed it did
it with too much fierceness and Violence, though such things are but too natural
to Military Men, yet the King has expressed a high displeasure at it; and now
by this Sample, the Reader may, judge of all the rest.

Having exerted his utmost Malice in misrepresenting K. William's Actions at
home, Page 37.
his Envy hurries him on to attempt to hide his Glories abroad, and after he
has slandered his Conduct in Civil Affairs, he despises his Martial Prowess;
whereas all Europe sees he has raised the honor of the English (buried in the
Effeminacy and Vices of the two last Reigns) to the greatest Height: And the
Great Lewis is so sensible of his Valor, and his Soldiers Courage, that his
famed, numerous and disciplined Troops (as the Pamphlet calls them) durst never
attack us, but are braved in their very Camps, and tamely suffer it, counting a
Shield a better Weapon than a Sword, and reckoning the Cowardice of avoiding a
Battle, to be the best way of making their Campaigns. The French King's
Laurels, as our Author justly says, are drenched in the Tears of his Subjects;
for he has ruined the Liberty and Property of his People, to maintain an Army
for robbing, burning, and destroying all about him. And it is not our King (who
only defends the Oppressed) but he, that makes all Christendom pay so dear for
safety and Protection. In Ireland our victorious Prince has utterly routed not
the Irish only, but great numbers of well disciplined and armed French; and in
little more than two years entirely conquered that large Country: And that
which Spain yet retains in Flanders, is principally owing to K. William's
Conduct and to the Bravery of his Army, who has at the same instant dared the
French by Land, and given them such a Blow at Sea, as they will not recover of
many years: A Victory that eclipses the little Advantages that their Fleet had
at Beachy, and has done us more good, and them more damage, than the winning a
Land Battle could have done; nor will the taking of Namur pay for their loss of
so many Capital Ships, so necessary for their Defense by Sea, which is their
weak side. But it is not enough to satiate our Author's spite, to trample on
the glorious Reputation of our King, he reviles all Christian Princes that are
in the Confederacy, and he will not allow it to be the Usurpation of France
that ingages them against their Common Oppressor, but imputes it to their
particular interests. Though any unbyassed Man, any but a Loyalist or a Jacobite,
would see, it must be universal Injustice, and horrid Barbarities committed by
the French on every side, that forces the most zealous Princes of the Roman
Communion, to join against a King pretending to the same Religion, and enter
into League with those they count Heretics, to save their several Countries
out of the Hand of a devouring Power: Yea the best Pope that Rome has had for
many years was in the Confederacy, not to secure our Rights and Religion (as
this Writer weakly suggests) but to defend his own Privileges against a Prince
that persecuted the Pope and the Protestants both at once, and thereby showed
he had no Religion at all. Page 38.


Nor is it any wonder that the Confederates loved and trusted the Prince of
Orange more than King James, for he had always been true to the Interest of
Europe, and gloriously opposed the French Encroachments, while the late King
abetted the Monsieur in oppressing his own Subjects, and robbing all his
Neighbors, and had as little regard to the safety of Christendom, as to the
welfare of England, in hopes by this infamous Obsequiousness to be assisted in
his pious design of Enslaving and Dragooning his own People; and on this
desirable Work he lavished out all those Treasures he had laid up while he was
Duke of York, which so generally disgusted his Subjects, that no Parliament of
English Protestants would ever have given him any more. So that he forfeited
his Credit and Interest every where but in France, and therefore could never be
invited into this Confederacy; into which, not Ambition, but the love of
Justice, and his pity to Oppressed Nations drew this brave Prince, who in the
former part of this Pamphlet is represented to be so cunning as to cajole his
Uncle, make a mere Tool of his Father-in-Law, and to out wit all the Priests
and Jesuits: Yet now this same King William is so extreme silly, that he would
make us believe all the Confederates make a Fool of him, and though he owns he
knows nothing of the private Agreements King William has made with the
Confederates, yet he confidently pronounces, We are to have all the Loss and
they all the Gain by this League; and upon this Subject he rails blindfold till
he be out of Breath; but all that have Eyes in their Heads will see through
this winking Malice, and sooner believe that he is a shameless Calumniator,
than that all the Confederate Princes are Knaves, and King William a mere
Stepping stone to their Designs, as this modest Gentleman upon bare Conjecture
represents them.

With the like random Guesses, Page 39.
he goes on to banter us with idle Suggestions, That we are like to have no
Advantage by a Successful War in this Confederacy, and dreadful Losses if it
prove unfortunate in the Issue: To which I shall only reply, That King William
is as eminent for his Prudence as for his Valor, and the Nation is convinced
they may trust him with making War and Peace for them, since his Interest and
theirs are one and the same. The Dutch and the House of Austria, do not aim at,
or intend the Destruction of France, as the French King does at theirs; but
only at the humbling and reducing him to his just Bounds, and to secure
themselves against his Ravages and Usurpations. So that he is ridiculous in
talking of the Confederates falling out who shall have the Power at Sea, and
who the Provinces at Land, when that Great Empire falls to be divided amongst
them. The Confederates glory in the Justice of their Cause, which is to recover
the late Encroachments from France, and defend their present Possessions from
Burning and Destruction; and they hope the Righteous God will make their Cause
as prosperous as it is Just and Necessary: and if it prove so, every one of the
Confederates will be content with his Share in the Common Safety. But if for
our Sins it should prove Unfortunate, we are as likely and as able, under the
Conduct of our Wise and Valiant King to defend and secure our selves, as any
Nation or Country in this Confederacy. Nor will his Eloquence in setting off
the Miseries of our falling into the French Mercy, have any other Effect upon
this brave Nation, than to make them more obstinate in fighting against, and
more wary in treating with so bloody and treacherous a Foe.

But the Perfection of his Politics, Page 40.
is showed in his learned Demonstration, That all Christian Princes wish the
dethroning of King William, and the restoring of K. James, imitating Seneca's
Tool, who being blind, fansied all the House was dark. That France will
endeavor both, as well by Force as Treadhery, that Unchristian King has
sufficiently showed, to put us upon our Guard. But the House of Austria cannot
have a more Faithful and Powerful Ally on the English Throne than King William,
who will certainly assist them to bring King Lewis to Reason, and be their best
Guarrantee when he is reduced to a Just Peace. Whereas K. James's former
Carriage has convinced them, That if he had Power it would always be at the
French King's Service Right or Wrong. Again, if the Dutch, (as he pretends)
hated King William, they must keep him on the Throne, to prevent his return
among them. But their Affection and entire Confidence in him is apparent by the
great Command they now give him; which shows they believe the greater his Power
is, the safer are their Liberties; and they know, K. James mortally hates them,
and never can forgive them. His Fancy that Sweden should wish for an English
King and his Heir, both of that odious Religion which they have banished out of
their Country with their lawful Queen who had embraced it, is as peculiar and
ridiculous, as that Denmark (which lends us Forces) should hate King William
for bringing one of their Blood Royal to so near a Possibility of the English
Crown. And England knows it is her Interest to have a King that will protect
them from the fatal Ambition of France, so that all his Politics fail him; and
he must suppose us all, as he did ( Page 2.) to be Idiots and Madmen, to be
enticed into a Civil War with such Paltry Reasonings as these.

His last Exploit is to despise his Adversary, and charge him again with
Impudence and Emptiness, for wondering any Man should be so weak, as to believe
that K. James's Restoration is the way to secure the Protestant Religion and
here with his usual Confidence he undertakes to prove and answer all things;
but of his Performance let the Reader judge.

First, Page 41.
he will prove our Religion was in no danger of being over-turned by King
James's Practices. And here again all that Prince's open trampling on Law and
Right, all his Zeal by Promises and Threats to make Converts, his Swarms of
Priests, his standing Army to protect them, his Rage and Rigor against all
that oppose his illegal Methods to bring Popery to be the established Religion,
are by this Jesuit in Disguise, smoothed over, or past by, as nothing
extraordinary, nothing but a desire natural to Mankind to procure some ease to
them of their own Persuasion, etc. But if this were all, why did he not accept
of that Liberty which his Loyal Protestant Parliament offered to grant, that is
Indulgence as to their Worship to all Papists, and Liberty to prefer a certain
number of others? This he rejected with Rage, and dissolved that Parliament
only because this would not answer his design of putting all Power into Popish
Hands. And as to Liberty of Conscience the thing needs none of his
Commendation: The Roman Faith indeed needs severity; without which no Nation
under Heaven would endure it. But our most Holy Faith can subsist without
Compulsion; and therefore this Nation was not against it, if a further design
had not been discovered. We were sure K. James could not love Liberty of
Conscience for its own sake; first, because Popery absolutely damns all other
Religions: And can a devout Papist give whole Nations leave to go to Hell?
Secondly, because it neither is nor ever was allowed in any Popish Country
where that Church had Power to persecute. Thirdly, because he used all means
but open Force (which he durst not practice) to urge Men not half convinced, to
declare themselves Papists against their Conscience, as diverse of them now
declare: Wherefore Liberty of Conscience was known to be inconsistent with the
Principles and Practices of his Church, and contrary to his French Master's
Copy as well as to his own Judgment; and all this makes it plain he only
pretended to love Liberty of Conscience to break the Church of England, divide
Protestants, and set up Popery at the last: So that the thing it self was as
dangerous in his Hands, as the Methods were unjustifiable: The Counsel was
given by Contzen the Jesuit long since, That to divide Protestants by seemingly
favoring all Parties, was the ready way to bring in (as our Author kindly
calls it) the Roman Religion.

At last it seems it is with him but a bare Supposition, that some did intend
by Liberty of Conscience, Page 42.
to prefer Catholics and propagate that Religion, yet he thinks K. James
understood the World and England so well, that he would never attempt it. It s
now his Cue to make K. James very wise, even in a Point where his zeal blinded
him, whereas just before he was the weakest Man alive, and foresaw nothing; and
though he used the means, this self contradicting Creature will not allow he
wished for the End: I am sure no body was in so much Grace with him as these
Priests and new Converts, whose warm Brain, and enterprizing Faith entirely
guided him: And it is no thanks to K. James his or their good Intentions, that
these Projects did not succeed, but to the early discovery of the Plot, and the
Nation's brave opposing him in bringing it to effect. But Truth will out, and
therefore, finally, he grants (that which all England knows to have been plain
Matter of Fact) that K. James did every thing to advance Popery, and suppress
the Protestant Religion; and then he guards himself with the little Progress
that was made -- Which is false; for in less than two years time after he
pulled off his Mask, there were many in the Court, the Camp, the Universities,
Inns of Court; in all Cities and in the Country, who really or feignedly
turned. Thousands more complied, and were ready to shake Hands with their
Religion as soon as their Interest told them they might do it safely. And what
might have been the Consequence of our Passive Obedience (as some expound it)
in a year or two longer is easy to judge: But he would recall his grant again,
and says, If the late King had by real Discoveries evidenced his Intentions to
ruin the established Religion, nothing but an universal Defection could have
followed. Oportet Mendacem esse Memorem: He said Page 6th. That the Army was
quite Poisoned, and that there was nothing sound and untainted in the whole
Kingdom: and Page 11th. There was an universal Defection of his Children,
Servants, Soldiers and Subjects. Therefore by his own Rule K. James had made
real, public, and undoubted Discoveries of his Intention to ruin the
established Religion. Well, but he urges, That the Catholics were but few --
However they daily increased, and had a Biggotted King to protect them from
fear of Laws, an Army (after the designed Regulation) ready to defend them, the
Sectaries generally on their side, and wanted nothing but a pre-engaged
Parliament to make them uppermost. As to the Laws, upon which he makes so large
an Encomium, as if they were a sufficient security to our Religion.

I grant they would have been so, Page 43.
if our King, knowing this, had not resolved to break through all these Fences,
and picked out Judges for his purpose, who expounded the Laws as the King
directed, and set up his Dispensing Power at one blow to null them all. Laws
are, it is true (as the Philosopher says) the Soul of a City, but the
Magistrate is the Soul of the Laws; which are a dead Rule, a mere Shadow, when
the Prince and his Judges conspire not to execute them, and no Man dare claim
the Benefit, or need fear the Penalty of them. What good did the Laws do any
Protestant cited before the High-Commission-Court? What hurt did they do to any
illegal Officers, Magistrates, or promoted Priests? What Security were they to
Corporations when Jeofferies roared out the King's Will. Old Maynard, when King
William told him he had outlived most of his Profession, truly answered him,
That if He had not come over he had over-lived the Law it self. And we had seen
the French Tyrant in one part of his Reign subvert all the Laws of his Country,
and destroy all the Liberties of his Subjects, -- He was going on in the same
Design, Licet non passibus aequis: And why should not he hope and we fear, that
what was done at our next Door was poffible to be done here. It Is true, the
Nation was in as little danger of loving him then, as they are now of wishing
his Return: But those Fears and Jealousies (which he rails at in the last Page,
and here commends) had signified nothing if he had gone a little further in
these Methods. He resolved to have no Parliament, but such an one as would
engage before hand to betray their Country, and comply with him in every thing?
And was it likely an oppressed People could manage a wise and discreet Treaty
with such a King, in such a Parliament? He foresees it will be objected, That
K. James being a Friend and Ally of France, could not want French Forces to
compel the more obstinate sort of Heretics; which is a dreadful, but a certain
truth; and he gives no satisfaction by his Sham-Reasons to the contrary: First,
K. James (he thinks) was not so lost to all Discretion and Morality to accept
French Troops; for now you must know he is to be represented very Discreet; and
he that was so easily drawn in by his Enemies to act against his Judgment, is
now so wise and wary, that for fear of ill Consequences, he will not admit any
Succors from his Friends to help him to save a Million of Souls, Credat Judaeus
Apella. He that was training up many of the old Race of murdering Irish for
this meritorious Work, would not (if occasion had been) have scrupled adding
French Dragoons. And our Authors Morality is not to be relied on, when he
says, K. James refused French Succors at the Revolution; for it is well known
the King of France's Hands were full elsewhere, he having then made a violent
and treacherous Invasion upon the Empire, and besieged Philipsburg: For his
Intelligence from England was that he relied on, he believed that this Kingdom
was falling into a Division and a Civil War, that would be so equal and last so
long, that he might finish his Conquests in Germany, and yet come time enough
to complete our Ruin, while we should have been destroying one another.
Otherwise K. James (if he had not wanted time, and his Ally-Forces ready) would
no more have refused French Troops to keep the Prince from coming in, than he
now scruples to use them for turning him out.

But he pretends it was not the French King's Interest to lend K. Page 44.
James any Forces to assist him in the Conversion of England. But suppose he
were bent upon it, and would hazard three Crowns on Earth for it (as his saying
was) and chanced to be opposed in it by his stubborn Subjects, K. Lewis must
not let his dear Friend sink or suffer by following his Example, especially
since he was sure as long as this King was in Power, he could not want one that
would stand by him in all his Usurpations and Cruelties without Reserve: And I
dare affirm the greatest part of the Nation firmly believes, That within a
little time, King Lewis would have sent, and King James have accepted a Body of
booted French Apostles for this religious Work. To divert with rational Fear,
our Author starts an improbable Paradox, and for three Columns together pursues
it with full cry, viz. That the French K. rather wishes England should remain
Protestant than become Papist, because (forsooth) he is in no danger of an
Invasion while the Nations continue to be of different Religions: Which
frivolous and false reasoning deserves no Answer; so that I will make a few
brief Remarks upon it, and dismiss it.

First, Page 45.
he has learned of the Jesuits to suppose England was always terrible to
France till Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and to blame the Reformation for this:
Whereas it is well known that the English lost their hold in France in the
Reigns of Hen. 6th. and Queen Mary, two Popish Princes; and none of our Kings
were ever more courted by France than that Illustrious reformed Queen, who
broke the dangerous growth of the most Catholic King, though her Subjects and
his were of different Religions. Secondly, he falsely supposes all the French
are zealous Catholics, whereas those of the Roman Communion there (the Clergy
excepted) are no Bigots; and there are many thousands who have by Cruelty been
forced to declare for Popery, that yet are Protestants in their Hearts, and the
French King knows that if he be invaded by a Protestant Prince, these Men will
endanger him by a Revost. Thirdly, we observe that many Catholic Countries
have been so Barbarously harrassed, and their Princes so injured by the French
K. that (without any regard to his Profession) He who shall be the happy
Instrument to humble France, will be grateful to the greatest part of
Christendom, because the Mounsieur usurps upon Papist and Protestant without
distinction. Lastly, I must observe that the French King's late inhumane Usage
of the Protestants has made him odious, especially, to all reformed Nations;
and our English have lately showed they will and can fight as bravely against
France as ever their daring Ancestors have done: Wherefore all this Banter of
the Author's is a false Alarm, designed to make us secure on that side where
our danger is.

To this he adds another Fiction of K. James his offering us to carve out our
own Securities, Page 26.
and dreams of lasting, legal, full and happy Settlements we might have had
under him: But when, and to whom were these Offers made? the Prince made Offers
to him, and desired a Parliament might be called, but K. James burnt the Writs,
and fled from the Treaty, dreading nothing more than a Legal Settlement to tie
up his Hands. Promises he had made many, especially in his Distress; but alas,
he had taught us they were Insignificant; and it was plain enough the Irish and
French were always his Darlings: For the English Nation, he never loved, them,
yea, his parting Letter shows his Hopes, viz. That we should be so divided, as
to send for him again upon his own Terms: He therefore that would not stay to
redress any thing, nor endure either a Treaty or a Parliament, for fear of
being bound to secure us by Law, and now attempts to break in upon us by Force.
He is to answer for all the Money and Lives spent in our own necessary Defense.
We desired to be quiet under him, and neither began nor continue this War,
further than for the safety of our Religion and Liberties, which he resolved
not to secure: So that as the Crocodile weeps over them it intends to devour,
this Hypocrite sheds his deceitful tears over bleeding England, which he and
his Party have forced into a War, and now would wheedle us into a Peace more
fatal than all the other Mischiefs they have involved us in.

To this purpose he would persuade us, Page 47.
that this is a religious War, and notes, That Defections on pretense of
Protestant Religion, generally terminate in the destruction of Religion, and
the pretenders to it: Where observe that he cannot find any such things in
Defections for Popery: They doubtless in his Opinion are lawful and prosperous:
He never heard of the League in France, nor of the Earl of Westmorland's
Defection from Queen Elizabeth, etc. Papists may do this, but Protestants are
only to sit still and have their Throats cut. We thank him for so plainly
telling us what side he is of. But to pass that by, his Examples show he
understands foreign History no better than our Chronicles. Zisca's Bohemian War
was begun for both Religion and Liberties, Anno 1419. And besides the Success
in the beginning, it had this Event, That the Religion they defended was
professed there for about 200 years after, and (as Dr. Heylin notes) though War
and Persecution both have been used, yet this Doctrine could never be routed
out. Cosmog. C. 2. Page 78. The Civil Wars in Germany were defensive against
Charles the fifth, who hoped (as our late King also did) to extirpate the
Northern Heresy. But the Conclusion was the settling the Protestant Religion in
many Countries and Cities where it remains to this day; and the Imperial Family
wears greater Scars of it than any Protestant Princes concerned in it. It Is
true, the second Bohemian War had an unfortunate Issue, by the neglect of
timely Protestant Succors; but there the Papists drove out the rightful King,
and yet prospered: So that this Instance should have been brought to prove that
Protestants are not the only People that fight against their Princes to settle
their own Religion, or set up Kings that will defend it. The Hungarian War on
the Protestants Part, was purely in defense of their Liberties, and to guard
themselves from an illegal and cruel Persecution, of which (as he intimates,
Page 37.) the Emperor was the Author, and they were ready to have laid down
their Arms if they could have had any reasonable Conditions; and the Emperor
has got nothing by that War; nor has he so extinguished Protestant Religion
there, but that he must grant the free Exercise of it, or he will never have
Peace on that side.

However, it is well he grants at last that Protestants may be Victorious so
long as they only Petition, though with Arms in their Hands: For this was our
case so long as our King would stay to be Petitioned. These are all the
discouraging Instances he can pick up, but he might have found as many to
encourage us if he had pleased. Holland, Scotland, Geneva, some of the Cantons,
and diverse Hans-Towns were fortunate in their Defections to keep off Popery and
Slavery; so that one or two Instances on the other side do not make the Scales
even, only we may justly wonder to hear a Jacobite who rails at Dr. Sherlock's
Providential Reasoning, Page 57. pressing an Argument from Success, and must
admonish this Author to look into the Answer to Mr. Ashton's Papers, Page 16,
17. where he will find that which way soever the success go, Queen Elizabeth,
King James the first, King Charles the first, and their Parliaments; yea, and
Archbishop Laud himself have declared the thing lawful, and resolved, That
where Princes broke in upon their Subjects Rights and Religion, they ought to
defend thenselves, and might justly be assisted in such a War.

Wherefore if his Rhetoric should move some weak People, Page 48.
his Logic cannot work upon any considering Man, who concludes from two
Examples neither proper nor truly related, that this and all Wars wherein
Protestants defend their Religion must be unfortunate: But how should he be a
Prophet to foretell the Issue of Wars, who is so ignorant as to mistake the
present Emperor's Name, whom he calls Rodolph instead of Leopold, like the
ridiculous Star-Gazer who was predicting future Events by looking up to the
Stars, and dropped into a deep Pit just before him. And it seems at last his
Heart fails too as to the certainty of our defensive Wars ending unfortunately;
so that he turns his Threats into Wheedle, and would have us tamely to send for
the late King again, and accept of his Concessions, (which we never yet saw)
yea to tell he may return upon a Protestant and English Foot. But I must tell
him, we can make no such Offers now, without out King and Parliament; and if we
could, whatever promises he should make to get us once more into his Power, he
would certainly break them, unless he would return with a Protestant Heart,
which is never to be hoped for. He concludes with that which he calls answering
the Objections raised against King James his Return, but indeed with nauseous
Repetitions of that which he had said over and over before, so that I may
Answer all that is new in these Pages in a little Room. First, we say he cannot
return but by a Conquest; and he thinks he must and ought to be allowed 15000
French for his ordinary Guard, and these he hopes, with the accession of
English who will desert King William, will do the Business without Conquest:
Alas, he forgets that most of those who will fly to a Popish Prince, at the
Head of a French Popish Army, must be Papists, or very loose Principled
Protestants. The main body of the Nation, the Nobility, Gentry and People are
averse to K. James, who used them rudely and left them, without any Care of
them; and they will freely venture their Lives for King William, a Prince of
their own Religion, who rescued them once from extreme Danger, and has
ventured his Life for their safety ever since: He forgets also what he said,
Page 45. That Catholics will fight to the last to escape the Dominion of such
as they believe Heretics: Now is it not much more rational that Protestants
will also sight to the last against such as they know to be not only Papists
but persecuting French Dragoons and Irish Murderers? In short, let K. James
(if he have so great an Interest here) stay till the Nation send a General
Embassy to recall him as they did in his Brother's Case: Or otherwise let not
him or his Friends hope he can force himself upon Us, without such an
Opposition as must end either in his or their Ruin, or the Destruction of the
best part of the English Protestants.

And such a Conquest would make us Slaves both to K. James and to the French
King, Page 49.
to whom he was ever obsequious; but the merit of restoring him will make him
his Vassal: So that we shall have Cham's Fate to be Servant of Servants; and if
K. Lewis help to make us so, he will account these three Crowns a Purchase and
no Present. But considering how uneasy English Protestants must be under a
double Slavery, the only way to tame them must be a severe Persecution; to
which, if Interest did not lead the French King, Ambition would: For he
Dragooned his own Subjects against his Interest, purely out of Vainglory, and
to show his Will was absolute and uncontrollable, and that neither Conscience
nor the Fear of God should exempt any Man from Obedience to it; besides, we saw
by K. James his Elight, that he considers not the Nation's safety when he
thinks himself in Danger, and when he has his trusty Irish and French Guards
about him; it is but pretending our Liberties and Religion are inconsistent with
his Security, and then Popery and Slavery must be advanced to keep him in the
Throne.

We may take the Author's Word for K. James's Concessions to the Scotch
Plotters, Page 50.
(since he has no doubt been in all Plots since the Revolution) but suppose
they have his Word, his Hand and Seal for these Favors, we know he will
promise any thing in his Distress; but were he restored and in full Power, it
would be pleaded, he was under a Force when he made these promises, and so not
obliged to perform them. Moreover I would ask why he did not offer such Acts of
Grace here, while he had Power to call a Parliament to confirm them? The only
reason must be, that if his Concessions had passed into Laws, and other
Securities had been given, he could never have ruined the Protestant and set up
his own Religion: Nor would he be so free to grant now, if he did not know how
to be absolved from fulfilling those Grants. His Pre-Engagements to the Pope
are well known; we have his Letters to the Holy Father, and hear of the
Arguments used at Rome for his Holinesses's Aid, which are his losing three
Kingdoms for his Zeal to reduce us to the Catholic Faith, and his Resolution
upon his Restoration to promote the same pious Work. Oh! but King William
(he suggests) has made more Engagements to the Holy-Chair, to gain the Pope to
favor his Advancement to the Throne. Very Comical! King VVilliam's Advancement
to the Throne was neither foreseen by the Pope, nor any Catholic Prince, nor
by himself: Some of them might possibly know of his Descent, and favor it, as
it might tend to weaken their common Enemy the French King and his only
considerable Allie, but none of them foresaw that K. James would desert, and
therefore the Liberty the Papists enjoy here is owing to King William's good
Nature and Tenderness, not to any Promises he made beforehand to any of the
Confederates.

His next Attack is upon Dr. King's Book of the State of the Protestants in
Ireland, Page 51.
which proves that K. James expressed his Hatred of Protestants, and his
Bigotry for Popery there since the Revolution: A Book writ with that known
Truth, and Firmness of Reason, that every Page of it is Demonstration, which
has been often threatened with an Answer, but the long Silence of the party
shows guilt and despair. As for this Author's Falsehoods and Calumnies, I refer
the Reader to that convincing Tract, which not only confutes all our
Adversary's sham Stories of these Irish Affairs, but exposes his Impudence in
venturing his Credit by telling such Improbabilities. The Truth in short is,
that Tyrconnel had disarmed all the Protestants before K. James came over, and
left them naked to the Outrages of the bloody Rapperees, who plundered whole
Towns and killed many, and upon Complaint, no Protestant could have Redress; K.
James would not employ nor trust any of them, their causes in all Courts still
went against them, the Soldiers oppressed them, the meanest Papists insulted
over them, their Lands were unjustly taken from them by that tyrannical Law of
Repealing Settlements, and this by K. James's own Solicitation, who struggled
with his Bishops and modest Judges to carry it, and after he was duly informed
of the Cruelty and Injustice of it, still pressed it, and at last got it passed
to the ruin of Thousand Protestant Families, most of which had purchased and
paid for these Estates. Those who stayed in Ireland were oppressed, imprisoned
and used barbarously. Those who fled for safety or for Bread, were attainted of
High Treason, by an Act that never had a Precedent in any Age since the Roman
Proscriptions. Many thousands of all Qualities and Ages and of both Sexes were
Condemned without Citation or any sort of Evidence brought against them. And
whereas to give some Color to so Barbarous a proceeding, they had a day
assigned them to come in, after which the Attainder was to take place; yet that
none of them might be the better, for the Orders were given, and care was taken
that no Man should come by the sight of it. And every where Protestant Churches
were taken from them by Force and given to Popish Priests, by the Order or
Connivance of the late King. Yet all his was done in those parts of Ireland
where the Protestants were very peaceable under him. And now let the World
judge whether these undeniable Matters of Fact be not a sufficient Cure for any
English Protestants wishing to see him restored to a Power to do the like
Mischiess here: His Temper and Principles we see are the same they were, in the
height of his Attempts on our Religion and Liberty, and if we put him into the
same Circumstances, we should soon feel the Effects of our Folly and his
Revenge.

We agree with him that King Charles the first was ill treated to the great
Scandal of that part of the Nation who were his Enemies; Page 52.
but when his Son saw how dire Effects a few stretches of the Prerogative, and
some groundless Fears of Popery had produced, methinks he should not in the
same Age have set up a more illegal High-Commission-Court, nor openly declared
himself a Romanist, and against Law and Reason given all the best Places in
England to those of that Persuasion: Nor should he have Imprisoned or Fined Men
contrary to Law, nor committed more Outrages by his Army in times of Peace,
than have ever since been committed by a more numerous Army in time of War. He
therefore, not King William is most concerned in that unhappy Precedent. The
kind Arguments which one of his Adversaries urged to convince the Non-swearing
Protestants have an equal share of Logic and Truth; for which cause this
Author rather evades than answers them; he brings in over again the Grants to
the Scotch Plotters, which were showed before to be insignificant, and at last
passes his Word for his Master, That he will be very kind to them at his
Return, and persuades them to believe all things and doubt nothing; though
Experience and Reason both show there is no ground for them to expect any
thing, or rely on any Promises: I shall therefore only beg of the worthy
Gentlemen concerned, to read the Paper cited, and compare those solid Reasons
with this Man's smooth Sophistry, and then shall leave the obstinate that
Cardinal's Benediction, Si vult Populus decipi decipiatur.

The next Caution is as prudent as the former was charitable, Page 53.
viz. That we must beware least another Revolution should set up the
Prerogative higher than is consistent with the Subject's Liberties: For it is
natural for all Men, especially the English, to run from one extreme to
another, and K. James's Inclination and Intetest will lead him to it: The
Papists will work upon his Fears, and plead it is necessary, and many
Protestants will join with them either to make their Peace or to curry favor.
And if Monmouth's Invasion which was so easily quashed and soon over, gave
color to raise so great a standing Army, this last Revolution may be easily
improved into keeping up a greater Force, and lodging more power in the King.
He proceeds to answr some Questions which that Author asks, and first owns he
thinks not himself bound in Conscience to fight for Popery against the
Protestant Faith; but will not allow fighting for the Restoration of K. James
can be called by that name. I answer by an old Logical Maxim, Causa Causae est
Causa causati. He that fights to put a Prince into Power that will certainly
use that Power to promote Popery, and suppress the Protestant Religion, and
fights to eject another Prince who has rescued us from extreme Danger Popery,
and establish the Protestant Faith. He fights for the former and against the
latter Religion. As to his repeated Phrase of King James, his desire to return
upon a Protestant Foot. I have reason to believe he does not wish to be so
restored; for then he must leave most of his Priests behind him, and deliver up
his Son to be brought up a Protestant, and give Securities for it; and that he
will by no means like: Yet if he can find a Popish Nation so tame as to have
let in a Protestant Head (without such Conditions) upon a Popish Foot, we may
promise him to follow the Example. We can show him a Country that obliged a
Popish Head to quit her Crown, and march off upon a Protestant Foot, viz.
Sweden: And can instance in France where Hen. IV. King James's Grandfather, so
long as he was a Protestant, was kept out by Papists with Force and Arms, and
could not be admitted quietly, till he declared himself of the Roman Church.
And no People of any Religion (if they can help it) will set a King up over
them, who is an Enemy to their established Faith: Wherefore till K. James
sincerely becomes of the English Religion, though it should be his Interest and
Inclination to return, it will not be ours.

He is also very free to declare he will not fight for his Prince against the
Laws; Page 54.
but these are only words. He will fight for a King who endeavored to alter
the whole Frame of our Government; who challenged, and exercised a Power to
vacate and suspend what Laws he pleased; that resolves to be above, and without
Law, and will endure no Judge who shall not force the Laws already made to bow
to his Will. No Parliament that will not promise beforehand to Make and Repeal
what Laws he pleases. Now if this be not fighting for a Prince against the
Laws, I know not what is. As to his Insinuation, That King William has broken
and intends to destroy our Laws: It is as groundless, as it is malicious; he
has done nothing but by Advice of his Convention, Parliaments, and Judges; and
has very sparingly exercised his Prerogative, even in this time of War, when
Necessity sometimes required it: so that to fight against him, is really to
fight against the Maintainer and Defender of our Liberties and Laws, and
consequently of our Religion, whereof these Laws are the best Fence. And
therefore, as he well hints, the French King, who resolved to change his
Subjects Faith, first made them Slaves, that so he might make them Papists; and
he who copied out that Pattern in England, began with our Laws, and pulled up
all the Fences; and his next Work would have been to suppress our Religion;
which if it be dear to us, we must never expose it again to one that used such
Methods, but stick to him who can never design to make us Papists, and
therefore can never desire, or need, to make us Slaves.

But our Author thinks, Page 55.
whatever Cause Protestants have, they are the only People of the World, who
must not enter into a Religious War; no, not to defend themselves from Popish
Aggressors: As if their Religion alone, stripped them of that universal natural
Right of Self-Defence, and let loose all Mankind upon them. He has no Remarks
upon the Holy Guisian League; none upon his dear Monsieur's League with
Infidells. It Is only Wicked in the Germans of old, and us now, to resolve to
defend our Countries from Popish Aggressors. I am sure the Germans League was
so necessary and so just, that a Popish French King assisted them in it, and
the Protestants were not all overrun by it, but are still very numerous and
potent there. And when Denmark was in Danger, King Charles the first thought it
pious and lawful to assist them; and Archbishop Laud drew up a Declaration to
justify and promote it, as our Author may see in the Answer to Mr. Ashton's
Papers, page 17. We grant it is no Chimera, that the Jesuits have in all times
solicited the Catholic Princes to unite for the Extirpation of Protestants;
and therefore we cannot be safe under a King conducted by their Councils. But
the Protestants never did combine to extirminate Popery in general, and we do
not fear that all Catholic Princes (most of them disobliged by K. James)
should unite, to be revenged upon us, for not stopping our late King, when he
resolved to leave us: But withal, we observe how this deceitful Writer blows
both hot and cold, page 50th. He would fright us with the Pope's being in
Confederacy with King William, and with some solemn and sacred Engagements made
to the Holy Chair: And now he threatens us with an Army of Catholic Princes,
and the Pope in the Head of them, to destroy us, and all the Protestants of
Europe. He may well call us Fools and Madmen (in the next Column:) For if he
did not think us so, he would not hope to work on us, with such incoherent
improbabilities. He proceeds to deny, that the Liberties of Europe are
concerned in the Issue of this War with France, because diverse Princes of
Europe are in perfect Peace with that Crown. I reply first, they are all far
distant from this Tyrant, and so do not yet feel the Effects of his Cruelty and
Injustice; and secondly, they only stand Neuter, there being not one Christian
Prince (now King James is gone off) who gives him actual Assistance; so that an
Infidel Mohammedan (to his eternal Reproach) is his only thorough-pac'd
Confederate: Nor is it any great Glory to the French King, that all the States
he could reach have been so woefully injured, and so barbarously treated by him,
that he has exasperated all his Neighbors against him; and the remoter
Princes will repent, too late, of their Neutrality. If France should enlarge
its Conquests, all Europe, in time, may suffer, for not more early entering into
this Confederacy: -- Tua res agitur paries cum Proximus ardet. -- To Day thy
Neighbor's House they burn,
To Morrow 'twill be thine own turn.


His Adversary does not say, Page 56.
(as he falsely suggests,) That the Interest of our Prince and Country, is, to
give way to that of the other States: But when their Interests and ours agree,
(as it does, in hindering France from the Universal Monarchy it aims at,) it is
a good Argument for our Prince and State, to confederate with other Nations in
this Common Cause, without any Distinction on the Account of Religion: And
being entered into so just a League, we are not to desert our Allies, till
their Dangers be averted, and their Injuries repaired, as well as ours. The
last Case is not only probable, but certain: King James, his Temper, his
Principles, his late Acts in Ireland, and the Allies who assist him, convince
all thinking Men, that he will return with the same Designs he had before. But
since, to divert this, he proposes the giving up those Ministers of King
William to Justice, who advised or assisted in our Rescue from Popery and
Arbitrary Power; I will make another Proposal, with humble Submission to
Authority: Which is this, That since King James his Priests and Popish
Ministers put him upon these illegal and mischievous Methods, which hastened
his Fall, and hinder his Return; let him first give up all these Criminals to
suffer what they deserve by Law, and then we will treat with him concerning a
Return. I doubt he will not part with them for his Three Crowns; and if he will
not come without them, and must have these implacable Enemies of our Religion
and Liberties about him, he will be governed by them, and make use of them
after his Restoration: And therefore we shall infallibly lose our Troy, if we
take in this Papal-Horse, with his Belly-full of armed Foes; and the certain
Consequence of restoring him with this pernicious Crew about him, will be the
perfecting those Designs they so dangerously had begun; of which this Nation is
so firmly persuaded, that King James truly said in Ireland, See Doctor King's
State of the Protestants in Ireland, chap. 3. page 49,
He never expected to get into England, but by Fire and Sword. Wherefore it was
very just in one of our Author's Adversaries, to say, That the Jacobites Pangs
of Loyalty were very unseasonable now. A little of this Loyalty before he went
off, (if he durst have trusted them, and they him,) had kept him on the Throne
by a fair Treaty; which was all the Prince desired: But then they let him sink,
seemed glad he was gone, and were as ready as any body to put the Government
into the Prince's Hands, out of which (after the Nation has fixed it there)
they cannot tear it again, but they must involve their Native Country in a
bloody Civil War, and expose us to French Incendiaries and Dragoons, who will
soon waken them out of their senseless Lethargy; and make those who invited
them in, wish, (with half their Estates) to hire them out again.

The greatest part of the Nation believe that King James his Desertion vacated
the Oath formerly taken to him; Page 57.
therefore these, with a good Conscience, took the Oath of Allegiance to King
William, and think themselves obliged to defend him; these must and will fight
for him: Some few, perhaps, mocked God, and the present King, in taking them,
to save their Bacon: But no Casuist need to trouble himself to solve such Men's
Cases; for this Hypocrisy and Profaneness shows they have no Conscience, and
will neither be true to any Religion, or any Prince; but to be sure, the lowest
sense that any honest Man (who has sworn Allegiance to King William) could
take that Oath in, is to live peaceably, and not to fight against, or betray
him to whom they have solemnly vowed Faith and Allegiance: And if they do look
upon their Oath as Conditional, however, it binds them till King William desert
us, as King James did; or, till he utterly break the Original Contract, (not by
a few unavoidable Errors, as our Author grants, page 12. but) by attempting to
overthrow the whole Constitution, and Main Body of the Laws; and we need desire
their Faith and Allegiance no longer, than till one or both of these happen.
But as for those who declare they ought to fight against this Government, so
soon as an Enemy appears; I hope the Government will withdraw its Protection
from them, and pair their Nails in time. His Jest, of our expounding Allegiance
by Abdication, will not pass; for we say, King James cast off our Allegiance,
when he left to Protect us: We did not Depose him, but he Deserted us; and our
Allegiance does neither bind us to keep him in his Throne, when he will not
stay; nor to live in Anarchy till he return; no, nor to take him again on ill
Terms; especially when we have a far better Prince, whose Courage, Conduct and
Interest is such, that they who attempt to force him from us, must involve
their Native Country in a bloody War: And to hinder them from so fatal a
Purpose, we may properly desire them to consider of the sad Examples of the
Wars between York and Lancaster, between King Charles I. and the Parliament,
and of the Miseries France and Germany suffered by Civil Wars: For they who
impose an Abdicated King upon an unwilling People, by Foreign Forces, are the
Aggressors, and must answer for all the Blood and Calamities that do ensue.

Our Revolution was managed without Blood; Page 57.
and if any attempt, by Force, to obtrude another, we cannot, by Perjury and
Ingratitude, forsake that Prince whom we freely chose, when we were left
without a Governor, and who rescued us from apparent Ruin. We have not hurt
our Monarchy, and have happily settled both Church and State: We have no Disease
now; and if we had, the French Physicians generally Let too much Blood, to be
trusted with our Cure. And this State-Mountebank advises a Remedy ten times
worse than any Disease we can fall into, under this Government; for he would
have us take up the Sword again, that wounded us; and give our selves a Second
Wound, to cure the First; which is irrational and absurd.

The Payments its confessed are greater than they need have been, if K. J's
Friends did not encourage the French to invade us; but by these Payments
England is delivered from Popery and Slavery, and remains in Peace, while the
War is carried into another Country: And Ireland is rescued out of the Claws of
Frenchmen, Tories and Rapparees: Our Government is settled in Church and
State, and all his Endeavors to aggravate the Price of these inestimable
Blessings turns upon himself. For when we have paid (as he says) as much as we
are able to bring things to a Settlement, it cannot be expected we can or ought
to pay more to unsettle us again: A tired Horse can endure no Addition to his
Load. If we can spare but a little more to maintain our Defender, I hope we
shall not find Money to pay the late King's Debts to the French, contracted by
his own Wilfulness; nor shall we willingly pay Money, to hire Executioners to
destroy us.

If the Payments will not draw the Nation to Mutiny, Page 59.
he hopes the ill Success of our Arms will; and to make this Falsehood pass, he
spits all his Venom at our brave King, on whom (as on the Darling of Heaven,
and Delight of Mankind) either Victory, or at least Honor and Safety, always
attends. It has been observed indeed of K. J. that he ever brings ill Fortune
to the side he takes, and never won a Battle in his Life: But for this
mercernary French Pen to turn this Character on King William, who has so often
delivered oppressed Nations, and conquered their Oppressors, or reduced them
to Reason; is the height of Impudence: His Victories in England, Ireland, and
Flanders, will be writ in the Leaves of Fame, when the Great Monsieur will only
be remembered for his Cowardice and Treachery. K. William's reducing a whole
Kingdom last year, and beating the French Fleet this Summer, were great
Actions; and his daring their whole Army by Land shows, that if (through others
slackness) the French have the Advantage, yet he has entirely the Honor of
this Campaign, wherein K. Lewis has had such Experience of our King's Valor
and Conduct, as will give him Reason, by an honorable Peace, to endeavor to
make us his Friends: And if we get no more for all our Charge, but Security and
Quiet, while the War endures, and a profitable Peace at the End of it, we need
not murmur; or if we do, it should be against that Common Enemy, who disturbs
all that are within his Reach.

He owns a Debt to the French King, Page 5^.
but supposes his tender Regard to his Honor and Glory, will make him forgive
it, and not require Payment as the Dutch have done. But first as to the
Monsieur, if he believe Honor to be the only Reward of Virtue, he has taken
the worst Measures in the World to get true Glory; having not got one Inch of
Ground, nor a single Town by true Valor and Bravery, nor omitted any thing,
though never so mean or wicked, which he thought tended to set up his only God,
his Interest; and will Honor keep such a Prince from demanding Payments for
his Men and Money, his Ships and Ammunition, lent to serve our late King? he
that will burn a whole Country to Ashes, and turn 500 Families a begging in a
day or two, only for not paying him Contributions when they owe him nothing,
nor cannot raise it; will his Generosity allow England to dye in his Debt?

Secondly, Secondly.
The Dutch desire no more than that Hire was promised them for their Men and
Ships, and they deserve it, for helping us now in our extreme Danger, as we
once before did assist them, when they beat out Slavery and Persecution:
Payments of this kind are tolerable, but to repay the French King for fighting
against us, is so gross a Folly, that Englishmen cannot be guilty of it. As to
Religion, it is the Glory of our Nation, that we are so tender of it, so
zealous, and so careful to preserve it. The only Scandal to our Church, being
this, that so many Pretenders to it, are ready to join with Papists to destroy
it: But these Gentlemen are but a small Number; the greatest part of the Nation
are not so easily wheedled or threatened out of their Religion, their Liberties,
their Estates and Lives; they know their Foes from their Friends, and
understand when they are well; so that this plausible Writer, with all his
Rhetoric, will not be able to spread the Poison of his Sedition, so far as his
Hopes flatters him.

To conclude: Page 61.
Finding his Arguments will not make K. William and his People fall out and
part, to make room for his dear Master; he falls to Praying and Flattering,
desiring God to incline our King's Heart to take his Counsel, who mortally
hates him, shamefully slanders him, and every where represents him as the worst
of Humane Race; and after this, with a smooth Hypocrisy, even humbly desires
him freely to give up that Crown which he has been urging the Nation to take
from him. But where such Folly is cried up as Heroic, King William's Eyes are
open enough to see the dull and obvious Cheat: And One would imagine, he durst
not offer such palpable Shams to so Great and Wise a Prince: But it is plain, he
has so accustomed himself to Falsehood and Sophistry, that he can blush at
nothing; and begins to dream, that our present King is such a Creature, as he
represents King James to be; One that was advised by his mortal Enemies to the
ready way to ruin Himself, and all his Friends. But after all his elaborate
Harangues, he must even be content to see King William despise his Railing and
his Flattery, the Nation detest his seditious Counsel, and God cast out his
foolish Prayer, who has most graciously preserved our King and our Country
hitherto; and till he do utterly abandon us, and deprive us of Grace, yea, of
Common Sense, we cannot be so weak, as to promote this fatal Restoration,
which he so vehemently recommends.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE State of the Protestants of Ireland, under the late King James's
Government; in which their Carriage toward him is justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to Their present Majesty's, is demonstrated. The Fourth Edition,
with Additions.

Bid Venerabili Opera quaedam Theologica nunc primum edita necnon Historica
ante a semel edita accesserunt Egberti Archiepiscopi Eborocensis Dialogus de
Ecclesiastica Institutione and Aldhelmi Episcopi Scireburnensis Liber de
Virginitate ex codicae antiquissimo emendatus.

A Defense of Pluralities, or holding Two Benifices with Cure of Souls, as now
practiced in the Church of England.

L. Annaei Flori Rerum Romanorum Epitome, interpretatione, and Notis
illustravit Anna Tanaquilli Fabri Filia, Jussu Christianismi Regis, in usum
Serenissimi Delphini.

De Presbyteratu Dissertatio Quadripartita, Presbyteratus Sacri Origines,
Naturam Titulum, Officia and Ordines, ab ipsis Mundi primordiis usque ad
Catholicae Ecclesiae consummatam Plantationem complectens. In qua Hierarchiae
Episcpalis Jus divinum and Immutabile, ex Auctoritate Scripturarum Canonice
expositarum, and Ecclesiasticae traditionis Suffragiis, breviter quidem, sed
luculenter asseritur.

Martindal's Art of Surveying.

The Frauds of the Romish Monks and Priests, set forth in Eight Letters, lately
written by a Gentleman in his Journey into Italy. The Third Edition.

Observations on a Journey to Naples; wherein the Frauds of Romish Monks and
Priests are farther discovered: By the Author of the former Book.

Forms of Private Devotions for every Day in the Week, by a Method agreeable to
the Liturgy: With Occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the time of Sickness.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, Continens, ex 7059. versiculis totius. N.
Testamenti, tantum versiculos 1900. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes
universi Novi Test. voces, una cum versione Latina, inveniuntar. Auctore
Johanne Leusden, Philos. Doctore, and Linguae Sanctae in Academia ultrajectina
Professore ordinary. Editio Quinta.

Roman Forgeries in the Councils, during the First Four Centuries: Together
with an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius.
By Thomas Comber, D. D. Prebend of York.

The END.

