A LETTER WITH Animadversions upon the Animadverter On the BISHOP of
VVorcesters Letter.

By J. C. M. D.

-- Mentiri nescio. Librum,
Si malus est, nequeo laudare --
Juv. Sat. III.

London, Printed for M. B. 1661.

A Letter with Animadversions upon the Animadverter on the Bishop of Worcesters
Letter.
SIR,
I Have perused the Pamphlet, and with it return you some slight Animadversions
upon the slightest of Animadverters. He who called Presbyterians Demicasters in
Divinity, was too superlative in his title of Honor, since with their great cry
there is no wool, only dirt and bristles. Few have run mad in these later
times, who have not supposed all the world so beside themselves, as this
phrensie-inspired Animadverter, who has entitled the most sober, learned, and
reverend Prelate, ^o his own, and the passions of his Cock-brained party. Were
St. Paul alive, and should ask again the question, Shall I come with a rod, or
in love? he had undergone the Presbyterian censure, and with as much ease as an
Arch-Presbyter made a Papist of Grotius, or the Synod an Heretic of Dr.
Hammond, they would have made both of the Apostle.

Page 1. The Bishop, by the learned Animadverters concession, has the better
of Mr. Baxter. Hinc spargere voces. The Goliath of the Philistines is fallen, and
see now what weapons are brought to revenge the Champion, even tongues sharp as
razors, and words like two edged swords.

Page 1. If heat be not mistaken for zeal, the Dog Days may prove dangerous.

This may be no useless Adnimadversion to the Animadverter. Hector adest, and
with him Bedlam and Billingsgate rush into battle, the occasion of the grand
quarrel being no other, then that the Bishop speaks truth, and tells us.

Page 2. Kings and Bishops must stand and fall together, and all who are
enemies to the one, must be enemies to the other. He knows the much talked of
Axiom, and the advantage to be taken by the late wars, is in his judgment for
the Order of Bishops, a passionate lover of the Kings Person and Government,
yet being called to speak truth (contrary to humor and interest) must needs
say. 1. It is clear from story, that Kings were in all parts of the world in
their most flourishing estate, before ever Bishops were heard of; and what has
once been, no reason can be given, why it may not with the same terms of
convenience be again.

Our puny Historiographer sure calculates all time from the reign of Oliver,
and dates Episcopacy only from this happier Restoration, or the flourishing of
all Princes must be from Paganism, when Subjects were Slaves, Kingdoms only
splendid Robberies, and Dirt and Blood went only to the composition of Kings.
The Satyrists Ad generum Cereris, may inform their flourishing condition: Yet
Rome had a Pontifex Maximus, and, could this pretender to story, be capable of
any History, he could not be ignorant that the Romans attributed Success to
their Piety, and to the care of the Gods the conquest of them they called
Barbarous Nations. A Moses had Aaron an assistant, the Jewish Nation always an
High Priest, the Primitive Christian Emperors, Bishops, nay, Patriarchs; and
Papa signifies nothing but Pater Patriarcharum. Even the Turks in policy have a
Mufti; and no Christian Nation was before the Reformation without a Bishop, nor
since has any wanted, beside that whose zeal is as cold and barren as their
Country, and Religion consists only in Rapine and Blood. Now for a Sophomore or
half-witted fellow to maintain Arguments against things evident to Sense and
Reason, what is it but cum ratione insanire? to deny fire to be hot, water
moist, snow white, to renounce our Senses to gratify our Phancies, and believe
any thing beside our own experience: When experience verifies the exercise of
Episcopal Jurisdiction by Protestant Bishops, was for eighty years so far from
diminishing the power, or eclipsing the luster of English Princes, that Royal
Power was only then triumphant, when Bishops by Princely favor enjoyed Courts,
Jurisdictions, Honors, Privileges, according to former Grants of ancient
Kings, and the Laws and Customs of our own Nation. On the contrary, the
miseries of Germany, Rebellions in France, Scotland, etc. the meditating the
death of Queen Mary in England, the ruin of Queen Mary of Scotland, the
menacing Queen Elizabeth and her Council, the excommunicating and violence put
on King James, the Rebellion against, and after that, the Murder of King
Charles, do all of them instruct Geneva an instiller of strangely loyal and
Prince-preserving principles. The prevalency of the Smectymnuan faction, by
lopping off what they called Luxuriant Branches of Episcopacy, made an easy
way to take away Root and Branch, and soon after to verify the Aphorism, No
Bishop, no King. And now King and Bishops are restored to their just power, and
God has heard graciously the weak Prayers of an oppressed party, beyond the
loud-crying Perjuries, Sacriledges and oppressions of their enemies, we cannot
misdoubt (what troubles the Animadverter) so inseparable a dependence, so
strict an Union betwixt King and Bishops, that Hypocrisy and Disloyalty may no
longer reign in them, nor Perjury, Sacrilege, and Oppression, exercise an
arbitrary sovereignty over us.

Secondly (says he) Bishops as they are by Law established in England, are
purely the Kings subordinate Ministers in the management of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, which His Majesty may confer on what order of men He pleases. It is
very injurious therefore to the Kings Authority, to aver He could not otherways
uphold and maintain it, then by preserving the undue, and, as some think, the
Antichristian Prelation of His inferior Officers.

Monster of deep Sense and Reason! This is no ordinary Call, which makes him
speak such strange truths against Humor and Interest. Page 2. Much (he says)
he is in his judgment for the Order of Bishops, a passionate lover of the King
and his Government. Suit, having run out of his wits to make room for an
heretical spirit, he must obey the impulsion, that he may be the fitter
Champion for Mr. Baxter, producing Arguments of no more consequence then his.
The Kingly Office will prove as undue, and Prelation be thought as much
Antichristian, as this of his Inferior Officers; since Nihil dat quod non
habet, and (as the Animadverter) Bishops are purely the Kings subordinate
Ministers, in the management of Ecclesiastical Affairs.

The Presbyter and Independent suppose they have sufficiently confuted
whatsoever they mislike, if they pronounce it Popish or Antichristian. Yet in
this, as in other things, they symbolize with the Papists, and divide the
branch of Antichristianism. The Presbyterian Consistories claim as ample and
absolute Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over Princes, and power to excommunicate
them, as Papists challenge due to the Pope. Independents exempt their
Congregations, as Pontisicians their Clergy. Our Bishops and Conformists
pretend neither Jurisdiction over the King, nor Allegiance to be withdrawn from
him; but in all matters, either Ecclesiastical or Civil acknowledge him to have
the supreme power. The injury then to the Kings power is, that the Bishops are
good Subjects, and good Christians; or that they have a pre-eminence in power,
that there may not be as many Schisms as Priests. Sure the Kings interest
stands not with the Devils and a Tyrants, to divide by Sects, least all may
unite against Him, but to unite all, that they may agree in the service of God,
and of him who is Gods Vicegerent.

Thirdly, Bishops are little useful to support the Regal Dignity, being the
greatest enemies to Sovereignty; intermedling in Civil affairs, and mangling
the Church Authority in Church matters, leaving the King nothing of Supremacy.

Had not this trifler been lost as much to good Books as Brains, he might have
learned of the most eminent B. Saunderson, That derived power is so far from
destroying the original from whence it is derived, as it rather confirms and
establishes it. The farther it is extended, so it be regular, the more it
serves to illustrate the honor of the original; since the efficient cause is
best known by the greatness of the effect: For, Propter quod unumquodque est
tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. And did not the valor of this Champion
proceed only from his ignorance, when Protestant Bishops only profess, maintain
and submit to Regal Supremacy, he could not thus whiffle to no greater purpose,
then the calling of his Brains into question.

Page 3. The Bishop cannot be Pastor of all the Congregations in his Diocese:
For since a Bishop cannot otherwise discharge his duty, then by Substitutes,
the Bishop of Rome may as well oversee a Million of Churches, as the Bishop of
Worcester Five hundred.

Most Logical and profound! A Steward who oversees laborers, may with a like
faculty, employ, encourage, and take account of five thousand as five.

He forbears to urge the contrary practice of Paul and Peter, hopes the Bishop
not angry he calls them not Saints, who need no honor from the Popes Calendar.

The Saintship sure belongs to Peter's, not St. Peter. He need not believe the
Scripture, since the Pope calls it the Word of God; or there was a Savior, he
had Apostles, and those were Bishops, since it comes but from tradition, and
that from the Pope, and who knows how far the Bishop of Rome has put in his
foot into the Pot?

Page 4. Here this Ridiculum caput tortures in (...) Overseers or Bishops,
(...) overseeing or acting like Bishops, not like the Bishop of Worcester,
Lording over Gods heritage, but as patterns to the flock, Strange Overseers,
who have no power over deceitful workers. He takes no notice of St. Paul's
course (like the Bishops) which he took with Alexander the Copersmith, with
Demas, Philelus, and Hymeneus, does only tanquam Canis ad Nilum, ^ap and away.
But sure they need not fear Crocodiles, who are what we call Crocodiles, the
worst of Dissemblers.

The next trouble is, Who come in by the wrong door, are called Thieves and
Robbers. He who would be angry with Christ, Ignatius would scarce please, with
a who does any thing without the Bishops License (...), serves the Devil; nor
St. Cyprian with his Unum scire debes siquis cum Episcopo non sit, in Ecclesia
non esse, That he who is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church. The Church
maintaining the Ordinations of Presbyters for mere nullities in themselves,
cannot own their Ordinations without renouncing the Catholic Church. Omnis
Ecclesia appellata est virgo, as St. Austin. He who commits a rape by entering
by force, may be entitled to punishment, not matrimony, though this
fumivendulus A. would have Presbyterian Ordination as little to be impeached,
as marriage. Oh, but Christ silenced the Scribes and Pharisees with Arguments
only, which the Bishop can never do. In this only the Mythologist is to be
believed. We have an honest Fathers word for it, St. Austine, with a quid
promobis exercitatissime Scripturarum? si quid defenderis, negetur; si quid
negaveris, defendetur: Tit contra nihil promoves, nisi vocem perdis in
declamatione, nisi bilem suscitas de blasphematicis. All the learning of this
most Reverend Prelate, gains nothing beside the anger of blasphemous
Schismatics.

That the Bishops says, Presbyterians preach sedition and treason, is most
false, and directly contrary to their declared principles.

It would be worth the inquiry, whether this Declaration was ever in England or
Scotland, or Calvin made it at the Expulsion of the lawful Prince, the Bishop
of Geneva.

The Pharisees taught blasphemy, yet our Savior like the Bishop, did not go
about to prohibit them by force.

This Sciamachist will forget both our Saviors power, and the Kings, and that
he called Bishops the Kings subordinate Ministers, and rarely infers, Sedition,
Treason, and Blasphemy, must be all preached and tolerated, or else the Bishops
usurp a power Christ never gave, and at the last day (as our Grand Polemick)
Christ will not thank them for the exercise of it.

He seems much concerned in the Bishops distinction about the Act of
Indemnity, and Act of Oblivion; that the King by it only pardoned the corporal
punishment; but the Church had not, nor ought not to forgive the scandal, till
honorable amends were made her by Confession and Recantation.

It is evident (as the incomparable Thorndike observes) that the whole Church
was governed by Bishops, and that not against Gods Law, for then there could
have remained no Church, and therefore the pretense of Governing the Church by
Presbyters, is a breach of unity, unless a part may give law to the whole,
which, who do so, are by so doing Schismatics; then how should that communion
be counted a Church which receive Schismatics as Schismatics, viz. without
renouncing positions destructive to faith, and obligations for their future not
infringing the unity of the Church. St. Austine to the Donatists objections,
that the Church received their Apostates without rebaptizing them, could have
had no answer, had he not had this; That the Church, received them, not as
Donatists, but converted from Donatists, and not refusing to make a profession.
I wish Mr. B. and ejusdem farinae sodales, these Donatists, for so they were
pleased to call themselves, Gifted persons, would make such professions, or
else what assurance can be given a Church, that when they preach, they open not
their mouths, only to widen our differences?

Page 8. As for the Chain of Consequences which the Bishop links and ties
together, as from diversity in external Rites, arises dislike; from dislike,
enmity; from enmity, opposition; then Schism in the Church, and Sedition in the
State; the Church cannot be safe without unity, nor unity without uniformity;
nor uniformity without a rigorus imposition, is a Rope of sand, and the parts
of the Chain as little hang together, as Sampsons Foxes before they were tied
together by the tayls, which course the Bishop does imitate, not forgetting to
put the Firebrand into the comparison.

Mentiris Bellarmine! Learnedly and Politickly confuted. Sure beloved, in Truth
and in good Sooth-law, you and your fellow Schismatics are the Rope of Sand,
twisted into an association; you and your Partners are the Sampsons Foxes, who
divided by the heads, without the Bishops chain, would be tied by the tail with
Firebrands to the combustion of Church and State.

Page 9. Nothing is more clear, then there has bin, nay ought to be,
diversity in External Forms, without any dislike at all as to the person of
another.

The greatest Doctors may dissent (as St. Austine) (...) fidei compage, and
concord may be preserved, which is the effect of charity, since it is unio
voluntatum non opinionum; and as our Incomparable Bishop Land, It could be
wished all would be what the Apostle exhorts, of one mind, but it is not to be
hoped, till the Church is triumphant over humane frailties, which here hang
thick and close about her; the want of unity, even where Relion is pretended,
proceeds rather from men and humors, then things and errors to be found in
them. In unitate fidei diversa sit consuetudo, as St. Gregory, is true in
National Churches. For, as a Father, the Multitude, and I may say, diversity
of Ceremonies, is so far from infringing, as they commend the unity of the
Church, while all agree in one Faith. The eating of Meats offered to Idols,
totally restrained the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, seems permitted to the
Church of Corinth: if no body challenged it, what was urged upon the
Corinthians, was not imposed upon the Galatians, to show every one is obliged
to observe the Rites of his own Church, lest they come under the Anathema of
contentious and troublesome. Neither Kingdom nor Church can stand which is
divided in it self; while there is no King in Israel, every one does what is
good in his own eyes; when there is no Bishop, there may be as many Schisms as
Priests; hence, as St. Hierom, in Schismatis remedium factum est, quod unus
electus qui caeteris praeponeretur, ne unusquisque ad se trahens ecclesiae
tunicam rumperet.

Page 10. Kneeling at the Sacrament is manifestly most Superstitious; for,
First it varies most from the first pattern. Secondly, it has been monstrously
abused by Papists to Idolatry.

Sure this Babe in understanding, cannot go above his first rudiments, or
childs gibberish. Why does he not argue for communion with the Leveller,
baptizing in Rivers with the Anabaptists, making life a peniless pererration
with the Franciscan, plead for leaning one upon the other at the Lords Supper,
and lying down at the Table, and taking of it after Supper? For these were the
primitive patterns. As Chrysostom, Theodoret, Isychius, Eucherius, and other
primitive Fathers, by a (...), etc. calling it a Transfiguration, Conversion,
Mutation, Translation, Transelementation, though not a (...), if they have lent
some occasion of error to the Papists, yet may instruct us of the primitive
reverence at the taking; could we neither believe a St. Ambrose, nor a St.
Austine, that we must have Sursum corda, and nemo digne manducat, nisi prius
adoraverit. But ah! the Papists abuse it to Idolatry! And oh! the Presbyterian
abuses the Scripture, and makes it what the Papist calls a Nose of Wax,
therefore they must not be allowed to read the Scriptures. This Illogical
fellow and Mr. B. must make no more Arguments, because some of them have ill
consequences, must never warm his fingers, because some have been burnt with
fire, or wash his foul mouth, because some have been choked with water. We are
not to offend weak ones, but it is observable, none are so ready to take
offense, as those who are most proclive to give it, imperious, petulant, and
envious Sciolists; and to fear to offend them, is not to have respect to the
weak in faith, but strong in passions.

Page 11. Truly, Sir, I am a little angry.

Lord help it, poor thing, art angry? Choler spoils the memory, as thou say,
and thou have but a weak one, Et mendacem memorem esse oportet. Thou art a
lover of the King, his Government, and the order of Bishops, and could you not
scruple to pray, and pray heartily too? Lord deliver us from such Bishops, and
let all the people say, Amen. Lord send us more such Bishops, and let all the
people say, Amen, that they be no longer worried by Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing.
For though Sir Politick-would-be, will tell him in his ears, Page 9. Our Wars
did not arise from the separation of conscientious Dissenters, but from the
violence and fury of inconscionable imposers; though cock brained Sciolists
know nothing, wisemen cannot be ignorant, that the want of such Bishops lent
occasion to our misery, and he speaks truth against his will; only it was not
conscientious Dissenters, they could not turn disloyal, but furious and violent
imposers on the people by their holy art of juggling, while Anti-clergy
Lecturers were tolerated to the eternal disgrace of Religion, to spit fire like
Juglers, and preaching which brought in Religion, seemed designed to carry it
out of the World: The hour of temptation was spent in invectives against Church
and State, whimsies about Antichrist, the accomplishing Brightmans Dreams, and
stuff like these fit only to be studied in Bedlam, and practiced at
Billingsgate. I conclude with the ingenious Osborne, that story which
prosecuted might expunge all villainy legible in History.

Page 11. But the A. too will leave his prosecution to some more able pen in
Divinity and policy, etc.

The Bishops more able pen in Divinity and Policy, may convince the world this
is no time to sow tares, and we hope the Age is wiser then to be gulled by
every gut-inspir'd-Ideot who can suppose he vents oracles out of his Belly.

Next he runs into a furthermore (Sermon-maker-like) he crives leave to give a
taste of deep wisdom, or rather his own shallow wit, in three particulars. 1.
In that he declaims so fierce as he would break his girdle against all those
who force all Communicants to come unto them, and be particularly examined;
this is a man of straw, set up to get him an heat this cold weather. 2. He
thinks it politickly done, to declaim against the Covenant. 3. He cannot
commend his wisdom enough for resolving angrily to write no more.

1. Though the girdle is whose, and contains more solid wisdom, and sober piety
then a Jewish Sanhedrim or whole Assembly of addle brain'd-smectymnuans, we
cannot doubt the Animadverters brain so cracked, as it can retain neither truth,
wit, nor honesty. 2. It was zeal, not policy made Eliah destroy the Idol of
Baals Priests, as this good Bishop the Idol of Bawling Priests, a Covenant. 3.
The Scribler might have been more commended for his wisdom, had he not writ,
then thus to have writ without wisdom. But because the Bishop will write no
more, he scribbles: thus (...): If an Ass kicks, or a Dog barks, a wise man
neirther kicks the one, nor barks at the other, if we believe Socrates. To be
as brief in his Character as he has been with the most Reverend and Learned
Bishop, he is what (while he would nibble at wit) he calls, a man of straw, set
up to be threshed, yet not worth the threshing, since chaff and dust, without a
grain of wit, is to be gained only by this stramineous Animadverter. There is
no use to be made of his straw above what cut-purses do, to tickle some idle
ears to gain the opportunity of picking their pockets, as perhaps he has done
to such a person of honor and quality, as in this last weeks triumph he might
have rid on horseback with his face reversed before the sledges, stuffed with
such furniture, as at first cast dirt on the Fathers of the Church, and in
their ruin made way for the Murder of the Father of the Country, our Churches
Martyr, Charles the first. He raves, talks of heat and Dog Days; and sure the
days are present, when every overheated brain, or pidler in knowledge,
Cur-like, barks at Celestial Bodies, because they cannot attain either their
height or luster. A Dog who bites at stones would be too sober a character for
him, who has all the symptoms of a mad Dog, raves, fomes with malice, snatches
at every thing meets him, and runs on without fear or wit to destruction. The
shaking of a whip is the fittest weapon for such a Champion; for other weapons
being useless to the conquest of slaves, this cannot be successless against
him, who is a slave to slaves, in vassalage to the worst of passions. The
Bishop, if he has a sting, it is Bee-like, for the gathering of honey into the
hive of the Church, but such Insects as this, who are only quickened out of the
putrefaction of an intemperate climate, run out into legs, for want of blood,
translate the best things into poison with the spider, or buzze, and make a
noise with the fly, and taint every thing with their evil breaths. If this be
the Presbyterian Goliath, there is no danger of him, for we may be assured he
has got a stone in his noddle, or else he could have never ventured with a
pepper-box on so eminent a person, upon the empty fiction of a Mouses killing
an Elephant. But lest I should dwell upon nothing, or a subject that is worth
nothing, farewell. Only remember me to the Animadverter, who may be better
cured by Physic then Divinity. What the Letter is defective in, the Profession
shall supply, of him,

Who is engaged to serve you, and him for your sake, J. C.

FINIS.

