Lex Talionis:

Or the Law of Marque or Reprizals.

Fully represented in the Case of Spoils and Depredations, upon the Ships,
Goods, and Factories of Sir. WILLIAM COURTEN, and his Partners in the
East Indies, China, and Iapan.

Whereupon Letters Patents for Reprizals were Granted under the Great Seal of
ENGLAND, to continue effectual in the Law against the STATES GENERAL of the
United Provinces, and their Subjects; for Recovering of the Sum of 151612 l.
with Costs and Damages mentioned in the said Patent.

Together with three Several PROPOSALS of the Creditors, to the KING, and their
answer (in a POSTSCRIPT) to the Lord Chancellour's Arguments upon the Scire
Facias, brought by Sir. Robert Sawyer, His Majesty's Attorney General,
concerning the Letters Patents aforesaid.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of SHREWSBURY.
THis following Case being drawn up, and Printed by some of the Agents and
Solicitors of the Creditors of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, for
satisfaction of several Persons that were earnest to have it Published; and
Communicated to all the late Members of both Houses of Parliament; I obstructed
the progress thereof, being resolved that it should not go so nakedly into the
world without any Title or Dedication, and then only to the view of such
Persons as are principally Interessed and Concerned therein; I am obliged to
let Your Lordship and the rest of the Creditors know, that I have been in my
Quality, as Administrator and Assignee, both Active and Passive, at home and
abroad, ever since his Majesty's Restoration, in the pursuit of such our
Rights and Properties, that cannot be Mortified or Extinguished, except Mankind
be Exterminated.

There are Volumes of Examinations and Depositions by me, taken from the
Servants, Officers, Factors and Seamen, employed by Sir William Courten, in
Discovering, Planting, and Fortifying the Island of Barbados; manifesting to
all the World, that he was the Original Proprietor of that Island, and so
Confirmed to him and his Heirs, by Letters Patents, under the great Seal of
England, in the third year of King Charles the first: Yet no Restitution or
Reparation could be obtained to this day, for the forceable Entries and
Intrusions made by James late Earl of Carlisle, and his Accomplices upon Sir
William Courten in the said Island.

There are as many more Volumes of Examinations, Depositions, Memorials,
Answers, Replications, Rejoynders, and other proceedings in several Languages
by me, in the case of the East India Spoils and Depredations upon Courten and
Pyndar, before the values of the Loss and Damages were reduced to a certainty,
by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England; which vested the Interest
with an Authority irrevokable in the Grantees for recovery thereof, according
to the Rules of Law and Common Right; Yet no Restitution or Compensation can be
obtained for the same.

There are little less Volumes of Proceedings upon the Civil Actions, depending
in Holland and Zealand, against the Heirs and Executors of Sir James Cats,
Jacob Pergens, and Peter Boudaen, for Moneys lent upon Bonds, and Accounts
standing out in Trade. Yet all have terminated in contempts of the Law and
positive Denialls of Justice, in this Age of ingratitude and forgetfulness.

Your Grandfather, John Earl of Shrewsbury, having lent the Sum of five and
twenty hundred pounds to Sir William Courten, toward his first Expedition into
the East Indies, China, and Japan, upon whose foundation the present great
East India Trade is erected. After the Death of Sir William; William Courten
his Son and Heir, together with Sir Edward Littleton and others, entered into
new Security in the year 1639 for the same Debt (being all the ready Money then
in your Family.) Whereupon Francis Earl of Shrewsbury, your Father, with diverse
other great Sufferers (Creditors of Sir William Courten, and his Son, as also
of Sir Paul Pyndar) applied themselves in company with me upon the Kings most
happy Restoration, for some seasonable relief against the Hollanders and
Zealanders, that had lived upon the spoils of all Nations.

His Majesty being then upon a Treaty of Common Alliance with the States
General: After eight months debate in Courtens affair, came to this Stipulation
in the year 1662. That upon restitution of the Island of ^olleron, and
satisfaction to be made for the Spoils and Depredations concerning the two
Ships named the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura; All other Losses and
Damages of his Subjects; and even that of Amboyna, should be Mortified and
Obliterated, that is to say, No Sovereign remedy should be given to any of them
by his Majesty, for the said Damages by Reprizalls; which was Mutually Signed,
and Solemnly Ratified accordingly.

This Stipulation was pursued by several Memorialls to the States General, for
the space of two years, at the Hague, and seconded by diverse Orders from the
Council Board, and several Letters of Recomendation from his Majesty, to the
said States, under his Sign Manual, which proving all innefectual. A Complaint
thereof being brought before the House of Commons, in the year 1664. was there
Espoused with vast Royal Aides, toward the Protection and Relief of the
Complaynants: Therefore they are under great mistakes, both in matters of Fact
and Judgment of Law, that Report the King was either Surprised or Deceived in
his Grant, or that the States General had not due Notice of Passing the Letters
Patents, for Restitution to be made to the said Francis Earl of Shrewsbury, and
others in the said Patent Mentioned and Expressed; being grounded upon several
Acts of Parliament, and the Ancient Law of Marque, and Reprizals: The Instances
whereof, once brought home to a Fiat under the great Seal of England, becomes a
Decree unalterable, like the Laws of the Medes and Persians

I beg Your Lordships Pardon and Patience, in craving Your Honors Serious
Consideration upon the said Case; and the Creditors Proposals to his Majesty;
with the Postscript after them, in answer to the Lord Chancellors Arguments, on
Friday the 26 th. of May last, when his Lordship gave Judgment for the King,
upon the Scire-Facias, concerning the said Letters Patents, wherein Your
Grandfathers Debt is included; yet further secured by Collateral Covenants from
my self, respectively to Your Honor and Sir Thomas Meres for another Debt of
2000 l. Contracted in the year 1641, upon the obligation of William Courten
Esquire; Sir Edward Littleton and John Earl of Bridgewater, to Elizabeth
Viscountess Cambden, due to the said Sir Thomas Meres as Executor of Sir
Erazmus de la Fountain, Executor of the said Viscountess; not doubting of Your
Diligence and Endeavors for obtaining thereof, by all ways and means that are
Honorable and Just, more especially for those Crying Debts due to many
hundreds of Orphants and Widows, claiming under my Administration, (whose cause
I shall never desert:) Yet constantly remaining

(SIR,) Your Lordships most faithful and humble Servant. George Carew.
Richmond August 2d. 1682.
The Case between the King and Carew, concerning the Letters Patents for
Reprisals (hereunto annexted) against the Hollanders; Briefly and faithfully
stated, for satisfaction of all persons concerned.
GEorge Carew of Richmond, in the County of Surrey Esquire; Administrator of the
Goods and Chattels of Sir William Courten Knight deceased, with his Will
annexed; having contested at the Hague and Amsterdam, after the Kings
Restoration, for the space of fifteen Months, concerning the Spoils and
Depredations, upon Sir William Courten's Ships and Factories: A Provisoe was
made in the fifteenth Article of the Treaty concluded at LONDON, between the
King and the States General, the 4th. of September 1662. that satisfaction and
reparation should be made by the East India Company of the Netherlands, for the
two Ships named the Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura, with their
Freights and Lading.

In pursuance of the said Treaty, Carew having Expended and Disbursed diverse
great Sums of Money, both in Holland and England without effect, he was
prompted by several Ministers of State at Whitehall, to Address himself by
Petition to the Commons in Parliament, in the year 1664. for Relief, who
referred the same to the Committee of Grievances accordingly.

Sir Tho. Clifford, then Chairman of the said Committee, after Examination of
all the Papers and Depositions concerning this Case, brought in by Sir Thomas
Littleton, Reported that the Loss and Damages amounted to the Sum of One
Hundred and Fifty Thousand pounds Sterling and upwards, hinting at the evil
consequences thereof, to the Honor and Interest of the Nation, if those
Damages were not satisfied and repaired unto the Families of Sir William
Courten and Sir Paul Pindar, who had merited so much from the Crown and Kingdom.

Soon after a War insued, whereupon the Commons Voted to assist the King with
their Lives and Fortunes, unto whom they granted several Millions of Money for
the Prosecution thereof.

In the Month of May 1665. the Cause concerning the said Spoils and
Depredations which had been debated in the Admiralty, in Council, and in
Parliament, was reduced to a certainty, for satisfaction by Letters Patents for
Reprisals under the Great Seal of England, wherein Sir Edmund Turnors Name is
used in Trust, Carew having the Interest in Law on the behalf of himself and
others, the Dutch Ambassador then Resident in England had notice of all the
proceedings, as it is recited in the body of the said Patent, which passed
through the greatest Offices of Trust in the Kingdom, upon mature Consideration.

The Warrant for passing the said Patent, issued out of the Lord Arlingtons
Office, then Principal Secretary of State, containing two clauses for
continuance of the Grant, until the Debt of 151612l. with Damages should be
recovered, which was debated three Months, by the Lord Chancellor Hyde, before
it passed the Great Seal, Sir William Turnor and Sir Robert Wiseman the Kings
and Dukes Advocates general, being often consulted therein, affirmed, That it
was consonant to the Laws of Nature and Nations, that the said Debt and Damages
should be satisfied and repaired. A President thereof being shown under the
Great Seal, in the late Kings time, in the Case of Paulet, a Merchant, who had
the like Letters of Reprisals against the Spaniards, to continue effectual in
the Law, until the Debt and Damages should be Reprised, who upon a Peace made
with Spain, had the remainder of his Debt unsatisfied.

In the year 1666. Carew and the Creditors claiming under him, procured several
Duplicates and Exemplifications of the said Letters Patents, and put the same
in execution, by deputations against the Hollanders, who Trading in diverse
Bottoms, under the colors of Sweeds, Hamburgers and other Neighboring Princes
and States in Amity with England, the very charges of equipping out private men
of War could not be gotten, the Ships brought in for Prizes* being reclaimed
and restored, as by the Rigister of the Admiralty Court appears.

However Sir William Coventry then Secretary to his Royal Highness complaining,
That those special Letters of Reprisal, obstructed the Lord High-Admirals
profits of Tenths by Letters of Marque in time of War, and that the Kings Ships
were deprived of Seamen: A Proclamation issued out the 10th. of August 1666. to
suspend the Execution of the said Letters Patents, protempore. Notwithstanding
his Royal Highness was gratified with a Months Tax for his Heroic Courage at
Sea.

In the year 1667. a Peace was concluded at Breda, whereby all Letters of
Reprisals were mentioned to be revoked, whereupon the said Carew and the
Creditors remained passive, until the year 1671. when another War was
proclaimed, the King having particularly owned this Cause, declaring, That he
was obliged in Justice and Honor to see that Debt and Damages, mentioned in
the Letters Patents aforesaid, to be satisfied and repaired; the Lords of the
Privy Council having also affirmed, That all past Treaties were absolutely
cancelled, as if no such Treaties ever had been made.

Then the said Carew was dispatched away with Orders of the Council Table,
Referrences and Instructions, with the Kings Letters to his Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, to insist upon plenary satisfaction and Reparation in any
Treaty to be made with the States; The King expressing in his Leters under his
Sign manual his care to protect his Subjects in their just Rights, as well as
to assist them in the recovery thereof.

In the Month of August 1672. It so happened that Carew and his Servants were
Imprisoned by the States of Holland as Spies, for seeking after Justice, and
detained close Prisoners without access (and threatened with Death) during the
War, which ended in a common Alliance, in the year 1674. upon the consideration
of Eight hundred Thousand Patacoons (inter alia) to be paid to the King in four
years, for Damages yet three parts thereof were assigned to the Prince of
Orange, and the fourth part received for other services by Alderman Backwel,
upon his Majesty's account, but the Debt and Damages ascertained for the Spoils
and Depredations aforesaid, was left in statu quo, to the remedy at Law
prescribed.

In the year 1680. diverse of the Creditors of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul
Pindar and Sir Edward Littleton, having importuned the said Carew to put in
execution the said Letters of Reprisals, since they had no satisfaction either
out of the Prizes taken by the Kings Ships, during the War, nor out of the said
Patacoons, or any other ways or means whatsoever, notwithstanding their
several Addresses to the King, the States, and the Prince of Orange, for that
purpose.

Then Carew being advised that several Writs at Common Law, in case of a Spoil
at Sea, lay against the Subjects of Foreign Princes and their Goods found in
England, until the Statute of Edw. the third, provided that the only Remedy
should be by the Law of Marque or Reprisals, without Fraud or Deceit, for all
Damages upon Spoils, which being ascertained and reduced into a Grant, under
the Great Seal of England, became such an Interest vested in the Grantees,
coupled with an Authority that could not be taken away without satisfaction
made to the Parties interessed and injured.

And further advised, That Sovereign Princes in all parts of the World, having
once granted such Letters of Reprisals for Spoils and Wrongs done to their
Subjects, hold themselves obliged to see right done by one means or other,
being trusted with the power of Peace and War: A Prerogative subservient to the
immutable Laws of Nature, and right Reason.

Then Carew Equipped out a small Ship called the George Bona Adventura, under
the command of Captain Compton Gwyther, who took a Fly-Boat laden with Wine and
Chestnuts near the Isle of Wight, called the Love of Rotterdam, to awaken those
that ought to make reparations, whereupon the Dutch Ambassador moved for
Proclamations, Supersedeas and scire facias, but nothing was offered for
satisfaction or repairation upon any account whatsoever, for the Debt of 151612
l. although no part of that principal money, or of ten thousand pounds more
expended and disbursed by the said George Carew, in the prosecution of his
right, was recovered or received, as by his Affidavit filed in Chancery,
hereunto annexed also appears.

Then Compton Gwyther and his Mariners, being Apprehended were tried for Pyracy
and Felony, by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, grounded upon the
Statute of Henry the VIII. at the New Hall, in the Court of Marshalsea in
Southwark, on the 18th. of Febr. 1680. where the Jury acquitted them as not
acting with a Fellonious intent, under the color of that Commission for
Reprisals, Yet the Ship was restored by the King to the Dutch.

In the Month following Sir Robert Sawyer, the Attorney General, brought a
scire facias in the Pettibag against Sir Edmund Turner, and George Carew, to
show cause Why the LETTERS PATENTS should not be revoked, repeald, or made null
and void; Whereupon Slings by Bethel and Henry Cornish Esquires, the Sheriffs,
gave personal notice, and returned the said Writ in Easter Term 1681. Then
Turnor and Carew Appeared and Pleaded the same Term, which lay Dormant until
Easter-Term, 1682. when the Attorney General put in a Demurrer: whereunto the
Defendants rejoyned, and the Record being Read in Court (consisting of five
large Skins of Parchment) on Saturday the 20 of May, the Lord High Chancellor
of England, appointed Tuesday following to Argue the same; whereupon the
Defendants Council moved the Court for longer time, in regard they could not
have Copies of the Record Written out so soon, yet it was denied; and his
Lordship gave Judgment for the King, without Arguing the same by the Defendants
Council, who will in due time be ready to make appear not only diverse Errors in
the said Scire facias. But that Judgment ought not by the Laws of the Land, to
be given on the said scire facias: his Lordships Judgment being reversable by
Writ of Error or Appeal.

But in the Interval, between the scire facias brought and the Demurrer put in,
Carew being pressed to enter other Ships and Pinnaces (according to his
Covenants) to Reprise some part of the Debt and Damages, many Widows and
Orphants Creditors of Courten and Pindar, being concerned therein; The Ship
named the America, with 4 others, were offered, at their instance, to be entered
in the Admiralty, and Cap. W. Hawley to be Commander of the America. But Sir R.
Lloyd and Mr. Bedford refusing to take any other Notice of the Paper, than only
Reading and returning the same, it was Registered in the Chancery, and a
Deputation given to the said Cap. Hawley upon an Authentic Copy of the said
Letters Patents to put the same in Execution; who in Prosecution thereof, took
a Fly-boat laden with Wheat and Rye, called the Young Schonemaker of Dort,
under Sail about three Leagues from the Texell, and then brought the same into
Woodbridge Harbor, and sent the Bills of Lading with all the Papers on Board
unto Mr. Thomas Broadrick Procter in the Admiralty, in order to a Sentence of
Condemnation. Then a Warrant dated 29th of April 1682. issued from the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty, directed to Mr. William Ioynes the Marshal, who
restored the Prize to the Dutch, and apprehended Captain Hawley and his Men for
Pyracy and Felony, and committed them to the Prison of the Marshalsea, in
order to their Trial on Saturday the 10th of June 1682.

Mr: Carew's Affidavit Filed in Chancery:
Dom. Rex verse. Carew and al' super Brev. scire facias in suprem' Curia
Cancellar.
GEorge Carew of Richmond in the County of Surrey Esquire one of the Defendants in
this Cause, makes Oath That he this Deponent being advised by his Council
Learned in the Laws, that a special Proviso was made in the fifteenth Article
of the Treaty Concluded at London, between the King and the States General,
Dated the 4th of September 1662. For Satisfaction and Repairation of the
Spoils and Depredations of the Two Ships, called, The Bona Esperanza, and
Henry Bona Adventura, and the Letters Patents for Reprisals in pursuance
thereof Recited, in the PLEA to the said scire facias he this Deponent valued
himself, as vested with such a right and property in the Debt and Damages,
Ascertained by the Grant in the said Letters Patents, That he this Deponent
disbursed and expended the sum of Ten Thousand Pounds and Upwards in the
Prosecution of his Right; Three Thousand and Five Hundred Pounds of the said
Money being furnished by Thomas Foley Esquire upon the purchase of Aunton Farm in
Worcestershire, from this Deponent, Two Thousand Pounds more thereof lent to
this Deponent by Tho. Colman Esquire upon the Mortgage of Eight Houses in the City
of London, and Two Thousand Five Hundred Pounds by Sir James Butler, upon a
Conditional Surrender of a Coppy-hold Estate in Richmond; Whereupon there is a
Decree in this Court to foreclose this Deponant from the Equity of Redemption
if the Principal Money Interest and Charges be not paid by Christmas next, most
part of the said 8000 l. being paid to Sir William Powell, Sir John Ayton and
others, claiming their Debts under this Deponants Administration, by Judgments
and other Securities from Sir Paul Pindar and Sir William Courten. And this
Deponant farther faith, That He this Deponent has not Directly nor Indirectly
received any Satisfaction for the principal Debt of 151612 l. mentioned in the
said Letters Patents for the said Spoils and Depredations, save only the Sum
of 50 l. Sterling, paid by Alderman Backwell, by the Earl of Danby's Order out
of the 800000 Pattacoons, and 150 l. more by the States of Holland, toward
this Deponents extraordinary Charges in Prison. The King having paid the
ordinary Costs and Expenses of this Deponents Imprisonment, with two Servants
for the space of 22 Months at the Hague, during the last War; notwithstanding
there is One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds Sterling, and upwards, due to
the Creditors of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pindar upon Bonds and
Judgments, wherein many poor Orphants and Widows are concerned. And this
Deponent says, That the Record consisting of five Skins of Parchment,
appointed to be Argued on Friday 26 of this Instant May. This Deponants Council
that Subscribed the Plea cannot be ready in so short a time to Argue the
several Points in Issue, the Record being but Read in Court on Saturday last,
and the Defendants having Rejoyned in the Demurrer to the PLEA but two days
before.

Jurat 25 die Maij Anno R. Rs. Carol. sec. etc. xxxiiij. Coram me George Carew.
Io. Coell.

An Exact Account of the Proceedings at the Marshalsea, June 10: 1682. against
Cap: Hawley, and his men, upon Pretense of Piracy, acting under Letters Patents
for Reprisals against the Hollanders.
ON the 10th of June instant, the Commissioners appointed to try Capt. Hawley
and his men, upon the Stat. of Hen. 8. for Paracy and Felony. Being met at the
New Hall in the Marshals Court in Southwark. The Commission was read by Mr.
Tho. Bedford, the Register of the Admiralty, Sir Tho. Exton, as President of
the Court, gave the Charge: Then the Sheriff of Surry brought in the Precepts,
whereupon the Jurors were returned and Sworn: The Indictment then was delivered
to the Grand Jury who found the Bill. Unto which the Prisoners pleaded, NOT
GUILTY, Took their Trial, and put themselves upon God and the Country.

Then Sir Richard Lloyd, Council for the King, alleged to the Petty Jury that
the Letters Patents for Reprisals, aforesaid, were made null and void by Treaty
of STATE, Supercedeas, Proclamation, and Judgment of the Ld Chancellor upon a
Scire facias: Yet was so tender of the KING's Honor, That he would not suffer
the Letters Patents to be read openly in Court, but only by the Jurors
thmselves privately. Whereupon the Council for the Prisoners insisted, That
there were not Arguments suffered to be made on the Defendants side, upon the
Attorney Generals Demurrer to the Defendants Plea, which consisted of 5 Skins
of Parchment: the Record being read on Saturday the 20th of May, Judgment was
given in the Week following, before Copies could be made of the Record. However
Mr. Carew himself persisted, at this last Trial, That nothing could affect the
Patent but Satisfaction: For That by the Laws and Statutes of England, Letters
Patents in this Case, which vested an Interest in the Patentees, by especial
Grant (as set forth in his Plea to the scire facias) could not be revoked or
taken away without satisfaction first made to the parties that suffered the
wrong. And that the L d Chancellors Judgment is as avoidable upon a Writ of
Error for Mistakes in his Opinion, as the Grants in the Letters Patents are
avoidable upon Satisfaction made: for that no Act of State (unless an Act of
Parliament) can bind the particular Interests of the Subject without
Satisfaction: and the scire facias being defective, the Judgment given upon it,
is null in it self, there being no such Letters Patents as are mentioned in the
Scire facias, returned by the Sheriffs, as aforesaid, for Restitution to Carolo
tunc Comiti Salop, etc.

Then the matters of Fact being made out by the Dutch men the Master and others
in the Ship called the Schonemaker of Dort, against Cap. Hawley and his men,
That they took the ship by force, and possessed themselves of the Ship and
Lading. To which the Prisoners made little Defense, save only, That they did
nothing felloniously or pyratically, but acted by Virtue of a Commission and
Deputation indorsed upon the backside of an Authentic Copy of the Letters
Patents, hereunto annexed, which was put into the Jurors hands to peruse; who
brought them in Not Guilty.

Werereupon Mr. Ioynes the Marshal, immediately arested Mr. Carew, Capt.
Hawley, and his men in a joint Action for 1000l. Damages, by Writ out of the
Admiralty, upon the Dutch Ambassadors desire, at the Suit of Willem de Widt,
Iohanes van Eich voor, Alewyn van Vollenhoven, Lodewyck Terwe, Jacob van
Harrlem, Antony Walbeeck, Antony van d Santheuvel, all Inhabitants of Dort,
that were the Owners of the said ship and lading; but upon Mr. Carew's
complaint to the Court, then sitting, and the Dutch Ambassador also present, he
was discharged pro tempore. But within two days after gave sufficient Bail by
two eminent Citizens to answer the said Action both for himself, the Capt. and
his Company.

Then some of the most considerable Creditors claiming under Carew's
Administration being unsatisfied with these Proceedings, caused Mr. Ioynes to
be arested by Writ out of the King's Bench for 2000l. Damages, to answer the
Value of the said Ship and Lading: having dispossessed the said Cap. Hawly, and
his men thereof, in an extrajudicial way, upon pretense of a VVarrant from the
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, dated about the 29 of April 1682. who
brought the said Cap. and his men Prisoners, and put them into the custody of
Mr. Lowman, the Keeper of the County Gaol in Southwark, where they were
detained 44 days, or thereabouts, close Prisoners at their own costs and
charges, and after they were legally discharged, wereforced to pay Mr. Ioynes
and the Register of the Admiralty, several exorbitant Fees, amounting to 6l. 10
s. a man, or thereabouts; to procure which Money, they were forced to fell
their Beds from under them: For all which the Captain and his men are advised
to take their due Course at Law against them for their respective Damages:
That is to say, Cap. Will. Hawley, Richard Washington, Ri. Terret, Ierom Hawley,
Th. Tomkins, John Tailor, and Glanvil Lamboy.

Its Remarkable, That the Dutch Ambassadors are very clamorous at Court, upon
any Complaint of the Hollanders, whose ships and goods are suddenly restored
right or wrong, although they refuse to appear for the Heirs and Executors of
Ia. Pergens of Amsterdam, and Pet: Boudaen of Middleburgh, who have got into
their hands and Possessions the Effects of Sir W. Courtens, and Sir Paul
Pindars Estates to the value of 138000l. owing upon Accounts of Bills of
Exchange, Moneys lent upon Obligations, and Goods exported out of England in
Trade of Partners-ship, wherein diverse great sums of Money were taken up at
Interest* and employed in that Trade, and are still standing out and due to
diverse Orphants and VViddows whose Cries have reached the Heavens, and fallen
down with Inundations upon their Country, for Justice in those Civil matters,
wherein the States of Holland and Zealand protects the Persons and Estates of
the Heirs and Executors of the said Pergens and Boudaen from common Justice,
under the Pretense of Treaties of Peace and common Alliance between the King
and the States General, although they never came under the Consideration of any
public Treaty, as the spoils and depredations of the Ships Bona Esperanza an
Bona Adventura did. And that which cannot be mentioned without Grief and
Astonishment, is that the Complaints of the oppressed Creditors concerning the
civil Causes of Actions depending in Holland and Zealand against Pergens and
Boudaen leys before the Secretaries and principal ministers of State at
Whitehall for relief, without any effectual Answer, although earnestly
solicited for many years together. Dormiat aliquando jus sed moritur nunquam.


Recollected by Th. Smith, Genesis
June 16th. 1682.
A Copy of the Affidavit, made by Mr Conny and Mr Peisley, filed in Chancery,
concerning the Entry of the Ships in the Admiralty, hereunto annexed.
IN pursuance of an Agreement in Writing Indented, made the Twelveth day of
May; one Thousand six Hundred sixty six, and in the Eighteenth year of the
Reign of Our Sovereign Lord Charles the second; Between George Carew, Esquire
Administrator of the Goods and Chattels, Rights, Debts and Credits of Sir
William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar Knights, (With their Wills annexed)
Deceased of the one part; And John Graham of Westminster, Esquire and John Brown of
London Gent. of the other part, on the behalf of several Creditors in the
Schedule to the said Indenture annexed.

These five Ships, with their Tackle, Ammunition, Provisions and Men, are
Nominated and Appointed to be entered in the Admiralty, in Prosecution of
certain Letters Patents for Reprisals in the said Indenture mentioned, and
thereunto Annexed to put the same in Execution, from time to time, according to
this entry, and the Proviso's and Limitations in the said Letters Patents
contained, until the Debt of One Hundred Fifty One Thousand Six Hundred Twelve
Pounds, with all Costs and Damages shall be Recovered and Received, or a
Composi^ion made for the same, as in the said Letters Patents is mentioned and
expressed.

The Ship named the Planter, of the Burden of twenty Tuns or thereabouts, four
Guns, twenty five Men, Victualled for six Months, Aaron Wright Commander, to
put the said Commission or Deputation in Execution, from six Months to six
Months, until the Debt of One Hundred Fifty One Thousand Six Hundred and Twelve
Pounds, with all Costs and Damages, shall be Recovered or otherwise Composed.

The Ship named the Asia, burden one Hundred Tuns or thereabouts, Ten Guns,
seventy Men, Captain Roger Hawkshead, Commander, Victualled from time to time
for the space of three Months every season, until the said Debt of One hundred,
fifty one thousand six hundred and twelve Pounds, with Costs and Damages
mentioned in the said Letters Patents, shall be recovered or composed.

The Ship named the William and Thomas, burden one hundred and fifty Tuns or
thereabouts, two hundred Men, twenty five Guns, Victualled for nine Months,
Captain Robert Cambell Commander, and at the Expirations of nine Months, for
nine Monts more; and so at the end of every nine Months to be Victualled de
Novo, from time to time, for nine Months longer, until the said Debt, Damages
and Costs shall be Recovered and Received, or a composition made with the
persons Interested and Injured.

The Ship named the America, burden fourscore Tuns or thereabouts, one hundred
Men, eight Guns Victualled for six Months, Captain William Hawley Commander,
and at the Expiration of the said Term, to Revictual and Equip the said Ship,
from six months to six months, until the said Debt of One Hundred Fifty One
Thousand Six Hundred and Twelve Pounds, with costs and Damages shall be
satisfied and repaid.

The Ship named the Africa, burden one hundred and twenty Tons, or
thereabouts, one hundred and fifty Men, fifteen Guns, Victualled for 12 months,
Captain Thomas VVood Commander, to put the: said Commission in Execution, as
aforesaid, according to the several Conditions, Limitations and Proviso's in
the said Letters Patents, expressly mentioned and contained.

Unto whom Deputations were immediately given accordingly of the same date, to
put the said Letters Patents in Execution at such times and in such parts of
the World as they should think most convenient for their Purpose.

THomas Conny, and Samuel Peisly of London Gentlemen, make Oath, That they
these Deponents, did in Company with George Carew, Esquire on the ninth of
September, 1681. at the request of several persons Interested and Concerned in
the Debt of 151612 l. mentioned in the Letters Patents within Recited; call
upon Thomas Bedford, Esquire Register of the Admiralty Court, at his Office in
Doctors-Commons, and then and there require of him to make an entry of the five
Ships with the number of their Men, Guns, Provisions, Burdens, Commanders
Names, and times of Victualling, as they are mentioned and expressed on the
other side of this Affidavit. whereupon the said Thomas Bedford, desired these
Deponents to come again the next Morning, and appear with him, before Sir
Richard Lloyd, Surrogate to the Judge of the said Court, who took the same in
his Hand, and after he had perused the Contents thereof, gave these Deponents
the said Paper again, in Company of the said George Carew. Saying they would
not make any other entry, then several Notes they had taken in Writing, and the
Names of these Deponents.

Jurat 10. die Octobris Anno Regni Dom nri. Car. sec. 33o. Coram me magro in
Canc'. Io. Francklin. Ex. W. Poynter. Tho. Conny. Samuel Peisly.



A COPY of the LETTERS PATENT For Especial Reprisals granted by the King of
Great Britain, (under the Great Seal of ENGLAND) against the States General,
and their Subjects, for 151612 l. Sterling, with Costs and Damages for the
Recoverie thereof.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Christian People to whom these
Presents shall come, Greeting. Whereas our loving Subject William Courten Esquire
deceased, and his Partners, in the year 1643. by the Depredation and Hostile
Act of one Geland, Commander in Chief of two Ships belonging to the East India
Company of the Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao in the Streights of
Malacca, deprived and most injuriously spoiled of a certain Ship named the Bona
Esperanza, and of her Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, and all the Goods and
Lading in her, upon a very hopeful Trading Voyage to China, which were carried
to Batavia, and there all de facto, without due Process of Law confiscated: and
that also in the said year, another laden Ship of our said Subject, called the
Henry Bona Adventura, being come on ground on the Island Mauritius, was there
both Ship and Goods seized upon by some of the Officers and Ministers, and
others under the Command of the said East India Company, and utterly detained
from the right Owners. And whereas the said William Courten, and his Assigns in
his lifetime, used all possible Endeavors to recover the said Ships and
Goods, and to procure further Justice against the Malefactors, and yet could
obtain no Restitution or Satisfaction, whereby they became to be much
distressed and utterly undone in their Estate and Credit: and that thereupon,
and upon the most humble Supplication and Addresses of Francis Earl of
Shrewsbury, and William Courten Esquire Son and Heir of the said William deceased,
Sir John Ayton, and Sir Edmond Turnor Knights, George Carew and Charles
Whitaker Esquires, on the behalf of themselves and diverse others Interessed in
the said two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura, and in the Estates
of the said William Courten deceased, Sir Edward Littleton Baront and Sir Paul
Pyndar Knight deceased, That We would take their Case into Our Princely
consideration. We out of the just sense We then had, and still have of their
unjust* Sufferings in that Business, both by Our own Letters under our Sign
Manual to the States General of the United Provinces, and by Sir George Downing
Knight and Bart. Our Envoy Extraordinary, to whom We gave Especial Command so
to do, required satisfaction to be made according to the Rules of Justice and
the Amity and good Correspondence, which We then desired to conserve with them
firm, and inviolable: And whereas after several Addresses made to the (...)
States General by our said Envoy, and nothing granted effectual for Relief of
Our said Subjects (whom We take Ourselves in (...) and Justice, concerned to be
satisfied and repaired) We lately commanded the said Sir George Downing to
intimate and signify to the said States, That We (...) their (...) Answer,
concerning Satisfaction to be made for the said Ships and Goods by a time then
prefixed, and since elapsed, That we might to govern Our selves thereupon, that
Our aforesaid Subjects might be relieved according to Right and Justice: And
yet no Satisfactory Answer has been given, so that We cannot but apprehend it
to be not only a fruitless Endeavor, but a prostituting of Our Honor and
Dignity, to make further Application, after so many Denyals and Slightings. And
whereas John Exton, Doctor of Laws, Judge of Our High Court of Admiralty of
England, upon Our Command, to certify to Us the Da^ie of the Losses and
Damages Instaine* by the said William Courten and Partners, whose Interest is
now vested in our loving Subjects, Sir Edmond Turnor Knight and George Carew
Esquire and Partners, has upon full Examination and Proofs thereof made by
Witnesses in Our High Court of Admiralty, Reported and certified under his
Hand, That the same do amount to the sum of One hundred fifty one Thousand six
hundred and twelve Pounds.

Now know Ye, That for a full Restitution to be made to them for their Ships,
Goods and Merchandises, of which the said William Courten, and the Assigns of
the said William Courten, and Partners, were so despoiled, as aforesaid, with
all such Costs and Charges; as they shall be at for Recovery of the same: We
by Advice of Our Privy Council have thought fit, and by these Presents do Grant
License and Authority under our Great Seal of England, unto Our said Subjects
Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and on the behalf of themselves, and other persons interessed as
aforesaid, to Equip, Dictual, Furnish, and set to Sea, from time to time, such
and so many Ships and Pinaces as they shalll think fit: Provided always that
there be an Entry made and Recorded in the Admiralty Court of the Names of all
ships and Vessels, and of their Burden and Ammunition, and for how long time
they are Victualed: and also of the Name of the Commander thereof, before the
same, or any of them be set forth to sea: and with the said ships and Pinaces
by force of Arms to set upon, take and apprehend any of the ships, Goods,
Moneys and Merchandises of the said States General; or any of their subjects
inhabiting within any their Dominions or Territories whatsoever, of any
particular Estate within those Provinces, and the Inhabitants thereof;
wheresoever the same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbor of England,
and Ireland, unless it be the ships and Goods of the Parties that did the
Wrong: and the said ships, goods, Moneys and Merchandises being so taken and
brought into some Port of Our Realm or Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be
taken by Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and judgment shall be given in
Our Court of Admiralty by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being and
upon Proof made before him or them, That the same ships, Goods, Wares,
Merchandises or Money, did belong to the States General, or any of their
subjects, as aforesaid, That they shall be lawful Prize to the said Sir Edmond
Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as
aforesaid, to keep and retain in their or any of their Possessions, and to make
sale, and dispose thereof in open Market, or howsoever else, to their and every
of their best advantage and benefit; in as ample manner, as at any time
heretofore has been accustomed by way of Reprisal, and to have and enjoy the
same as lawful Prize, and as their own proper Goods: so that neither the
Captain, Master nor any of the Company that shall serve in his own person, or
shall promote and advance the said Enterprise in manner and form aforesaid,
shall in any manner of wise be reputed or challenged for any Offender against
any of Our Laws. And that also it shall be lawful for all manner of Persons, as
well Our Subjects as any other, to buy the said Ships, Goods and Merchandises
so taken, and apprehended by the said Captains, Masters and others, and
adjudged, as aforesaid, without any Damage, Loss, Hindrance, Trouble,
Molestation, or Encumbrance, to befall the said Buyers, or any of them, in as
ample and lawful manner, as if the said Ships, Goods, Wares and Merchandise had
been come and gotten by the lawful Traffic of Merchants, or of just Prizes in
time of open War. Provided always, That all ships, goods and merchandises,
taken by Virtue of this Our Commission shall be kept in safety, and no part of
them spoiled, wasted or diminished; nor the Bulk thereof broken, until
Judgment have first past, as aforesaid, That they are the ships and
Merchandises of the States General, or some of their subjects, as aforesaid.
And if by Color of this Our Commission, there shall be taken any ships, Goods
or Merchandises of any of Our loving subjects, or the subjects of any Prince,
or State in good League, or Amity with Us (except the States General) or their
subjects, as aforesaid: and the Goods therein Laden, sold, embezled or ^^^^^ed,
or the Bulk thereof broken in any place, before they shall be adjudged to
belong to the said States General, or to some of their subjects, as aforesaid,
That then this Commission shall be of no sufficient Authority to take the said
ships Goods and Merchandises, or to Warrant, and save harmless such as shall
Receive, Buy or Intermeddle therein but that both the Prizes so taken, and the
said ship of War, shall be confiscated to Our Use. And further, We do hereby
declare, That it is Our Will and Pleasure, That this Our Commission shall
remain in full Force and Power, to all Intents and Purposes until the said Sir
Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as
aforesaid, shall by Virtue thereof have by Force of Arms Apprehended, Taken,
Seized, Recovered and Received from the said States General, or their Subjects,
One hundred fifty one Thousand six hundred and twelve pounds, according to
Appraisement to be made by sufficient Appraisers upon Oath, Nominated and
Authorized in our said Court of Admiralty, of all such Ships, Goods, Wares and
Merchandises, as shall be taken from the said States General, or any of their
Subjects, by Virtue of this Commission, or shall otherwise receive Satisfaction
of the Debt aforesaid, by Composition to be made between those of the East
India Company of the Netherlands, and the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George
Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid.
Notwithstanding it may so happen, the present Difference between Us, and the
States General depending upon General Reprisals, may be agreed and composed,
and that in the Interim a Peace and good Correspondance may be renewed between
Us, and the said States General: In which Case, Nevertheless, it is Our Will
and Pleasure, That in the Execution of this Our Commission, no Violence shall
be done to the Persons of the said Subjects of the States General, but only in
Case of Resistance; and that after, in cold Blood, the said Subjects of the
said States General, if hurt or Wounded, shall be used with all convenient
Office of Humanity and Kindness. And Further, Our Will and Pleasure is, That
although it shall happen, That all Hostility between Us and the States General,
and Our respective Subjects shall cease, yet this Our Commission shall remain,
and be in full Force and Power, to the said Sr Edmond Turnor and George Carew,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as aforesaid, by Virtue thereof to
apprehend, take and seize by Force of Arms, so many more of the said Ships and
Goods of the said States General, or any of their said Subjects, as besides the
said Sum before mentioned shall countervail, satisfy and pay all such Costs
and Charges as the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, as aforesaid, shall from time to time make proof to
have disburst and paid toward the Equipping, Manning, Paying, Furnishing and
Victualing of the said Ships, so licensed and authorized, as aforesaid, by this
our said Commission, to be Equipped, Manned, Paid, Furnished or Victualed by
the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, as aforesaid, for the Purpose aforesaid. And Our Will and Pleasure
is, and We do hereby require Our Judge or Judges of Our High Court of
Admiralty, for the time being, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all
other our Judge or Judges, Officers, Ministers and subjects whatsoever, to be
aiding and assisting to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, in all points in the due
Execution of this Our Royal Commission, and to proceed to Adjudication, and to
adjudge all ships, Merchandises, Moneys and Goods by Virtue thereof to be taken
and proved to belong to the said States General or any of their subjects, to be
Lawful Prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, as aforesaid, according to Our Princely Intention,
hereby signified and expressed, and to take Care that this Our Royal
Commission be duly executed, and favorably Interpreted and Construed in all
respects, to the Benefit and best Advantage of the said Sir Edmond Turnor and
George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as aforesaid. In
Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents. Witness
Our self at Westminster the 19 day of May, in the 17 Year of Our Reign.

Per ipsum Regem. Barker.

Nota, That there is due to the Estates of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul
Pindar the Sum of Two hundred Thousand Pounds sterling and upwards from the
Crown of Enland, for Moneys lent to the late King upon several Branches of the
Revenue, before the year 1640. toward the ordinary Charge of the Crown, the
greatest part of the said Money being taken up at Interest, and still standing
out, and due to several Orphants and Widows who claim their proportionable
Shares of the Debt and Damages mentioned in the Letters Patents aforesaid.

Memorandum.
THat King Charles the First, found it necessary to put Sir William Courten,
and his Partners, upon Trading Voyages to the East Indies, China and Japan,
unto whom he gave a Charter under the great Seal of England, for the
prosecution thereof in the Year 1635.

That his said Majesty encouraged Sir Paul Pindar, and others, to advance
diverse great Sums of Money, as Adventurers in that Expedition and Enterprise.

That Sir Edward Littleton, and others Interessed before the Kings most happy
Restoration (being under the Notion of Delinquents and Sequestration) durst not
appear openly against the States and their Subjects for Common Justice,
concerning satisfaction and reparation for the Spoils and Depredations.

That Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pindar, strained their Credits so far by
borrowing several great Sums of Money, both of Natives and Strangers to carry
on this affair, That there is not a County nor Corporation in England; Wherein
there are not either Original Creditors, or their Relations at this time
Complaining for their Debts.

It is inconsistent with the Honor and Interest of the King, and Kingdom,
(under all the Circumstances attending this Case) to let the History of such
Oppression remain upon Record, when the Creditors have made their humble
Proposals to his Majesty, that Lies before the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury, and Mr. Secretary Jenkins for relief upon easy Terms, even out of
the Foundations that Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pindar laid.

The Royal Word of a KING being past, and confirmed under his Great Seal, That
his Grant should not be Obliterated, until Satisfaction and Reparation to the
Grantees in this Case; there ought to be an Inquiry made, Whether the Parties
Grieved be Satisfied and Repaired, and also that they may be duly heard, before
this Grant be any ways called in, by Ministers or Officers of State, to be
Cancelled and made Null. It being repugnant to the Laws of God, the Laws of
Nature, the Statutes of this Realm, and even against the Laws of Common
Humanity, that a particular Interest (so ascertained and secured) should be
taken away from Private persons for a Common Good, and not be Satisfied and
Repaired, either out of the Public Purse, or suffered to Reprise their
Satisfaction and Reparation, for the Wrongs and Injuries done them, by the
Subjects of Holland and Zealand, without the Danger of being Hanged as Pirates
and Felons, for asking their OWN.

Three Humble Proposals of the Creditors of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul
Pyndar, William Courten Esquire and David Goubard; Humbly offered to the KING.
That in consideration of the Debt and Damages of 151612 l. contraded by the
Spoils and Depredations upon the Ships, Goods, and Factories of Sir William
Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar, and their partners, in the East Indies; for which
Letters Patents for Reprizals were granted under the Great Seal of England, to
continue effectual in the Law, until the said sum of 151612 l. with Costs and
Damages, should be recovered and received; which is become a Debt incumbent
upon the Crown, if his Majesty undertakes to Indempnifie and discharge the
States General and their Subjects concerning the same.

I. It is therefore humbly proposed, That His Majesty should, in lieu thereof,
grant and assign the 4 and per cent, arising out of the Barbados, and the
Careebe Islands, and the wast Lands there, to certain Trustees, for the use and
benefit of William Courten, Grandchild and Heir of Sir William Courten, and
the Creditors of his Father and Grandfather, who were the Original Proprietors
of the Island of Barbados, whereof they were dispoiled by James, late Earl of
Carlisle, and his Adherents; to the insupportable Damages of Sir William
Courten, his Family, and Creditors.

That in Contemplation of Sir Paul Pyndar's great Services and Sufferings for
the Crown of England; and more particularly, for the vast sums of Money lent to
the late King, Charles I, amounting to the sum of One hundred and thirty
thousand Pounds, upon the Allom-Farm, Sugar-Farm, Collectors of the Papists
Compositions in the Northern Counties, and other Branches of the Revenue; which
were diverted in the late troublesome times to other uses, leaving Sir Paul
Pyndar's Assignments unsatisfied, and many of his Creditors undone.

II. It is therefore humbly proposed, That there may be a Privy Seal granted
for Fifty thousand Pounds upon the Reference from His Majesty, that lies before
the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury to be raised out of the said Papists
Estates (at the instance and Petition of Richard Powel Esquire and Nathaniel Hill
Gent.) upon their old Compositions in the eleven Northern Counties, as they
paid under the Collection of Thomas, Viscount Wentworth, in the year 1638.
which they are willing now to satisfy accordingly.

That whereas there are diverse great Debts and Sums of Money owing, and resting
in the hands and posessions of the Sons, Heirs and Executors of Jacob Pergens
of Amsterdam, and Peter Boudaen of Middleburgh in Zealand, that belongs to the
Estates of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, upon Bills of Exchange,
Obligations for Money lent, and private Contracts in Trade and Merchandising,
amounting to the sum of One hundred and twenty thousand Pounds, and upwards:
Whereupon there are Actions depending in the ordinary Courts of Judicature in
Holland and Zealand, ready for Sentences, and final Decrees; wherein Justice is
positively denied, upon vain pretenses of extinguishments and mortifications by
Treaties of common Amity and Alliance.

III. It is most humbly proposed, That His Majesty would be graciously pleased
effectually to recommend the Petition of the Creditors, that lies before the
Lord Conaway to that purpose, for speedy satisfaction to be made therein, for
relief of His most Oppressed Subjects.

POSTSCRIPT.
KInd Reader, before you come to peruse the Answer to the Lord Chancellor's
Arguments, when his Lordship gave that hasty Judgment for the King, upon the
Scire facias, and Pleadings relating to the Letters Patents for Reprizals,
without hearing Counsel of the other side: It Is necessary that you should first
read the Abstract of the Scire facias, brought by Sir Robert Sawyer, His
Majesty's Attorney General, and the Plea thereunto: The Demurrer, and Rejoinder
thereupon, being things of form and course, to bring the whole matter in Issue,
are omitted herein, for Brevity-sake. The Plea being filed in Easter-Term 1681.
lay dormant until Easter-Term 1682. Then the Demurrer was brought in generally
that the Plea was not sufficient in Law, etc. Whereupon the Defendents
persisting in their Rejoinder that it was, the Record was made up and read in
Court accordingly

An Abstract of the Scire facias (returned into the Pety-Bag-Office) rendered
out of Latin into English
CHARLES the second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, etc. To the Sheriff of Middlesex, greeting. Whereas by our
Letters Parents under Our Great Seal, dated the 29th of May, in the 17th year
of Our Reign, for restitution to be made to Charles then Earl of Shrewsbury,
and others, for certain Ships, Goods and Merchandises therein mentioned, that
were unjustly taken and detained from them by the Subjects of the
States General of the United Provinces: We gave License and Authority to Sir
Edmond Turnor Knight, and George Carew Esquire their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, on the behalf of themselves and others to set forth several Ships and
Pinnace's to Sea, from time to time to take and seize the Ships, Goods and
Merchandises of the said States, and their Subjects; and to detain and keep the
same, as lawful Prize, until the said Turnor and Carew shall have recovered the
Money in the saeid Letters Patents mentioned, with their Costs and Damages, as
by the said Letters Patents (with the special Clauses and Provisoes therein
contained) may appear; With this, that by Articles of Peace and Amity between
Us and the said States General at Breda, July 21. 1667. in the 19th year of Our
Reign, and ratified under Our Great Seal Aug. 24. following: It was agreed and
concluded, that all Letters of Reprizals, Marque, and Counter-marque, general
and special, should be inhibited and revoked; so that the Subjects of either
Party should not exercise any Hostility or Violence afterward, upon any
pretext or color whatsoever; And by other Articles of Peace and Amity between
Us and the said States, concluded at Westminster, Febr. 9. in the 26th. year of
Our Reign, and ratified under Our Great Seal on the 28th. of the same month,
and proclaimed accordingly, that the Treaty made at Breda was renewed and
confirmed; And that further by Our Letters Patents, dated June 6. in the 32d.
year of Our Reign, We had superseded, revoked and made null and void the said
Letters Patents, bearing date May 19. in the 17th. year of Our Reign, as
aforesaid; And that all and every the Powers, Authorities, Clauses,
Commissions, Grants and Licenses in the said Letters Patents confirmed to the
said Turnor and Carew, were thereby made null and void, and of no effect in the
Law. Wherefore, to the end that the Treaties of Peace and Amity between Us and
the States, might be kept firm, and that a further remedy might be provided for
that purpose: We command you, by good and lawful men of your Bailywick, to
summon the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew to be and appear before Us,
in Our High-Court of Chancery 15 days after Easter, to show cause, if they can,
why the Letters Patents aforesaid should not be brought into Chancery, and the
Enrollment thereof cancelled, and made null, and void. Witness Our Self at
Westminster, the 12th. day of February, in the 33d. year of Our Reign.

By virtue of which Writ, the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew being
summoned, and the said Writ returned by Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish,
Esqs; Sheriffs, they appeared and pleaded in Easter-Term accordingly, as
follows.

An Abstract of the Plea filed in the Pety-Bag-Office, in Easter-Term, 1681.
THe aforesaid Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, by Matthew Pyndar Esquire their
Attorney, comes and defends the force and injury, etc. craving Oyer of the
Letters Patents, and pleaded the same in haec verba; Charles II. by the Grace
of God, etc. which being read, they said, that the Letters Patents ought not to
be brought into Chancery, nor the Enrollment thereof obliterated, and made null
or void; because King Charles I. by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England, in the year 1635 gave Sir William Courten and his Partners a Charter
to Trade and settle Factories in the East Indies, China and Iapan, for Trading
Voyages; and renewed the same to William Courten, Son and Heir of Sir William,
and his Partners. And that Sir Paul Pyndar had furnished Sir William Courten
with Thirty five thousand Pounds, toward the first enterprise of that Trade.
And that the said William Courten the Son, and his Partners, had set forth the
two Ships named the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura, (in* the Patent
for Reprizals mentioned) in the year 1641. with Moneys, Goods and Merchandises,
for supply of the said Factories and Trade; whereof seven parts belonged to
Courten, and the 8th. part to his Partners. And that William Courten the Son,
by his Indenture, dated 26 April 1642. had transferred and assigned his
Interest in the said Ships and Merchandises to Sir Edward Littleton, in the
County of Stafford, Baronet, for Counter-security against several Debts
contracted by Sir Will. Courten and his Son wherein he stood obliged for payment
thereof* And that Sir Edward Littleton, jointly with Will* Courten the Son, had
by their Indenture dated December. 19. 1642. transferred and assigned all their
Interest in the said Ships, Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura, to Sir
Paul Pyndar, toward his Debt, and the surplus to the Creditors of. Courten and
Littleton. And the said Turnor and Carew further say, that the Officers of the
East-India-Company of the Netherlands in the year 1643. unjustly seized and
detained the said two Ships and Lading, and converted the same to their own
use, without any legal Process, contrary to the Laws of Nations, and the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm; which was proved by the Testimonies of several
Witnesses in due form of Law taken. And that the said East-India-Company, and
the States of the Netherlands, had altogether denied to make any satisfaction
or reparation to the said Proprietors for the said Spoils and Depredations.
Afterward, Will. Courten Esquire the Son and Executor of Sir Will. Courten, died
Intestate, in the year 1655. And William Tooms, Executor of Sir Paul Pyndar, in
the same year also died Intestate; And that Letters of Administration of the
Goods and Chattels of Sir Paul Pyndar, with his Will annexed unadministred, was
in due form of Law granted to Sir William Powel Baronet; and Letters of
Administration of the Goods and Chattels of Sir Will. Courten, with his Will
annexed, unadministred, was likewise in due form of Law, granted to the said
George Carew, who (bona fide) paid and satisfied the said Sir Will. Powel, John
Whitfield, Esquire, and others, the sum of 3000 l. sterling, in satisfaction of
their Debts, upon account of Sir Paul Pyndar, out of the said Carew's proper
Money; whereupon Sir Will. Powel by agreement having relinquished the
Administration, Letters of Administration, with Sir Paul Pyndar's Will annexed,
was in due form of Law granted to the said George Carew. Then the said Francis
Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir John Ayton, and others, humbly supplicated His Majesty,
on the behalf of themselves and others interessed, to require the
States General to make satisfaction and reparation for the said Spoils and
Depredations, as in the said Letters Patents at large appears; but no
restitution or reparation could be obtained; Whereupon the said Letters Patents
were granted for the recovery of 151612 l. with Costs and Damages, under those
conditions and limitations therein expressed. And the said Turnor and Carew
further say, that they are entitled, and legally vested with an Interest, and
inviolable right to recover and receive the said Money, according to the Laws
of Nations, and the Laws and Statutes of England, and the very express grants
and intentions in the Letters Patents contained accordingly; notwithstanding
any War or Wars, or the supposed Treaty at Breda, or any other Treaties
whatsoever, between His Majesty and the States General; or the pretended
Supersedeas in the Scire facias mentioned. The said Turnor and Carew* in fact
saying, that they, or either of them, or any claiming under them, or either of
them, have not to this day received, taken or seized from the States General,
or their Subjects, or the East-India-Company of the Netherlands, the said sum
of 151612 l. or any part thereof, or any part of the 800000 Pattacoons,
mentioned in the 10th. Article of the last Treaty at Westminister, mentioned in
the said Scire-facias; or half the Charges and Expenses occasioned thereby.
Wherefore, the Letters Patents ought not to be brought into Chancery, or the
enrollment thereof cancelled, or made null and void; for that the King was not
deceived in His Grant.

Signed by Richard Wallap, Edmond Saunders, John Summers. Richard Powell,
Charles Molloy,


THe Record being made up, and brought into Court on the 26th. of May 1682. the
Attorney General and the Solicitor both moved for Judgment without any other
Argument for it, than pretended. Reason of State. Whereupon the Council for the
Defendants moved, that it was against the practice of all Courts in
Westminster Hall, to argue the same. Term the Record was brought in, or without
a Consillium, and a convenient time appointed to study and argue the points in
Issue; especially in a matter of this weight and consequence, being a noble
Case to be debated and argued, both in point of Law and State; and therefore
desired a longer day; whereupon the Lord Chancellor stood up, and said, If they
were not ready to argue, he was ready to give Judgment; and that they might
argue by the Spirit, if they would. So his Lordship informing the Court that he
had studied the Case himself; And for the satisfaction of all mankind (as he
said) gave these Arguments following, which were taken in writing by several
Counselors at Bar.

The Lord Chancellor's Arguments.
THe Statute of 31 H. 6. cap. 4. gives Admiral Jurisdiction to the Court of
Chancery for speedy relief in cases where strangers are robbed at Sea by the
King's Subjects.

And that, after a Peace concluded, Letters of Marque (for Reason of State) are
totally extinguished.

These Letters Patents, especially being granted when this Kingdom and the
Hollanders were in a state of Enmity, (they appearing to bear date the 19th. of
May, 1665. in the heat of the War) are therefore disannulled by the subsequent
Peace.

A Safe Conduct granted by the King, supersedes Letters of Marque, as appears,
11 H. 4. N. 66. by Judgment of the Parliament of Paris, and the Parliament of
Montpellier, 2 H. 5. N. 34.

A Truce between Nations that have been at Enmity, supersedes Letters of
Marque, as appears, 11 H. 6. N. 34. Parl. Rot.

A fortiori, A Peace, after Proclamation thereof, and a Supersedea sunder the
Great Seal, will abolish and extinguish Letters of Marque; and that for the
Reason aforesaid; The King having the Power of Peace and War.

Mr. Carew cannot be a good Subject, to involve the Public, by executing
these Letters of Marque in times of Peace; who (as I am informed) had 30 Ships
out in time of War.

And the Clauses contained in the Patent, that no Peace shall extend to the
prejudice of the said Letters Patents, before satisfaction, was a Clause
unusual, and incerted by surprise, and ought not to have been, and is in no
sort obligatory.

Wherefore, I give Judgment, That the Letters Patents shall be brought into
Court, to be cancelled, and the Enrollment thereof razed.

The Argument turns upon his Lordship; the King being sole Legislator of Peace
and War. The Clause of continuance in the Patent, has the force of an Act of
Parliament

His Lordship would be both Judge and Party, (and sole Arbiter) if a Writ of
Error did not lie in the King's Bench, and finally in Parliament, to reverse his
Erroneous Judgment.


A Copy of the Order in Chancery.
Veneris, 26 die Maii, Anno Regni Caroli secund' Regis tricesimo quarto. Inter
Dom' Regem Quer', Edmund' Turnor Mil' and Georg' Carew Ar' Defend'.
Lord Chancellor.
THe Record of the Demurrer joined in the Pety-Bag upon a Scire facias brought
by Mr. Attorney General on the behalf of His Majesty, for revoking certain
Letters of Reprizal granted to the Defendents the 19th. of May 1665. coming
this present day to be argued before the Right Honorable the Lord
High-Chancellor of England, by virtue of an Order of the 20th. instant, at
which time the Record was read: The Defendents Council desired longer time;
But, upon hearing of Mr. Attorney General on the behalf of the King, his
Lordship declared, that the matter in debate did concern the Public, and could
not admit of any further day to be given to the Defendents. And his Lordship
having been attended with the Record, and duly considered the whole matter, is
of opinion, and does order, That the said Demurrer do stand, and that Judgment
be entered up for the King, for the revoking the said Letters Patents; and does
further order, That the Enrollment thereof be vacated upon Record, and that the
Defendants do forthwith bring into this Court the said Letters Patents, and all
Exemplifications and Duplicates thereof, under Seal to be cancelled.

Ex. Per George Edwards, Deput' Register.

On the next morning the Lord Chancellor was pleased in open Court to give
order, that the Attorney General should be careful in drawing up the Judgment;
and that the Clerk of the Pety-Bag should enter it upon the Roll, and
exemplify the whole Record, under the Great Seal, and send it to the
Admiralty-Court, to remain there.

It may be observed, That the Scire facias being returned in Easter-Term 1681.
and the Plea filed of the same Term, and the Demurrer coming in not before
Easter Term last: the Attorney General had a whole year to consider of the said
Plea, which is admitted as to the matters of Fact in all particulars by the
said Demurrer, and since sworn to be true by one of the Defendants: So that the
Attorney General making no Reply, insisted only upon the Law. The Questions
therefore that do naturally arise upon it, are, Whether the Scire facias be a
Legal and warrantable Writ in this Case for the Lord Chancellor to ground his
Judgment upon, for repealing the Letters Patents, (without satisfaction) so
solemnly obtained under the Great Seal of England, according to the Laws of the
Land? or, Whether the Plea be not sufficient in Law to support and maintain the
Letters Patents, until the Debt and Damages be recovered?

BUt before we come to answer the Lord Chancellor's Arguments, it is absolutely
necessary to speak a word or two concerning the Scire facias, and the Order
entered by the Register, that the Defendents should bring the Letters Patents,
and all Exemplifications and Duplicates thereof, under Seal into Court, to be
cancelled.

It Is recited in the Record made up, pro restitut' faciend' Carolo tunc Comiti
Salop, and al' in eisdem Literis Patent' etc. whereas there is no such Patent
as is mentioned in the Scire facias. Notwithstanding, it is affirmed in the said
Order of the 26th. of May 1682. That his Lordship had been attended with the
Record, and duly considered the whole matter; and yet in the second Line of the
said Record it is written, Carolo tunc Comitis Salop; whereas in the Letters
Patents for Reprizals it is mentioned for restitution to be made to Francis Earl
of Shrewsbury, and others; So that the Foundation being bad, the Structure must
fall to the Ground: there being no such Patent as the Scire fas' recites.
Whereupon a Distringas is since issued forth to the Sheriff of Mid. to distrain
all the Lands and Tenements of George Carew within his Bayliwick, until the
said Patent, Exemplifications and Duplicates thereof, under Seal, be brought
into Court, and cancelled; which is impossible for him to do, being out of his
power; the said Duplicates and Exemplifications being in the hands of several
Persons beyond the Seas, with Assignments and Covenants that they shall
continue effectual in Law, until the Debt of 151612 l. with Damages, shall be
recovered and received, according to the words of the Grant, and the King's
Declaration. Wherefore, it would be both Honorable and Just for any Ministers
of State in England or Holland, to bring the Scire facias in one hand, and
Money to satisfy the Debt and Damages in the other; And without that Quid pro
quo, (under his Lordship's favor) the Patent cannot be legally revoked,
repealed, or made void.

Yet for satisfaction of all Mankind, that the Defendents will abide by their
Plea, they have retained their Council to give modest Answers to the Lord
Chancellor's Arguments, as follows; who holds it convenient to begin at the
root, where his Lordship ended.

That the Clause of continuance was unusual, and incerted by surprise, and
ought not to have been, and is in no sort obligatory.
1. The stipulation for extinguishing all other Losses and Damages by the
Treaty 1662. from the like Sovereign Remedies. 2. The States denial of making
satisfaction for the Spoils and Depredations of those two Ships, according to
the said stipulation. 3. The Services and Sufferings of Courten and Pyndar for
the Crown of England, so eminently known to all Parts of the World 4. And the
great Supplies given to His Majesty in Parliament, for the Protection of His
Subjects at the very time the said Patent for Reprizals was passing through Sir
Heneage Finch's Office, when he was Solicitor-General, (upon the Negotiation of
Mr. Gilbort Crouch) were four invincible Arguments for the King to pass this
Grant of common Right, to his Subjects, with those two Clauses of a continuando
until the Debt 151612 l. wi^h Costs and Damages, should be recovered and
received; the King having declared so much in his Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, and expressed in the very body of the Patent, (in these words) For
relief of Our said Subjects, whom We take Our selves in Honor and Justice
concernd to be satisfied and re-paid So that the King declares Himself equally
Great and Just. Therefore, neither surprised nor deceived in this Grant of
Reprizals, that had passed the Test of all the chief Officers of State and
Trust in the Kingdom, whose Judgments are Arraigned, by questioning the
validity of the said Grant.

The reasons are very obvious to all Mankind, that the Patent ought to be so
worded, until the Debt and Damages shall be recovered and received; for that
there is no other remedy for the Subjects relief, but such Grants, grounded
upon the Law of Marque, after Justice denied in the Case of a Spoil.

This Clause of continuance distinguishes between general and particular
Reprizals; the one being an Act of War, the other a Process at Law, and out of
the King's Power to obstruct the restitution of this Debt and Damages to the
persons interessed, and injured otherwise the remedy would prove a Grievance,
after such vast Expenses in ascertaining the Debt and Damages according to the
Rules of Law, if the Grant should not be obligatory.

It is in the Power of the States of Holland, or the King, to satisfy this
Debt and Damages, to make good the King's own words, and preserve His Honor
and Justice entire, which ought to be kept Sacred and Inviolable; And if the
King cannot pardon the least Trespass, when sued for reparation in the ordinary
Course of Law: a fortiori, He cannot pardon a Spoil after a Judicial Grant to
recover it according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

General Letters of Marque, in time of War, are ambulatory, and revokable at
Pleasure, being usually granted to all persons in all Nations that will ask for
the same, to weaken the Enemy; as they did at Oast-End, Dunkirk, Flushen and
Diep, in the times of War between Spain and England, France and England, and
Holland and England; and those are called Privatters, or Private men of War, of
whom the Lord High-Admiral has a tenth part of all Prizes; And these are the
Letters of Marque* the Lord Chancellor so often mentions in his Arguments;
whereof there are hundreds of Precedents in the Courts of Admiralty in England,
Holland, France and Spain; which are Temporary Grants, and determinable at
Pleasure, or certain days prefixed under the Seal of the Admiralty.

By the sacred prescriptions in Holy Writ, restitution is to be made double the
value of the property injuriously taken, which implies the Charge of
Prosecution; and if the Trespasser, be not able to satisfy, he shall be Sold
for his Theft, or kept for a Ransom: Upon this ground the old Writs in the
Register, and F. N. B were made, and our Ancestors were so careful for the
preservation of every English-mans Right and Property, and the encouragement of
Navigation and Commerce; That Merchants Strangers resident in England, and
their Goods were Arrested by those Writs, for satisfaction of Injuries done at
Sea by the People of that Kingdom or Nation, that did the wrong, whereof they
were Subjects.

But upon the Petition of the Merchants, Staplers, and others to the
Parliament, in the 27th. of Edw. 3. c. 17. The force of those Writs were taken
away, and it was ordained and Enacted by the same Parliament, That all Persons
Spoiled at Sea, shall have the Law of Marque, without fraud or deceit, that is
of taking the value of the Loss and Damage again.

Bracton Says, Quod nihil aliud potest Rex in terris cum sit Minister Dei, and
Vicarius; quam solum quod de jure potest. Every Man has a Right to Justice;
and every Subject of England having a Fundamental property in his Goods, and a
Fundamental liberty of his Person. It is repugnant to the Laws of God, Religion
and Property, to take away our Goods (for reason of State) without price or
satisfaction: he is not a Subject, but a Slave that suffers his Substance to be
taken from him against his Will Infinite are the Arguments that may be used,
and deduced from the Law of Reason and Natural Justice, in the vindication of
this Patent: However, its neccessary to answer the Lord Chancellor Gradatim to
his Arguments, aforesaid,

His Lordship was pleased to say, That the Chancery had an Admiral
Jurisdiction, by the Statute 31. Hen. 6. cap. 4. for the speedy relief of
Strangers Robbed at Sea, by the Kings Subjects.
His Lordship would here beg the question, and have all Mankind to take it for
granted, That those who Act under this His Majesty's Royal Charter and
Authority, are Robbers and Thieves: Notwithstanding the express words in the
Patent, That it shall be lawful for them to recover the said Debt and Damages,
although a Peace for General Reprizals (concerning the Dominion of the Sea)
should be concluded.

Its true, the said Statute of Hen 6. provides a remedy for those that have
safe Conduct, and are Robbed by the Kings Subjects. The Lord Chancellor
calling to him, any of the Judges of either Bench, who upon Bill of Complaint,
shall cause Restitution to be made of Ships and Goods to the parties grieved.
This Statute may be still in Force, but not practicable, since the Odious and
Arbitrary power of the Admiralty Court was taken away by the Statute of Hen. 8.
in the 28th. year of his Reign, for Trial of Piracy by Jurors, according to the
course of the Common Law. However the Statute of Hen. 6. recited by his
Lordship, comes not to this case upon the Scire Facias.

But its enacted and ordained, by the Statute made in the 20th. year of Hen. 6.
cap. 1: And several other Statutes of this Realm: That all Letters of safe
Conduct, Treaties and Leagues of Amity and Alliance, shall be Enrolled of
Record in Chancery, or else not to be of any Force or Effect in the Law.

And the Treaty at Breda being not Enrolled, or made any matter of Record in
Chancery, whereby the Kings Subjects might have recourse thereunto; cannot any
ways affect this grant to Turnor and Carew: And many proper Officers have lost
their Heads in former ages, for their miscarriages; not inrolling in due time
such public Treaties, Leagues and Alliances.

Its also true as the Lord Chancellor observes, the Letters Patents to Turnor
and Carew, were granted in time of War, (for an injury done to private Persons
in time of peace,) but provided that no Subsequent peace should affect it,
without a recovery or satisfaction to be made for the Debt and Damages: either
by force of the Grant, or Composition made with the Persons interessed. The
Fiat passed in the month of May 1665. But the proceedings that brought it to
that conclusion, continued de die in diem, ever since the Treaty of Alliance,
made in the year 1662. Wherein it was concluded and agreed, That the said Debt
and Damages so assertained and Liquidated should be satisfied and repayed.

Yet admitting this Treaty at Breda concluded upon the surprise of Chattam, had
been duly Enrolled, and made a matter of Record in Chancery: It was afterward
cancelled, disanulled, and openly extinguished by Proclamation, in the year
1672. And particularly signified to His Majesty by a report, upon a reference
to five Lords of the Council Table, concerning the Debt and Damages mentioned
in the Letters Patents aforesaid; In these words, That the States General
having wholly cancelled all past Treaties and Agreements, and left your Majesty
and your Subjects as free in all justice and Equity, as if they never had been
made: We therefore humbly presume to report our Opinions to your Majesty, that
it is now but just and seasonable for your Majesty, to insist upon reparation
for the Debt and Damages aforesaid: This reference was made to the Lord
Arlington, Lord Ashley, Sir Thomas Clifford, Sir John Trevor, and Sir John
Duncomb, by Order of Council 22. of March 1671. Now whether a Treaty never
Enrolled, and afterward Cancelled by Order of Council, and Proclamation should
be properly insisted upon, in any Judicial Writs, is fit for another Court of
Judicature, or Parliament to resolve.

It Is granted, that after a peace concluded, all Temporary Letters of Marque
having a bare Authority in themselves, are for reasons of State totally
Extinguished, in regard those Letters of Marque had not an Authority coupled
with an Interest.

A general Letter of Marque or Reprizal, as before it is said, is an Act of War;
A particular or Especial one is a process at Law, which is our case.

Letters of safe conduct, usually granted to Foreign Ambassadors, and other
Persons: Upon Emergent occasions are in the nature of a Supersedeas to any
Commander (that has a Commission or general Letter of Marque) or Privateer, so
properly called as before; nor shall they be interrupted by any Person that
has a special Commission grounded upon the Law of Marque; and this is
consonant to reason of State, and the Law of Nations.

And it is not denied but that a Truce between Enemies supersedes all Temporary
Letters of Marque, being Acts of War, but not special Letters of Marque or
Reprisals which take their rise from Spoils and Depredations committed in times
of Peace upon particular men or Companies, that becomes a personal injury. And
the reason is plain, for that the Law of Marque and Grants thereupon, are
consistent with times of Peace, and the strictest Amity and Alliance, between
Sovereign Princes and States. Captions thereupon being in the nature of
Seizures in a hundred for a Robbery upon a private person before Sunset, which
comes to a common Average to prevent a failer of Justice.

It Is observed that Sovereign Princes holds the Scepter in one hand and the
Globe in the other. The Sword is carried before them by some Chief Minister of
State, to show that Justice is to be duly Administered by Officers that are
accomptable for their miscarriages; By the Law of England, the King can do no
wrong. He is obliged by Oath to protect His Subjects in their Rights,
Properties and Estates; Therefore His Ministers cannot take them away.

Yet no man of sense will deny, but that the King for a public good may by
due means and ways make void even the Letters Patents, in this case of
Reprisal, that is to say (as it is observed before) with Money in the right hand
of a Lord Treasurer, Dutch Ambassador, or Lord Chancellor, and the Scire-facias
in the left hand, for the Grantees to show cause (the Money being paid) why
they should not bring the Letters Patents into Court to be Canceled.

Treaties of State if they be repugnant to the Law of God, the Law of Reason,
or the Laws and Statutes of England (ipso Facto,) they are void in themselves;
The third Article of the pretended Treaty at Breda, concluded in the year 1667.
after the Surprise at Chatham, says that all Offenses, Injuries, Damages and
Losses sustained on either side by the King or the States, or their Subjects
during this War, or at any time before upon any cause or pretense whatsoever,
should be totally expunged and buried in Oblivion, and all Actions at Law
concerning the same.

Now if any forced Interpretation should be put upon this Article, (so
generally Penned) that all private differences of meum and tuum, between
particular persons of either Nation should be comprehended in this Article,
it is void, because its not in the Power or Prerogative of any Prince to hinder
the due course of Law for a particular debt or personal injury. Admit that a
Hollander were indebted to an Englishman before the Treaty at Breda for goods
Sold or sent to make Sale of, and the Dutchman should plead specially the
Treaty at Breda; in Bar to an Action brought for the Money, it would not hold
good in Law; for that it cannot be any ways intended that particular Debts and
Actions should fall under the considerations of such Offenses, Injuries, Losses
and Damages mentioned in that Article which generally relates to Kings and
States.

As for Mr. Carew, his Plea to the Scire Facias, and Affidavit annexed, speaks
sufficiently for his Justification: Persisting, That no restitution is made for
the 151612 l. or any part thereof; although Sir James Butler and others are
ravishing his Estate from him, upon Fore-closures of Equity, even for Moneys
lent upon account of prosecuting this Cause.

There was never such a president since the Creation, that a particular
Interest and Property so Liquidated and Established for satisfaction and
reparation (under those circumstances) according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm; wherein so many Families are concerned, as the Creditors of Sir
William Courten and his Son, Sir Paul Pynder and Sir Edward Littleton should be
so slighted and contemned

The Lord Chancellor well observed it concerned the public, it is very true it
concerns the public Honor and Interest, the public Justice and Equity of the
Nation, that the Debt and Damages should be satisfied and repayed.

There is no Reason of State that particular persons should Purchase a public
Peace at their own Charge, or that a private Interest should be Sacrificed for
the public good, without satisfaction out of the Public Purse.

The Parliament of Paris, or Monpilier, cannot give Laws to the Parliament of
England, that enacted if any man should be spoiled by French or others at Sea,
in peaceable times they shall have the right and benefit of the Law of Marque
or Reprizals, to recover their Loss, Damages and incident Charges; which by
consent of Nations being once ascertained by a Judicial Act, must have its
Extent, and Execution the end of the Law (Satisfaction.)

And this being agreeable to the Laws of God, the Laws of Nature, the positive
Laws of Nations, and the Laws and Statutes of England, and the King having by
His Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, pursuant thereunto,
commanded and required all Judges of the Admiralty and Officers there for the
time being, to be Aiding and Assisting to Turnor and Carew, their Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and to take care that all things shall be
favorably interpreted, and construed in all respects, to the benefit and best
Advantage of the said Turnor and Carew, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns; Witness himself at Westminster, the Letters were made Patents the
19th. day of May, in the 17th. year of his Reign

Now how the Actions and Proceedings of several Ministers and Officers of the
Admiralty (and other Mercenary Mortals) do quadrare with the Kings Honor and
Justice, (that have Issued out Warrants in the Kings name, to apprehend and
seize the Persons and Goods of his Majesty's Subjects; detain them in Prison
and Irons until they were Tried, as Fellons and Pirates, for duly acting under
his Majesty's Royal Commission and Charter; grounded upon the Laws and Statutes
of England; Whereby they were found innocent and accquitted. Yet afterwars
detained for Exhorbitant and Extrajudicial Fees of Registers and Marshalls of
the Admiralty) is left to any Mankind to Judge.

Conclusion.
THe Commons of England in Parliament in the Preamble of their Acts,
acknowledging their thankefullness to His Majesty, for His abundant care in
their preservation at Sea, and the great charge necessary for the defense
thereof, granted to the King at several times, during the two last short Wars
between England and Holland, the Sum of Five Millions Four Hundred and Forty
Thousand Seven hundred and Fifty Pounds, Eleven Shillings and Eight Pence
Sterling Money; For extraordinary supplies toward the said Wars (whereof His
Royal Highness the Duke of York received 120902 l. 15 s. 8 d. being one Months
Tax, as a present for his Heroic Courage at Sea.) This vast Expense of
Treasure, occasiond by the Hollanders, gave hopes to the Kingdom for greater
returns, than that only Debt of 151612 l. Liquidated and assertained for
satisfaction.

That reason of State was depraved in the Lord Treasurer Danby, who parted with
600000 Pattacons (the price of so much English Blood and Treasure) out of
England to the Prince of Orange, that reaped the benefit of his Ancesters
Offices and Honors by the last War, besides his tributes (as Lord High Admiral
of the seven Provinces) out of 1500 Ships and their Ladings, taken from the
English by the Dutch Capers, (having his general Letters of Marque,) during
that War.

There was no necessity therefore for those great Ministers, H. Finch, C. S.
Latimer, Ormond, Arlington, H. Coventry, and Marquess del Fresno, to suffer the
Debt of 151612. and Damages to remain incumbent upon the King or the States,
when treble the value of that Debt was offered to the English Ambassadors in
the year 1673. at Cologne, besides another Sum of Money in gross for the
Fishries upon the English Coasts, to purchase a separate peace with England.
Diverse Polliticians remarking the English Administrations of State and Justice,
Blushed for several miscariages in our later days; Wherein the due course of
Law has been Obstructed, Strangers and others suffered to eat our Bread, and
have disgested the very Blood of many hundred Orphants and Widows: Some by
Imbeaziling the spoils of Wars, others in detaining our Moneys and Goods; All
men in Office turning deaf Ears to our Complaints; forgeting the Kings Honor;
and that Justice which Establishes the Thorn, and Exalts the Nation, being
unmindful of those very periods, in his Majesty's Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, on the 24th of November. 1664. as follows,

Mr. SPEAKER,
ANd you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I know not whether it be worth My
pains, to endeavor to remove a vile Jealousy, which some ill Men scatter
abroad, and which I am sure will never sinck into the breast of any Man who is
worthy to sit upon your Benches; That when you have given me a Noble and
proportionable Supply, for the Support of a War, I may be induced by some evil
Councelors, (for they will be thought to think very respectively of my own
Person,) to make a sudden Peace, and get all that Money for my own private
occasion.

But let me tell you, and you may be most confident of it, that when I am
compelled to enter into a War, for the Protection, Honor, and Benefit of my
Subjects; I will (God Willing) not make a Peace, but upon the obtaining and
securing those ends, for which the War is entered into; and when that can be
done, no good Man will be sorry for the determination of it.

How far the Plea and the Judgment given upon the Demurrer, concerning the
151612 l. will be reconciled to the Kings Speech, or the Law of the Land is
left to those Members of both Houses that heard it, to resolve if any man can
be safe in his Rights and Properties, under such presidents as these, which
calls to my mind the Old Addage of Sir Fulke Grevil, Lord Brook in his time. --
Mankind is both the Form
And matter wherewith all Tyranies transform;
For Kings can neither see, act nor devise,
Without the Peoples Hands, Hearts and Eyes:
And were not man by himself oppressed,
Kings would not, Tyrants could not, make him Beast.



FINIS.

