THE CAUSE OF England's Misery: Or, A Brief ACCOUNT OF THE Corrupt Practice of
the LAW.

HUMBLY Offered to the Consideration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament Assembled.

London, Printed in the Year School.

England's Misery: Or, a Brief ACCOUNT OF THE Corrupt Practice of the Law, etc.
GReat Complaints have been publicly made, setting forth the wicked Practices
of the Professors of the Law, and those who have dependence upon the same, by
which I conceive, has been plainly made appear the great Calamity of the
People, and how Thousands of Families have consequently been ruined thereby.
Yet notwithstanding the Interest of those professing the Law, has been
hitherto so great, no Care has been taken to redress the same. But finding that
few particular Instances in Relation to Fact (which always makes a greater
Impression upon the Minds of Men than a general Notion of things) have been
given of Matters of this Nature; therefore I conceive my self obliged by the
Duty I owe to my Native Country, as well as in order to my own Preservation, to
give a brief Account of the evil Usage my self and some Friends have met withal
from Persons Professing the Law: By which, (if we Judge by the Rule of
Proportion) the Misery of the People in General will manifestly appear. And
that according to the present practice of the Law, no Man is safe, but liable
to be Eaten up and Devoured.

There Is none concerned in Merchandice, Trade, etc. But must unavoidably have
Disputes, some of which will consequently beget Lawsuits, which often times
are seen to prove (as things are now managed) to be the Ruin both of the
Plaintiff and Defendant, and many Suits appear to be kept on Foot only to
promote the Interest of Attorneys, etc. all which Evils come to pass
principally through the Remisness, or rather, gross Corruption of the Judges,
who are entrusted with the Executive part of the Law, and want not Power to
check and put a stop to all these Evil Practices; which spin out as it were the
very Bowels of the People. So that we who have been for many Ages past, the
happiest People in the World; and even the envy of other Nations, are now
become the Miserablest People in the Universe, only for want of our Laws being
duly Executed; yet lest it should be said I Caluminate Persons, and am not able
to prove Matter of Fact, I shall give a short Relation of several Matters, not
long since Transacted (some of them very lately) which I conceive will fully
Demonstrate what I say, viz.

1 There was a certain Person came to my House, to Lodge and Diet, pretending
to be a Lady, (was Recommended to me as such) and in some time, she became
Indebted to me, by Moneys Lent, etc. about 30l. for which she gave me Bond;
then I discovered her to be a Cheat, upon which she fled from my House, and it
was some Years before I found her out; then I Arrested her, which begot a Law
Suit, that cost me near 40l. yet I am kept out of my Money to this day; and tho
it was then publicly known, this Woman was a profligate Wretch, who had
escaped out of New Gate, and had several pretended Husbands (some of which had
been Executed at Tiburne, as Fellons) yet in this very Suit, was admitted as a
Pauper at one and the same time, both in the King's Bench and Chancery, (tho my
Debt as has been said was upon Bond,) she produced about 18 Witnesses, not one
of them appearing to be of any Reputation: Nay, my own Attorney who knew what
Wicked People I had to deal withal, and to whom I gave strict orders to be
careful of my Business, suffered me to be Nonsuited to my Cost, 6l. 6s.

2. This pretended Lady, and her Gang, was not satisfied in Engaging me in Two
Suits of Law, for they and some Lawyers did prompt and excite, a Young Man to
Sue me, (whom I had brought up from a Child, and put forth an Apprentice at my
own proper Cost and Charge,) tho he had no Just Ground so to do, being prompt
thereunto by this Gang, and some Lawyers, (as he has since with sorrow confessed
to me) upon which I had him before a Judge, but could have no relief; but in a
little time, the Young Man was sensible of his folly, and of his own accord,
came to me and begged Pardon for what he had done; so we went to the Attorney
and ordered him to stop Proceedings. Yet now my Attorney brings me in a Bill
upon this account, tho there was no Proceedings thereupon; but his wickedness
to me will farther appear; which at present I shall wave, and go upon other
Matter.

3. I was Trustee for Two Young Men for several Years, and the Account between
them and me, was Stated by Two Attorneys, who Audited the same, and set their
hands thereunto; yet some Years after these unhappy Young Men, met with some
Lawyers that put them upon Suing of me, tho there was not the least Ground for
it, as in the end it did appear, to the High Court of Chancery, the Matter
having been Twice referred, by Order of Court, to a Master in Chancery, who
Audited the Account, in the presence of Two Counselors at Law; this Unjust
Suit was near 200l. Charge to the Young Men, to the utter Ruin of one of them;
who lays his Ruin, and I think Justly, at the Lawyers Door, as the Cause
thereof.

4. I took out a Writ against a certain Person; upon which a Bailiff took him,
and took Bail of him in his own Name; then came to me, and swore desperately,
if I would not give him 40 s. he would let his Prisoner go. I not complying
with his unreasonable Demands, he arrested me; whereupon I summoned him before
a Judge, who did acknowledge, and say I was much abused, yet would do me no
Justice, but seemed rather to encourage the Bailiff, thereby to bring (as I
suppose) more Grist to the Mill; so I was glad at last to give the Bailiff 4 l.
to be rid of him, and secure my Debt.

5. The Attorney, whom I before did make mention of, I did employ in several
Businesses; for doing which, he sent me in a Bill of 13 l. odd Money, and in
some Months after sent another Bill of 17 l. (both referring to one and the
same Business) and then sent me several threatening Letters, that if I did not
forthwith pay him, he would arrest me; upon which I summoned him before a
Judge, before whom he appeared, and whispered to him, and then gave into his
Hand another Bill of 25 l. which I never saw otherways than in the Judges Hand;
whereupon I acquainted his Lordship that I had two Bills before given me,
either of which I was willing to have taxed; but it would not be granted, tho I
offered to prove that I had paid him 7 l 10 s. and that he charged me with near
Five Pound for Counsel Fees, which he never disbursed, and that he had a Bill
of 10 l. of mine in his Hands, and that he charged me 20 s. for viewing some
Writings in my Hands, when I never employed him, he having been employed by
another Person, who gave him 20 s. for his Pains; (nay, he had the Confidence
to tell his Lordship, that he examined two Cart-loads of Papers by my Order,
when as all of them were in a small Deale-Box.) The Judge was very attentive to
him, but would not hear me, tho I offered to swear it (as I have since done
before another Judge) and so signed and ordered the 25 l. Bill to be taxed, and
that I should pay in to one of the Prothonitors of the Kings Bench 25 l. in
Money, which I though to be a great Hardship put upon me when I was not in his
Debt; whereupon I waited upon the Judge again, and took a Friend along with me,
who endeavored to Convince his Lordship, but all to no purpose, tho I offered
to deposite the Money in a third Persons Hand, yet he would not recin'd from
what he had done, but 25 l. I must pay in; upon which my Friend went to my
Attorney, and asked him* why he was not willing to have either of his former
Bills taxed; He denied that ever he gave me any Bills before, when as I have
his Bills and Letters by me to prove it; but he showed my Friend the Bill
signed by the Judge, and said, if I would not have that taxed, he would Arrest
me before Night. This was about a Month since, but he has not done it yet; so
the Matter's still depending.

6. A Relation of mine sued a certain Person for 50 l. he was indebted to him;
in prosecuting of which Suit he spent above 200 l. before he could recover his
Debt; and in this Cause, between Plantiff and Defendant, there was spent above
500 l.

7. A certain Person came to a Shopkeeper (a Man of known Reputation) and
desired him to give him Silver for a Broad piece of Gold; according to his
Request he gave him the Money, but this Person, by a Trick of Ledgerdemain gave
him a Broad Guilt Shilling, instead of a piece of Gold. The same Day it was
done, he found he was cheated, and so made Search after the Person that did it;
who finding himself discovered, and that he was like to fall into Trouble, was
too quick for the Shopkeeper; for he takes out a Warrant against him, and had
him before a Justice of the Peace, for Scandalizing of him; upon which, the
Shopkeeper, and his Wife, acquainted the Justice of the Peace with the whole
Circumstance of the Matter, and offered to swear it, yet the Justice of the
Peace would not admit him to his Oath, but bound him over to the next Session
of the Peace for Scandalizing the worthy Gentleman; but afterward (not without
great Trouble) he took him up with a Bench Warrant, and the Matter was tried at
Hicks's Hall, where that and other Crimes of the like nature were fully proved
upon him, (tho he produced near 20 Witnesses such as they were) for which he
was by the Court Fined 40 l. but it was reduced to 20 l. which he immediately
paid and went off, and the honest Shopkeeper in prosecuting this Matter was at
above 12l. Charge, and like to have no Satisfaction; for if he could meet with
this Wicked Person, he says he dares not Sue him, seeing there is so great
Corruption in the Practice of the Law.

8. A Gentleman was unjustly Sued for 100l. yet in Defending himself, in that
Suit he spent above 120. tho he did not pay the Debt, he had paid the better
part of the Money to his Attorney who Arrested him before he gave him a Bill,
after which the Attorney gave him a Bill; and he Objecting against some things
in it; in a little time his Attorney gave him another, and made his Account
above 10l. more, and then Laughed at him* upon which he was advised by some
Friends to get the Bill Taxt, but others telling him how (...) things were,
advised him rather to pay the Attorney, then Involve himself in farther
trouble, which he accordingly did.

9. In the Year 1692 a French Ship and Cargo, called the St Nicholas of
Haverdegrace, of the value of near 3000l. in the open Seas was Seized by Three
English Sailors on Board, (who had been Captivated into France) and Carried
into Tenby, Dependant upon the Port of Milford; upon which Walter Midleton,
Collector of the said Port, etc. Unladed the Vessel by Night, and Embezeled the
Cargo, and withal Committed the Three English Sailors to the Common Goal, at
the same time Dismissing the French, who had been brought in as Prisoners.
Information thereof being given to the Admiralty-Court, Commissions of Enquiry
were thence Issued, and upon Examination the Embezelments fully proved, and
Sentence passed on behalf of the King; whereupon the Offenders moved for, and
obtained a Prohibition out of the Exchequer to stop all further Proceedings,
which is continued to this day; so the Spoil seems to have been divided among
them, The poor Sailors were continued many Months in Prison, and did not obtain
their Liberty without great difficulty; since which one of them has been Killed
in the Public Service, another of them taken by the French, and carried to St.
Maloes, where he was (as it is said) Murdered; and one Walter Jenkins This poor
afflicted Man lodges at one Bardet's, in King Street, St. Giles's, and is one
of the greatest Objects of Charity that ever Eyes beheld. There Is no Question
but a Multitude of such like Crimes have been committed; for there plainly
appears to have been a Combination to cheat the Kingand Subject; the only
Satisfaction the King and Kingdom can have, is Confiscating the Estates (the
Spoils of the People) of those who have been the Principal Actors; which is a
thing, would be highly pleasing to all honest Men, of what Persuasion soever.
, whom the Sailors Employed in Prosecuting this Matter, as did likewise the
Lords of the Admiralty on behalf of the King (who has been at Two or Three
Hundred Pounds Charge in the Prosecution) appears to have been as ill treated
as the poor Saylors, although their Lordships often gave him assurance, That if
he proved the Facts, he should not only be satisfied for his Trouble and
Expense, but very well rewarded; and tho he executed several Commissions, and
has attended this Matter for above Five Years (having been drilled on, and fed
with vain Hopes from time to time, to the utter Ruin of him and his Family) and
expended a considerable Sum of Money, yet has not been able to obtain any
Satisfaction, otherwise than that about Three Months since the Lords of the
Admiralty sent for him, and told him at a full Board, If he would not concern
himself any more in this Matter, but retire into his own Country, they would
order him 10 l. which he was constrained, through his great Necessity, to take.

An Attorney gave in a Bill of 13 l. to a Friend of mine, that summoned him
before a Judge, who reduced the Bill to 29 s.

11. Another Bill of 40 l. was given by an Attorney, which the Judge reduced to
7 l. and withal told my Friend, that if he pleased he would lay the Attorney by
the Heels.

12. Another Bill of 60 l. was given in by an Attorney, who was summoned before
a Judge, that reduced the said Bill to 14 l.

These three Cases, which I have last Recited, may seem to be great Acts of
Justice; yet with Submission in my Apprehension they are not so, but particular
Acts of Favor and Kindness, in regard the Judges (who are sworn to do
Impartial Justice) did not punish the Attorneys There are a sort of Men among
us who practice (in other Men's Names as Attorneys that are not so; it were
happy for the People they were suppressd, and that all Attorneys were
restrained in their taking Clerks, (as several Companies and Trades are in
London, to prevent their being ^o numerous) and not suffered to fill the City
and Country* as they do, with Splitters of Causes; it is one of the greatest
Evils that can befall a Nation to be overstock'd (as we are) with Lawyers.
, by disabling them to practice for the future; for having made so great and
notorious a Breach of the Oath they took, when they were admitted to practice
as Attorneys, they at the same time being Invested with a Power, which enabled
them so to have done. So that all this amounts to no more than as if I should
take up a Person, who had cheated me, and have him before a Justice of the
Peace, who should oblige him to restore to me what he wronged me of; and
afterward dismiss him, and give him leave to cheat any Body else whom he
pleased: For so it is, that when Men are not punished for their Offenses, it
does but encourage them and others to Commit the like Crimes for the future,
and to be more wicked than they were before; which plainly demonstrates any
Nation, having good Laws that are not kept, serve only to make the People so
much the more miserable.

And whoever does but consider how Counselors There Is no doubt there are many
worthy Gentlemen that practice the Law, who are great Enemies to these
Corruptions, and would gladly see them Removed.
and Attorneys at Law, are obliged by their Oaths, not knowingly to engage in
any Evil Cause, or to increase Fees, and views but the Practice of them every
Term, can hardly conclude otherways, than that they are, for the most part,
dreadfully Perjured, which they seem to be hardened in, for its well known they
generally make but a Jest of it.

And those few Instances that have here been given of their Evil Practices,
cannot be judged to be the hundred thousandth Part of the Misery the People of
this Nation undergo, by reason of the Corruption of the Law, and without all
Controversy, a Multitude of Families are every Year Ruined thereby, for many
Thousands of Persons may reasonably be supposed to be engaged in Suits at Law,
that understand nothing of the Law, but refer all to their Attorneys, and if
they find they are ill treated by them, and a Dispute happens to arise between
them, they are not able to contend with them, but for the most part lie at
their Mercy to do by them even as they please; yet if any are so hardy as to
contend with their Attorneys, so as to have their Bills Taxed, generally
speaking, they can have little Reason to expect Relief (Experience tells me,
and other Men so) upon the Account they who are Judges of the Matter, are
Brethren These Gentlemen Purchase their Employments or Places, which are but
for Life, with large Sums of Money, and having no Lease of their Lives, run
great Hazards, and considering the general Corruption there is in the Practice
of the Law, and the Temptation they lie under, it cannot be supposed but that
they will be willing to make use of their time, as well as other Men, by which
may be seen, what Misery the People are exposed to, by the Buying and Selling
Employment.
of the same Quill, from whom a Man has no where to Appeal, insomuch that many
Honest Men are now afraid to Sue for their Just Rights, for fear of wasting
their Estates, by being involved in Chargeable and Long Suits, and it is even my
own Case at this time.

So that what by the Evil Practice of the Law, and the Corruptions that have
crept into the Government during the late War (occasioned by Reason of His
Majesty's frequent and long Absence) the People in general are brought into
great distress, Trade Men bred to Trade (as I was) have the greatest
opportunity of knowing the Decay or Growth of Trade, and so are sooner made
sensible of the Calamity of the People, than those of higher Rank, though they
are not so well able to Express their Thoughts.
being reduced to a very low Ebb, and HandicraftsMen and Artificers, who
formerly used to Live Plentifully, and well, are now brought so low, that if
some speedy care be not taken to revive Trade, Thousands of Families in this
Nation will be in great danger of being Starved.

Whatever English Man has been abroad in Foreign Countries (as I have been) and
seen with what little Expense, and how soon Law Suits are there brought to a
period, cannot, without Regret, behold the present miserable Condition of his
Native Country, the more, in regard, it so visibly appears to have been
brought upon us by the wickedness of some Persons among our selves. With my own
Eyes have I seen honest worthy Persons, who detected and proved Notorious
Crimes, publicly Ruined, and suffered to perish through Grief and Want. Yet
notwithstanding all these Evils, it must be acknowledged, we have the best
Prince, and the best Laws of any Nation in Europe. So that now, upon this Happy
Peace, we have no Reason to question His Majesty's Goodness to his People; and
it is the just Apprehension of His Majesty's Goodness and Justice, that makes me
look back with Comfort upon the Happy and Glorious Reign of Queen Elizabeth; in
her time, no Man durst Embezel or Misspend the Public Treasure; and if any of
her Judges should have been heard publicly to declare, the Perquisites of his
Place was worth 3000 l. per Annum, She would soon have Caged him, and found a
Person more worthy to fill the place. Edmond Bohun, Esquire; who Writ the Life of
this most excellent Princess, in Page 60. says, She well considered whatever
was recommended to her, as useful to any part of her State, carefully viewing
the Conveniences, and the Ill Conveniences thereof; and what was at last
found Useful or Profitable to the Body of her People, was Settled by Authority.
It was a Maxim with her, That Equitable Laws, and Equal Justice, are the Two
Sure and Lasting Foundations of a State, Page 64. She dealt very severely with
all those that were found guilty of Frauds or Cheats in the Public Revenue,
which sort of People She used to call Harpies. She discouraged, as much as was
possible, all the Tricks and Corruptions in the Courts of Justice, Page 296.
She Increased the Wages of her Judges, that she might deliver them at once from
the Temptation and Suspicion of Bribery.

She Passed an Excellent and most Equitable Law, for the more speedy
Determining the Cases depending in her Courts. She Admonished her Judges, That
they should consider the Judgment or Jurisdiction they exercised was God's, and
advised them diligently to Study the Law, in relation to the Profit of the
State, and not show the sharpness of their Wits by a Falacious Interpretation
of a doubtful Law, to the Injury of the People, but that without Partiality,
they should administer Equal Justice to all, and severely punish those they
found Guilty. Page 316. It was ihe rare Felicity of her Times, that Men were
Advanced to Honors without their seeking it, and sometimes against their
Wills, being promoted for their Virtues, not Fortunes.

She would often tell those She Entrusted, That they might rest assured, she
would reward their Integrity, Industry, and Equity, and if she found them
Guilty of any Injustice and Oppression, She would as certainly Punish them for
it. She would never entertain into her Service any Ignorant, Covetous,
Dishonest, or Licentious Person.

She was an exact Observer of Justice, which is the most Resplendent of all the
Moral Virtues, and of Veracity and Constancy to her Word, which is the
Foundation of Justice. She was extremely severe against all that broke her
Laws, and punished sometime small Offenses with great Severity.

Page 322. In all Private Suits She was observed to be a Religious Observer of
Justice and Equity, and to keep the Balance even between the Greatest and the
Meanest of her Subjects; She preserved the Poorest from Wrongs, and made it her
care that every Man might enjoy his Own, and serve the Public with it, by the
Impartiality of Justice, and the Equity of all Law Proceedings, provideing
carefully for the Preservation of Humane Society, for the good of the Whole
Community.

Page 394. In her Progress she was most easy to be approached by private
Persons and Magistrates; Men and Women, Country People and Children came
joyfully, and without any Fear, to wait upon her, and see her. Her Ears were
then open to the Complaints of the Afflicted, and of those that had been any
way injured, she would not suffer the meanest of her people to be shut out of
the Places where she resided; but the greatest and the least were then in a
manner levelled* She took with her own Hand, and read with the greatest
Goodness, the Petitions of the meanest Rusticks; and she would frequently
assure them that she would take a particular Care of their Affairs, and should
ever be as good as her Word.

She by her Royal Authority Protected those that were Injured and Oppressed;

She Punished the Fraudulent, False, Perfidious, and Wicked.

It has always been my Opinion, He that that does not simpathize with, and has
not a Fellow-feeling of the Calamity and Misery of others, cannot properly be
said to be a Christian; for I conceive we are not bron barely for our selves,
and the Good of our own Families, but are strictly obliged, by the Dictates of
that Holy Religion we profess, to do all such Acts as tend to the Good and
Benefit of Mankind in general.

It was a due Apprehension of this general Duty that enduc'd me to appear in
Print; and however, though I may be censured by some Persons, yet I call God to
witness, that what I have done therein, has not been out of Malice or Prejudice
to any Person, or that I propose to my self any Advantage thereby (for I
neither seek or want any Employ) but only a Hearty and Sincere Desire to serve
my Country, by laying these things before this Most August Assembly, being
sensible there is too many that endeavor, as much as in them lies, to Stifle
and Conceal the People's Grievances, and keep them from the Knowledge of the
King and Parliament, hoping there by to escape the Hands of Justice. The not
punishing Offenders upon the Abdication of the late King James seems to have
been one great Occasion of all these Evils; and now if those that are Offenders
shall escape Punishment, the Nation can then expect no Security for the future.
The punishing Offenders will be doing the People Justice, and supplying of the
King's Wants, and which appears (...) the only Means whereby to Re-establish
Justice, and make (...)im and His People happy.

Feb. 3. 1697/8. Richard Collins.

FINIS.

