A PLEA For the bringing in of IRISH CATTLE, And keeping out of FISH CAUGHT BY
FOREIGNERS.

TOGETHER With an humble Address to the Honorable MEMBERS of PARLIAMENT of the
Counties of Cornwall and Devon, about the Advancement of Tin, Fishery, and
diverse Manufactures.

By JOHN COLLINS, Accomptant to the ROYAL FISHERY Company.

E Reg. Soc. Philomath.

LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford, and are sold by Langley Curtis
in Goat-Court on Ludgate Hill, 1680.

TO THE RAEDER.
Courteous Reader,
THE Royal Fishery Company having lost a stock of 11000 l. chiefly by reason
Six of their Seven Doggers, (whereof Three were new built) together with their
Ladings, were taken in 1676 by the French, were forced in July last to sell
their Vessels and Stores to one Mr. Benjamin Watson Merchant, with whom some
others of the said Company were induced to adventure, (by reason of
Encouragements like to be obtained in the last Long Parliament, and yet hoped
for) to renew a small Fishery (as a Basis to a greater) to supply LONDON with
Cod from about Michaelmas to Lady Day.

Now for as much as such Little Fishery is blasted in the Bud with any fresh
Loss, and cannot thrive without keeping out Foreign Fish, which were prohibited
by the Irish Act, and the said Act is ceased, and now under Consideration of
the Honorable House of Commons to be renewed; it was necessary to offer what
concerns the Fishery, yea and when the Welfare of a Nation is at Stake, it is
but seasonable for any one that wishes its Prosperity, especially one that
has been Chief Clerk in His Majesty's late Council of Plantations, where
Arguments of like kind were winnowed, to propound his Sentiments.

These Considerations begot the following Discourse: Which expects to meet with
many Opponents. But there is an able Pen in a Treatise now at the Press has
undertook to be an Advocate for the Importation of Irish Cattle: And I not
knowing what Arguments he insists on, nor consulting him, and hearing his Book
is large, and fearing it may come out too late, when the Debate is over; took
the opportunity to offer some sudden Thoughts about the same, to prevent (if it
may be) the fatal Subversion of the Trade of England, which will thence ensue,
as is herein showed by

A Well-wisher to its Prosperity, JOHN COLLINS.

A PLEA for the bringing in of Irish Cattle, and keeping out of Fish caught by
Foreigners, etc.
FOreign Fish are kept out by an Act for the Encouragement of Trade, of 15.
Reg. Car. 2. the Epitome whereof is, That after the first of August, 1664. no
fresh Herring, fresh Cod or Haddock, Coal Fish or Gull Fish, is to be imported,
but in English-built Ships or Vessels, according to the Certificate, the Master
and three Fourths of the Mariners to be English, and which has been fished,
caught, and taken in such Ships or Vessels, and not bought of Strangers, on
forfeiture of the Vessel and Fish, one Moiety to His Majesty, and the other
Moiety to the Informer.

Foreign salt Fish though is to pay as follows:
l. s. d. Cod Fish the Barrel -- 0 5 0 Consequently the Last of 12 Barrels -- 3
0 0 The Hundred cont. 120 -- 0 10 0 Cole Fish the Hundred of 120 -- 0 5 0 Ling
the Hundred of 120 -- 1 0 0 White Herring the Last -- 1 16 0 Haddock the Barrel
-- 0 2 0 Gull Fish the Barrel -- 0 2 0

By the said Act every Head of great Scotch Cattle imported after the 24 th of
August, and before the 20 th of December, in any year, is to pay 20 s. one
Moiety to the Informer, and the other to the Poor of the Parish.

This Act is in force, and by virtue of it Stock Fish not being caught by our
Vessels, are barred out.

And by the Act against Importing Irish Cattle, 18. Reg. Car. 2. no great
Cattle, Sheep, or Swine, or any Beef, Pork, or Bacon, (except Sailing
Provisions) are to be Imported from beyond Sea after the Second of February,
1666. hence Westphalia Hams are barred out.

By the said Act no Ling, Herring, Cod, or Pilchard, fresh or salted, dried or
bloated, or any Salmon, Eels, or Congers; taken by any Foreigners, are to be
imported or sold on penalty of losing the same, the one half to the Informer,
the other to the Poor of the Parish; and the same Penalty is on Flesh
beforementioned.

This Act is expired, and is now endeavored to be rendered perpetual.

The Query may be, What Clauses ought to be renewed? And with what Exceptions?
And for what reason Fish or other Commodities ought to be kept out?

The Reason we take to be this:

Those Provisions or Wares that England does or may afford, enough, good, and
to spare, ought not for our own Expense to be Imported or admitted from abroad.

The Argument thus limited is granted, with two Cautions: The First is,
Provided one part can supply another without great inconvenience. The other is,
That there be some Grains of Allowance for delight or ornament, besides
necessity.

Hence we having no Stock Fish, which being never salted is of great use in
East India, and long Voyages, that ought to come in: As to Cavair or Roes of
Sturgeon, and Sturgeon it self from the Sound; Potargoe's, or Roes of Mullets
and Anchova's from Italy, they were never barred; and Westphalia Hams being
chiefly for the City Treats, may be admitted under the Exception of Delight. To
which I shall not add three Vessels of Eels that usually and yearly come laden
from Holland, but leave it to the Parties concerned: And these being permitted,
all other Fish caught by Strangers that were not by the former Acts admitted,
may be kept out

Though the Irish Act seems to be built upon the Reason abovesaid, yet I have
heard of another Motive thereof; to wit, after His Majesty's Restoration much
Money was raised to disband the Army, to relieve His Majesty, and pay his
Debts, and vast Sums brought out of the Country in Specie, to carry on the
first Dutch War.

The Country finding the want of Money, the returns whereof were much
obstructed by the Plague in 1665. whence also the expense and price of
Provisions much fell, began to complain we wanted People, and to consider by
what means it was possible to get the Money to return again into the Country.
Some alleged there was no better way of doing it than by keeping out all
Foreign Flesh and Fish, to the end London paying dear for their Provisions, the
same would not only rise in price, but hasten the return of the Money: Adding
for Reason, that as long as Provisions were cheap, People would be lazy and
forbear work; and that the way to raise both Land and Provisions was to reduce
Interest of Money to a low rate. And these Reasons, with the first about
England's Plenty prevailing, an Act passed, prohibiting God's Blessings.

Others have undertaken to show the ill Consequences thereof, and therefore I
shall not engage in it, farther than to add two or three Arguments (that
perchance are not obvious to them) as a means to occasion better measures to be
taken, than to pass this Act, at least for any long time or perpetual.

The First Argument.
The Right Honorable the Lord Brereton lately deceased, lent me a Paper to
peruse, that was a Copy of A Report of the Irish Council of Trade, intended to
be presented to his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland,
dated March 26, 1673. in Obedience to An Order of Council of Jan. 20, 1672.
concerning the Trade and State of that Kingdom; what were its Aggreivances, and
the Remedies. Amongst other Articles I find diverse relating to England, which
are inserted at large into this Discourse, to wit, in Article 15. it is
alleged, That Ireland pays a yearly Debt to England of about 200000 l.

In Article 16. it is said, That while the Cattel-Trade for live Oxen and Sheep
was open, the value of all the Cattle exported to England never exceeded 140000
l. per Annum, whereof 60000 l. per annum was Commodity, to wit, Hides, Tallow,
Wool, and Freight, so we had but 80000 l. in Flesh: In lieu whereof, they had
Goods from England to about three or four times the value, that is, 280000 l.

And Article 17. the Customs between England and Ireland in the freest Trade,
are said to come to 32000 l. per annum, as appears by their Custom-house Books.
And therefore after a Harangue of some hard Measures in Article 13. come to a
result in these words Article 17. That about one third of all the imported
Manufactures might be made in Ireland, and that about two Thirds of the
Remainder might be more conveniently had from Foreign Parts than out of
England: And Consequently it is scarce necessary at all for Ireland to receive
any Goods out of England, and not convenient to receive above one Fourth from
thence of the whole which it needs to Import, the value whereof is under
100000 l. per Annum.

The Case being thus, it is highly our Interest to admit not only Irish Cattle,
but all their Commodities, to keep them by Agreement, on equitable terms
(hereafter propounded) from furnishing Foreigners; their Hides were formerly
wrought into Shoes, and exported to the Plantations; as also Tallow.

And as to their Wool, if they are permitted to export it, either manufactured
or unmanufactured, it will in time ruin all the Wool and Cloth Trade of
England, for now they feed on their lean Cattle, export their fat, and increase
their Flocks of Sheep.

In sum, Ireland can and does sell to Foreigners Wool, Hides, Tallow, Flesh,
and Fish, at about one Moiety of what England can afford them at; and seeing
our Lead and Tin are also in a very declining condition, as is hereafter
showed, it follows, that this must be redressed, or our Commodities lie on our
hands: The Merchants in their humble Remonstrance in 1659. to the then
pretended Parliament, represented it as their judgment; That for as much as the
Ground of Ireland was of far less value than that of England, an Acre there nor
being worth 4 s. which is here worth 40 s. and Provisions so much cheaper, and
consequently the Labors of Men; they might afford their Commodities one half
cheaper than the English can do: So that in time, if this were not redressed,
Ireland would get all the Trade from England; but if not, it is better to Trade
with them on an Overbalance than not at all; and better to lessen their
Markets abroad, than quite to obstruct our furnishing the same: Whence the
Query resulting is this:

Have we, or is it fit we should have, a Power over Ireland, to hinder them
from selling their Commodities in Foreign Parts, when we will not have them our
selves?

If we have, it is not well observed, of which take the following Narrative.

Mr. Euclid Speidell a Custom-house Officer, informs, that in the year 1678.
there were 40 Ships lading of Wool Shipped off from Ireland, that according to
Cockets ought to be unladen in England, but none of it arrived here; the
Contents he certainly knew not: But according to a moderate supposition, Mr.
Poyntz, His Majesty's Tapestry-maker, has given the following Calculation; to
wit, 40 Ships or Vessels at 40 Tuns each is 1600 Tuns, which will employ 29458
Men, Women, and Children, for a year, allowing 3 Persons to a pound of Wool for
a day; in some of the faculties of Carding, Spinning, Combing, Weaving, Dying,
and Dressing, which at 6 d. each per diem comes to 268804 l. per annum. And
according to Mr. Poyntz all these Faculties may be estimated to employ 96000
Persons for a year, who may earn in that time at moderate rates 750000 l. which
if wrought beyond Sea, is not only so much loss to His Majesty's Native
Subjects, but as much gain to Foreigners, besides the loss of Navigation and
Money, if the same should come in upon us.

The Second Argument.
Secondly, Suppose that Act pass, and Irish Cattle are barred out; and this in
favor to the Western and Northern Parts, or breeding Grounds: I say, His
Majesty and the Eastern and Southern Parts are for the present the losers; and
in the event the Nation shall have no Fishery, nor by consequence be able to
contest the Dominion of the Sea. Of each severally.

1. His Majesty loses most of the Customs of 32000 l. a year beforementioned;
and also much by the over-dearness of Provisions for His Navy, which are twice
as dear at home, as our Neighbors over the Water are furnished with them from
Ireland (as follows), in so much that if another War at Sea should happen,
the Nation in this respect must soon groan under it as an unsupportable burden.

2. The Kingdom loses the Navigation between England and Ireland and
consequently the Employment of three or four hundred Sail of Ships and Vessels,
and the breeding of Mariners to manage them, whereof (alas!) we have too few.

3. The Eastern and Southern Parts have lost their Victualling of the Dutch,
and of our own Merchantmen, as may be plentifully proved from the Searchers
Office at the Custom-house, and it is already asserted in Print, that our Ships
for the most part, Westerly or Southerly bound, Victual here but for six Weeks,
and take in the rest of their Provisions in Ireland, or Irish Provisions in
Spain, according to contract made for the same:

Whereupon I put this Querie?

Shall English Ships be permitted to Victual in Ireland or not?

If yea, then our Provisions are not spent at home, contrary to the Hypothesis
in keeping Cattle out; and our Money must be returned to purchase them there.

If the English shall not be allowed to Victual there, I further Enquire, shall
the Irish be permitted to carry their Provisions abroad, or sell them to
strangers at home, or both? Have we power to impose upon them.

If they shall be permitted to carry them abroad, our Provisions cannot obtain
Foreign vend, as being much dearer than theirs: And when they Export their
Provisions they will also Export their Commodities, and furnish their returns.

Of this take the following instance; to wit, a Sea Commander Captain Swain
informs, that for 5 years past there were seldom less than 20 Irish Ships
frequently at Dunkirk, Laden with Beef, Tallow, Hides and Leather, much Butter
and some Wool; And that all the Capers or Privateers during that time were
furnished with these Provisions.

That diverse other Irish Ships furnished Ostend: and many of them he has seen
at Nants, Burns, Rochel.

That at Dunkirk, the Irish sold their Provisions at the following Rates.

Tallow and Butter the Hundred Weight, from 20 to 22 Livers, That is, from 30
s. to 33 s. whereas 100 l. of Butter cannot but cost dearer here, a Liver may
be reckoned at 18 pence, and 10 Stivers to a Shilling, there is no great
disparity in Weight, 100 l. there makes 104 l. here.

A Barrel of Beef Weighing about 2 Hundred and a half, from 12 to 23 Livers;
That is, from seven and six pence, to thirteen and eight pence the Hundred
Weight.

Tanned Leather from 14 to 18 Stivers a Pound Weight, that is, from 16 pence to
21 pence.

That there was Imported but little Provisions besides Corn from England, to
wit Butter; by which there was no great gain.

Cod, Salmon, and Herrings, abound most plentifully on the Irish Coasts,
insomuch that some years there has been seen at Wexford, no less than 200 sail
of Ships at a time, part English, part French, but most Dutch, taking in
Herrings and other Provisions, where a mesh of Herrings containing about 500 is
commonly sold for Four Shillings, often under, and sometimes higher, and about
two mesh fill a Barrel, moreover Cod at other places are sold for 4 d. or 5 d.
a piece.

So that if this be permitted, and no redress found, it will be a folly to
catch any Herrings in the Channel, in hopes of a profit by sending them to
Spain or into the Streights, when at Yarmouth the first cost of a Barrel of
Herrings is above double the value they cost at Wexford, one Mr. Jared Hancock,
and others will attest the assertion.

The Third Argument.
Hence we must either allow Ireland a free Trade with others, to the subversion
of the Cloth Trade of England, and the incredible prejudice of the Fishery, and
of Trade and Staple Commodities in general; or by agreement with them on
equitable terms, (hereafter propounded) get so high a Duty of Customs laid on
their Commodities as may, if exported by Foreigners or by themselves, unless to
England, render them of equal or rather higher value than the like Commodities
in England, and then take off as many of them as we can, and furnish them to
others (after improvement here) at the second hand, the latter (if we will
avoid our own destruction) is the choice to be made.

Hence their Cattle, etc. ought not to be refused; and in what else can they
pay England the debt before mentioned, and over balance of Trade.

The Fourth Argument.
The prime reason for Barring Foreign Commodities holds not in this case.

The Irish Cattle in question, with their Hides, Tallow and Wool, are not so
much Imported for our expense, as to Ship off, to furnish Foreign Markets
withal, and are received in payment of an annual debt, which cannot be well
otherwise returned from Ireland.

Lastly, If we ought not for our own expense to be furnished with Commodities
from abroad, that we can supply our selves with at home, then ought we to have
no Foreign Salt, Iron, Brass, Paper, Tapestry-hangings, Canvas, Linen,
Earthen-wares, Madders, Safflore, Smalt, hard Soap, tinned Plates, and diverse
other Commodities of lesser moment Imported, and no Salt Petre from the East
Indies, nor Sugar from Portugal, seeing our own Plantations will afford it.

And if we admit these great concerns from Strangers, it is more fit his
Majesty's Subjects should have a free Trade with one another, for matters of
far less moment:

As to that straw, that unless Provisions be dear the people will be lazy, and
will not work.

Answer, it is granted necessity begets industry, yet notwithstanding if some
will be idle, it follows not that all or the Major part will be so: Poor people
must either work, beg, or steal; If the latter, besides saving the Alms of the
Parish, there are Houses of Correction and punishment.

Moreover goodness and cheapness are the main inducements to put off any
Commodity: And it cannot be well apprehended how Labor shall be cheap and Work
plenty where Provisions are dear, where the one rises the other does so
likewise: As at London and in other places where Provisions are dearest Labor
is dearest: And this assertion is contrary to experience in memory, to wit,
before the year 1640. Provisions were much cheaper than they are now, and
Labor likewise, and work more plentiful, for then we had a great Trade; And
about 60 Ships of about 400 or 500 Tuns burden employed in the Streights,
which afterward in 1659. came to be reduced to 6 or thereabouts, as the City
represented to Olivers Council: Whereas on the contrary at present we have so
little work that many thousands of Families of Salt-workers, Rope-makers,
Weavers, Dryers, Potters, Tanners, etc. have no Employment.

And to make Provisions dear as a means to make the poor work, is the ready way
to drive them into Foreign Plantations, where they may either have greater
Wages for their pains, or Ground for Plantations given them by the Law of the
Country. Those that are for grinding and made the Objection, I suppose would
not willingly undergo a mean comfortless drudgery themselves.

As to that Allegation about a low rate of interest, to the intent Lands and
Provisions may rise in value:

It Is granted and affirmed, that according to the Laws of Arithmetic for
yearly Purchases, if Money be at 4 in the hundred, Land should be at 25 years
Purchase; and at 5 in the hundred at 20 years Purchase: though the Effect does
not always follow the supposed Cause: As in the year 1640. when Money was at 8
per Centum, and Land should have been worth but 12 and a half years Purchase,
yet it was commonly sold for 20 years Purchase; Whence take this Sorites.

If Land rises, the Commodities the Land yields must also rise, otherwise the
Tenant cannot pay his Rent.

This rising-price must be paid either at home or abroad, if neither,
consequently a low Rate of interest cannot advance the price of Lands.

Cloth, Lead, and Tin, are our chief Staple Commodities: And whether these will
bear a considerable Rising price abroad or at home, is the Querie:

1. As for Cloth, I hear the Merchants hazard is great and gain little; and it
was more formerly: This says Mr. Baker, an eminent Merchant in a Book of the
Spanish and Smyrna Trade, Printed in 1659. page 13. Entitled the Merchants
Petition and Remonstrance.

The Clothiers and others complain against the Merchants in general, that they
take not off and buy their Clothes, and other their Manufactures: nor give
them such prices for them whereby they may make a Livelihood.

But the Turkey Merchants complaints are very great, because they are rather
losers than gainers by the sales of their Cloth, (on which Commodity I lately
lost 10 per Cent out of my principal on an hundred Clothes, well bought and
sorted, that I sent to Smyrna:) And to put off our Cloth we are now forced to
remit quantities of Moneys to Purchase the Commodities of those Countries;
which tends very much to the consumption of the English Stock.

At that time the Turks besieging Candy, in reason Cloth should have sold
dearer than now, when they are far in the Inland Country, and when Turkey is
supplied with the Cloth of Germany by the Venetians.

2. As to Lead, Mr. Baker page 8. says, that during the late (Usurper's) War
with Spain, the Spaniards wanting Lead Employed those that had skill in Mines,
who presently found most excellent Mines by Xaen, and since they have needed
little of ours from 1634 to 1646. says Capt. Thomas Bushel, that great Miner,
in his Case printed in 1649. page 13.3 or 4 Thousand Tuns yearly raised, was
and now is the Trade and Customs, both by Transportation and Importation.

3. Concerning Tin, I have heard diverse Merchants of late years affirm, they
could not get the Interest of their Principal by it; and when the Debate about
Tin Farthings happened, the Pewterers affirmed, That there was 22000 l. worth
of Tin at Smyrna remaining, that had been some years in the hands of one Mr.
Pythorne, a Factor there, that he could not sell to any advantage; and it is
well known that Tin was never so cheap at home, nor more of it lying on our
hands than now, albeit His Majesty ever since 1666. has received no benefit by
his Prerogative of praeemption, nor is like to have any for the future; whereas
in former times it was farmed at 12000 l. per annum Rent.

The Case being thus, give me leave to make a Digression about the improvement
of our Native Commodities.

Endeavors have been on foot to restore this fallen branch of the Revenue by
Farming it of His Majesty, and coming to a Composition with the Miners of
Cornwall to take off all the Tin the Mines yield, or at least 1200 Tuns per
annum, but there were two Rubs in the way; the one was, the Convocation could
not well come to such an Agreement, till an Act of Parliament was obtained to
bind all particular Miners to stand to such contract as the said Convocation
should make: The other was, the Farmers would not undertake such Bargain
without Covenanting with His Majesty, to supply England, Ireland, and the
Plantations, with Tin Farthings, a Pound weight of them to be cut into 16
Pence, that by the profit of these Farthings the Farmers might be enabled to
pay their Rent.

This Design was opposed by the Mint as a gross cheat and an abuse to be put
upon the Nation. Amongst many things alleged against Tin Farthings: I shall
enumerate some of the most material, as

1. That a Metal might be made whiter and harder than Tin of poisonous
Ingredients, viz. Spelter, Arsenick, Regulus of Antimony, etc.

2. That such Metal, when worn, would not yield above Two Pence a Pound, or
little more, and no Pewterer durst use it, as being contrary to Law.

3. That Tin Farthings might be coined with a Hammer, cast in a Mold, squeezed
in a Vice, and be counterfeited by any Tinker, Plummer, Smith, Glasier, Tinman,
Watchmaker, etc.

4. Hence a Query was put to the Farmers, whether they would change all that
were brought them or not, good or bad, either made by themselves or others? And
if so, who should allow the Country and City Brewers their Charges, in sending
them up to London in Drays and Wagons, with Tellers?

5. They refusing, it was inferred, that if Tin Farthings were Established, His
Majesty must receive His Revenue of Excise (and the Duke of York his Postage)
in Tin Farthings, in regard a Brewer cannot avoid the taking of much Money in
Tin Farthings at home of Tub-Women and Firkin-Men, and abroad of the
Ale-house-keepers that are his Customers.

These Arguments ruined that wretched Design, and I pray let it sleep in its
Rubbish.

Afterward one Mr. Vane deceased, proposed a Design to make Tin the fundus of
a Bank; to be managed for His Majesty's advantage by Commissioners that were
able Merchants, that could pay the Miners by Contract for the Tin quarterly,
and be reimbursed by Sales, when it should bear a price, or by others that
would have credit in the said Bank: And His Majesty to promote the same, bought
up 60000 l. of Tin when it was cheap, to wit, at 3 l. 8 s. 6. d. the Hundred
weight, of which this was the event:

The Plot breaking out, and the Parliament not sitting, such Contract could not
be made with the Miners; and the said Tin, after it had with Warehouse room,
and Interest of Stock, cost about 3 l. 16 s. the Hundred weight, was sold at
the African-House for about 3 l. the Hundred weight, or little more; and those
that bought it so, Shipped off most of it to Holland, and are ruined by the
bargain. And the cause is this:

The East Indies abounds with Tin, which the Dutch buy there at about 5 d. a
Pound, and bring it home for Ballast Freight free; and they have brought home
so much in former years, as to bring down the price of ours. See a Book of the
East India Trade printed in 1667. where in page 9. you have this passage:

As for Tin, there is vast quantities in some parts of India, the Dutch during
the time of the late proeemption of Tin having brought home in two years 4 or
500 Tuns: And it might be more advantageous to the English Company, not only to
transport Tin from one part of India to another, rather than to send it from
England; but also to bring Tin from India to England, for Ballast of their
Ships that come with Pepper from Bantam, did they not prefer the Kingdoms
Interest before their private Profit.

The Dutch, in August 1678. brought home, as a Letter from Holland mentions,
above 150 Tuns, which is said to be 5 s. a Hundred weight better than ours; and
at first sold it at 3 l. 5 s. the Hundred weight, then fell to 3 l. then to 2
l. 15 s. and ours would not sell for above 2 l. 10 s.

The Case being thus, to apply a Remedy I must humbly Address my self to the
Honorable the Members of Parliament that serve for the Counties of Devon and
Cornwall; and Propound,

That whereas we now in England make Salt the best yet known in the World, and
are notwithstanding much oppressed by Foreign Salt; to Redress which, the
Salt-workers have for many years endeavored to bring on a small Excise on our
own, to recompense His Majesty for the loss of the Customs of Foreign, to be
kept out by a high Duty.

1. That you be pleased no longer to oppose such Excise, upon pretense that our
English Salt will not cure your Pilchards.

I have a Treatise of Salt ready for the Press, showing the several ways of
making of Salt in England and other Countries, and setting forth the Excellency
and manner of using our own in curing both Flesh and Fish, for the longest of
Voyages through the hottest of Climates.

2. That you vouchsafe to make use of such opportunity to remove all burdens
upon Tin, as well Sealing Duty of 4 s. a Hundred weight, which may come to 5000
l. per annum (except a competent Recompense to the Officers for sealing such as
is free from Iron and Dross, according to Constitution;) as also exporting Duty
of 7 s. 4 d. a Hundred, which may come to 7000 l. a year, or more.

3. That then a Farm of all the Tin the Mines produce, be let to the Turkey and
Pewterer's Company; the one will so regulate the Price abroad, and the other at
home, that we shall not be undermined by the Dutch.

This done, the said Companies may erect a safe Bank, and not be damaged,
albeit they have Tin on their hands to a vast quantity and value. The
advantages of Banks are great, whereof I shall mention but one; It enables the
Hollanders to Trade with a dead stock: to wit, when a Laden Ship arrives, the
goods are appraised, deposited in the Bankers Warehouses and Credit given at
home or in Foreign parts, for about three quarters of their value; which is an
incredible advantage in Trade.

I further humbly represent to you, that in the Usurper's time an Excise of a
half penny a Gallon brought in 26000 l. per Annum when Fishery-Salt was
excepted, and paid nothing, the which was observed to be a notable back door
and a Cloak to many fallacious pretenses, whereas laying the duty universal,
the revenue raised by Fishery Salt, being employed for the advantage of a
Fishery Trade, shall much more advance the design, than the payment of such
duty can hinder it, especially seeing our Neighbors cannot be furnished with
Salt for that purpose so good and cheap, as we by 12 or 15 per Cent; And in
case the same be employed in the Royal Fishery Company at London, out-parts may
complain their Fisheries are discouraged; to which may be replied that at
London a duty is paid upon Ballast, but not the like in the out-ports or most
of them, where a revenue may be levied on Ballast to promote their respective
Fisheries; And if such duty be laid universal and well managed it may produce
38000 or 40000 l. a year. And such a stock as that Employed to encourage our
Manufactures, shall enrich the Nation much above a Million a year; I offer how
and most humbly move you to promote:

1. In setting up a Fishery Company, to have 10000 l. a year given them, to
Build Ships and Vessels to encourage Adventurers to undertake the Fishery
Trade, and the making of Twine Nets, Canvas, and Cordage, at Clerkenwell
workhouse, not only for their own use, but also for his Majesty's stores; as
is hereafter propounded. And if they be rendered a Council of Trade, (for which
reasons are afterward given, why they are or may be a most proper
constitution,) they will go far in earning such benevolence, and doubtless give
such advice as followed shall redress the aggreivances of the Nation about
Trade and Manufactures.

2. There is a new Art of preparing, whitening, and dressing both of Hemp and
Flax, that shall render it of a silver Color, so fine that of one pound of it
a thread may be made 20 Miles long, and in value to 50 s. or 3 l. Hence we want
no Foreign Linen nor Canvas, which may be barred out by a high duty.

Of the refuse or Tow thereof, of Rags, Old Fishery Netts and Sails, may be
made Paper; whereof we spend in England in Writing and Printing, about 1000
Reams a day, or to the value of 120000 l. per Annum. Good Paper is made in
Germany and Holland; and the Art thereof is attained in England; but to
encourage the same here, there wants a higher duty on Foreign Paper; and a
Company with a good stock to undertake the same; the which might be the
Stationers Company, with other Adventurers; to whom for encouragement might be
allowed the use of 5000 l. per Annum Gratis; to be taken out in Stationary
Wares for the supply of all his Majesty's Offices.

3. By the like encouragement, the Upholsterers with others might be induced to
undertake the Manufacture of Tapistry hangings, the benefit of gaining such
Manufacture is great, viz.

1. It will save an expense of Foreign Wool, and beget an expense of our own,
to the value of One hundred thousand pounds per Annum, now imported in
Tapestry-hangings.

2. It will cause our Clothes to go off in Turkey in Barter, to procure raw
Silk to work up with the said Hangings.

3. It will in the balance of Trade save the value of such Hangings yearly to
the Nation, and in time become a Staple Commodity to Ship off, in regard we can
have Wool, Silk, and Provisions, much cheaper here than in Flanders, and
Brabant, the sole Provinces where this Manufacture was formerly made, the skill
whereof is now well attained in England; but Encouragement in its Infancy by
keeping out Foreign, and a Stock to carry it on, is wanting.

4. It will employ many thousands of poor People in Carding, Combing, and
Spinning, besides Dyers, Weavers, Worsted-workers, Drawers, and D^signers. See
the excellent Proposal in Print of Mr. Francis Poyntz, His Majesty's
Tapistry-maker.

5. The Parliament having lately built 30 Men of War, it is hazardous to trust
them and many more in the River of Medway; and besides, their Moorage and
Attendance is very chargeable: A wet Dock would add much to their safety, and
prevent much of the constant charge

A Proposal may be drawn where to make such a Dock, with a Pool behind it
wherein to keep Masts sunk, and at what Charge; which might be defrayed out of
the Excise upon Salt.

Lastly, if there be yet a Surplus, the Revenue of the Mint craves it; the said
Revenue was much too short for Coining any considerable quantity of our Moneys
into smaller pieces than Shillings, even before the Prohibition of French
Wines, (which paid 10 s. a Tun Coynage-duty) and became a notable Abridgment of
such Revenue, namely, 6000 l a year. Moreover to Coin more Moneys small, is the
best way to accommodate the People, and prevent its Exportation.

Now, after a long Digression, having showed that our Commodities will not
yield the intended rising Price abroad, it seems ridiculous to suppose they
should rise, lying on our hands at home.

I proceed to show the languishing Condition of our Foreign Trade, and that in
opposition to those gross ignorant Flatterers, that say, England was never more
thriving, our Trade never greater, nor safer, and so endeavor to beget an
Enmity in the Gentry, or Country Party, against the City, the Merchants, and
Trading part of the Nation.

As to our ready Money, if we have about 7000000 of People in England and
Wales, as Mr. Grant, Sir William Petty, and others, on rational grounds
suppose, and but 1000000 of ready Money, as Mr. Mun, and others, guess; these,
if equally distributed, would not be 3 s. a piece.

As to our Foreign Trade, I begin with that of the East India, where the Dutch
have not less than 50 or 60 Men of War, and such vast numbers of Trading Ships,
that it is ordinary to see 140 Sail at a time in Batavia Road, from 300 Tuns
burden to 1400 Tuns, not to mention 37 Magazines, and 20 considerable Forts,
as we read, asserted in the printed Translations of two French Treatises of the
East India Trade. How small our number of Trading Ships thither is, (to wit, 15
or 16) and how great our danger* I need not to mention.

As to the West India Trade, they have in a former War got Surinam from us,
which (as the late Lord Brereion affirmed) has sometimes yielded about 3000
Tuns of Sugar in a year, and will yield as much of that Commodity, Tobacco,
etc. as they can get hands to Plant and manage, and being on the Main, is more
free from Hurricanes, and more temperate, than the Leeward Islands; amongst the
Westwardmost of which, they have one called Curasao, the Mart for their
Negro's; amongst the Eastwardmost they have Tabago, and claim two little
Islands from us, to wit, Sabia, and Stacia alias Eustachia, near St.
Christopher's, which the French took from us in 1666. and by the Treaty of
Breda were to restore, but baffled us* selling them to the Dutch, from whom our
Governor Colonel Stapleton took them in 1673. and the Dutch under Everson
retook them in 1674. he being gone, valiant Stapleton retook them the same
year; and on the Conclusion of the last Peace with the Dutch, it not being
known (as is presumed) that they were in our hands, we agreed to restore what
was taken from them, and they what was took from us; accordingly they restored
to us New York, and expect to have Sabia and Stacia from us, which, if we keep,
will do us no good; but if we restore much hurt, for whilst the Dutch had them,
they framed the Timbers of Sloops in Holland, carried them thither in the holds
of their Ships, and there completely built them, a Sloop being a Vessel of
about 25 or 30 Tuns burden, and with these they went a Trading by stealth to
replenish our almost-ruin'd Islands with Negro's in barter for Commodities, to
wit, Cottons, Sugar, Tobacco, Indigo, Ginger, Fustick, and other dying Stuffs;
and by virtue of such Trade with the French which they allow, and with us by
stealth or connivance, they have some years laden home many Ships, as 12 or
more, of Goods of the growth of those Islands* to His Majesty's great loss in
the Customs, and carrying them home into Holland, and thence Exporting most of
them to Foreign Markets almost Custom free, were capacitated to under-sell us
12 or 15 per cent. and it is their chiefest aim in getting Islands there not so
much to Plant, as to drive on this kind of Trade. How great our loss of Negro's
and Inhabitants was in 1666. off the Islands of St. Christophers, Montserat,
and Antego, is not so proper to mention as bewail, in regard the French have
more Islands full Manned, and a considerable Fleet commonly abroad in those
Parts.

Thus we see the danger of our West India Trade, except that of Newfound-Land,
for poor Jack in which we are undermined by the French, and New Englanders by
aid of 1000 of our own Seamen that stayed there on shore in 1665. to avoid the
Service against the Dutch, where in a following years expedition our damage was
so much, that the Town of Dartmouth alone lost 8000 l. but of this more largely
in my Salt Treatise.

Before I come to our Streights Trade, let us consider the Dutch advantages
over us at home, did they Trade merely not to export again, which are these:

1. Their Ships lying for the most part at or near their own Doors or
Warehouses, they save Lighterage and Cartage.

2. They save Interest of Money, not paying Duties there 'till a Sale, whereas
here we pay Customs upon entry.

3. Their 7 Provinces, Switzerland and Germany, spend more imported Goods than
England can spend; these Countries are furnished by Boats and Vessels, some of
40 Tuns, that go above 500 miles up the Rhine, as far as Franckfort, which is
not now hard to do by aid of towing Engines in Boats. The late Lord Brereton
affirmed, the French make way up the River Rhodanus, one of the most rapid
hitherto known, by a new Invention, after the rate of 4 or 5 miles an hour.

4. Down these Rivers they are furnished with Rhenish Wines, and other German
Commodities, in large flat-bottom'd Vessels built of great Timber, never
intended to return, out of which they build their Doggers, Busses, and Fishery
Vessels, at about half the Rate we can do the like in England.

5. Their Bank enables them to borrow Money, and to Trade with a dead Stock,
that is, Goods there deposited: By aid of such Bank, they in former years
furnished about 80 Sail of Trading Merchants Ships in the Streights of about
600 Tun, and 30 Guns each, with a Stock of ready Money to be let out at
Bottomree; that is to say, the Money is lent to Jews, upon taking in a Cargo of
Goods at one Port, at the rate of 10 per cent. for Interest and freight, less
or more, according to agreement, the Owners to run all hazards whatsoever of
Shipwreck, Pirates, etc. and when the Ship arrives at the Port whereto she is
bound, the Money is received on board before the Goods are delivered on shore:
In the mean while the Owners ensure at a moderate rate at home, by this means
sending out their Ships with East India, and Northern Commodities of Russia,
the Sound, etc. they keep them in long Employment abroad. I have seen 40 of
these kind of Ships at once employed as Men of War in the Venetian Fleet, when
the English have not had above two or three; neither have we the like way of
employing our Ships abroad, or little practice it.

6. The Dutch Trade, as Carriers, to supply all Foreign Markets with all sorts
of Commodities, the English Trade chiefly to export their own Goods, and
furnish Returns for their own Expense: And this comes to pass by reason we pay
Customs, or a Duty, when we import Goods, and they Excise, that is a Duty not
paid 'till the Goods are sold for Expense. The Disparity is so great, that it
has been the prime cause of the greatness of the Dutch Trade, Wealth, and
Power at Sea.

In 1641. Mr. Jews Roberts represented to the Long Parliament, in his Book
called The Treasure of Traffic, two Examples thereof, to wit, suppose two
Ships of equal burden of 300 Tuns each, to come out of the River of Bourdeaux
laden with Wine, the one arrives at London, and pays Duties inward, the other
at Amsterdam, and then both Export; the Charges at London come to about 1200 l.
and at Amsterdam 60 l. and in two Ships of Tobacco of 200 Tuns each, the
charges shall be here 1000 l. and in Holland 120 l.

And by reason hereof the Hollanders use to employ about 300 Sail of Ships
every Winter to bring in French Wine and Brandy to Ship off again, to the
quantity of 40000 Tuns, by which they could not get less than 2 or 300000 l.
and 200 Sail more for Salt. I have twice seen Fleets of theirs of about 500
Sail at a time in the Isle of Wight, whereas the English only trade for 11 or
12000 Tuns of Wine yearly to spend.

The Case being thus, and our building and sailing with more hands more
chargeable, it is no wonder we do not much thrive, albeit we drive on rather a
great Navigation, than a profitable Trade.

This inconvenience was long since represented to King James by Sir Walter
Rawleigh, as we find in his little Book of Observations upon Trade, printed in
1653. page 10. in these words:

Of this their smalness of Custom (meaning in Holland, Hamburgh, etc.) inward
and outward, we have daily Experience; for if two English Ships, or two of any
other Nation, be at Bourdeaux, both laden with Wine of 300 Tuns a piece, the
one bound for Holland, or any other petit States, the other for England, the
Merchant shall pay above 900 l. here in Duties, when the other in Holland shall
be cleared for 50 l. and so in all other Wares and Merchandises accordingly.

It ought to be an Instruction to a Council of Trade, to State an Account
thereof on every Commodity.

He proceeds, and says* That this draws all Nations to Traffic with them, and
although it seems but small Duties which they receive, yet the multitudes of
all kind of Commodities and Coin that is brought there, and carried out by
themselves and others, is so great, that they receive more Customs and Duties
to the State (besides Excise) by the greatness of their Commerce in one year,
than England does in two years, for the hundredth part of the Commodities are
not spent in Holland, but vended into other Countries, which makes all the
Country Merchants to buy and sell, and increase Ships and Mariners to transport
them. My Travels and meaning is, neither has been to diminish your Majesty's
Revenues, but exceedingly to increase them, etc.

This might be remedied, by changing that part of the Duty of Customs that
concerns Foreign Goods, into an Excise, to be managed in the same places, and
by the same Offic^rs, and that without detriment to the Revenue, laying the
Excise upon the Expense, especially of Goods we may want, or best spare, high,
and yet hardly raise the price of them, for where Goods are plenty they will be
cheap, and People will be rather content with a small profit at home, than run
the hazard of a greater abroad.

If the advice of our renowned Hero had been followed, the Dominion of the Sea
had never been disputed, which if once gained by our Adversaries, (as an
eminent Peer in his Speech, well observed) is never to be lost, or recovered;
and if so; we might possibly be at their mercy: whether the River of Thames
should be stopped from Coals and Trade or not.

That we have lost the Greenland, Muscovia and Fishery Trades, is notorious.
And all this digression, is but to render Gentlemen that may possibly meet with
this discourse, more kind in their measures toward the trading part of the
Nation: especially at such a time, when our staple Commodities, and Foreign
Trades are under such circumstances: and we not out of danger of our Neighbors
entering into a Conjunction against us.

The Remedy we Propounded in the Third Argument, will destroy the greatest part
of the profit, the Irish could or might have had, by Trading with any but our
selves. We must therefore propound equitable Terms of amends, Namely: that
whereas we are now Furnished with Linen, and Canvas, from Foreign parts, to
the value of much above a Milion a Year: We ought to encourage the planting of
Hemp, and Flax, and the Manufactures thereof, by keeping out Foreign, both in
Ireland and at home: And by taking off all that Ireland can furnish* allbeit,
it be to the value of 400 Thousand Pounds a Year: in that Commodity, and in
building and fitting out (if the Fishery Trade be well encouraged) Ships and
Fishery Vessels, Cordage, Twine, and Nets, Sails, and Barrels: which may be
done there at Cheap rates, so by that means encourage their industry; and
receive payment for the Debt, payable to England aforesaid; and for that great
value of goods that used to be exported hence into Ireland. And withal allow
them a Trade to our American plantations.

This was the Advice of Mr. Baker, and many eminent Merchants, given to Oliver
and his Council; in 1658. as we find it, in Page 14 of his Book, Entitled, The
Merchants Petition and Remonstrance: consented to by the Lord Mayor, etc.

How great Prudence, and Right State Policy were it, That all encouragements,
and immunities, should be given to those of Ireland, that should Sow, Flax, and
Hemp, and that the same might be made into Linen; whereby England might become
dependant on Ireland for the same. Which would make that Country to become very
Rich, and Flourish; And so the wealth of these Nations would be kept within
themselves. And for a mutual Correspondency; all the wools of Ireland, shall be
brought into England: and converted into Manufactures. And these Manufactures
Exported into Ireland, to pay neither Custom nor Excise. Whereby you will
still keep Ireland dependant on England; according to the practice of the King
of Spain, in the West Indies: Where Vines for Wines, Olave Trees, for Oils
will grow better than in Spain. Yet none are suffered to be planted, upon pain
of Death; because they may keep them dependant on Spain, for the Commodities of
their own growth, and by which comes unto them most benefit. For if they should
have permitted the planting of these in the West Indies: they would not have
needed that Assisttance from Spain. The West Indies being large Territories:
and the Ground of little value; And the Ground of Ireland, being of: far less
value, than that of England; an Acre there, not being worth 4 s. which is here
worth 40 s. And Provisions being so much cheaper, and consequently the Labors
of men, they may afford their Wool cheap; which being wrought into
Manufactures, and that Country better situated than England, for Foreign
Exportations, they might afford them the one half cheaper than the English
should be able to do. So that Ireland in time, would get all the Trade from
England; And it will be no prejudice to them, to bring their Wools into England.

Now the price of Wool, will not therefore be the Cheaper in England: rather
they will have thereby a greater value, because the Commodities that are made
of the same, will be exported again into Ireland; and, Foreign parts, where
the prices of these Manufactures would otherwise be lessened. And consequently
the Wools, by how much they should make, and Export from Ireland, etc.

This occasions me to say, that Carolina is a Plantation that yields Wines,
Oils, Silks: As Sir Peter Colliton, and others proved before his Majesty's
late Council of Plantations.

The Council of Trade aforesaid, in the 12 Article, are desirous of an
Accommodation; and thus urge.
If the Titles of Estates in Ireland, be the more hazardous and expensive, for
that England, and Ireland, are not under one Legislative Power. If Ireland till
now, has been a continued charge to England; If the reducing the last
Rebellion did cost England three times more in Men and Money, than the
substance of the whole Country, when reduced was worth.

If it be just that men of English birth, and Estates, living in Ireland,
should be represented in the Legislative power. And that the Irish should not
be judged by those, who they pretend usurp their Estates: it then seems just
and convenient, that both Kingdoms should be United, and Governed by one
Legislative Power: nor is it hard to show how this may be made practiable; nor
to satisfy, repair, or silence those who are interested, or affected to the
contrary.

ARTICLE 13. Articles of the Council of Trade before mentioned, at large.
IN the mean time, it is wonderful, that men born in England; who have Lands
granted to them by the King, for Service done in Ireland* to the Crown of
England, when they have occasion to reside, or Negotiate in England, by their
Country men, Kindred, and Friends, should be debarred, to bring with them
Food, whereupon to live. Nor suffered to carry money out of Ireland: Nor to
bring such Commodities as they fetch from America directly home, but round
about by England: with extreme hazard, and loss, and be forced to Trade only
with strangers. And become unacquainted with their own Country; especially
when England gains more than it losses, by a free Commerce, as Exported
hither, above 3 times more than it receives form hence. Insomuch, as 95 l. in
England, was worth about 100 l. of the like money in Ireland, in the free time
of Trade.

ARTICLE 15.
The value of the Estates in Ireland, of such persons as do usually live in
England; the Interest of the Debts of Ireland, due and prayable to England: The
pay of the Forces of Ireland, now in England; The Expense and Pensions of
Agents, and Sollicitors, commonly residing in England, about Irish Affairs: the
expense of Irish and English Youths: now upon their Education, beyond the Seas.
And lastly, the supposed profit of the two great Farms now on Foot, do
altogether make up more than two Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year. As a Debt
payable to England, out of Ireland.

ARTICLE 16.
The value of the Cattle, viz. (Live Oxen and Sheep) Beef, and Mutton: carried
out of Ireland into England; was never more than 140 Thousand Pounds per an.
The Freight, Hides, Tallow, and Wool, of the said live Cattle; were worth
about 60 Thousand Pounds, of the said 140 Thousand: And the value of the goods
imported out of England, into Ireland, when the Cattle Trade was free. Was
between Triple* and Quadruple: the Net value of the Oxen, and Sheeps Flesh;
transported from hence, into England.

Concerning the New Art of Preparing Flax, and Hemp, before mentioned; it has
formerly been imparted to diverse Members of Parliament, in the Words following.
(The Proposers name, being Franciscus Strick, a Flemming)

1. HE has an Art, to Dissolve it, and make it extraordinary Fine, Soft, and
of a Silver Color; so that both the Flax, and Tow, may be Spun to an
extraordinary fineness, and even Thread.

2. The Flax dressers, that dresses Flax the ordinary way in all places, cannot
produce more than One Pound, and a Quarter, out of a stone of Flemish Flax,
which stone ways Six Pounds. And the Proposer can produce Four Pounds and a
half fine, out of the said Six Pounds; that shall Spin as fine a Thread as
theirs, and shall bear a price current with the same.

3. In the dissolving, he takes nothing from the Flax, but the Earthy ponderous
and unprofitable substance: which they must of necessity take out at last,
after the great charges, in the Hackling and Spinning of the said Flax.

4. They must Boil, or Scour their Thread, or Twine, after it is Spun, to take
out that filthiness, which the Proposer takes out before: And in so doing, they
lose out of every Pound of Twine, one quarter of a Pound; which is more worth,
than the whole stone of Flax, before it was prepared.

5. The Proposers Twine or Yarn, needs not to be Boiled after it is Spun, or
any other thing done to it. Only given to the Weaver, or Throwster: to be
Woven, or Twined, into fine Thread.

6. It will be an evener Thread, and the Weaver needs not to stiffen it, (with
size,) as they do their own Thread, by which means it will be much easier and
more speedily Twined, and will be much stronger: thereby the stock will have
more speedy returns. The Proposer's charge being but small, in the preparing
of it.

7. The Tow may be spun as well as the Flax; and the reason is, because of its
extraordinary fineness, before it is hackled. For in the Hackling, it is only
drawn together, and in the spinning, is easily drawn out again; And it is
appraised, or rated, according to the fineness thereof.

8. Of Three Pounds, or less, of this Yarne: there may be pieces of Holland
Woven, cantaining 50 Else flemish, or 30 Else English measure: Or fine Sewing
Thread, from Ten Shillings a Pound weight, to Three or Four Pounds Sterling the
Pound weight.

9. What is affirmed concerning Flax, is common to Hemp. It being prepared the
same way; And there may be made of it, all sorts of died Thread; fine Tykes for
Beds, all sorts of Fringes, may be, and commonly are Woven of the Hempen Yarn:
And thereof better Linen Cloth may be made, than is generally made of Flax in
England: as hitherto practiced.

10. Also a way will be found, to draw the Negotiation of the French Sail
Cloth, and all kind of Tackle, concerning Ships, in as small or big Cordage, as
all other Nations afford, a Third part lighter, stronger, and lesser stowage;
to more profit to the English Nation, and Companies of Merchants, as well as
particular Trades.

Thus far the Proposer. Others add, that the Hurds, offall refuse, or Tow, of
Flax, and Hemp, will serve to make a weaker, or a worser sort of Linen, or a
good Printing and Writing Paper, here in England; some Trials of all sorts
whereof have been lately, (and never before) made, by Mr. Henry Million,
Stationer in the Old Bayley; who deserves well of the whole Nation; for his
indefatigable pains, in promoting the Paper, Woollen, and Linen, Manufactures;
and well understands the Art of preparing of Hemp, and Flax.

And whereas it is objected, that English Hemp, even that which is dew wet, and
not River wet, is not so long; nor will not take Tarr, to make Cables of, as
Swedish Hemp does, and consequently, has not that strength, or durability.

To this it is answered. That it has been affirmed at the Royal-Society; That
the late Earl of Strafford, sent over an Agent, to Riga, to observe on what
Ground, Hemp, and Flax Royal, as they call it, grew there: And to bring over
some of the seed, etc. which being planted in Ireland, grew very well. And that
the Hemp being fine dressed, took Tarr; why may not the like be done in England?
and some say it is in Yorkshire: the reason our Hemp will not take Tarr, is
conceived to be, either because it is not fine enough dressed, or over hard* I
have heard of a Rope maker, that having wetted our Hemp in May dew, steeved the
same for some time; that it might somewhat swelter, moisten, or impair it self;
and then it took Tarr but although our Hemp should not be fit to make great
Cordage; as Cables, and Halsers. Yet it is much coveted, and used by
Foreigners, and our selves, for small rigging: And is affirmed to be much
lighter, and stronger, than any Foreign Cordage of the same size.

I believe, there only wants some good Experiments to be made, to determine the
matter, whether our English Hemp, will take Tarr: and hope some of the Lords of
the Committee, of his Majesty's Privy Council for Trade, will give order, to
some of his Majesty's Rope-makers, to try the Experiments, before the
Royal-Society.

Enquiry being made at the Royal-Society, what was known, concerning the
aforesaid Art of, preparing Flax and Hemp, Answer was given,

1. That this Art of preparing, and dressing of Flax, and Hemp, was long known,
and practiced, by Mr. Charles Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk: who many
Years since, had showed diverse Examples of Hemp, and Flax, so prepared; as also
to one Mr. Stephens. And that Engines, or Tools might be contrived, so far to
facilitate the work, that one man therewith furnished, should dispatch as much,
as diverse could do without.

2. That there are diverse Marsh, Sandy Clay, and other Grounds, on the Coasts
of England, and Wales, belonging to the Crown, that ly wast, or turn to little,
or no benefit, that might properly be made use of, for planting of Hemp, and
Flax, which admirably prepares for Corn.

3. That Mr. Charles Howard, lately imparted this new art of preparing, and
Whitening of Flax, and Hemp, to one Mr. Fermin, who before he knew it, is said
to have Spun Thread so fine, out of Flax, that one Pound has yielded 20
Thousand Else, but now can produce much more.

4. How much the working of Rough Hemp, into Cables, and wrought Cordage, has
been discouraged; may be taken from an instance at Yarmouth, put in Print, by
one Mr. Bowers, a Merchant of that place; who presented his Papers, to diverse
Members of the House, setting forth.

1. That in Anno 1653. Four Rope-makers of Yarmouth, wrought up 208 Tuns of
Hemp, for the then Parliament, besides what they, and Six Master Rope-makers,
wrought up for private uses, a good part whereof, was English Hemp.

2. That the whole Town at present, does not make 7 Tuns of Cordage in a Year.
Whereas in those times, there was 4 or 500 stone, at 14 lib. the stone, of
English Hemp, (besides Foreign) wrought up weekly into Cordage, and now it
falls short of 30 Stone.

Mr. Cook, in a discourse of the Norway Trade, says, that we have lost the
making of 2800 Tuns of Cables, and Cordage, Yearly, in the County of Norfolk.
The cause thereof is:

The Customs of Cordage, and Cable Yarn, being Foreign wrought, and commonly
bad, are but 8 Pence the Hundred weight, the same with the Customs of rough,
or unwrought Hemp.

The Consequences hereof are.
1. The Importation of Hemp unwrought, is obstructed.

2. The Marsh Grounds on the Coasts, and within Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Essex,
Kent, etc. Formerly Sown with Hemp, either ly waste, or are now for want of a
proportionable Consumption Sown with Corn, to an incredible detriment.

3. The Employment and skill, many poor People might attain unto, in Sowing,
Planting and Manufacturing such Hemp, either for Netts, Twine, Canvas, Cordage,
etc. Is lost, and for want thereof, Rents, and Lands, are fallen, and the
Parishes are burdened with such poor.

4. The Nation, if a War breaks out, when his Majesty's stores are not
thoroughly replenished, may ly under a surprise, and either be barred the
Sound, or be driven to great inconveniences.

The Remedy.
Is, to continue the present duty of 8 d. per. Hundred weight on unwrought, or
rough Hemp, and to enlarge the duty of Customs on Cordage, and Cable Yarn,
imported, 5 or 6 s. the Hundred weight.

The Consequences will be.
1. If Hemp be either imported or sown here, it will give Employment to the
People.

2. If Cordage, and Cable Yarn, be still imported (as it is like, it will be
for some Years) the duty is multiplied to his Majesty's advantage; As for
instance, the Town of Yarmouth, Yearly spends, 2 Thousand Tuns of Cordage, or
thereabouts, which at 8 d. the Hundred weight Custom comes to 1333.6 s. 8 d.
Whereas, at 6 s. the Hundred weight, the Customs would come to 12000. l. The
like is the case of other places.

Lastly, the expense of the Nation in Linen, Cordage, and Canvas, cannot be
less than a Million a Year. With which, it is fit we should supply our selves,
as far as we can, by discouraging Foreign, by an imposition, of a Penny an
Ell, and possibly a higher duty on Flax, and unwrought Hemp, to encourage the
Planting of it here, in which case we must be wary, that it be not oppressed,
with Taxes, and Tyths. Now to encourage the Manufacturing we offer,

A Proposal for the Advancement of the Fishery, and employment of the Poor.
FOrasmuch, as the Fishery probably connot prosper, without good
encouragements; and in time of peace, cannot well employ their Boys in Summer
time, and furthermore, a War may happen, and prevent Fishing; And
consequently, cause the adventurers to give over: To prevent such
inconveniences, it is proposed.

1. That the Royal-Fishery Company, undertake the making of Canvas, at
Clerken-well workehouse, to supply his Majesty's stores with, it being well
known, that our own Canvas is as good, and as strong, yea, better than any
Foreign.

2. That his Majesty be graciously pleased, to take off to the value of 10
Thousand Pounds per a^. paying for the same quarterly aforehand, allowing the
Company to gain half a Crown in the Pound, that in 10000 l. will come to 1250 l.

3. That the Company pay his Majesty 10 per cent. for the advance of the Money,
out of such bounty or benevolence, the Parliament shall be pleased to give,
which if but narrow: may be in this manner enlarged, by letting the Company
gain that in his Majesty's affairs, which otherwise must be got by others.

Courteous Reader, Thou may perceive the Advantage I have taken from a
report, agreed and drawn up by a Council of Trade in Ireland, and if we had
enjoyed a good one continually in England, with proper instructions, I believe
the Nation might have been twice as rich and much stronger at Sea, than now it
is. I my self about three years since, drew up a Draught of instructions: such
as do not interfere with the work of the present Committee, of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Council, for Trade, with a Narrative of the losses of our
English Fisheries, in all making about 7 Sheets of Paper, and intend to publish
the same: after it has obtained License, from one of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, for there are some things in it, of a private Nature, and
others that much concern the advancement of his Majesty's revenue, and
prevention of frauds.

The preamble is this. That as soon as such Council shall be constituted, and
their House agreed upon, that it be declared to all the Nation, in the Gazets,
and upon the Exchange: That his Majesty's Gracious intentions, in erecting the
same is to encourage the Manufactures, and employ the poor of the Nation. And
that hereupon, all Merchants, Tradesmen, Corporations, Counties, and places,
be invited and desired, to send up their Complaints, and aggreivances about
Trade, and Manufactures, or any Act relating thereto, to the Secretary, who is
to Collect, and draw up out of all Papers sent in, or otherwise procurable, all
that can be pertinently said, on any argument of Trade, by way of Debtor and
Creditor: all that can be said, pro on one side or the left hand Page; and all
Contra on the right hand Page, observing the like Method, in Replies, and
Duplies.

The first of the Inland instructions was about the Irish Act, to consider some
Laws in being, whether they hinder, or encourage Trade, particularly the Irish
Act about Cattle. And to be the better satisfied about the same, to send to all
Counties, and Corporations, for their sentiments therein, how much they
conceive they are benefited, or damaged thereby, and to give an account of how
much feeding, and breeding grounds they have, and thence accordingly, to state
an Account, and Report in readiness, when called for, the like for the Act of
Navigation; and whether our Trade to the Sound be not obstructed thereby, and
the building of Ships, and Vessels, for the Norway and Fishing Trades hindered,
and what the Annual damage may be.

And the first Instruction about Foreign affairs was. That whereas, suits of
Law, in Chancery, about Merchants Accounts, depend long there, to the great
trouble of the Court, the vexation of the Masters, to whom the same are
referred, and in the event, to the ruin of the Parties concerned; to prevent
which, the Instruction is to obtain the Constitution of the Court of Merchants
in Holland, for ending Suits of that nature, and to consider whether the like
may not without inconveniency be put in practice here, and what additional
Laws, Constitutions, and Instructions, will be necessary for the settling
thereof.

The Reasons of such Instruction Mr. Baker thus renders:

That tedious Law Suits create great Expense, (which otherwise would go in
Trade to the benefit of the whole Nation) the makers of the Law not
understanding Accounts, could not provide for the same; and the Counselors
having their Study by the Law, and they and the Judges having no experience in
Merchants affairs, or skilled in Accounts, they cannot be so competent Deciders
and Judges thereof, and great inconveniences come unto all Traders for want of
such a Court (where the Parties alone and their Witnesses should be heard)
spending both their Moneys and their time in Law, and after many years of
Contest, for the most part their business is referred out of Chancery to
Merchants, or ended at Law, as it were, at hit or miss, when very often both
Parties have spent more than double the value of the thing they contested for,
being necessitated for every motion or trial to have many Lawyers on both
sides: Whereas in Spain, and other parts, there can be admitted for each Party
but one Lawyer, nor can there be more present in any of the Courts where the
Causes are tried, than one Lawyer for the Plaintiff, and another for the
Defendant; and to the eminentest of them 20 s. is an extraordinary pay, when he
shall attend purposely for the hearing of that one Cause several days. To which
may be added, that it discourages Merchant-Strangers to live and trade with us.

Being loath to omit mentioning such an Aggreivance, I come now to give the
Reader a Copy of a Paper formerly drawn up to assert, that the Royal-Fishery
Company when well filled and constituted, are proper to be rendered A Council of
Trade, but with this limitation:

That it be not hence concluded that none but the Fishery Company, nor all of
them ought to be concerned in such a Council, nor that others shall be
excluded; the Regulation and Choice as to Number and Persons, is most humbly
submitted to His Majesty's grave Prudence, who by adding some eminent Persons
to such a Company, may have the more frequent Informations how such Affairs
move on.

The REASONS are,
1. Such Company did of late, and it is hoped will again consist of Members
enough, to wit, Nobles, Gentlemen, and Merchants, where out at all times to
have a sufficient Choice.

2. Such Company connot thrive (at least in its Infancy) without good
Encouragements from the Crown or the Nation, (by its Representative in
Parliament) and therefore in lieu of such Encouragements, may be put on Duty to
earn the same.

3. In regard of the Capacity the Members thereof are proposed to be in, to
wit, of obtaining the Honor of being of the number of such Council, it will
excite many who aim at His Majesty's and the Nation's welfare, to become
Adventurers in such Company, which in probability may in some time become as
splendid as either the East-Indian or African Company, who thrive already
without any such Encouragements.

4. If such Company (at least for some years) be allowed House-Rent by His
Majesty, and Salaries to their Officers for doing the work of the Fishery, and
withal, that of the Council, it is as good as so much given to the said
Fishery Company; whereas to settle it on any other Constitution, were to put
His Majesty to a needless Charge.

5. Yea, and it may be suspected to almost a fruitless Charge, for it is not
reasonable to expect that eminent Persons named to be Members of such Council
shall be so diligent in attending an Affair, whereby they have no profit, nor
no particular concernment of their own, as wherein they have, especially if
their House have an inconvenient Situation.

6. If a War break forth and hinder Fishery Affairs, the Company must then lose
House-Rent and Officers Salaries, which would be a discouragement to them, and
may by this means be prevented.

7. The main work of such Council, will be first to call for and receive the
Complaints, Sense, and Informations of the trading People of the Nation about
Aggreivances concerning Trade, and the improvements of Manufactures, and the
amendments of Acts relating thereto, and thence to draw up all that can
reasonably be said pro or con*

Former Councils have not prescribed this, which ought to be the main work of
the Officers, and such Councils have been so slow or ill paid, that little of
this kind could be expected; whereas it is supposed the Royal Fishery will be
so well paid by Effects in their hands, that there will be no failure of the
like kind hereafter: And doubtless it is very material to encourage the writing
on Arguments of Trade as here propounded.

8. A Royal Fishery Company well constituted with a good Stock, may furnish the
Sound with Herrings before the Dutch, by using the Islands of Lewis and
Shetland; yea also Portugal, Spain, and the Streights, by fishing in the Irish
Seas, where Herrings and Cod arrive six weeks sooner than in the Channel; yea
also with Cod and Ling caught about Anglesey: To which (besides the advantage
of time) may be added, the propinquity of Situation; yea, such Company may also
have a Trade to New England, for building of Vessels, and returning with Cod,
Salmon, and Sturgeon, (if it prove good and well-cured) and with poor Jack from
Newfound-Land; whence it may be reasonably presumed, such Company, by reason of
its Foreign vent and returns, may have a greater insight in Foreign Trade, than
any other constitution.

9. The planting of Hemp and Flax, and the Manufactures thereof, as also the
furnishing of materials for Paper (if not undertaking that Manufacture) and
consequently employing the Poor, and many Trades will much depend upon the
example and directions of this Company, whence they may be judged a better
constitution for Inland Affairs than any other, and are like to afford more
Parliament Men, to speak to matters of this nature.

Since the writing of this Treatise, there came to my hands a printed Paper of
the learned and most renowned Sir William Pe^^y, of the Royal Society, about
Irish Cattle: A Copy of it follows.

Some of the OBSERVATIONS made by W.P. upon the Trade of IRISH CATTLE.
1. THat the value of the Oxen and Sheep (their Hides, Tallow, and Skins
deducted) which were ever imported in one year out of Ireland into England,
were never worth above 80000 l. nor above the hundredth part of the Rents of
Land in England, nor above the hundredth part of the Butchers meat yearly spent
in England.

2. That Ireland never yet did, nor could spare, as many Sheep and Oxen alive
or dead, as would maintain a fifth part more People than now it has, that is
to say, than would maintain about 1300000 People, of which number there are
about 1100000 now in Ireland.

3. Whereas Ireland contains three quarters as much Land as England and Wales,
and there be above 6000000 of People in England it follows, that if Ireland can
furnish Flesh meat but unto 1300000, that E^gland cannot with equal plenty
furnish meat unto said 6000000.

4. The Owners of breeding Lands have since the Prohibition not gotten above 10
s. per Head more for their Cattle than before it which the Owners of the
feeding Lands have paid them and lost. Moreover the Mariners of England have
lost the getting of 9 s. 6 d. per Head for Freight and Primage, and the People
of England have lost 4 s. 6 d. per Head more for driving and grazing; the King
has lost 3 s. 6 d. per Head for Custom on both sides, besides Officers Fees;
and the Traders in Hides and Tallow have lost what they might have gained out
of 15 s. per Head; and the Merchants and Artizans of England have lost yearly
what they might have gained by 140000 l. worth of English Manufactures; the
Wool-growers of England have lost as much as their Wool is fallen; by reason of
the extraordinary Sheep-walks now in Ireland; the Landlords of Ireland resident
in England, have lost 5 percent. extraordinary for exchange of Money. Lastly,
the Bulk of the People of England have losts one Halfpenny for every pound of
Flesh meat they have spent, amounting for all England unto about 2000000 per
annum, of which great sum, the Owners even of breeding Lands have paid three
times more in the enhansement of Wages and Manufactures, than they got by the
raised price of their Cattle abovementioned.

5. Since this Prohibition, the Papists in Ireland (who are 800000 in number)
have gotten a Dispensation from Rome to eat Flesh five days in the week,
whereas formerly they did but four, in which extraordinary day of Indulgence,
there is as much meat spent by the Papists in a year, as ever was brought into
England.

6. Although a Beast worth 40 s. might be brought out of Ireland even to London
for about 20 s. yet the Land of England generally taken is worth five times as
much, Acre for Acre, as the Lands of Ireland generally taken; neither can the
Lands of Ireland rise up to a level of value with those in England, without the
Mission of some millions of People more into Ireland than now are there, nor
without the expense of more Millions in buildings and improvements, than all
Ireland now is worth; nor can the Lands of England fall down to a level with
those in Ireland, without vast Depopulations and Devastations preceding.

Every of the beforementioned particulars can be readily proved from grounds
of Sense, known, granted, or Authentic.

Here it is not improper to acquaint the Reader, that Ireland before the
Rebellion was planted with Native Irish, and the Lands were in their
possession; but now after so great a Desolation, and Destruction as the Wars
made, most of the Lands were planted and peopled by the English and Scotch, who
adventured their Lives and Fortunes in reducing it, who carried over with them
the best Cattle, Horses, and Sheep, England could afford, where they have
raised such a Breed, as will compare with the best in England for largeness and
fatness, and the Wool, Butter, and Cheese there raised, is not inferior to
what is made in England for goodness, and yet notwithstanding they have many
lean Cattle to spare, but their Sheep need no fattening.

The Laws there are made by a Parliament, consisting of most English and
Scotch, with aim especially to encourage the making of Cloth and Woollen
Manufactures, to the end, they may supply Foreign Markets, which they doubt not
to effect ere long at half the price English Cloth goes at: And they do by
their Laws discourage the bringing of their Wool into England, and have laid a
great Custom upon all Cloth, Stuffs, Stockings, and Hats, that shall be
imported out of England. This they do acknowledge in Print, and that they have
furnished Holland, Flanders, France, Portugal, Spain, and the Streights:
plentifully with Provisions, namely, Beef at 9 or 10 s. the hundred weight;
confessing, that not only English, but other Nations have their Factors
residing in Ireland, to buy up Beef, Fish, Tallow, and Hides, and that all
their Ports are well stored with Shipping, whereby they supply all those Parts
with Provision, and make their returns with those Commodities the Kingdom can
vend, which they can have much cheaper than from England, and the Surplus plus
they return in Money: This I take out of a Sheet, printed with Allowance by
J.B. in 1677.

The Particulars following are taken out of a Letter from Ireland, printed in
1677. viz.
Page 8. We find more advantage by Victualling Foreigners, than we had formerly
by a whole Sale in England.

Page 9. You were provided by a sufficient Act of Parliament to be the only
Mart for Wool, it being made Felony to transport it into Foreign Parts, and
Confiscation to import it to you otherwise than crude and unmanufactured.

Page 20. This is not to be exported neither without License, paying both the
King's Duty, and that to the Lord Lieutenant,

Page 9. Which is at least 2 s. a Stone, besides Freight, Factorage, and Market
Charges.

Page 20. All exported, must be first entered for England and pay these Duties,
though afterward it loses its way at Sea.

Page 11. An Account is given of their Progress in setting up the Woollen
Manufacture.

Much Provisions also and Goods they Ship off to our Plantations, from whence
it is probable in time we must export Money for our own supply.

Against this whole Discourse may be raised the following grand Objection, to
wit, an Opponent may insist, that the admission of Irish Cattle causes Rents
of breeding Grounds exceedingly to fall, contrary to the Interest of the Owners
and Farmers thereof; and this is the reason why Cattle, in themselves a
Blessing, are called a Nuisance.

Answ. The Objection is granted, and comes to pass, because we cannot Victual
our Neighbors and their Shipping, nor most of our own, nor is the sale of
Flesh much hindered by Fish or Izeland Cod, for of late years little or none
has been spent in His Majesty's Navy-Royal: But a remedy is propounded. On the
other side, the Owners of feeding Grounds, the Merchandising and Trading part
of the Nation, or Corporations, who bear above two Third parts of the Charge of
the Government, sustain the greater wrong, which in the event will be very
prejudicial, if not ruinous to the whole.

I my self have my life in Lands in Marshland in the County of Norfolk, which
tell from 32 l. to 17 l. a year, but is of late risen to 21 l. a year.

I know some Gentlemen Owners of feeding Grounds in our Midland Counties, whose
Rents are fallen above one quarter of what they usually made before the Irish
Act had a being, they know not to what other cause to impute it, and I have not
liberty to mention particulars.

Also there is a London Minister, who has Lands in Gloucestershire which fell
from 60 l. to 30 l. per annum, and both he and some of the Gentlemen aforesaid,
are forced to stock their Grounds, and keep them in their own hands, committing
the management to Bailiffs.

The Author of the Irish Letter, page 7. says, That if the business were now
to tell Counties, he has been lately assured from some in England, that those
Counties that find not themselves benefitted, and those that are really
aggreived by this Act, do by this time upon Experiment, and second thoughts,
make up the greatest Party.

And page 5. he says, That when it passed, it was not without some repugnance
at first in His Majesty.

The Reason is obvious, His Majesty could not but foresee some of the ill
consequences thereof, as namely, that it would cause his Duty of Customs to
fall, lessen our Navigation, much increase the charge of Victualling his Navy,
and disoblige all his British Subjects in Ireland, which might be of dangerous
Consequence.

But to restore an Union with them and at home, suppose they consent to the
terms Propounded in page 9, 23.

Then there will be a considerable Accession made to His Majesty's Revenue in
Ireland, to wit, near the value of all the Commodities exported out of that
Kingdom that come not to us, and this will help to maintain a Navy, there or in
the Channel; and such help is but highly necessary, for one of the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty was pleased to inform me, that 300000 l. a year,
supposing the same constantly allotted and paid to that use, would but defray
the ordinary annual Harbor Charges of Repairs, Yards, Moorage, the Wages of
Workmen and Laborers, the Salaries of Officers, and 14 Men of War at Sea.

Whereas to furnish Stores, build a necessary supply of Ships from time to
time, and maintain a competent Fleet abroad, will require a far greater Sum, as
has been represented to the late Long Parliament.

So that I hope if the Irish Act pass, it shall not be perpetual, and that in
the interim, our Grandees will propose, and receive terms of Accommodation with
Ireland.

If the former Measures take, these must be the Consequences.
1. The Poor will obtain Employment; in other Nations they have been their
Renown, Wealth, and Strength, but here on the contrary, our Shame,
Improverishment, and Burden; hence to employ the Poor, and to render idle
beggarly Persons profitable Members to the Kingdom, to reclaim Vice, and
encourage Industry by proper Expedients, cannot but be Subjects that may always
deserve and expect due encouragement from Authority, but more especially now,
when too too long empoverishments make us groan for Redress, which if obtained,
will be a bitter potion to our too powerful Neighbors abroad,

2 Navigation and strength will increase; and if we can be either happy or safe
without Navigation, and maintain it without a Fishery, and manage it without
Pilots, it is well; but if not, the Fishery is of an absolute and indispensible
necessity to the welfare, both of King and People.

3. The Merchants, and Trading part of the Nation, will be encouraged, and are
they not as Writers denominate them. The great Revenue of the King, the honor
of the Kingdom, a noble Profession, a School of Skill, the supply of our Wants,
the source of Employments, the improvement of our Manufactures, and cause of
our Exportation, the Nursery of our Mariners, the Walls of the Kingdom, the
means of our Treasure, the sinew of our Wars, and the terror of our Enemies.

4. I my self hope through Divine Bounty to obtain a good Employment to sustain
a numerous Family, having met with great Losses in public Affairs, however if
not, I have cast in my Mite, and I hope a Person whose business and study has
been the Argument of Trade, may have as much, if not a greater, liberty as
others, to propound how to remove the Encumbrances thereof, to the advantage, I
hope, of all Interests. Hence if His Majesty and the Nation, reap any benefit,
I have in a great measure obtained my

END
POSTSCRIPT.
THis Discourse has been all penned and printed in great have, to wit, in
about a Fortnight's time, and therefore could not be so well digested as were
to be wished, some Escapes we shall remark.

Page 1 line 25. for force, read force as to Fish. p. 11 l. 29. for more, read
worse, p. 15. l. 25. for not sell, read not then sell. I do not say our Tin was
sold for 2 l. 10 s. the hundred weight, I hear it was kept 'till theirs was
gone and yielded a better price, p. 20. l. 1. for these, read this. I am not of
Mr. Man's opinion, but believe the Cash of the Nation to be much more. p. 21.
l. 25. for about 600, read from 450 to 600. p. 23. l. 25. for this, read much
of this. p. 27. l. 26. for Yarn, read Yarmouth. p. 30. l. 21. for Councils,
read Courts.

Since the writing hereof, I met with a new ingenious Discourse of the
East India Trade, printed for Robert Boulter, Stationer, at the Turks-Head in
Cornhill; by which it appears, that the said Trade and Shipping is increased
since their last Account of it by me mentioned in page 20. to wit, says the
Author in page 23. The Company have 25 Ships and Vessels Trading in the
East Indies from Port to Port, besides 11 great Ships sent out last year. The
Author page 4. and 5. says, He is of opinion we cannot cope with the Dutch in
White Herrings, Fish, Salt droaging from St. Walls to the Eastland, or the
Russia or Greenland Trade, 'till the Interest of our Money be as low as theirs,
namely, 3 per cent. I add the remedy is unsufficient, we must also render
Provisions, and exporting Duties (of which see page 22.) cheaper than theirs,
in regard our Building, and Sailing with more hands is much dearer.

As to an Objection about want of People, page 3. it is hoped Sir William Petty
will be pleased to publish a Discourse he dedicated to His Majesty, Entitled,
Political Arithmetic, where in chapter 8. he asserts, there are spare hands enough
amongst His Majesty's English Subjects, to earn above two Millions a year more
than we do, see p. 10. of this Discourse.

THE CONTENTS.
THE reason of prohibiting Foreign Provisions or Wares Page 2 The value of the
Cattle from Ireland 3 Wools, great quantities carried from Ireland to Foreign
Parts 6 So of other Provisions and Fish 8, 9, 33, 34 A Proposal about Trading
to Ireland for their Provisions, Wo^l. and Manufactures, without damage either
to our selves or them, yea, to the great advantage of all 9 23 A low rate of
Interest will not raise Lands, unless Comm^ditie^ rise in price accordingly 11
The Declension of our Staple Commodities, to wit, of Cloth, Lead, and Tin 12,
13 Tin Farthings an abuse 14 Tin how to become the ^undus of a Bank 15, 16 An
Address to the Honorable Members of Parliament of Cornwall and Devon, about the
same, and about Salt 15, 16, 17 Proposals for advancement of the Fishery 17,
28, 29, 30, 31 And for encouraging and gaining the Manufactures of Paper and
Tapistry Hangings 18 Also about making a wet Dock for the Navy Royal 19 And
about a supply for Coining small Money at the Mint Ibid. The danger and
declining condition of our Foreign Trade 20 to 23 Articles taken out of the
Report of the Irish Council of Trade 24 A new Art of preparing of Flax and Hemp
26 Whether English Hemp will take Tar Ibid. The Manufacture of Cordage how lost
27 The Manufacture of Cordage and Canvas how to be restored 28 Arguments to
prove a Royal-Fishery Company a proper constitution to be rendered a Council of
Trade, and the benefits thereof 29, 30, 31 Mr. Baker's Proposal about a Court
of Merchants, for ending Lawsuits about Accounts, etc. 30 Some of Sir William
Pettys's Observations on the Irish Act 32 Proofs of Assertions taken out of
printed Papers about Irish Affairs 33, 34
More Arguments against the Irish Act may be met with at the end of a Book new
printed, Entitled, The Trade of England revived, with another Answer to their
grand Objection about the fall of Rents.


