A Modest and True Account OF THE Chief Points IN CONTROVERSY Between The
Roman Catholics, And the PROTESTANTS: TOGETHER With some Considerations upon
the SERMONS of a Divine of the Church of England.

By N. C.

Corripiet me Justus in Misericordia, and increpabit me; Oleum autem Peccatoris
non impinguet caput meum, Psalm. 141. ANTWERP: Printed in the YEAR, 1696.

THE PREFACE.
WHen first I thought of this Work, my Design was only to answer the most
material Objections in Dr. Tillotson's Sermons; without offering any Reasons or
Arguments, to prove the Tenets which He impugns. But upon second Thoughts,
considering that the Weaker, and more Ignorant sort of People, for whose Use I
chiefly designed it, might be easily shaken in their Faith, by the specious
Arguments of this Ingenious Man; and not a little startled at his Pretense to
Evidence of Sense and Reason, against the Doctrine of R. Catholics; and that
perhaps they had not the leisure, nor happily the will, to read over other
Controversies, where the said Doctrine is largely proved: I judged it would
contribute more to their satisfaction, and strengthen them more effectually in
their Faith, if I should lay down some of the Grounds on which their Belief is
founded; than barely to solve the Objections, and refer them to other Books for
the Proof of their Faith: Weak Capacities being commonly loath to take much
pains; and, what is worse, apt to forget what they read in one Place, before
they join it to that which they read in another: Whereas a brief Account of
their Faith, and some Considerations upon the Objections laid together, would
render the Task more easy, and the satisfaction more full.

But what influenced me most to take that Method, was this: A certain R.
Catholic Gentlewoman being very uneasy with her Friends, upon account of
Religion, was very much solicited by One, to whom she had some special
Obligations, to read Dr. Tillotson's Sermons, as the most effectual means to
make her see the Truth of the Protestant Religion, and the Errors of her own:
And to engage her the more in the matter, he read some of the said Sermons to
her, and highly commended them; concluding that nothing could be more plain,
than that she was very much wanting to her own Interest, if she should refuse
to read those Sermons, which (as he said) made out as clear as the Day, that
she was in an Error. Which when she told me, and withal added, that she should
be glad to have the Scruples, which these Sermons gave her, removed; and not a
little pleased to find that her own Faith was founded in Scripture, and in the
Authority of the Primitive Fathers, which it seems, she had not taken pains to
enquire into before: I promised her to contribute my Endeavors to her
satisfaction in both.

And this, in a word, is what chiefly determined me to prefix the Proof of each
Controverted Point to the Dr's Objections. How well I have succeeded in the
Performance, let others judge. This (with many other Defects) I am Conscious
of, that the apprehension of being too tedious, has made me contract my
Arguments and Reasons; and bring them within a narrower Compass than the Rules
of Discourse will well allow of. My Business it to instruct the Weak, and
Ignorant, not to please the Curious; and therefore, if I have delivered my
Thoughts plain and easy, I am content. It Is the Fate of Great Volums scarce
ever to be read all out, at least, by such as most need them; and so, by
multiplying of Reasons and Arguments, and dilating upon them, the whole is made
useless. Whereas small Treatises, of two or three days reading, are commonly
perused by every body, upon this sole Consideration, that if the Advantage be
not great, at least the Labor is but little.

For this Reason, in quoting the Fathers, I have multiplied their Number, nor
their Passages to that degree as might otherwise be expected. But to make
Amends, I took special care to bring no one Passage, to which any Learned
Protestant can justly except; being such as the most Judicious Critics do
acknowledge to be the Genuine Works of those Fathers, in whose Names they are
quoted. My Passages are, indeed, Small in Number, but Great in Authority. I
judged, that five or six of the Fathers, the most Eminent for Piety and
Learning, were sufficient Witnesses of the Faith of their Times; especially
when not contradicted by others. These Great Men I look upon as so many
Flameing Torches, set up to give Light to all future Ages. Their vast Learning
and Knowledge in Sciences, especially in the Law of God, is enough to persuade
any Man, that they could not be ignorant of any the least Point of their Faith;
and their Piety and Zeal for God's Honor, and His Holy Religion, sets them
above the suspicion of even Malice it self, of Writing, or Teaching, or
Practicing any thing that should appear to be contrary to the Faith and
Discipline of the Church; especially, since their learned Works do still
demonstrate how suddenly they were alarmed at the least Errors, or Innovations
in these Matters, and how zealously they wrote against, and branded the
Broachers and Promoters of Novelty. So that we may confidently assert, That
what these Fathers taught and believed, was undoubtedly the Catholic Faith; and
pronounce upon the strength of their Reasons and Authority, though we had no
other Arguments to prove it.

As to Dr. Tillotson's Sermons, because there are several Editions of them in
different Sizes, it will be requisite to let the Reader know what Edition and
Size I make use of. I have all that has been hitherto published of them, in
Eight Volums, in a large Octavo; whereof, the two first are of the Eighth
Edition; the third, of the Fourth; and all the rest, of the First Edition. But
the Three Last being published by Dr. Barker, after the Decease of the Author,
are Marked on the Back, and in the Title Page, 1st. 2d. 3d. Vol. which in my
Citations I point at thus. Vol. 1st. 2d. or 3d. Edit. post Obit. to distinguish
them from the Rest, which are Cited without Addition, only that of Volum and
Page.

Two things more seem to require I should here speak to, in order to bespeak
the Reader's Favor: The First, that it may seem to need some Apology, that in
Answering the Books of an Arch Bishop, I do not treat him with that Civility
and Respect, that is due to his Person and Character. The Second, that it may
seem very hardy and bold for a R. Catholic to engage in a Controversy, which
must needs offend many, especially at this time of day, when the most Innocent
of our Actions are liable to sinister Constructions: For it seems to carry a
face of Rashness and Presumption to provoke our Superiors, when we know it is
in their Power to crush and destroy us.

To the First I Answer; That I have endeavored, (as far as the Nature of the
Cause would allow it) to keep within the Compass of Civility and Respect; and
would have given no Man cause to complain, if his Conduct had not (as I
conceive) extorted some hard Words from me. It Is true, no manner of Dispute, or
Controversy, can Justify a Man's being Rude or Uncivil; yet, I believe every
one will allow, that it is not possible to manage a Controversy of this
Nature, and, at the same Time, to show the Respect that might be expected upon
other Occasions, without betraying the Cause. I have, indeed, on purpose,
forborne to give him any other Title than that of Doctor; because my Dispute
with him is not, as he was an Archbishop, but as a Dr. of Divinity; and
because I conceived, I might with less Disrespect use the necessary freedom of
speech under that Notion. However, if any of my Readers will please to do me
the favor, to let me know wherein I have unnecessarily exceeded the Limits of
due Moderation, I shall take it very kindly, and endeavor to make amends for
my Fault.

To the Second; That I never intended to provoke or exasperate any Man; much
less would I provoke any of the worthy Members of the Church of England, whom I
am in Duty bound to Honor and Respect: And if I wrote any thing that looks that
way, 'twas the necessity of the Subject, not my Inclination, that forced me
upon it.

My Design was only to lay before those of my own Persuasion, the Truth of that
Doctrine, which they, and their Ancestors, have believed since Christianity was
planted among Them; and which I see now they have many Temptations to quit: And
in this, I think, I do but follow the Example of the Apostles and Primitive
Fathers, who, in the greatest Heat of Persecutions and Fiery Trials, (as the
Scripture phrases it) took more care than ever, to inculcate to the Christians
the Truth of their Religion; and to Arm them with the Hopes of a future Life,
that they might, the better, be able to bear up against the Temptations, and
Rage of the World; and suffer with Joy, as St. Paul says, the Pillage and
Plunder of their Goods. Rapinam bonorum vestrorum cum gaudio suscepistis.
However, if I have sinned on that hand, I have that confidence in the Equity and
Goodness of the Church of England, that my Fault, which is peculiar to my self,
will not be required at the hands of Those of my Persuasion, whose Consent, or
Approbation I never desired.

I am not ignorant, That our Lives, and Fortunes, are at the Mercy of the Law,
and may be deprived of Both, when it shall please our Magistrates to put them
in Execution: But such is their Lenity and Goodness, that they overlook us, and
suffer us to live; which we accept always, and in all places, and with all
Thankfulness; and earnestly beseech Almighty God to bless and prosper them for
it.

The Better Sort, (which, blessed be God, are also the Greater) are sensible,
that our only Crime is our Conscience, which we cannot help; and which, I trust
in God, we shall ever prefer to all that is most dear to us in this World. They
desire our Conversion, because they think us in an Error; and we likewise
desire, and earnestly pray for their's, because we are persuaded they are in
the wrong. They know we have made no Innovations in Religion, nor broached any
New Doctrines; but only stick to, and (to use St. Paul's Words) hold fast the
Profession of that Faith, which we received from our, and their Ancestors: A
Plea which secured the very Pagans in the Possession of their Lives and
Fortunes, when the Christians got the better of them; and which, I trust in
God, and in the Goodness of our Governors, will ever secure us.

We are not therefore insensible of the Clemency and Good Nature of the Worthy
Men of the Church of England, nor are we so dull as not to take notice of the
Connivance and Liberty they are pleased to allow us; but we think we cannot
make them a more suitable Return, ( a more charitable I am sure we cannot) than
to lay before them the Dangerous Consequences of their Errors, and the
desperate State of their Souls. We see the horrid Sacrileges committed by their
Ancestors, and the Schism and Heresy into which they fell; and we conceive it
our Duty to them, (who, though they should use us never so ill, are still our
Brethren) to mind them of the great Danger and Hazard they run, in following
the Steps of their Forefathers; and in persisting in those Things, which we
conceive are very great Impieties. And if, in handling these Matters, we are
forced to use such Expressions, as may seem to give Offense; it is the Necessity
of the Subject, not our Inclination, that extorts them from us. Bad Things must
have bad Names, and Words must bear some Proportion with the Things they are
put to signify; else they would not give us a just Idea of them: And
therefore, in speaking to things, that are confessedly Bad, namely Heresy and
Schism; if any Expressions, in this Treatise, may seem to shock, or give
Offense, I hope they will be looked upon as necessary and unavoidable; and
consider d as Vinegar intended only to Cleanse the Wound; but not to Vex the
Patient, though it should prove Uneasy to him; which I call the Great GOD of
Heaven to Witness, was the Author's Design.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 3. read Ingenious. p 6 l 12. r seemingly. p 7. l 19. r
Patrlarchs. p 1^. l 33. r demonstration. p 17. l 30. r according. p 25. l. 1. r
^^^ebians. p 39. l ult. r Homin^m. p 52. l 1^. r Catera^. p 55. l 17. r as. p
8. l 28 r prayed. p 106. l 2. add it. p 119. 16. r this is. ibid. l 13. r be. p
129. l 34. r re^^^'d. p 131. l. 24. r Scurrilous. p 157 l. 29. r too. p 158. l
10. r Incredulous. ibid. l 15. r Divest. p 174. l 24. r added. p 175. l 33 r
tell. p 183. l 26. r was. p 184. l 28. r practice. ibid. l 30. r given. p. 100.
l 1. r Question. p 193. l 2. r left. p 200. l 21. dele must. p. 204. l 27. r
Calvinists. p 207. l 33. r Captivity. p 208. l 14. r Eastern. ibid. l 18. r
Common. p 215. l 14. r hundred. p 216. l 24. r probi^y. p 220. l 18. add it is.
222. l 24. r Test. p 225. l 32 r appear. p 228. l 20. r Solem^. p 251. l 3.
(...). p 261. l 18. r proportion. p 262. l 15. r gra^eful, p 297. l 32. for
these r the.

A Modest and True ACCOUNT OF THE Chief Points in Controversy, etc.
The Introduction.
IT is commonly said, and our own Experience teaches it us, that good Language
goes far in gaining Credit to whatever is said; and that a smooth polished
Discourse, when Gravely delivered, seems to carry the Face of Truth, though it
should happen to be otherwise. Words, when handsomely laid together, have I
know not what of Charming in them, and do challenge the Attention of the most
obstinate, especially when delivered by a Man in a High Station. This, with
some other Considerations, moved me to examine the Sermons of Doctor Tillotson,
late Archbishop of Canterbury; to see if the intrinsic Value of his Coin be
answerable to the Luster, and outward Appearance of it.

This ingen^ous Man has taken a great deal of Pains to convince the World of
his Skill in Controversy, and has delivered his Thoughts in such fine smooth
Language, that, in my Opinion, very few of his Brethren can equal him in the
Elegancy of his Style. We have eight Volumns in 8vo. of his Sermons, in which
he seems to have exhausted the Treasure of his Eloquence, in combating the most
essential Points controverted betwixt Catholics and Protestants; viz. The
Infallibility of the Church, the Pope's Supremacy, Transubstantiation,
Communion in one kind, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, as he is pleased to call
it; Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, (his own words) Purgatory, and
Indulgences. Though this be not the Order, I find he observes in handling these
Points, but treats of 'em a little confusedly, as suited best with his Texts;
yet, for method Sake, I chose to lay 'em down in this order, being, as I
suppose, the more natural to treat of the most material Points, before I come
to those that seem to be of less Importance. In the handling then of this
important Piece of Controversy, I shall, with God's Assistance, observe this
Method.

First, I will lay down what the Roman Catholics believe, as of Faith,
concerning these Points.

Secondly, I will prove their Tenets with Reason, Scripture, and Authority of
Fathers; though of this there should seem little need, considering that it has
been so often already done; were it not that my Business is with the simple and
ignorant, whom I would willingly instruct in the Grounds of their own Faith, as
well as to caution them against the Subtilities of their Adversaries.

Thirdly, I will answer all the material Objections, which Dr. Tillotson brings
against the said Tenets; and do faithfully promise, that where I do not quote
his own words, (for that I cannot always do, by reason they are in many places
very long) I shall not extenuate nor diminish, to the best of my Knowledge, the
Force of his Arguments; nor wrest his Words to any other Sense, than what they
naturally bear in any other Man's Mouth, or Writings.

But before I begin, it will not be amiss to lay down the Foundation on which
this Ingenuous Man builds his Controversy; a Foundation, indeed, whose
Superstructure had it been so true and solid, as it is artificially contrived,
would in a great measure justify the Church of England, and all other
Protestant's Separation from their ancient Brethren, and silence the R.
Catholics from fastening the Imputation of Schism and Heresy upon them. But how
far this is from what it seems to be, let the Reader judge when the Mask is
taken off.

Dr. Tillotson's Fundamental Principle then is this. Whatever is plain and
evident to our Senses and Reason, is to be believed, though all the Churches and
Men in the World should persuade us to the contrary. Thus far, I own, he is in
the right; but what he infers from thence, namely, that this is the Protestants
Case in regard of the Papists, (as he is pleased to call the R. Catholics)
requires something more than Herculean Labors to prove. He owns, indeed, (and
that for Reasons well known to the World) that in things doubtful and obscure,
every private Man ought to hear the Church, and receive her Interpretation; but
in things that are plain and evident, nay, as evident, as that twice two make
four; I would stand alone, says he, against all the World: His own Words are
thus, as I find them in the fifth Volume of his Sermons, page 16.

In all matters of Faith and Practice, which are plain and evident, either from
Natural Reason, or from Divine Revelation, this Resolution seems to be very
reasonable: But in things doubtful, a modest Man (and every Man has Reason to
be so) would be apt to be staggered by the Judgment of a very Wise Man; and
much more of many such, and especially by the unanimous Judgment of the
Generality of Men.

But in things plainly contrary to the evidence of Sense or Reason, or the Word
of God, a Man would complement no Man, or Number of Men; nor would he pin his
Faith upon any Church in the World; much less upon any single Man, no not the
Pope; no, though there were never so many probable Arguments brought for the
Proof of his Infallibility.

In this Case, a Man would be singular, and stand alone against the whole
World; against the Wrath and Rage of a King, and all the Terrors of his fiery
Furnace; as in other matters, a Man would not believe all the Learned Men in
the World against the clear Evidence of Sense and Reason. If all the great
Mathematicians of all Ages, Archimedes, and Euclid, and Apollonius and
Diophantus, etc. could be supposed to meet together in a General Council, and
should there declare in the most solemn manner, and give it under their Hands
and Seals, that twice two did not make four but five; this would not move me in
the least to be of their mind; nay, I who am no Mathematician, would maintain
the contrary, and would persist in it, without being in the least startled by
the positive Opinion of these Learned Men; and would most certainly conclude
that they were either all of them out of their Wits, or that they were biased
by some Interest or other, and swayed against the clear Evidence of Truth, and
the full Conviction of their own Reason, to make such a Determination as this.
They might, indeed, overruled the point by their Authority; but in my inward
Judgment, I should still be where I was before.

Just so in Matters of Religion, if any Church, though with never so glorious a
pretense to Infallibility, should declare for Transubstantiation; that is, that
the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, by virtue of the Consecration of the
Priest, are Substantially changed into the natural Body and Blood of Christ;
this is so notoriously contrary both to the Sense and Reason of Mankind, that a
Man would choose to stand single in the opposition of it, and laugh at, or
rather pity the rest of the World that could be so servilely blind, as seeming
to conspire in the Belief of so monstrous an Absurdity.

And in like manner, if any Church should declare that Images are to be
worshipped; or that the Worship of God is to be performed in an unknown Tongue;
and that the Holy Scriptures which contain the Word, and Will of God, and
teaches Men what they are to believe and do in order to their eternal
Salvation, are to be locked up and kept concealed from the People in a Language
which they do not understand, lest, if they were permitted the free use of
them, in their Mother Tongue, they should know more of the Mind and Will of
God, than is convenient for the common people to know, whose Devotion and
Obedience to the Church does chiefly depend upon their Ignorance: Or should
declare that the Sacrifice of Christ was not offered once for all, but is and
ought to be repeated ten millions of times every day; and that the people ought
to receive the Communion in one kind only, and the Cup by no means to be
trusted with them, for fear the profane Beards of the Laity should drink of
it; and that the saving Efficacy of the Sacraments does depend upon the
Intention of the Priest, without which the Receiver can have no Benefit by
them: These are all of them so plainly contrary to Scripture, and most of them
in reason so absurd, that the Authority of no Church whatsoever can oblige a
Man to the Belief of them. Thus far the Dr.

Here you see, Christian Reader, a Great Orator and Divine, teaching from the
Pulpit and Press, that Sense, Reason, and Scripture are all on the Protestant's
side in the aforesaid controverted Points, as clear and evident as that twice
two make four. Here you see him arraign all the Patriacks, Primats,
Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors, Universities, and even all Kings, Princes,
Peers, Magistrates, together with the common people of all Countries and
Provinces of the West; as also the Greek Church, and all the Countries and
Provinces in Communion with it; all these Learned and Pious Christians, I say
that flourisht in, and Governed this part of the World, when Martin Luther
appeared upon the Theater, this worthy Man arraigns for Fools and Madmen; I
say, for Fools and Madmen; for all these Patriarchs, Primats, Kings, Princes,
etc. professed, in those days, to be guided by their Senses, by natural Reason,
and by the Word of God, contained in the Holy Scriptures; and yet all of them
believed the very same, concerning the said Points, the R. Catholics do now.
Surely then, they must have been all Fools and Madmen, if Sense, Reason and
Scripture be as clear and evident on the Protestant's side, as that twice two
make four. For, who ever in his wits denied, that twice two do make four? Or in
his right Senses, ever affirmed, that white was black, or black white? Or that
any of our Senses, when they are perfect, do not give irrefragable Testimony of
their proper Objects? Or that plain and evident Texts of Scripture were not to
be believed? These monstrous Absurdities the Dr. fastens upon all the Eminent
and learned Men of the Eastern and Western Churches, which flourisht not only
when Martin Luther rose up, but also, by his own Acknowledgement, for, at
least, several Ages before him; which is in effect to Brand them all with the
Ignominious Character of Fools and Madmen.

If all the great Mathematicians of all Ages, says the Dr. could be supposed
to meet together in a General Council, and there declare in the most solemn
manner, that twice two did not make four but five, I should most certainly
conclude that they were either all of them out of their Wits, or biased by
some Interest or other. But good God! What should bias any Man in his Wits,
much less any Society of learned Men to declare against a thing so clear and
evident? Nothing surely less than Phrensy or Madness. But let us hear the
Application. Just so in matters of Religion, (continues the Dr.) if any Church
should declare for Transubstantiation, that is, that the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, by virtue of the Consecration of the Priest, are Substantially
changed into the Body and Blood of Christ; this is so notoriously contrary both
to the Sense and Reason of Mankind, that a Man would choose to stand single in
the opposition, and laugh at, or rather pity the rest of the World, etc. The
Dr. knew very well, and so do all the learned Protestants in the World, that
the Latin and Greek Churches, and all in Communion with them, have not only
declared for, but have always believed, at least, for several Ages,
Transubstantiation, as aforesaid: If it be then so notoriously contrary both to
the Sense and Reason of Mankind, as the Dr. would suggest; all those Men,
whereof a great number had, at least, the Reputation of being both Learned and
Virtuous, must necessarily have been all of them out of their wits, or biased
by some prejudice, which most certainly could be nothing else, but the
extremity of Madness and Folly, their eternal Damnation being necessarily
consequent upon such a Belief. He pursues the same comparison, instancing in
the rest of the Controverted Points aforesaid.

But what Man in his right Senses would believe, that any one Nation, much less
all Europe should conspire to renounce all those means, which God has given
them to acquire the Knowledge of things, viz. Sense, Reason, and the Word of
God, without which it is impossible to know any thing; especially in a matter
which so highly concerns them: Or who would not rather believe, that Dr.
Tillotson was mightily mistaken, than that the best part of Mankind should make
Shipwreck of that which alone distinguishes them from Beasts? nay, who would
not rather believe, that either he himself had been out of his Wits? Or that he
designed to impose upon Mankind so strange a paradox, as that hundreds of
millions of Learned and Ingenious Men should conspire to declare against that
which is, both their everlasting Interest, and constitutes them Men; since
neither he nor any Man else, could ever instance in one single Man in his wits,
that ever was guilty of such a Folly.

This, I must confess, is one of the most surprising, nay the most intolerable
Charges that ever was laid to Mankind; and yet how monstrous and absurd soever
it appears, it is no less than what was absolutely necessary to support the
Cause the Dr. had undertaken. He was it seems, well read in that famous Dispute
betwixt Dr. Hammond and Mr. Sergeant concerning Schism. The former wrote a Book
in Vindication of the Church of England from the Imputation of Schism, which
the R. Catholics charge her with: The latter answers his Book in an other,
entitled, Schism disarmed: Dr. Hammond writes a Reply to this, and Mr.
Sergeant adds a Rejoinder to that, which he calls Schism dispatched.

Now to know what relates to our purpose in this Dispute, you must understand,
that Dr. Hammond in the first Chapter of his Defense of the Church of England,
in his Description of Schism, paints it in its own horrid and dreadful Shape;
as the Scripture, and Holy Fathers of the Primitive Church, had done before
him, viz. That it is Carnality, Self-condemning, contrary to Charity, bereaving
one of the benefit, both of Prayers and Sacraments; as bad as, and the
Foundation of all Heresies; that there is scarce any Crime so great as Schism,
not Sacrilege, Idolatry, Parricide, that it is obnoxious to peculiar Marks of
God's Indignation, Antichristianism, worshipping or serving the Devil, not
expiable by Martyrdom, very hard, if not impossible to receive such an Injury
or Provocation from the Governors of the Church, as may make a Separation
excusable; impossible, according to St. Austin, that there should be any just
cause for any to separate from the Church truly Catholic. Thus far the Dr. and,
indeed, very right, only where the Fathers condemn him and his party; he is so
much a Friend to his Cause, as to alter the Phrase a little: For instance,
whereas St. Ireneus says absolutely, It is impossible to receive such an Injury
or Provocation from the Governors of the Church, as to make a Separation
excusable; he saw very well, that if no kind of Injury or Provocation could
justify a Separation, himself and his Party stood condemned in that Holy
Fathers Opinion; and therefore he changed the word Impossible, into very hard,
if not impossible; though in the Greek, (which some will have to be the original)
or Latin Translation, there is not the least color for it. So, where St.
Austin says, That it is impossible there should be any just Cause for any to
separate from the Catholic Church; He softens the Expression, changing,
Catholic Church, into, the Church truly Catholic; pretending, if I may presume
to spell his meaning, that they did not separate from the Church truly
Catholic, though they had separated from all other Societies and Congregations in
the World; upon a ridiculous Pretense, as if the Catholic Church and the Church
truly Catholic were two different things; or where the Expression seems too
harsh, he thinks himself sufficiently entitled to moderate it; as, where the
Holy Father St. Austin says, There is no Crime so great as Schism; he makes
bold with his Words rendering them thus; there is scarce any Crime so great as
Schism.

Mr. Sergeant, to whose great Wit, and indefatigable Labor we are obliged for
several other Learned and Ingenious Works, in these two excellent Treatises,
presses his Antagonist to purge himself and his party of the guilt of Schism;
since he owns they had made a separation from that Church, in whose communion
they, and their Ancestors were, since they embraced the Christian Faith. But
among other pressing Arguments, he urges this, which in my opinion is enough to
open any man's eyes that has not sworn never to see the Sun. Dr. Hammond
gathers from Fathers and Scripture, that Schism is so horrid a sin, that there
is scarce any crime (I give you his own words) so great, not Sacriledg,
Idolatry, parricide; not expiable by Martyrdom; very hard, if not impossible to
receive such an injury or provocation from the Church, as may make a separation
excuseable. Impossible according to St. Augustine, that there should be any just
cause for any to separate from the Church truly Catholic; whence Mr. Sergeant
reasons thus: No Man in his Wits, much less any body of Learned Men ought to
separate from the Church, or withdraw themselves from its Authority, unless
they had a clear and evident Conviction, both that this Separation wa^
absolutely necessary, and that the Authority pretended by the Church, was a
manifest usurpation; because they would else incur that horrid guilt of Schism:
But Dr. Hammond and his Party are so far from having any such Evidence or
Conviction for either the one or the other, that nothing is pretended but bare
probabilities and conjectures: Consequently, it is the last of madness and
folly in Dr. Hammond and his Party to persist in their Separation. Now, Dr.
Tillotson, who was a very acute Man, foreseeing what effect so plain a
Demostration was like to have upon such as tendered the Salvation of their
Souls; being however resolved to maintain the Cause at any rate, could bethink
himself of nothing sufficient to justify so dangerous a Separation, less than
a clear and evident Demonstration of the necessity of it: And this, in my
opinion, was the Reason why he undertook to demonstrate that, in regard of the
aforesaid controverted Points, the common sense of Mankind, natural Reason,
and the Scripture, were as clear and evident on the Protestant's side, as that
twice two make four. But what if I show that he is so far from having any such
Evidence on his side, that there is not one of all these Points in which he
instances, but what is destitute of even the least probable Argument to support
it? Nay, I go farther, what if I demonstrate that the R. Catholics have all the
Evidence and Reason that the nature of such things will bear, for what they
hold concerning these Points? Then surely I may reasonably hope, that Rational
Men, who ought to tender the welfare of their Immortal Souls, will be so just
to themselves, as seriously to consider, into what horrible and dangerous
crimes they are drawn by the wilfulness of Men, who are resolved to maintain a
Separation, which all the world knows, was begun for no other end than to
countenance Things that I am unwilling to name, but are too well known to be
concealed.

This I shall endeavor, by the assistance of God's Grace, to perform in the
following Chapters; when I have first laid down that chief and fundamental
Point of all Controversies, namely the Infallibility of the Church.

CHAP. I. Of the Infallibility of the Church.
THE R. Catholics hold, that the Church is infallible, that is, cannot err in
delivering the Doctrine she received from Jesus Christ, nor mistake in her
Explanation thereof, when by Heretics wrested and perverted to a wrong sense.

The ground of which Tenet I conceive to be this; that Christ has provided such
efficacious means for the conveyance of Truth to all succeding Ages, as will
infallibly secure the Church from error in her Decrees concerning Articles of
Faith.

This Point is to be managed with so much the more perspicuity and clearness,
by how much it is of greater importance than any other: It will be therefore
requisite to take some pains to satisfy Men's Reasons, and, if it be possible,
to make this Truth so clear and evident, that those whose Interest and
Prejudices make them unwilling to own it, may, at least, be ashamed to deny it:
And methinks I have this peculiar advantage in this undertaking, that every
Pious Christian, who tenders the welfare of his Soul, cannot choose but wish me
success; because I undertake the Proof of that which it is every Man's
Interest, it should be true; for, if I can show that there is an Infallible
Church, and that such a Congregation of Faithful is that Church, then all
Christians, who are Solicitous about the true Church, and the means of
Salvation, and agitated with various Scruples and Difficulties; and which is
more dreadful, threatened with Hell and Damnation by the furious Zeal of
different Parties, may sit still, and hear what the Infallible Church says to
them. In the handling then of this important Truth, I shall do these three
Things.

First, I will endeavor to show, that there is a Church, or Congregation of
Faithful, which is Infallible in her Decisions and Declarations of all Articles
of Faith.

Secondly, That this Congregation, and no other, is that which is in Communion
with the Bishop of Rome.

Thirdly, I shall answer the Objections which Dr. Tillotson brings in his
Sermons against this Point.

First, I will endeavor to show, that there is a Church, or Congregation of
Faithful, which is Infallible in her Decisions and Declarations of all Articles
of Faith. To prove this, I shall lay down these Grounds.

1. That Jesus Christ planted his Doctrine in the Hearts of a certain number of
Men, by working True and Real Miracles in their presence, which no other but an
Omnipotent Power could effect; and that in order to the propagating of this
Doctrine, he chose twelve Men, whom he called Apostles, and made them his chief
Ministers, vesting in them his own Power and Authority for that End.

2. That these twelve Apostles, and other Disciples went into several
Countries, and preached the same Doctrine to Jews and Gentiles, confirming it
with true and real Miracles.

3. That the Apostles ordained and constituted other Ministers of this Doctrine
to succeed in their own Room, to whom they delegated the same Power they
received from Jesus Christ; and These, Others; and so on from Generation to
Generation, to continue to the end of the World.

4. That this Power of working Miracles continued in the Preachers of this
Doctrine, at least, till a considerable number of people had embraced the same
Doctrine in most of the then known Countries of Asia, Europe, and Africa: This
supposed, I say,

1. That the people who heard the Apostles preach, and saw them confirm their
Doctrine with true and real Miracles, were infallibly sure, that this Doctrine
was True; because they were sure the doing of such Miracles required an
Omnipotent Power, and that, according to the Notion all Men naturally have of
God, he would not exert his Omnipotence in Favor of a Lie.

2. That, whatever Articles the Universal Consent of so many Nations was agreed
upon to have been received from the Apostles, it is impossible it should be
false, that they had received them; because it is impossible, that so many
Nations of different Interests, Tongues and Manners, should all conspire and
agree to relate the same thing, as received from the Apostles, if it had not
been so. And as this is most assuredly true in regard of those, who saw the
Miracles of the Apostles, and delivered their Doctrine to the next Generation;
so it is, for the same Reason, equally impossible it should be false in respect
of any succeeding Generation.

That there was such a Man in England, as King Henry the VIII; or that there
is, or was, such a Man as the Grand Signior, or such a City as Constantinople;
I am as certainly sure, as of any thing I see with my Eyes; for, it is as
evident to my Understanding, that it is impossible in practice, that so many
Nations, (as relate these things) different in their Humors, Manners and
Interests, should all conspire to tell an Untruth, which can be of no Advantage
to them, as it is evident to my Senses, that I see the Paper, and feel the Pen
wherewith I write. For, since no Cause imaginable can be assigned, to cause so
many different Nations to conspire together in the Belief of an Untruth, (no
interest, as we suppose, moving them thereunto) and no Cause put, it is
impossible an Effect should follow, it is as evident to my Reason that they
cannot thus conspire, as it is to my Senses, that I perceive their proper
Objects; unless we have recourse to God Almighty, and say, that he might put it
in their Hearts to act thus: But if we should suppose this not inconsistent
with his Divine Attributes; may we not likewise suppose that he might impose
upon my Senses, and make me think I see and feel when I do not? Yes
undoubtedly: Yet, I suppose, no Body will say, but that I may be certainly
sure, that I both see and feel. And whatever reason his unsearchable Wisdom
might have to impose upon my Senses, I am sure it does not stand with his
Goodness to put into any Man's Heart to tell a Lie. If it be then impossible,
that the universal Consent of all the Nations in Europe, should be liable to
err in delivering to posterity things of an indifferent Nature; how much more
must the Universal Consent of all the Christian World be certain in conveying
the Truth of the Gospel upon which our eternal Welfare depends?

One single Man may, and has often declared the Truths that were committed to
him; but because he is obnoxious to Error, no Man is bound to believe him any
further than he shows good Credentials for what he says. It was therefore
necessary the Apostles and other Disciples, who first preached the Gospel, each
apart, should be endued with a power of working Miracles to gain themselves
credit. A small Body of Men, such as a City or Corporation, is less obnoxious
to Error than one Man; however no Man is obliged to believe them, no further
than they show good Reason for what they say; because it is easy for such a
Body of Men, for some private End to conspire in the Belief of an Untruth. Thus
in some time after the Flood, the Son of Cham erected Idols, and persuaded the
rest of their Kindred, (Men simple indeed, but very much abandoned by God) that
these were the Gods they must adore. And for all this false Worship prevailed
in succeding Ages as Men increased, so as to spread almost over the whole
Earth: Yet because it was not only destitute of all Rational Motives to
persuade its Belief in the beginning, but even contrary to the Light of Nature,
the very Philosophers and learned Men, that seemed to promote its Profession,
gave no Credit to it. Thus a small number of Sarazens persuaded the rest of
their Rude and Barbarous Countrymen to believe the Impostures of Mahomet: And
however this Barbarous Nation forced their Passage with Fire and Sword through
many spacious Countries, and planted their Religion in most parts of Asia and
Africa. Though their Principles be not altogether so absurd as those of the
Pagans, yet as they have not the least Rational Motive to induce any Man to
believe them; so neither were they obtruded on the Believers (the Progeny of
those who first embraced them excepted) by any other means than Cruelty and
Slaughter. I have on purpose mentioned these two false Religions, that swayed
in the World for a long time, to obviate an Objection which might be made
against the Unanimous Consent of Christians in their Belief of the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ. For, if it be said, that several Countries and Nations of Pagans
and Mahometans have conspired in the Belief of the Faith they received from
their Ancestors, yet that this Faith or Religion was false: This Objection is
so far from impairing the Truth of the Christian Religion, that it rather
confirms it: For it is most certain, the Pagans and Mahometans received their
Religion from their Ancestors, and these from others, and that the mistake did
not consist in this; but because they were so foolish as to receive it from
those who took it up in the beginning, without any Rational Motive, nay
contrary to Sense and Reason, and the very Light of Nature. The Case was very
different with the first Christians: They embraced their Religion upon a clear
and evident Conviction of their Senses and Understanding; viz. upon the
evidence of true and real Miracles, and other Corroborating Proofs: But of this
enough.

A whole Nation is much less subject to err, in conveying Truths received to
Posterity, than a City, or small Body of People: And though it be not impossible
they should all agree together, to deliver to Posterity what they had not
received from their Ancestors, yet it is hardly credible they would. That there
happened a great Conflagration in London in the Year 66. we have no other
Evidence, but the Testimony of the People of England; yet, whoever should deny
that Fact, would be looked upon as a Fool, or a Madman. If it be then so
incredible, that one Nation, who speak all the same Language, and have daily
intercourse one with an other, should be so disingenuous as to deliver to their
Posterity as a Truth received from their Ancestors, what they had not received;
how should it ever sink into the Heart of any Man in his wits, to believe that
Hundreds of Nations of different Humors, Tongues, Customs and Interests,
should unanimously agree together to do that, which is so incredible of one
single Nation? This indeed is plainly impossible; unless we can suppose, that
so many Nations should meet together, or communicate their Thoughts to one
another by Writing, and so all agree to tell what they knew not, to the
Prejudice of Truth, and their own and Posterities eternal Damnation, than which
nothing on Earth is more absurd: Or that God should put it into their Hearts to
deceive their Posterity, which, even to imagine, is horrid Impiety.

The Sum of all that I have said is this, That it is impossible the universal
Consent of the Pastors and People of so many different Nations, should concur
and agree in declaring any Article or Articles of Faith, unless they had
received the same Articles from their Ancestors; and it is equally impossible,
that these Ancestors should have so delivered them, unless they had received
them from their Ancestors, and these from others their Ancestors, and so up
till you come to the first People who took up these Articles: And if it be
found, that these people had evident Conviction of the Truth of these Articles,
such as true and real Miracles, it is equal to a Demonstration that the same
Articles are true; because (as it is said before) the working of real Miracles
requires an Omnipotent Power; and the Light of Nature shows us, that God would
not put his Seal to an Untruth. And if it be asked, how come we to be certainly
sure, that the Apostles confirmed their Doctrine with Miracles? I answer,
because it is impossible that all the Nations to whom the Apostles and their
Disciples preached the said Articles of Faith, should all agree to deliver to
Posterity, that they had received such Articles upon a clear Conviction of
their Senses and Reason by true Miracles, unless it were true that they had so
received them. And this is an Advantage whereof all Heretics are destitute; no
Sect that ever yet sprung up in the Church being able to derive its Heretical
Opinions from the Apostles, or first Planters of the Christian Faith; but have
all a certain Period, beyond which they cannot ascend to derive their Doctrine.
To instance in some: The Arians for near 200 Years might claim the General
Consent of some Nations, asserting they had received their Doctrine from their
Ancestors; but when they went back as far as the Beginning of the fourth
Century, all their Ancestors are reduced to miserable Arius, who at that time
contrary to the unanimous Consent of the whole Christian World, denied the
Divinity of the Son of God.

In like manner, the Nestorians and Eutychians may pretend to a General Consent
of some Nations, for a great many Ages; but when they ascend as far as the
latter End of the fourth, and the beginning of the fifth Century, they are
forced to stop there, and reduce their Ancestors, the first, to Nestorius; the
second, to Eutyches a Monk, and Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria. The Waldenses
likewise may say for themselves something like the rest; but if we look back as
far as the twelfth Century, we shall find them all terminate in one single
Merchant of Lions in France Peter de Waldo. And to come nearer home, those
many, and almost innumerable Sects in our own and Neighbor Countries, who go
by the General Name of Protestants, though they pretend to have received their
Doctrine from their Ancestors for some Time; I hope they will not say (and
indeed to do them Justice, I never heard they pretended to it) that those
Opinions they hold in opposition to the R. Catholics, were delivered to them by
their Ancestors, any higher up, than the Beginning of the sixteenth Century;
when, it is no less manifest, that all their Ancestors were R. Catholics, than
that Luther, Zuinglius and Calvin were the Inventors of their new Opinions.

Here, perhaps, it will be Objected, That this Consent of Nations, for all the
Articles of the Catholic Faith, is not so universal, as I pretend; since it is
well known, a great many in almost all Ages have contradicted it: The Arians,
for instance, (to omit many other Sects before them) contradicted it in one
Point: The Nestorians, and Eutychi^^^, in Two; the Waldenses in more, and the
Protestants in most of all.

This is the only Objection which can, with any color of Reason, be made
against the universal Consent of the C. Church; and which, doubtless,
occasioned the P^ain of many Souls; most of those People, that followed these
Ringleaders, being either unable to examine the Grounds of their Separation,
or prejudiced by some temporal Consideration, in favor of their Opinions: And
with all thinking themselves secure in the Society and Communion of so many
Men, whom they looked upon to be both Learned, and Godly.

Now if I can make out, that this Objection is not only weak, but even void of
all color of Reason; I hope our deluded Friends will be so just to their own
Souls, as to consider how dangerous it is to persist in a Separation which is
necessarily attended with the unevitable crime of Schism, so dreadfully
described, by one of their own Dr. Hammond.
Learned Men. Which that I may the more distinctly do, I desire these four
things may be considered.

I. That the Contradiction of each of the said Sects began first in one or two
at must.

II. That the Contradiction of all such as adhered to the Heads of each Sect,
be they never so many, amounts to no more than that of those One or Two who
first opposed it.

III. That these Authors of Sects did not all oppose this universal Consent at
the same time; but some in different Ages, and all at different Times.

IV. That they did not all oppose the same Points of Faith.

1. That the Contradiction of each of the said Sects began first in one or two
at most. This is so manifest in History, and in all Records both innocient and
Modern, that it were superfluous to go about to prove it.

2. That the Contradiction of all such as adhered to the Heads of each Sect, be
they never so many, amounts to no more than that of those one or two, who first
opposed it. This is evident; for, if Arius, for instance, erred in denying the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father; no number of Adherents to his
Opinion can make it True. Now that Arius erred in this Point, it is easy to see;
because the universal Consent of all the Christian World was against him. And
as this is manifest in respect of Arius, and his Sectators, so it is no less
convincing in regard of Nestorius, Eutyches, and all other Sects whatsoever.

3. These Authors of Sects did not oppose the universal Consent at the same
time; but some in different Ages, and all at different Times. This is so plain,
that it needs no Proof; for no body, who is never so little read in Antiquity,
can be Ignorant, that Arius, for instance, opposed it in the Beginning of the
fourth Age; Nestorius, in the Beginning of the fifth Age; Eutiches, in some
Years after, and so of all the rest.

4. They did not all oppose the same Points of Faith; This is no less evident
than the former, our Adversaries themselves being the Judges: Indeed, if they
had all denied the same Articles of Faith, at the same time, and in different
parts of the World; I must confess, it would in some Measure lessen the
Authority of those that asserted them; for it is natural to think, that several
Men of different Tongues and Interests, would, without any mutual Participation
of their Thoughts, never agree to assert or deny the same things, unless there
had been some Reason for it. But when one Man denies one Point or more, if you
please, in one Age, and an other denies an other, in another Age, or, at least,
at a different Time; what is this, but one Man against all the World? To answer
this Objection then; I say,

1. That though it were true, that all these Heads of Sects had always opposed
the universal Consent of the Church as aforesaid, viz. One, in one Age; and
another, in an other, or at a different time; this Opposition can no more
prejudice the Faith, which we hold upon the universal Consent of all the
Christian World, than if one Man, in the last Age, and an other in this, had
denied the being at any time of King Henry the VIII, or of the City of
Constantinople, such Impudence could lessen our Belief concerning that King, or
this City.

2. It Is not true, that these Heads, or Ringleaders of Sects did always oppose
the universal Consent of the Church: For, since they were the first, as I shall
prove by and by, that opposed the Doctrine of the Church, and taught new
Opinions contrary to what was believed before; they must have been for some
time before they broached their new Doctrine, of the same Opinion with the rest
of the Church, who taught them their Faith; consequently they did not always
oppose the universal Consent; but concurred with the rest in it, till they took
up their new Opinions; and even still continue to own, that the Doctrine which
they opposed, was universally believed at the Time of their Separation. So that
we have the Universal Consent of the Christian World, for the Truth of our
Faith; even the Consent of those who afterward opposed it, not excepted.

Now that these Heads, or Ringleaders of Sects, to wit, Arius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, Luther, etc. were the first that opposed the universal consent of the
Church, in respect of the several Opinions wherein they are said to contradict
it; may easily be proved; first, by the confession of their own Parties, who
ingenuously own that they follow the Opinions of those Men in the Things
wherein they differed from the rest of the World; and have therefore got the
Apellation of Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Lutherans, etc. whereas, if any
Churches, or Societies of Christians had held these Opinions before; they would
have continued in Communion with them, and not have separated, from all the
World, as it is manifest they have, even by the acknowledgment of their own
Writers. Secondly, By an Induction of all these Sects in particular, and of the
Councils held in several Ages, wherein they were proscribed: But in this I am
happily prevented, by the ingenuous confession Dr. Tillotson was pleased to
make of this Truth, as far, at least, as relates to my purpose. Thus (says he)
in the height of Popery, Ser. 1. Vol. 5.
Wickliff appeared here in England; and Hierom of Prague, and John Huss in
Germany and Bohemia. And in the Beginning of the Reformation, when Popery had
quite overrun the Western Parts of the World, and subdued her Enemies on every
side, and Antichrist sat securely in the quiet possession of his Kingdom;
Luther arose a bold and rough Man, but a fit wedge to cleave in sunder so hard
and knotty a block; and appeared stoutly against the gross errors and
corruptions of the Church of Rome; and for a long time stood alone, and with a
most invincible spirit and courage maintained his ground, and resisted the
united malice and force of Antichrist and his Adherents; and gave him so
terrible a blow, that he is not yet perfectly healed and recovered of it. So
that for a man to stand alone, or with a very few adhering to him and standing
by him, is not a mear immaginary supposition, but a case that has really and
in fact happened in several Ages, and places of the World. Thus he; and, indeed
enough to prove what I said: For you se^, he ingenuously owns, these Authors of
Sects stood alone each in his Time; and he might as well have said the same
thing of the Authors of all other Sects that ever rose in the Church. Wickliff,
says he, appeared here in England; and Hierom of Prague and John Huss (two of
Wickliff's Disciples) in Germany and Bohemia: There was none then of their
Opinion before them, Luther stood alone for a long time; all the World was then
against him. And must this single Man be believed upon hi^ bare Word,
delivering a new Doctrine in opposition to all the World, without the least
Mark or Character of a Man sent by God? These are surely harder terms than God
ever required of the very Pagans for their Conversion from Idolatry. But to
give this more weight: Let us compare the Jews which received the Law and the
Prophets, with the Christians who received the Gospel.

Though the Scribes and Pharisees were notoriously known to be very wicked, and
had enjoined the Jews the observance of some Traditions of their Fathers,
together with the Law of Moses; yet Christ was so far from advising the Jews to
separate from them, that he expressly commanded them, to observe and do
whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees bid them: Mat. 23.2.
And that, because they sat in the Chair of Moses: Nay, what is more, he says,
if I had not done among them the works, John. 15.24.
which none other man did, they had not had sin: Intimating that it was neither
Reasonable to depart from that Religion which they received from their
Ancestors, the Truth whereof was at several times confirmed by True and Real
Miracles; nor sinful not to hear his Doctrine to the prejudice of their own,
unless he had done greater Works, that is, had wrought greater Miracles in
confirmation of the Truth of it, than any man before had done in confirmation
of theirs. And shall the Catholic Religion, the Religion of Jesus Christ, which
is grounded upon surer and better promises than that of the Jews, even upon the
promise of that Word which abides for ever; shall this Religion, I say, be
abandoned at a Signal given by one single man rising up in opposition to all
the World, without a Sign, or Miracle, or the least reasonable pretense to it?
Surely this is so monstrously absurd, that were we not convinced of the truth
of it, by our own woeful experience; we should rather believe, the whole frame
of nature would dissolve, and all things run counter to their usual course,
than that any man in his wits should be guilty of such a folly; Obstup^cite
Coell super hoc! That one Profligate Monk, who, as all the World knows,
debauched a professed Nun, whom he kept till his death, contrary to his and her
solemn vows of Chastity; and, for ough that ever I could hear or learn, never
showed any marks of Repentance for this his Incestuous and Crimminal Commerce:
That this wretched man I say, without the least Mark, or Character of a Divine
Commission; on the contrary, that was branded with all the Marks wherewith
Christ and his Apostles point us out the Ministers of Satan, should prevail
upon the Credulity of so many Great, and, in other matters, Wise and Learned
Men; is surely so surprising, that nothing in Nature can parallel it.

But did the first Authors of the Reformation work no Miracles? As for true
Miracles I do not find they did any; but something like Miracles, or rather
surprising wonders, I find recorded by their own Writers; but the mischief on it
is, they are such as overthrow the whole Reformation, if they were believed.

Luther tells us in his Book do missa angulari, that, what he wrote against the
Mass was suggested to him by the Devil. This Book was printed and published by
his own Reformed Doctors of Wittenberg; but becauses it looks now something
scandalous to pious reformed Ears, it must pass for an Imposture. Bolsec a
Protestant Writer tells us; that Calvin agreed to give a certain man named
Bruleus, a sum of money, on condition he would feign himself dead, that he might
come to Resuscitate him; and when all things were prepared for this farce, the
new Apostle had no sooner commanded the Living to rise, when his words had that
strange efficacy as to strike him dead; but Bruleus his poor Wife, who lost
both her Husband and the hopes of her Money, reviled the Apostle, and
discovered the Imposture: But this is still so offensive to the Reformation,
that it is meet it should likewise pass for a Fable. But to return.

Luther arose, says the Dr. and appeared stoutly against the gross Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, -- and resisted the united malice and force
of Antichrist and his Adherents. And what are these gross Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome? Even that Faith which was preached to his
Ancestors at their first Conversion to Christianity, as the best of his own
Protestant Writers do confess; the Truth whereof was confirmed, not by
Impostures, but by true Miracles, as venerable Bede, and all the Historians of
those Times do witness. As to his unchristian Railing in this Place, I will say
nothing to it, but leave him to his own Master to account for it. And, indeed,
if Railing were the subject of our Dispute; I would freely yield him the Palm,
for I own I have no Talent that way.

You see then, Christian Reader, upon how fickle and sandy a bottom the Faith
of all Sectaries stands; and how firm and solid that Basis and Foundation are,
whereon the Catholic Faith is built, namely the Universal Consent of all the
Christian World, which, if liable to Error, we may justly doubt of the Truth of
any thing in the World, even of what we see with our Eyes; since, as it is
already proved, it is as impossible, that the Universal Consent of so many
Nations should conspire to declare, they had received that Faith from their
Ancestors; if they had not, as that a Wall, for example, should not be white,
when I see it to be so.

Here, I foresee, it will be objected, that clear Evidence destroys the Virtue
of Faith, which is essentially obscure, as St. Gregory says, Nec bides habet
meritum cui Ratio humana prebe^ Experimentum: Nor has that Belief any merit to
which humane Reason gives Experience. But this is easily answered, viz. That
the Obscurity of Faith is well consistent with Evidence, that the Faith was
revealed, though not with the Evidence of the Thing revealed by Faith; that is,
one may have Evidence of the Existence of a Thing, though his Reason can neither
understand, nor comprehend the Thing it self; else the Apostles must have been
in worse Circumstances than any other Christian; for having seen with their
Eyes, Epist. 1. chap. 1.
and felt with their Hands, as St. John says, most of the Mysteries of our
Redemption, they had the Evidence of their Senses for the Truth of their
Existence; consequently, could have no Faith concerning them, if there be any
Force in this Objection. This Answer is agreeable to the Definition St. Paul
gives of Faith, viz. That it is an Evidence of things not seen, Fides est
sperandarum substantia rerum, Argumentum non apparentium; Faith is the
Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen; that is,
grounded upon the Evidence of things not seen nor understood. And thus St.
Gregory's Words are to be understood; for he comments upon these Words of St.
John, cap. 20. When the Doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled for
Fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst. Quomodo (says he) post
resurrectionem corpus Dominicum verum fuit quod clausis januis ingredi potuit?
Sed sciendum nobis est, quod divina operatio, si r^tione comprehenditur, non
est admirabilis, nec fides habet meritum cui ratio humana prebet o^perimentum.
How was the Lord's Body, after the Resurrection, a true Body, that could enter
(the House) when the Doors were shut? But we must understand, that, if the Work
of God be comprehended by Reason, it is not wonderful; nor has that Belief any
merit to which humane Reason gives Experience. The Disciples saw Christ's Body,
and felt it with their Hands; consequently had the Evidence of two of their
Senses: Yet, according to St. Gregory, they could have Faith concerning the
Truth of his Body, only because they did not comprehend, how it was possible
for it to enter the House when the Doors were shut.

In like manner, though we have Evidence of Reason, that the things we believe
were revealed by Jesus Christ; yet the Reward of our Faith is nothing
diminished, because we believe such things as we neither comprehend nor
understand. And, indeed, whoever seriously considers the great Work of our
Redemption, he cannot but think, that it was most agreeable to the infinite
Wisdom, and Goodness of our Divine Redeemer to leave us this Evidence. Jesus
Christ came to the World, declared to a select Number of Men, such high and
mysterious things as seem to shock Humane Reason; laid down his Life for the
Salvation of Mankind, sent his Apostles to publish these Mysteries over all the
World, and threatened with eternal Damnation all those, who would not believe
them; and that, not only for a Time, but also unto the End of the World: Is it
not then very reasonable, that this mysterious Doctrine should always be
attended with such Characters and Credentials of Truth, as may convince the
most obstinate Gainsayers of it; which, I am sure, nothing less than either
Evidence of Sense, or Reason can effect: For, if the Evidence be less, then the
Doctrine is only probable; and if it be only probable, one may reasonably doubt
of the Truth of it; and if the Truth of it may be reasonably doubted, the
contrary, for ought any one knows, may be true; and if the contrary may be
true, I am sure, it does not stand with God's Goodness to condemn any Body to
eternal Flames, for not believing a Doctrine the contrary to which, for any
thing that he does, or can know, may be true.

Here I would not be understood so as to mean, that none can have true Faith
without clear Evidence; for it is plain, that the most part of Mankind are
taught the Articles of their Faith by their Parents or Pastors, whose Testimony
is confessedly fallible; nor do I pretend, that this is a Rigorous
Demonstration, such as Mathematicians make, nor yet an Evidence of Sense; but
this I say, that the universal Consent of so many Nations, as compose the
Catholic Church, conspiring in the Belief of such Articles of Faith, make it as
evident to my Reason, that the said Articles of Faith are true, as any Evidence
of Sense, or Demonstration could make them, if they were capable of any. In a
word, the Apostles and their Disciples delivered the Christian Faith to several
Nations, and convinced their Senses and Reason of the Truth of it, by true and
real Miracles; and the Universal Consent of the same Nations, which succeeded
the Evidence of Miracles, is equally convincing to us, that that Faith is
certainly true: Consequently we have a certain, and an undoubted Motive to rely
upon, in the Belief of the Articles of our Faith.

Now it is manifest, and even acknowledged by our Adversaries, that, excepting
those who separated themselves, or were cut off from the Church by
Excommunication, for their obstinate Adherence to some Errors contrary to
Faith; and whose Opposition cannot prejudice the Truth of that Faith, as I
proved before; that excepting those, I say, the Universal Consent of all the
Christian World agrees in all the Articles of Faith, that the Catholic Church
holds and believes. But among other Truths that are derived to us by this
Universal Tradition, or common Consent of all Nations, as before explained; this
is one, That the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of God, does assist the Church, and
does guide her into all Truth necessary to Salvation. Hence we conclude:

1. That the Catholic Church is Infallible in all the Articles of Faith that
she holds and professes: For, since the Holy Ghost is given to the Church to
guide her into all Truth, and that this Holy Spirit is Omniscient and
Omnipotent, it cannot be affirmed without Impiety, that it should permit her to
fall into Error.

2. That General Councils are Infallible in all their Definitions and Decisions
of Faith For, though a General Council be but a Representative of the whole
Church; yet, because General Assemblies of the chief Pastors of the Church have
been always looked upon, even by the Apostles themselves (whose Steps in this
particular the Church does follow) as the best and most effectual Means of
determining any Controversy that may arise; and that all Good Christians have
always held themselves bound to acquiesce to their Determinations, and to
submit to them: it is reasonable to believe, that the Spirit of God does assist
and guide them.

3. That the Catholic Church is Infallible in determining what Books of
Scripture are Canonical, and what Books are not; and in declaring the true
Sense, and Interpretation of them: For, since these sacred Books, and the right
Interpretation of them are very necessary for the Edification of our Faith and
Manners; the same Spirit which guides the Church into all Truth, does, no
doubt, guide Her in these great and important Truths. We shall see hereafter
what Society of Christians can justly pretend to be called the Catholic Church.
I now proceed to prove from Scripture, that the Church is Infallible.

But whereas the Protestants are accustomed to carp at this kind of Proof,
pretending that this is to Dance in a Circle, as They are pleased to term it;
it will not be amiss to examine what is meant by a Circle, and when it is to be
admitted in Reasoning.

When two things bear witness mutually the one of the other, we call this a
Circle; and when they have nothing else to support the Truth of their Evidence,
but their mutual Affirmation, then that sort of Proof is Faulty: But when both,
or either, have such Evidence on their side, as is sufficient to establish
their Credit before they bear witness one of another; though it be still a
Circle, yet it is good and vallid in all sort of Proof. Thus God the Father
bore witness of Jesus Christ, and He again of the Father. Thus Jesus Christ
bore witness of John the Baptist, and John the Baptist likewise of Him: And I
hope no Body will be so impious, as to say, these were vicious or faulty
Evidences; because God the Father's Testimony was known to be true, though Jesus
Christ had not confirmed it; and Jesus Christ his Works proved likewise his own
Testimony to be true, though his Father had not born Him witness. In like manner,
the Church bears witness that the Scripture is the Word of God; and the
Scripture again bears witness, that the Church is Infallible; and yet this way
of Reasoning is not in the least defective, because the Church has sufficient
Credentials for the truth of its Evidence, before it rereceives a Testimony
from the Scripture, viz. The Universal Consent of the whole Catholic Church,
which, as is already proved, is undoubtedly certain. The Testimony then of
Scripture, bearing witness of the Church; is properly speaking Argumentum ad
homin^^, that is, an Argument from a Concession, or a Principle agreed upon by
both Parties.

And now, since the Protestants do agree, that the Scripture is Infallibly
true; I hope they will hear it, if it bears witness of the Infallibility of the
Church. Let us see then what it says upon this Subject. Christ says, Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock, I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, Matthew. 16. verse 18. Again, Go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you; and so, I am with you always, even unto the End of the World, cap. 28. ver.
19, 20. And again, I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them now ^ howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth, John. 16. ver. 12, 13. St. Paul writes to Timothy, But if I tarry
long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House
of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Ground of the
Truth, 1 Timothy ^. ver. 15.

You see Christian Reader, that Christ promi'sd to build his Church upon a
Rock; and that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; that he himself
continues with it ^^^o the end of the World: That the spirit of Truth shall
guide it into all Truth. And St. Paul says, that the Church of God is the
Pillar and Ground of the Truth. Now if any Man, that believes the Goodness and
Power of Jesus Christ, to perform what he promises, can show me any Text in
Scripture more Plain and Evident to prove any thing else, than these do the
Infallibility of the Church; I shall hold my self highly obliged to him for
that Favor. If the Gates, on Power of Hell (for they are both the same) shall
not prevail against the Church; surely then it shall not fell into Error: For
there are but two Ways of prevailing against it, viz. by destroying all the
Members that compose it, as to their temporal Being; or by corrupting their
Souls with Error. That the Gates of Hell has not prevailed, as to the former,
our own Being is a sufficient Evidence; and that they shall not, as to the
latter; methinks a sober modest man ought to be content with the Insurance of
Christ's Promise. If Christ continues with the Church unto the end of the
World, can it be imagined, that he should suffer it to fall into Error, since
we cannot suppose him to have any other business to continue with it, than to
preserve it from that? If the holy Ghost, or, as the Te^t calls him, the Spirit
of Truth will guide the Church into all Truth; we must surely renounce all
pretense to Reason and Christianity, if we believe that any Power, whether
Earthly or Infernal, can be able to make it err. Lastly, if the Church be the
Ground and Pillar of Truth, as St. Paul calls it, certainly neither Rain, nor
Floods, no^ Wind, can shake or throw down an Edifice so firmly founded, I shall
now add three or four Testimonies of the Primitive Fathers in savor of this
Truth, and so conclude this chapter.

Saint Ireneus, a Father of the second Age, writes thus of the Church; where
the Church is, there is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of God is, there is
all Grace, lib. 3. c. 40.

Praes. in lib. per. Ar.
In the third Age, Origin, That only is to be believed for Truth, which in
nothing disagrees from the Tradition of the Church. And a little after: We must
not believe otherwise, than as the Church of God has by Succession delivered to
us. In the same Age, St. Cyprian: Whoever divides from the Church, and cleaves
to the Adultress, is separated from the Promises of the Church; he cannot have
God his Father, that has not the Church his Mother. Again, To Peter's Chair,
and the Principal Church, Infidelity, or false Faith cannot have access, Epist.
55.

In the fourth Age, St. Jerome, The Roman Faith commended by the Apostles,
cannot be changed, in Apolog. cont. Ruffin.

In the beginning of the fifth Age, St. Augustine, I know by Divine Revelations,
that the Spirit of Truth teaches it, (the Church) all truth, Lib. 4. de Bap.
c. 4. Again, To dispute against the whole Church is insolent Madness; and I my
self would not believe the Gospel, were it not that the Authority of the Church
moves me to it, cont. Epist. fundam. c. 5.

I shall not trouble the Reader with any Reflections upon these Sentences, but
will let them stand or fall by their own Weight; persuaded as I am, that no
Comment, or Gloss whatsoever can make them speak plainer, or more to my
purpose: I will only mind him, that these Great and Eminent Men, who shined in
the Church like so many Lights, as well by the Luster of their extraordinary
Piety, as by the profoundness of their Learning, could not be ignorant of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church of their Time: Consequently would never have
taught so peremptorily the Infallibility of the Church, unless it had been the
Opinion of all the Christian World. There is then an Infallible Church, that is
to say, a Congregation of Faithful that believes, holds, and teaches the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ. 1. Upon the Universal Consent of the Christian World.
2. Upon clear and plain Texts of Scripture, declaring the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost to guide it into all Truth. 3. Upon the unanimous Consent of the
Fathers of the Primitive Times; a Triple Cord which neither the Power of Hell,
nor the Subtility of Heretics, nor the Malice of the World shall ever be able
to break. Let us now examine what Society of Christians can justly lay claim
to, or be truly called, the Catholic Church.

CHAP. II. The Congregation of Faithful in Communion with the Bishop of Rome,
and no other, is the Catholic Church.
TO prove this Assertion, I shall lay down some Principles known, either by
their own Light, or sufficiently proved by plain Texts of Scripture, and the
Consent of our Adversaries.

I. That in the Catholic Church there is, and shall be a Continued Succession
of Bishops, Priests and Teachers, from Christ to the End of the World.

II. That there is but one Catholic Church.

III. That one Communion, as well as one Faith, is Essential to the Being of
one Church.

IV. That whosoever separates from, or is excommunicated by the Church, for the
Obstinate Denial of any Article of the Faith, which the Church professes,
cannot justy be called a Member of the Church.

1. In the Catholic Church there is, and shall be a Continued Succession of
Bishops, Priests and Teachers, from Christ, to the End of the World. This is
manifest from these Words of St. Paul. He gave some, Apostles; and some,
Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and some, Pastors, and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

2. There is but one Catholic Church. This is evident from Christ's own Words,
I have other Sheep which are not of this Fold; Them also I must bring, and they
shall hear my Voice, and there shall be one Fold and one Shepherd. John 10.16.
And from these Words of the Nicene Creed, I believe One Holy Catholic Apostolic
Church.

3. One Communion, as well as one Faith is Essential to the Being of one
Church. This is no less evident from the aforesaid Words of Christ, who says,
that his Sheep will not only hear his Voice, but also shall be brought all into
one Fold; than from the very Notion, which as well protestants, as Catholics
have of a Church; namely, That it is a Congregation of the Faithful, believing
and practicing the same Things with due Subjection, and Subordination to their
Lawful Pastors. This Truth the Gentlemen of the Church of England are very loath
to own, in their Disputes with the Roman Catholics; and not without Reason? For
they are Sensible, that all their Authority and Mission, if any they have, are
derived from the Church of Rome; and that, if Unity in Communion, which, as
aforesaid, implies a Due Subjection and Subordination to Lawful Pastors, be
essential to the Being of the Catholic Church, they quite unchurch themselves;
since it is Manifest, that in the Beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
They shook off all Obedience and Subjection to their Bishops, who were all R.
Catholics, and Drove them all away; and in some Years before, in King Henry the
VIII. his Time, what with Death, and other Cruelties, they compelled most of
Them to divide and separate from the Pope, and all other Bishops in the World
besides. They would therefore willingly pass by this sore place, if possible;
but when the Dispute is with the Presbyterians, this Truth is highly magnified.
These they look upon to be Schismatics, because they separated from their
Communion, and erected Altars against their Altars; and so far, indeed, they
are in the Right, if a Separation from a Separation may be called Schism.
However, this I cannot but admire, that they do not observe, that in charging
the Presbyterians with Schism, they condemn themselves; since it is notoriously
known, they are highly guilty of what they charge them with; namely, of
separating from their own, and all other Bishops in the World. Whoever desires
farther Satisfaction in this matter, may consult Dr. Heilin's History of the
Presbyterians, Intitul'd, Aerius Redivivus, and the History of the Reformation,
by the same Author; but more especially an Ingenious Treatise, lately published
by a Learned Divine of the Church of England, under this Title, The Principles
of the Cyprianic Age. In this, the Author proves excellently well the Necessity
of One Communion as well as of One Faith, for the being of One Church. I will
transcribe some of his Words, and leave the Reader to judge how well he proves
my Postulatum. Now they were thus united (says he, speaking of all the Bishops
in the Catholic Church) by the Great and Fundamental Laws of one Faith, and one
Communion. That the One Holy Catholic Faith is essential in the Constitution of
One Holy Catholic Church, is, even this day, a received Principle, I think,
amongst all sober Christians: But then, I say, that the Christians, in St.
Cyprian's Time, reckoned the Laws of one Communion every whit as forcible and
indispensable to the Being of one Church, as the Laws of One Faith. It was a
Prime, a Fundamental Article of their Faith, that there was but one Church; and
they could not understand, how there could be but One Church, if there was more
than One Communion. By their Principles and Reasonings, a multiplication of
Communions made unavoidably a multiplication of Churches; and by consequence,
seeing there could be but one true Catholic Church, there could be likewise but
one true Catholic Communion. All other Churches or Communions were false, i. e.
not at all Christian Churches or Communions. Thus far this Learned Man, and
indeed very right: For it was the constant Principle as well of all, as of the
Primitive Ages of the Church, that One Communion was no less Essential to the
being of One Church, nor less necessary to Salvation than One Faith. And here I
cannot but observe two things by the way. 1. How unjust that intolerable charge
of uncharitableness is, wherewith the Protestants incessantly Traduce the R.
Catholics, for denying them Salvation out of their Communion; since it is
manifest, as this Learned Man says, that one Faith and one Communion are
equally necessary to Salvation: And no less evident, that the Protestants
separated themselves from that Communion and Faith, which the R. Catholics
believe, and maintain to be the true Church. How is it then consistent with
their Principles to allow Salvation to the Protestants whilst they persist in
their Separation? Or how can they be deemed uncharitable for judging according
to the known Principles of the Primitive Christians, who knew but one Faith and
one Communion, wherein Salvation was to be had? 2. What miserable shifts the
Church of England Gentlemen are driven to, being forced to deny to the R.
Catholics, in their own justification, what they so earnestly press upon the
Presbyterians, in order to reclaim them, as constant and fundamental Principles
in the Primitive Church.

4. Whosoever separates from, or is excommunicated by the Church, for the
obstinate. Denial of any Article of the Faith, which it professes; cannot
reasonably be called a Member of the Church. This is Self-evident, as to the
first part; for to separate from the Church, is to go away from it, as the very
Word imports; and by consequence to be no more a Member of it. It is likewise
no less evident, as to the second; for to Excommunicate is to put out of
Communion, or to cut off from the Body of the Church: So that whoever is
Excommunicated for the Denial of any Article of Faith, can no more be said to
be united to the Church, than an Arm cut off from a Man, or a Branch from a
Tree, can be said to be united to the same Man or Tree. All such then, who
wilfully separate from the Communion of the Catholic Church, let their Pretense
be never so plausible, are properly Schismatics: I say, let their pretense be
never so plausible; for Dr. Hammond tells us, as aforesaid, that it is
Impossible, the Church should give them such Provocation, as might justify a
Separation. in like manner, All those who are excommunicated by the Church, for
their obstinate Refusal to assent to any Truth, declared to be an Article of
Faith, are properly called Heretics.

Now Protestants, as well as Catholics agree, that neither Schismatics, nor
Heretics, are Members of the Catholic Church, nor any way within its Pale:
There only remains then to examine, who those are on whom these Marks of
Schism, and Heresy are justly chargeable; and who, on the other Hand, are free
from that charge; which, if plainly made out, it will be easy to see, what
Congregation of Faithful can be justly called the Catholic Church.

Now all the Societies of Christians, who, with any color of Reason, can
pretend to the Name of Catholic, are these: 1. The Nestorians and Eutychians.
2. The Greek Church. 3. The Church of England; And lastly, the R. Catholics. I
have on purpose omitted the Waldenses, Socinians, Hussites, Lutherans,
Calvinists, and all those, almost Innumerable Sects continually shooting out of
the Trunck of the Reformation, and spreading far and near, over our own
unfortunate Islands; as Anabaptists, Independents, Quakers, Mugoltonians,
Seekers, Familists, Philadelphians, etc. because all these are destitute of
even the least Pretense to the Name of Catholic Church; having neither lawful
Pastors, lawful Mission, nor Right Ordination, which, as all the Christian
World, before the Reformation; and, as the Church of England still grants,
cannot be given without Imposition of Hands performed by Bishops. This, they
Ingenuously own, they have not, consequently nor the least Pretense to the
Catholic Church; no nor, if we believe some Learned Divines of the Church of
England, to the Name of Christian: For, as these Gentlemen Reason, no Man can
be called Christian, unless he is Baptized; Baptism cannot be conferred but by
such, who have Authority to administer the Sacraments; no Man can have this
Authority, but by lawful Ordination; and this is not conferred, nor cannot,
without Imposition of Hands by Lawfully ordained Bishops. Bishops all these
Sects own they have not; consequently nor true Baptism, nor Christianity.

This, I confess, cannot be said of the four Societies aforesaid: For every one
of them has always retained the Hierarchy of the Church, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, at least, have pretended to it; and think it Essential to the being of
the Catholic Church: But since this is not enough, unless they have likewise
the Catholic Faith and Communion, which, together with the said Hierarchy, make
up the essential parts of Catholic Religion; our present Business shall be to
try each of them by this Touchstone, and see which will abide the Test.

1. Touching the Nestorians and Eutychians: Under this Appellation, I
comprehend the Jacobites, Cophtes, Armenians, and all other Sects, who follow
the Opinions of Nestorius, and Eutyches, touching the Person, and Natures in
Christ; all the Rest of the Eastern Christians either adhereing to the Roman,
or Greek Church. What I have to say concerning these Sects, shall be dispatched
in a few Words. Dr. Tillotson, and all the Learned Men of the Church of
England, do receive the Definitions of the four first General Councils, whereof
the two last excommunicated and condemned, as Heretics the Authors of these
Sects and their Adherents; N^storius, for asserting two persons; Eutyches, for
denying two Natures in Christ; consequently all those Sects, who took up their
Opinions, are justly excluded from the number of True Catholics. As to the
Points in Controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and the Protestants, viz.
Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayers for the Dead, Invocation of
Saints, etc. they are as firmly believed by the said Sects, as by the R.
Catholics.

2. As for the Greek Church: It is notoriously known, that the Chiefest Reason
of their Separation from the Church of Rome, was, because this Church asserted
the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, which yet the
Protestants hold to be Orthodox Doctrine: And no less evident, that the Greek
Church did Recant their Error concerning this Point, and all other things
wherein they differed from the Church of Rome, many times, but more especially
in three General Councils; First, in the Council of L^theran, where the
Patriarch of Constantinople assisted in Person. 2dly. In the Council of Lions,
where the Greek Emperor, and other Representatives of the Greek Church were
present. And lastly, in the Council of Florence, where the Emperor, the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great many Greek Bishops were present, and
disputed the Point for a long time; which, at last, came to this Issue. There
were Letters of Union drawn up, wherein the Grecians do acknowledge the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and Son, the Popes Supremacy, and
some other Points of no great Weight before debated. These Letters were signed
by the Emperor, and by all the Greek Bishops, (the Bishop of Ephesus only
excepted) and stand upon Record to this day. Whence it is manifest, that by
their own Act and Deed, they are convicted of Schism, for their wilful, and
causeless Separation afterward from the Church of Rome, whom they owned by
this Authentic Instrument to be the Catholic Church, and themselves likewise
to be Members of it.

Touching the main Points in Controversy betwixt the Protestants, and the
Church of Rome; what the Greek Church holds and professes, let us hear from the
Pen of an Ingenious Protestant Gentleman, Sir Edwin Sandys in his Europae
Speculum, page 233. With Rome (says he) they concur in the opinion of
Transubstantiation, and generally in the Sacrifice and whole body of the Mass;
in praying to Saints; in Auricular Confession; in offering of Sacrifice and
Prayer for the Dead; and in these, without any or no material Difference. They
hold Purgatory also, and the Worshipping of Pictures. Thus far Sandys. So that,
though the Greeks were a true Church, it would but very little help the
Protestant Cause, nay rather, it would very much prejudice it; since the
Grecians hold those points to be Orthodox; on the pretended falsity whereof,
the Protestants ground their Separation: But of this more in its proper Place.

3. Touching the Church of England. This is of so Great Importance to our
present Controversy, or rather the only necessary Point to be Rightly
understood, that it is requisite it should be handled with all the clearness
and perspicuity imaginable: And if it be possible to make it Evident, that this
Church is branded with Heresy and Schism, (two things sufficient to unchurch
any Society of Christians whatsoever) I hope I may, without vanity, say, that I
have gained my Point. To prove then, that the Church of England is both
Heretical and Schismatical (I am heartily sorry I must use such hard
Expressions to so many Ingenious and Great Men, whose Learning and other good
Qualities I very much honor and respect) I shall make use of no Arguments, but
such as are grounded upon the clear Light of natural Reason, upon the consent
of Mankind, and the concession of our Adversaries; and upon such known and
evident matters of Fact, as the most Impudent Wrangler would be ashamed to deny.

As to the first; That the Church of England is Heretical, I prove thus:
Whatsoever Society of Christians obstinately denies any Doctrine, believed by
the Catholic Church to be of Faith, is Heretical; but the Church of England
denies obstinately some Doctrines, believed by the Catholic Church to be of
Faith. Therefore the Church of England is Heretical. The Major, or first
Proposition, is a known Principle, which no Christian in his wits ever denied:
The Minor, or second Proposition I demonstrate thus: The Church of England
obstinately denies Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and many
other Points; but these are believed by the Catholic Church to be of Faith:
Therefore the Church of England denies obstinately some Doctrines believed by
the Catholic Church to be of Faith. That the Church of England obstinately
denies the said Doctrines or Points, is matter of Fact, and what She very much
glories in: That the same Points or Doctrines were all, in the beginning of the
Reformation, believed by the Catholic Church to be of Faith, we have, besides
the unanimous consent of the Roman, Greek, and all the Eastern Churches, the
Testimony of several Learned Protestants, who, surely would never have told a
thing so favorable to their Adversaries; if it had not been manifestly True.
And to show, that this is not said gratis; I will Instance in some.

Hospinian faith, Luther's Separation was from all the World. Epist. 141.

White: Popery was a Leprosy breeding so universally in the Church, that there
was no Visible Company of Men appearing in the World free from it. Defense. c.
37. p. 136. The aforesaid Doctrine^ is what this good man is pleased to call
Popery, as all the World knows.

Bishop Jewel: The Whole World, Princes, Priests, and People, were overwhelmed
with Ignorance, and bound by oath to the Pope. Sermon on Luke 11.

Whitaker: In times past no Religion but the Papistical had place in the
Church. Controv. 4.9, 5. c. 3.

Bucer: All the World erred in that Article of the real presence. p. 660.

Calvin: They made all the Kings and People of the Earth Drunk, from the First
to the Last. Justit. 4. c. 18.

Perkins: During the space of 900 years, the Popish Heresy had spread it self
over the Whole World. Exposit. symb. p. 266.

The Sum of this cloud of Witnesses, which yet is not the twentieth Part of
what may be brought from the Reformation-treasure; amounts to this; that before
the Reformation, there was no other Religion in the Whole Christian World, but
the Roman Catholic, or, as they are pleased to term it, the Papistical; and
that the aforesaid Points, and many more, which they call Popery, Leprosy, and
Ignorance, were universally believed, as Articles of Faith, by all the visible
Companies of Christians in the World. And if this be true; the Church of
England, which obstinately denies these Points, and many more, must necessarily
deny some Doctrines believed by the Catholic Church as of Faith; and by
consequence the Church of England is Heretical.

Touching the second, viz. that the Church of England is Schismatical. This is
no less evident than the former: For, if Schism be a willful Separation from
the Church, as it is defined by all Mankind, as well Protestants as Catholics;
the Church of England is doubly guilty of this Crime. First, for separating
from the Pope, and their own Immediate Heads, the Bishops of England. Secondly,
for separating from the Communion of all other Bishops in the World besides.

The Bishop of Rome, in the beginning of the Reformation, was acknowledged by
all the World to be, at least, Patriarch of the West; and by the Protestants
themselves, to have exercised Jurisdiction over the Church of England for 900
years and more; even from the time of its Conversion to Christianity; and
surely, so long a prescription is a sufficient Title, though no other could be
shown.

We find, in the Acts of the third General Council held at Ephesus, Binius Tom.
2. Apend. 1. Cap. 4.
a complaint exhibited by the Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, against the
Patriarch of Antioch, who would force that Island to submit to his jurisdiction,
and oblige its Metropolitian to receive the Grace of Ordination from him, as
the Council phrases it. To this Complaint the Council answers, That if the
Bishops of Cyprus could make out, that the Patriarch of Antioch, had never
conferred Orders upon their Metropolitan, it was unjust to pretend to it now.
And the Business being fairly proved in favor of the said Bishops; the Council
decreed, That the Patriarch of Antioch had no Jurisdiction over them, nor ought
to pretend to any. Whence it is manifest, that if the Patriarch of Antioch
could, prove that he had conferred Orders upon their Metropolitan, at any time;
or exercised Lawful Jurisdiction over them, the Council would have Decreed the
said Island to be subject to him; and that, as it was a manifest Usurpation in
the Patriarch of Antioch to pretend to any such Jurisdiction; since he was not
in Possession of it, nor could prove to have ever had it; so likewise, it would
be perfect Rebellion and Schism in them to withdraw from his Jurisdiction, if
he were Legally possessed of it. Now, I would fain know, if the same Council
were to judge the Church of England, and the Pope's cause, what they would
think of it? Pope Eleutherius sent some of his own Clergy to Convert the
Brittans in King Lucius his Time. St. Gregory sent Augustine the Monk, and
others to convert the Saxons, and exercised Jurisdiction over them, ordaining
their Metropolitan, or causing him to be ordained by his Orders; and the Popes
his Successors continued in peaceable Possession of this Prerogative, and they
(the Clergy and People of England) receiving and obeying his lawful Commands,
not only as Patriarch of the West, but even as Head of the Church, for the
Space of 900 Years and more; what would this Council, I say, think of the
Church of England's rising up against the Pope's Authority after so long a
Prescription? Certainly it would look upon them to be Rebels against the
Authority the best established in the World. Nor will it any way help them to
say, as they usually do, that the King of England has Power to Transfer the
Papal, or Patriarchal Power from Rome, and confer it upon the Archbishop of
Canterbury: For, besides that it is most absurd to suppose such a Power in a
King; since it cannot be imagined, whence such an Ecclesiastical Authority can
be derived to a Secular Prince; we have an express Decree to the contrary in
the fourth General Council held at Calcedon: What gave Occasion to it, was
this. The Bishop of Tire was anciently Metropolitan of Phaenicia, Council.
Calced. Act. 6.
and as such, exercised Jurisdiction over all the Bishops in that Province.
Marcianus the Emperor (contrary to the Canon of the Council of Nice, by which
it was provided, That there shall be but one Metropolitan in each Province)
made a Pragmatic Sanction, whereby he Constituted the Bishop of Berithum
Metropolitan in the same Province, and submited a great many of the former
Metropolitan's Suffragans to him; which when the Bishop of Tire exposed to the
Council, it was unanimously Decreed, That the said Bishop of Tire should be
restored to all his Privileges and Jurisdiction, notwithstanding the Emperor's
Sanction, which the Council declared to be of no Force or Virtue against the
Canons of the Church. So that it is evident, this General Council knew nothing
of any such Ecclesiastical Power vested in the Emperor, though Lord of almost all
the World; much less in a Prince of a few Provinces. It Is true, there is a
Canon of a Council held, long after in Constantinople, called
Quinisexta-synodus, which provides, that if the Emperor should Erect, or raise
any City to the Dignity of Metropolis of a Province, the Ecclesiastical Power
ought to follow the Temporal. The Sense of which Canon, I conceive must be
this; that either the Bishop of the City thus dignified, was to have the
Jurisdiction of a Metropolitan over all the Bishops in the Province, (the
former Metropolitan being reduced to the condition of a private Bishop) or that
the same Province ought to be divided into Two, and Governed by two
Metropolitans with distinct Limits and Jurisdictions. Whether of the two be the
Sense of those Fathers, it is manifest, this Canon does not exempt the one, or
the other from the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch, much less from that of the
Pope, as Head of the Church. And indeed, to give it the most rigorous
Interpretation, it is impossible to stretch it any further than this; That when
a City is made Metropolis, or Head of a Kingdom, the Bishop of that City ought
to have Jurisdiction over all the Bishops in the same Kingdom: But this does
not give the least color to any Exemption from the Ecclesiastical Power to
which this Kingdom was subject before. Besides, this same was not enacted by
the Emperor, or any Secular Prince; but by a Council of Bishops in favor,
doubtless, of the Episcopal Dignity; because it was proper, that the first
Bishop, or Metropolitan should have his Seat in the Metropolis of the Kingdom,
and take his Denomination from thence. And yet we see, this never took place in
the West; otherwise the Bishops of Paris, in France; of London, in England; of
Edenburg, in Scotland; and others might as justly pretend to a Primacy in these
several Kingdoms; which, I am confident the Archbishop of Canterbury would as
much oppose, as any of the Rest.

Now, that the Church of England did wilfully separate from the Pope, from
their own immediate Heads, the Bishops of England, and from the Communion of
all the Bishops in the World besides, Stow, Baker, Dr. Heilen, Dr. Burnet.
is plain matter of fact, equally attested by all Writers as well Protestants
as Catholics. K. Henry VIII. did separate from the Pope, and assumed to
himself, the Title of Head of the Church of England, persecuting and putting to
death all such, who opposed his Supremacy. After the Death of Queen Mary, in
whose Reign the Church of England was again reconciled to Rome; Queen Elizabeth
called a Parliament in order to settle Matters of Religion. In this Parliament,
all the Bishops of England were deprived of their Episcopal Seas; some cast
into Prison, others banished the Country, all violently forced away from their
Flocks and Pastoral Functions. Nor will it at all relieve the Protestant Cause,
to say (which yet is their only plea) that the Bishops were deprived, because
they would not take the Oath of Supremacy revived by that Parliament. For,
beside that, it is an unheard of Thing, that any Society of Laymen should take
upon them to determine Spiritual Matters (for such was the Tenure of that Oath)
and to impose them upon Bishops, to whom it chiefly belonged to determine such
matters: This Proceeding was contrary to the Ordinary Methods of Parliament,
both before, and ever after that Time: For all things relating to
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Matters, are first determined and agreed upon in
the Convocation of the Bishops, whose province and care it is to declare what
is Spiritual, and what not; and then referred to both Houses of Parliament, to
pass into Law. But here is a Spiritual Matter past into a Law, which vests the
Supreme Spiritual Power in the Queen; and which all the Bishops in the Kingdom
solemnly protest against, as a thing as monstrously absurd, as it was ever
before unheard of. And yet they must be all deprived, because they would not
swear to the Truth of, nor assert this Spiritual Power lodged in a Person,
whose very Sex rendered her incapable of. Indeed, they might as well deprive
them, for not believing and swearing to the truth of the Alcaron: But this is
too absurd to need a Confutation.

That the Church of England separated from the Communion of all other Bishops
in the World, is evident even to this day, since they never were able to show
as much as one single Bishop in the whole World, who professes to be of their
Communion. Now if all this be not Schism, I confess, I know not what is. To
separate from the Pope, and all in Communion with him: To separate from their
own Bishops, and raise Altars against their Altars, or rather to pull down all
Altars, as they have done; to separate from all the Bishops in the World: If
this be not in the highest degree Schismatical, farewell Reason and Religion.
And here I may justly make the same Intercession (as St. Paul calls it) against
the Church of England, with that of Elijah against the Schismatical Church of
Israel, whose perfect Image I am sorry they bear. Lord, they have killed thy
Bishops and Priests, and dug down thine Altars; and we poor persecuted Sheep
are left alone, and they seek our lives to take them away.

4. As to the Roman Catholics, I need not urge any more Reasons than what has
been already offered, to prove that this Society of Christians is the True
Catholic Church: For since it is manifestly proved, that neither the Nestorian,
nor the Eutychian, nor the Greek, nor yet the Church of England is the Catholic
Church; it remains, that the Roman Catholics must necessarily be it: However, I
shall lay down some Notes agreed on by all sides, to pertain to the Catholic
Church, which upon Examination will be found to be peculiar to the Roman
Catholic Church.

1. The Roman Catholic Church is a Great Body of the Faithful spread over all
the known parts of the World; there being but few Kingdoms known, where some
Believers in communion with the Bishop of Rome, are not to be found: Hence She
justly claims the Title of Catholic.

2. If we except the Protestants, there are but few material Points in which
all other Sects differ from Her. And most of these are condemned by the
Protestants; as are most, if not all the Points, wherein the Protestants differ
from Her condemned by all other Sects. An Evident Argument, that she alone has
the Truth; since, if these things which they ground their Separation upon, had
been Evident, as they pretend, they would all agree in them.

3. All other Sects separated from the Communion of the Church of Rome,
beginning, each Sect, in One, or Two in opposition to the whole World: And we
are able to point at the Age, and Year of their Separation; and at the Name and
Character of each Sect's Author and Promotor. An Argument that She is the
Mother Church, or Root of the Tree, and those Sects some Branches fallen, or
cut off.

4. The Roman Catholic Church was never Condemned by any General Council, nor
yet by any Council of Bishops whether National, or Provincial, for the Points
of Faith, which the Protestants contest, if we except the Bishops made in
England by Secular Power, when the true Bishops were all discarded: But the
Opinions held by the Protestants, and all other Sects, in Opposition to the
Church of Rome, were Condemned by several General Councils, as every Learned
Man can tell.

5. It could never be made, out in what Age, or Year, or in whose Reign, or by
Whom, any of the Points in Dispute were introduced into the Catholic Belief. An
Evident Argument, that they were believed from the Beginning; it being
impossible to conceive how all the Christian World could be induced to believe
those things contrary to what they held before, and yet that no Man should
perceive it: Nay, it is Absurd and Ridiculous to imagine, that the greatest
part of Mankind should not be alarmed at the Novelty of a Doctrine, which, if
we believe the Protestants, shocks so, much both Sense and Reason; whereas the
New Doctrine of Arius, Nestorius, Luther, Calvin, and the Rest of his Tribe, so
violently shook the whole Earth, that to this very day, our own woeful
Experience is but too sensible a Testimony of its direful Effects.

Lastly, the R. Catholic Church has the universal Consent of all the Christian
World for her Tenets in matters of Faith; if we except that of the different
Sects, which sprung up at different Times; which, as it is before proved,
amounts to no more, than the Dissent, or Contradiction of one single Man
concerning One Point, in one Age; and of another, concerning an other Point, or
more, in a different Age, at least, at different Times; and that in Opposition
to all the Rest of Mankind: A Prerogative which no other Society of Christians
can pretend to; it being evident, and even confessed by themselves, that the
Opinions which they hold, in Opposition to the R. Catholics, were taken up by
certain Men in different Ages and Times; by Luther, in the 16th Century; by
Wiclief, in the 13th; by De Waldo in the 12th, etc.

I will then conclude, That since the R. Catholic Church is as universal in its
Communion, as, almost, the Bounds of the Earth; as Ancient in its Doctrine, as
the Apostles of Christ; since it was it alone, that adhered to the Ancient
Faith, and rejected the Novelty of all Heresies; and can only glory in having
the Universal Consent of the Christian World (as before explained) for the
Truth of its Doctrine: This Society, and no other, is the True Catholic
Apostolic Church. I shall now proceed to answer Dr. Tillotsou's Objections to
this Point.

The first is taken out of Vol. 2. Sermon. page 50, 61, 62. which in Substance is
this. Though the R. Catholics be very Stiff, and Peremptory in asserting their
Infallibility; yet they are not agreed among themselves, where it is seated,
whether in the Pope alone, or in a Council alone, or in both together, or in
the Diffusive Body of Christians. They are sure they have it, says he, though
they do not know where it is. Then he adds, There is not the least Intimation
in Scripture of this Privilege conferred upon the Church of Rome; and it is
strange, the Ancient Fathers, in their Disputes against Heretics, should never
Appeal to this Judge, it being so short and expedite a way of ending
Controversies; and this very Consideration, (concludes the Dr.) is to a Wise
Man instead of a Thousand Arguments to satisfy him, that, in those days, no
such thing was believed in the World.

Answer. I may say of these Three Propositions; the first is neither True in it
self, nor in most of its Circumstances. The second is perfectly of the same
Nature, if you except the Word Rome. The third is grounded upon a Negative, and
proves nothing.

I begin with the first. "They are not agreed, (says he) among themselves
where it is seated, etc. For my own part, I never yet read, or heard of any
Catholic Divine, that ever said, That the Catholic Church, taken for the
Diffusive Body of Christians, was not Infallible in declaring Matters of Faith;
Therefore, I think, All agree, that the Infallibility is seated in the
Diffusive Body of Christians: And I challenge any Protestant in the World, to
name me One, who says the contrary. The Pope is One, and the Chief Member of
that Diffusive Body. The Pope, and Council together, make a Great many Members;
and if you add to these All the Rest of the Faithful, they make up the entire
Diffusive Body of Christian. If the Pope be Infallible, surely the Concurrence
of a Council will rather confirm, than diminish his Infallibility. If the Pope
and Council together be Infallible, the Consent of the Diffusive Body of
Christians must surely strengthen and confirm it; But if neither the Pope, nor
the Council alone be Infallible, the Diffusive Body of Christians must
necessarily be; if any such Thing as Infallibility may be ascribed to any of
the Three, seeing both Pope and Council are included in it. We are sure then
the Infallibility consists, at least, in the Diffusive Body of Christians. But
to illustrate this a little more, let us propose this familiar Example. If I
should ask where my Lord Major of Lond^n is, at this Time? And that some should
tell me, He is in his own House; Others, not in his own House, but some where
in London; and others, neither in his own House, nor in London, but in England;
I would willingly know whether these three sorts of People do not all agree
that my Lord Mayor is in England? Certainly they do; because the assent of the
two former is necessarily implied in the Latter.

In like manner, though some say, the Pope is Infallible; Others, not the Pope
alone, but together with a General Council; and others, neither Pope nor
Council alone, without the Concurrence of the Diffusive Body of Christians; yet
all do (...) in this, that the Diffusive Body of Christians is Infallible. The
Dr. then is very much out, when he says; they do not know where it is, though
they are sure they have it.

Touching the second Proposition: There is not the least Intimation in
Scripture of this Privilege conferred upon the Church of Rome; and it is
strange the Ancient Fathers, in their Disputes against Heretics, should never
Appeal to this Judge, etc. That there is not only Intimation, but even plain
Texts of Scripture, which denote the Church's Infallibility, is what, I think,
is already sufficiently Proved. And since it is likewise Proved, that the Roman
Church, or (which is the same thing) the Congregation of Faithful in Communion
with it, is the Catholic Church; I think it is a necessary 'Consequence, that
there are plain Texts of Scripture, that prove the Infallibility of the Church
of Rome. Nor is it less certain, that the Ancient Fathers, in their Disputes
against Heretics, did Appeal to this Judge. For in those days, there was no
other Means to convince Heretics of their Errors, but by the Authority of the
Church. In the primitive Times, New Heresies sprung up, as many, if not more
than in any of our latter Ages; yet there was no other Rule, or Standard to
judge these Errors by, the Canonical Books of Scripture not being collected, or
put together, at least, in 150 Years after the Foundation of the Church; and
then not one Book of it all, whose Authority, or Credit was not questioned by
some Heretic or other. How was it then possible for the Ancient Fathers to
confute these Hereties, unless they had Appealed to the Authority of the
Church, and told them, that this is the Doctrine of the Catholic Church; this
is what we received from our Forefathers; And this is what all the Christian
World believes?

Neither is it true, that the ancient Fathers did not Appeal to this Judge,
even when the Scripture was collected, and received as the Word of God: Read
but St. Ireneus Contra Haeres. Tertul de Praescript. Epipha. de Haeres. St.
Austin cont. Epist. Fund. and many more; and you shall find how much the Doctor
was mistaken in this business. I do not cite the passages of these Fathers;
because they are so well known, and so often quoted by Others, who wrote upon
this Subject: But let this of St. Austin (to use the Doctors own Phrase) be
instead of a thousand: I would not believe the Gospel, Cont. Epist. Funda.
were it not that the Authority of the Church moves me to it.

The second Objection is in Answer to a Certain Passage in the Canon Law, Vol.
3. page 94.
where it is said, That if every Man may judge for himself; there will be
nothing but Confusion in Religion; there will be no End of Controversies: And
that our Lord had not seemed to be Discreet, The Drs Translation of the Latin
has it so.
if he had not provided for the Assurance of Men's Faith, by giving them an
Infallible Judge. To this he says, that if this Reasoning be good, we may as
well conclude, that there is an Universal Infallible Judge in Temporal Matters;
but it is evident in Fact and Experience, says he, that there is no such Judge
in Temporal Matters; consequently nor in Matters of Faith.

Answ. Had there been an Universal Infallible Judge appointed in Temporal
Matters, it would, doubtless, contribute very much to the Peace and Tranquillity
of the World, if He were Obeyed; but very little to the Means, wherewith God
Almighty designs to bring his chosen People to the Kingdom of Heaven; which is
to exercise them with Fiery Trials, and make them pass through much Tribulation:
And therefore He permits the Cruelty of Tyrants to try the patience of Martyrs,
and suffers the Oppression of the Poor on Earth, to enhance their Reward in
Heaven. So that the Cruelty, or Errors of a Temporal Judge do rather increase,
than diminish the Happiness of the Just. But the Case is far otherwise in
spiritual Matters: If the Judge should spoil us of our Faith, or err in Judging
for us, it would cause our Eternal ruin, our Damnation being necessarily
consequent upon a False Belief. And for that Reason, the goodness of God seems
to be so much the more engaged to secure the Spiritual, than the temporal Judge
from error; by how much the danger is the greater on that side, and the Ruin
more inevitable, if we should chance to Err.

Christ threatens Damnation to all those that will not believe his Doctrine,
which, how it can stand with his Infinite Goodness, unless he had provided
Infallible Means of conveying the Truth of this Doctrine to them, it is hard to
conceive. In short, Temporal Ease, and Tranquillity is of very little Moment,
even in this Life, but of none at all in the next; and therefore generally
speaking, God leaves Men in the Counsel of their own Hands, and permits Them
very often to disturb the public Peace, and quiet of this World: But the true
Knowledge of his Divine Law, and of the Mysteries of our Redemption, are of so
great importance to our Eternal Happiness, that his Goodness will Infallibly
secure it for us, if it be not our own Fault.

Object. 3. An Infallible Judge, page 95, 96.
if there were one, is no certain way to end Controversies, and to preserve the
Unity of the Church, unless it were likewise Infallibly Certain, that there is
such a Judge, and who he is. For till Men were sure of both these, there would
be still a Controversy whether there be an Infallible Judge, and who he is.
And if it be true which they tell us, that without an Infallible judge
Controversies cannot be ended; then a Controversy concerning an Infallible
judge can never be ended. And there are two Controversies actually on foot,
about an Infallible Judge; One, whether there be an Infallible Judge, or not?
Which is a Controversy between Us and the Church of Rome: And the other, who
this Infallible Judge is? Which is a Controversy among themselves, which could
never yet be decided: And yet till it be decided, Infallibility, if they had
it, would be of no use to them for the ending of Controversies. Thus far the
Drs. own Words.

Answ. That there is an Infallible Judge, is already proved: Who that Judge is,
I have likewise manifestly shown, namely, the Living Voice of all the Catholic
Pastors and People agreeing in the same Points of Faith. And if it be farther
asked, who those Pastors and People are? I answer, The same in Communion with
the Pope, as it is proved before. And surely none will doubt, but we may be
Infallibly certain, that these agree in the same Points of Faith. Consequently
we may be Infallibly certain both that there is an Infallible Judge, and who
that Judge is.

And if it be True which they tell us, says the Doctor, that without an
Infallible Judge, Controversies cannot be ended, then a Controversy concerning
an Infallible Judge can never be ended. And why so? Why may not an Infallible
Judge end it? Is not an Infallible Judge sufficient to end any Controversy
whatsoever? If the Church be Infallible, and assisted by the Spirit of God for
no other End, than to guide it into all Truth, surely it will not be wanting to
it in this Point, which is the most material of all others. But I suppose the
Dr. grounds his Argument upon this Axiom; no Man ought to be Judge in his own
Cause. If he should hence conclude that the supreme Judge cannot decide a
Controversy concerning his own Prerogative, he must certainly be a great
Stranger to all Civil Laws and Constitutions in the World. The King, and
Parliament together are the Supreme Judge of all Causes in England. Now if we
suppose, the Rest of the people of England should Dispute that Prerogative;
this Controversy, according to the Doctor's Principles, can never be ended:
Not by the King and Parliament; for it is their Own Cause, nor yet by the Rest
of the People of England; for it is not Reasonable, they should be Judge, and
Party. Who must judge it then? No Body. So that, if we stretch that Axiom thus
far, we must leave undecided that, without which nothing can be lawfully
decided. The true Sense of it then is this. No Man ought to be Judge in his own
Cause; that is, no Private Man, who lives under Laws and Government, ought to
Judge for himself, or be his own Carver; but must have Recourse to the ordinary
Judges, whose Sentence he, and his Adverse Party are bound to obey. But this is
by no means to be extended to the Supreme Legislative Power, whose very Essence
is to Judge all others, and to be Judged by None. As to what he says, that a
Controversy, Who this Infallible Judge is, could never yet be decided in the
Church of Rome. I answer, there never was any Controversy in the Church of
Rome concerning what is of Faith in this Point; namely, that the Church is this
Infallible Judge; and what the Church is, surely no Roman Catholic ever
disputed.

Vol. 3. Edit. post obit. page 32.
Object. 4. If God had thought it necessary, That there should be an Infallible
Church, he would have revealed this very thing more plainly, than any
particular Point whatsoever; but this he has not done; therefore he did not
think it necessary.

Answ. Let the Socinians, for once, answer, or rather Retort this Argument upon
the Doctor. Had God, say they, thought the Knowledge of Three Persons really
distinct, each of them perfect God, and yet but One God, necessary to be
believed by the Faithful, he would have revealed this very Thing more plainly
than any particular Point whatsoever, because it is looked upon to be the
Chiefest Mystery of Christianity; but this He has not done; Therefore he did
not think it necessary to be believed. Will the Doctor allow this Argument to
be good? If not, I hope he will give me leave to have the same Thoughts of his
Argument. For I am certain, there is no Text in Scripture, that proves a Real
Distinction of Three Persons, whereof each is Perfect God, and all but One God,
so plainly, as it proves many other things, which are not so necessary to
Salvation.

But has not God plainly revealed, that the Church is Infallible? Tell the
Church, and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee, as an Heathen
and Publican. When the Spirit of Truth comes, He shall guide you into all
Truth. Go teach all Nations -- And lo I am with you always even unto the End of
the World. The Church is the Ground and Pillar of Truth. Are not all these
clear and plain? Has not Christ's own Mouth and his Apostle's revealed all
These concerning the Church? Surely then, he judged the Infallibility of the
Church necessary to be believed. And this is to a Reasonable Man instead of a
Thousand Arguments, that He thought it not only necessary, but even laid it
down as the Chief Fundamental Point of our Belief; because this once firmly
established, would easily clear the Obscurity of any other.

Object. 5. page 77.
We have as great need of Infallible Security against Sin and Vice, in matters
of Practice, as against Errors in matters of Faith; but we have no Infallible
Security against Sin and Vice, in matters of Practice; consequently, nor
against Errors in matters of Faith.

Answ. This Comparison is in one sense Just and Reasonable, and in that sense,
I will be content to stand or fall by it, viz. That, as the assistance of the
Holy Ghost infallibly secures the Church from Error; so the assistance of God's
Grace, together with the cooperation of our Wills, which is always in our
power, is an infallible security against Sin, if put in ure: For, is not every
Sin voluntary? And if voluntary, surely we may abstain from it; it would not be
voluntary else: For if we cannot abstain from it, it is no more voluntary, but
necessary, and therefore no Sin; and have not we, in several places of the
Scripture, a promise of the Assistance of God's Grace, which is never wanting
to our sincere Endeavors; and if we have God's Grace, and are able, at least,
by this assistance to abstain from sin; certainly we have an infallible
Security against Sin and Vice; or if we have it not, how can it stand with the
infinite goodness of God to condemn us eternally for that, which we cannot
avoid? In short, as it is most agreeable to his infinite goodness, and mercy to
condemn no Man for what he cannot help; so it is but reasonable we should
believe, he has given us such means as will infallibly secure us, if it be not
our own fault, both from Errors, in matters of Faith; and from Sin and Vice, in
matters of Practice: But with this difference, that Free Will, without which
there can be no reward or punishment, by not cooperating with Grace, falls into
Sin and Vice; whereas the assistance of the holy Ghost depending of no such
condition, as to its effect, infallibly attains its end, and preserves the
Church from Error in matters of Faith.

Object. 6. All things necessary to be known either in Faith or Practice, are
clear and plain in Scripture; therefore there is no need of an Infallible
Church.

Answ. This is a Fundamental Principle, I think, I may truly say, with all
Protestants* The Dr. I am sure, repeats it several Times, and lays great Stress
upon it. But in establishing this Principle, he does two things, which, I
suppose, he would not willingly allow of, had he but well considered them.

1. He makes any Man of sense, that can read the Scripture, as infallible, as
the whole Catholic Church pretends to be. 2. He justifies, in a great measure,
all the Heretics that ever denied any Points of Faith, on pretense that they
are not plain in Scripture.

1. He makes any Man of sense, that can read the Scriptures, as Infallible, as
the whole Catholic Church pretends to be: For the Catholic Church pretends only
to be Infallible in necessary Articles of Faith: Now if all things, necessary
to be known in Faith, and Practice, be clear and plain in Scripture; there is
no Man of sense, that reads it, but may be as Infallible in what is clear and
plain, as any Church, or Churches in the World: For what is clear and plain to
a Man, that he is, as Sure and Certain of, as if all the Mathematicians in the
World had demonstrated it to him; since a Demonstration serves for no other
end, than to make a thing clear and plain: So that this worthy grave Doctor
necessarily vests, in every private Man, that Infallibility, which he
endeavors with so much earnestness to deny to the whole Catholic Church. And
surely, if one single Man be Infallible, when he interprets Scripture
concerning necessary Articles of Faith, how much surer can the same privilege
be ascribed to a learned assembly of Divines composed of the whole Church: The
Dr. is then forced volens nolens, even by his own Principles, to admit an
Infallibility.

2. He Justifies, in a great measure, all the Heretics, that ever denied any
Points of Faith on pretense that they are not plain in Scripture. For Instance;
the Socinians are Generally Men of Learning, and their Ingenious Writings do
sufficiently witness to the World, they want neither sense, nor judgment; yet
they solemnly declare, they do not find one Text in Scripture, which proves
clearly, and plainly the Divinity of Jesus Christ, or a Trinity of Persons in
One God, in a True and proper sense; which notwithstanding is one of the
Greatest Mysteries of our Faith. What must we say of these Men? Can we imagine
they would be so great Enemies to their own Salvation, as to deny this great
Mystery, if it were clearly and plainly set down in Scripture? And if it be
not, with what face can Protestants condemn the Socinians, who openly profess
to follow their Principles; and do, for that very Reason, reject this Mystery,
because it is not plain in Scripture? Or how will they be able to convince them
upon this Principle; since they are ready, as they have often declared, to
believe the Mystery of the Trinity, if it could be made out, that it is
clearly, and plainly contained in the Scripture? But why do I say convince
them? Alas! They are so far from any such thing, that the Absurd and Ridiculous
Systems of many of their Doctors, in their Answers to the accute and Ingenious
Pamphlets of these Heretics, proclaim loudly to the World, that the Socinians
have got the better, and fairly beat them at their own Weapons. And thus in
rejecting the Authority of the Church, which Christ commands us to hear, on no
less penalty, than of being reputed Heathens and Publicans; they have opened a
door for these, and all other Sects, who are daily cutting their Throats with
those very weapons Themselves have put into their Hands.

CHAP. III. Of the Pope's Supremacy:
What we believe to be of Faith concerning this Point; is this, That the Pope,
or Bishop of Rome, is the Successor of St. Peter, and, as such, Head of the
Catholic Church.

That the Bishop of Rome is Successor of St. Peter, I hope, I need not prove,
since there is nothing in History more universally attested by all Ancient and
Modern Writers: Nor was it ever yet questioned, that I could find, 'till some
Protestants in this, and in the last Age, without the least Grounds in
Antiquity, had the Assurance to dispute it; whose Opinions notwithstanding are
exploded by most of their own Learned Writers. See Dr. Cave in the Life of St.
Peter.

The main Business then is to show, that this Prerogative was conferred upon St.
Peter. And for this we have several Texts of Scripture, in which it is plain,

1. That Christ conferred this Dignity upon Him.

2. That the Evangelist giving the Names of the 12 Apostles, marks particularly
his Primacy. And,

3. That after Christ's Ascension, he took upon him this Character, always
speaking first, and moving to the Rest of the Apostles whatever was to be
debated.

1. Christ conferred this Dignity upon him. I say unto thee that thou art Peter,
or ^as the Greek has it, a Rock, and upon this Rock I will build my Church.
Mat. 16.
Jesus says to Simon Peter. Simon Son of Jonas, Love thou me more than
these. John 21.
And a little after, feed my Lambs; again, feed my Sheep -- feed my Sheep. And
the Lord said, Luke 22.31, 32.
Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
Wheat; but I have praised for thee, that thy Faith fail not; and when thou art
converted, confirm thy Brethren. The English Translators (carrying, no doubt,
an Eye upon this Controversy) have rendered it, strengthen thy Brethren;
because a Charge of Confirming others does too plainly denote a Superiority.

I shall make no other Reflections upon these Texts, only desire the Reader to
observe, that this particular pointing out of Peter, as a Rock to build the
Church upon; the especial Charge of feeding Christ's Lambs and Sheep, by which
the Holy Fathers have always understood both People and Pastors; and the
Confirming of his Brethren, viz. The Rest of the Apostles, must, surely, denote
some particular Mark and Character above the Rest.

2. The Evangelist, in giving the Names of the 12 Apostles, marks particularly
St. Peters's Primac^. Now the Names of the twelve Apostles are these; the
first, Simon, Mat. 10.
who is called Peter. It Is certain, that Peter was not the first Disciple of
the twelve, nor yet the eldest Man; for his Brother Andrew was sooner a
Disciple, and older than Peter. And most certainly, Christ did not design the
(...) for a Primacy of Ceremony or Civility, but for that of Order and
Jurisdiction; at least, as far as it was requisite to found the peace and unity
of the Church.

3. After Christ's Ascension, Peter took upon him this Character. Acts of the
Apostles cap. 1. He stands up, discourses at large upon the fall of Judas; and
lays before the Apostles, and Disciples, the Necessity of substituting an other
in his Room. chap. 2. When the Disciples were filled with the Holy Ghost, and
spoke with other Tongues, and the Multitude thought they were drunk; Peter
lifts up his voice, and gives an account of that miraculous Gift. His Sp^ech in
the Temple, cap. 3. His defense before the Rulers, and Elders in Jerusalem,
cap. 4. His Sentence upon Ananias and Saphira, cap. 5. And many other passages
to this purpose found in the same Volum, are convincing Proofs of this Truth;
but more especially that famous Council of the Apostles related, cap. 15. Where
after much disputing, Peter, rose up first, showed the Apostles what conduct
they were to keep in regard of the converted Gentiles, and concluded, in a
manner, the debate with this Sentence: Now therefore, why tempt ye God to put a
Yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers, nor we, were
able to bear, etc. So that if we had never been taught any thing else,
concerning Peter's Primacy, his conduct in these affairs were enough for any
unprejudiced Man to conclude, that either he was qualified by Jesus Christ for
that Office, or that he must be a very arrogant Man in taking so much upon him,
to the Diminution of the Honor and Esteem of his Fellow Apostles. And if we
put these three things together, viz. 1. Christ's building his Church upon
Peter; giving him the Charge of feeding his Lambs, and Sheep; and the Power of
Confirming his Brethren. 2. The Evangelist, pursuant to this Power, not only
reckoning him first amongst the Apostles, but also calling him the First. 3.
Peter's exercising the Office, and Charge of Head, or Chief among the Apostles,
as aforesaid; We shall plainly see, that this Superiority is no Imaginary
thing, as our Adversaries would make the World believe; but a Real Truth
grounded upon the Word of God. And if this was conferred upon Peter, it is
granted by all, that the same Prerogative must necessarily devolve upon his
lawful Successors, the Bishops of Rome. And, indeed, this was so publicly
taught, and professed by the Primitive Fathers and Councils, as a necessary and
fundamental Truth, that many Learned Protestants have been forced to own it. I
shall instance in one; Monsieur Blondel, one of the most learned Protestants,
that ever writ against the Pope's Supremacy, gives it this Testimony. The
Titles of the Apostle St. Peter, says he, ought not to be put in debate, since
the Grecians, and P^otestants also do confess, that it has been believed, and
that it might indeed be, that he was the President and Head of the Apostles,
the Foundation of the Church, and Possessor of the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Again, page 107.
Rome being a Church consecrated by the Residence and Martyrdom of St. Peter,
whom Antiquity has acknowledged to be the Head of the College Apostolic, having
been honored with the Title of the Seat of the Apostle St. Peter, might
without Difficulty, be considered, by one of the most renowned Councils, (viz.
that of Chalcedon) as Head of the Church. Thus far this Learned Man; and
surely, nothing, but the Evidence of this Truth, could extort so ingenuous a
Confession from an Adversary, in favor of ^^me, whose Supremacy he chiefly
aimed to pull down. Now, how far this Title gives him Superiority, and
Jurisdiction over all other Bishops, I will not take upon me to determine. This
only I shall undertake to prove, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church did
believe St. Peter and his Successors, the Bishops of Rome, to be by virtue of
this Prerogative; St. Peter, Head, and Chief amongst the Ap^stles; and the
Bishop of Rome, the same among all other Bishops, and Center of Catholic Unity;
and that the Bishop of Rome did exercise Jurisdiction, as occasion offered,
over the Eastern, as well as the Western Bishops, even in the Primitive Times,
such as Excommunication, receiving of Appeals, Confirming and Deposing of
Bishops, etc. For the Truth of all which we have, besides the general Consent
of the Church, as Authentic Records, next to the Scripture, as for any matter
of Fact whatsoever happening at so great a distance. I should never end, if I
should cite all the Passages of Fathers, and Councils, and Ecclesiastical
Writers, which may be brought to prove this Point. I will therefore Instance in
a few only, but they shall be such as will, by the Greatness of their
Authority, and Clearness of Expression, I hope, be abundantly sufficient to
compose this Difference. And

1. St. Irenaeus speaks thus, of the Church of Rome; ad hanc Ecclesiam propter
potentierem principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos
qui undiqu^ sunt Fideles. Every Church, that is, the Faithful on every side,
must have recourse to this Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality,
lib. 3. c. 3.

2. St. Cyprian thus, of St. Peter; Hoc erant utique caeteri Apostoli quod erat
Petrus pari consortio praediti and Potestatis, and Honoris, -- Primatus tamen
P^tro datur, ut una Christi Ecclesia and Cathedra una monstretur The Rest of
the Apostles were the same that St. Peter was, endued with a like Fellowship of
Power and Honor, -- yet the Primacy is given to Peter, that the One Church of
Christ, and one Chair might appear, lib. de Unitat. Eccles.

3. St. Ambrose. Andreas prius secutus est Dominum quam Petrus, tamen
principatum non accepit Andreas sed Petrus. Andrew followed Christ sooner than
Peter, yet Andrew did not receive the Principality, but Peter, in 2 Cor. 12.

4. St. Jerome. Propterea inter duod^cem unus eligitur, ut capite constituto
Schismatis to^latur occasio. One is chosen among the twelve (Apostles) to the
end that, a Head being constituted, all occasion of Schism may be taken away,
Cont. Jovin.

5. St. Chrysostom. The Pastor and Head of the Church was a Fisherman. Hom. 55.
in Cap. 16. Mat.

6. St. Augustine. In Ecclesia Romana semper viguit Apostoli^ae Cathedrae
Principatus. The Principality of the Apostolic Chair has always flourished in
the Church of Rome, Epist. 162.

7. The General Council of Chalcedon. We thoroughly consider, that all Primacy
and Chief Honor is to be kept, for the Bishop of old Rome, Act. 16. This was
the General Language not only of the Fathers of this Council, but even of all
Antiquity, both in public Assemblies and private Writings; the primitive
Fathers and Councils always deferring the chief Honor and Primacy to the Sea
of St. Peter, as they generally phrase it.

And indeed, though the Bishops of Constantinople have always been observed to be
very ambitious to advance their own See above all others, and to have procured
in two General Councils, viz. in the first Council of Constantinople, and in
that of Chalcedon, to have that See preferred to Alexandria, and Antioch, and
placed next after Rome; yet we do not find, that any Council, or Father did
ever dispute with the Bishop of Rome in Point of Primacy or Jurisdiction; in so
much was all Antiquity persuaded, and convinced, that he was the Chief and
Supreme visible Head of the whole Catholic Church. Thus much concerning the
Primacy of St. Peter and his Successors, which yet is not the one half of what
may be alleged for this Point.

Now I would willingly beg of any of our Adversaries to Answer me to these few
Queries: Whether these Holy Fathers did not believe the Primacy of St Peter,
and his Successors, when they spoke so plainly in favor of it? Whether they
did not understand, and were well instructed in the Doctrine of the whole
Catholic Church, touching this Point? Whether they had a mind to flatter the
Bishop of Rome, or to grant him any more Authority, and Power over themselves,
than was justly due to him? And whether it be not an excess of Folly and
Weekness (to say no worse) in the Protestants, now, fifteen hundred Years
after, to dispute that Prerogative, which is so manifestly acknowledged by so
many Eminent Martyrs and Confessors, and great Doctors of the Primitive Church?

That the Bishop of Rome did exercise Jurisdiction, by way of Excommunication,
over the Eastern Bishops (of which alone there remains any difficulty) We have,
besides Innumerable Examples from the Fourth to the Tenth Century, as that, for
instance, Innocent the First excommunicated ^^e^phi^us Bishop of Alexandria;
Celestinus the First, Nestorius of Constantinople; Agap^tus, Anthimius, another
Bishop of Constantinople; Nicholas the First, P^otius, the intruded Bish p of
Constantinople; besides these, I say, we have two memorable Facts to this
purpose, in the beginning of the Second, and about the middle of the Third
Century. The first is related by two Eminent Witnesses, St. Irenaeus, and
Eusebius Casariensis; by St. Ire^aeus, in a Letter to Pope Victor; and by
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 5. cap. 25. This Historian tells
us, that Victor Bishop of Rome, excommunicated Polycrates, and the Rest of the
Asiatic Bishops; because they would not be induced to celebrate Easter, after
the Roman Custom. And St. Irenaeus in his Leter to this Pope, complains most
grievously of his Severity in cutting off so many Members from the Body of the
Church, for a matter of Discipline, which no way respected the Faith. It Is
true, St. Irenaeus, and Eusebius do not approve of Victor's Proceedings in this
Business; because they looked upon his Sentence to be too severe; yet neither
the one, nor the other, did ever say, that Victor had no power to do so: And as
St. Irenaeus took the liberty to reprehend the Pope, for his too great
Severity, as he thought, in this matter; so, no doubt, he would have told him,
that he exceeded his Commission by such a Procedure, if he had not been
convinced, that the like Power had been vested in him. And most certainly,
Eusebius, who was an Asiatic Bishop himself, would never have complemented the
Bishop of Rome, but would have plainly here inserted, that the Pope had no
power to Excommunicate the Bishops of Asia, had there been the least question
of his Authority in that particular.

The Second, is that famous Controversy between Pope Stephen, and St. Cyprian,
touching the Baptism conferred by Hereties. Many learned Writers are of opinion,
that St. Stephen Excommunicated St. Cyprian, and his Adherents; and all do
agree, that he threatened at last to Excommunicate Them: Yet we do not find that
St. Cyprian, or any other Ecclesiastical Writer did ever say, that the Bishop
of Rome exceeded his Power in so doing: It Is true, St. Cyprian, and his
Adherents, as well as the Asiatic Bishops, persisted in their Error,
notwithstanding the Pope's Excommunication, as it usually falls out, Men being
hardly ever diswaded from the Opinions they once undertake to maintain; but the
Council of Nice has Justified the Pope's Conduct in both these particulars,
branding with Heresy such as maintained the said Errors.

That there were Appeals made to the Bishop of Rome, by the Eastern Bishops, is
no less manifest: St. Athanasius, and Paul, Bishop of Constantinople, appealed
to Pope Julius for redress of the Violence offered them by the Arians; St.
Chrysostom stom, to Innocent the First; Theodoretus to Leo; besides many more which
I shall at present omit.

Socrates, a famous Ecclesiastical Writer of the Primitive Times, tells us,
lib. 2. cap. 15. How St. Athanasius, and Paul, with several other Bishops, came
to Rome, and complained to Julius of the Violence offered them by the Arians,
and how he had undertaken their Patronage. Among other things, he adds this,
concerning the Pope's Authority in this particular. (...). But he, (the Pope)
because the Church of Rome had that Privilege, warranted them with his
Letters, wherein he freely spoke his mind, and sent them back to the East,
restoring Each to his own Place, and severely reprehending those, who rashly
turned them out.

The Learned Theodoretus informs us, Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 4.
that St. Athanasius, being a second Time, turned out by the Arians, appealed
again to Rome. And that Pope Julius following the Canon of the Church,
commanded the Arians to come to Rome, and cited Athanasius to appear at his
Consistory. (...)

Let us now put both these Testimonies together: Here are two of the greatest
Bishops of the East violently thrust out of their Bishoprics, and flying to
the Bishop of Rome for Redress: Here are two of the most famous, and most
Eminent Historians of Antiquity, who tell us, that the Church of Rome had a
peculiar Privilege to protect and restore Bishops; that the Bishop of Rome did
but act according to, or follow the Canon, or Law of the Church, as Thedoretus
words it, when he commanded the A^ians to appear before him, and summoned
Athanasius to answer their Charge. If these be not A^ts of Legal Jurisdiction;
if this be not the formal and proper Process of an Appeal, we are, as yet to
Learn the meaning of these Terms.

Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis, in the Life of St. Chrysostom, tells us,
that this great Patriach sent four Bishops to Rome to plead his Cause; and we
have two Letters of Theodoretus, setting forth his Appeal to the Bishop of
Rome; the first, to the Pope; and the second, to Renatus, Dean or Archdeacon
of the Church of Rome; in which he has these Words: They have spoiled me of my
Bishopric; they did not reverence my Age consumed in Religion, nor my Gray
Hairs: Wherefore I beseech you to persuade the most Holy Archbishop to use his
Apost^lic Authority, and to command us to come to your Consistory; for that
Holy See sits at the Helm, and has the Government of the whole World.

Besides all these, we have an express Canon of the General Council of Sardica
held in, or about the Year 347. wherein it is manifestly Decreed, That, if any
Bishop be accused, or condemned, or deprived of his Bishopric, by the Bishops
of his Province; and that the Bishop thus deprived will Appeal, or fly to the
Bishop of Rome, and desire to be heard; the Bishop of Rome may either commit
the Cognizance of his Cause to the Bishops of the Neighboring Province, or
send Legates cl^ath'd with his own Authority to be present at the Judgment, or
do whatever shall seem best, in that behalf, to his own most prudent Counsel.
Now let any Impartial Man judge, if the single Authority of this Council be not
sufficient to establish the Pope's Authority, in Point of Appeals, though there
were nothing else to prove it.

That the Bishop of Rome exercised Jurisdiction over the Eastern Bishops, by
way of Confirmation, and Deposition is too well known to need much Proof. St.
Leo tells us, Epist. 13. That he was earnestly desired by Theodosius the
Emperor, to confirm Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, which yet he refused to
do, unless Anatolius had first professed the same Doctrine with Cyrillus, and
the Rest of the Catholic Bishops, in Opposition to the Heresy of Nestorius.
The same Pope gives us to understand in his Epist. 82. That he had constituted
the Bishop of Thessalonica, as his Vicegerent in that part of the East, for the
Corfirmation, and Dep^sition of Bishops, and for such other Acts of
Jurisdiction as depended of the Apostolic See. I might bring more Instances to
this purpose, from the most approved Writers of ancient and modern History; but
let these suffice for the Proof of a thing so universally attested by all
Antiquity.

And now, if neither plain Texts of Scripture, declaring this Prerogative to
have been conferred upon St. Peter, and plainly showing his exercising of it on
several Occasions; nor the Authority of so many Holy Fathers, and Councils of
the Primitive Times, manifestly defferring the same Privilege to his
Successors; nor the Testimony of two of the most celebrated Historians of
Antiquity, publicly witnessing, that the Church of Rome had the Privilege to
hear and restore the Patriarchs, and Bishops of the East; and that the Bishop
of Rome followed, or acted according to the Laws of the Church, when he
commanded or cited the Eastern Bishops, Patriach and all, to appear before him;
nor yet the Consent, which the Evidence of the thing has extorted from some
Ingenuous, and Learned Protestants in favor of this Truth: If all this, I say,
will not open our Adversaries Eyes, to see the Pope's Supremacy; all I can do
for their Service, is to pray to Almighty God, that he would be pleased to take
away from their Hearts that vail of Prejudice, which hinders them to see so
manifest a Truth. But of this enough; let us now see the Obj^ctions.

Against this Tenet the Doctor objects, 1. That the Bishop of Rome, as
Successor of St. Peter there, Vol. 6. page 155.
cannot be the Supreme and universal Pastor of Christ's Church by Divine
Appointment; because, says he, there is not the least mention of this in
Scripture. 2. That it is against reason to found the Pope's Supremacy in being
Successor of St. Peter page 156.
at Rome; whereas it should rather pertain to the Bishop of Antioch, where
Peter was first Bishop.

To the first, I answer, that, by all these Titles, is only meant, that the
Pope is Head of the Church, and the Center of Catholic Unity; and no more is
required of any Man to believe concerning this Point. Now, that there is not
only mention, but even Texts of Scripture clearly proving St. Peter, (whose
undoubted Successor all the World knows to be the Bishop of Rome) to have been
made the Head of the Church of Christ, is already made out. It Is true, the
Scripture makes no mention of these Words, supreme and universal. Pastor, no
more does it of the Word consubstantial, yet the Fathers of the Nicene Council
did not scruple to make a Fundamental Article of Faith of it, and carefully
inserted it in their Creed; because they judged it very proper to express their
Belief, concerning the Divinity of Jesus Christ.

In like manner, though some Catholic Writers call the Bishop of Rome, Supreme
and Universal Pastor, etc. yet I do not see what Grounds the Doctor had to
quarrel with them for that; since all Catholics agree, that they mean nothing
else by these Words, but that the Pope is Head of the Church, and use them for
no other end, than to express more fully what it is to be Head of the Church.
But it is very remarkable that no Sect ever separated from the Church, who did
not follow this Maxim. They take hold of some words invented by the Church, to
declare more expressly such Articles of Faith, as were contested; and because
these very Terms are not found in Scripture, they cry immediately Victory; as
if our Faith consisted merely in Words, and not in what is meant by them.

To the Second, I answer, That it is much more against Reason, nay altogether
absurd, to imagine, that St. Peter (whom the Dr. as well as I, must, in this
case, suppose to be Head of the Church) should come to Rome, place his Chair in
that City, and yet leave his Authority behind him at Antioch. This aerie
Notion, I am sure, none of the Holy Fathers and Councils in the Primitive Times
ever thought of; on the contrary, they have always considered the Bishop of
Rome as Successor of St. Peter, Head of the Church, and Principle of Catholic
Unity.

There are several Objections more of this Nature in the same Volume, Page 244,
245. etc. And though most of them are levelled at the Church of Rome, yet I choose
to take notice of them under this Head, rather than the former; both because of
their Affinity with this, and for the Reader's Satisfaction, who, I suppose,
will not be sorry to find them answered in the same order they lie.

1. The Doctor grants that, If the Roman Church be the Catholic Church, it is
necessary to be of that Communion, because (says he) out of the Catholic
Church there is ordinarily no Salvation to be had. But how do they prove
(continues he) that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church? They would fain
have us to be so civil as to take it for granted, because if we do not, they do
not well know how to go about to prove it. And after some pleasant Sallies of
Rallery, he concludes, that to prove a part to be the whole, is all one, as to
prove, that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church.

To answer this Objection, I say, first, that the Doctor here does very
courteously justify the Roman Catholics from that odious Imputation of
Uncharitableness, wherewith he elsewhere most grievously charges them, for not
allowing Protestants Salvation out of their Communion. He grants, that out of
the Catholic Church there is ordinarily no Salvation to be had: Now the Roman
Catholics do sincerely believe that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church;
consequently, when they say, that there is ordinarily no Salvation out of it,
they cannot justly be charged with the least Uncharitableness; since they have,
as it is already proved, the greatest Assurance for that Belief, that any thing
of that Nature is capable of. And if it be True, as most certainly it is, that
the Roman Church is the Catholic Church; then surely the Roman Catholics are so
far from being uncharitable in this particular, that it is one of the greatest
Marks of their Charity to have that Love for their Erring Brethren, as to mind
them of the Hazard they run, and exhort them to avoid it; though they are sure
they shall be hated for their Pains. 2dly. That he must be a great Stranger to
our Divines and Controve^tists, if he thinks as he here writes; they do not
well know how to go about to prove it. Surely he must have been very ill read
in the Writings of Bellarmin, Peron, Richelieu, and hundreds of Catholic
Divines, who wrote on this subject, when he advances so groundless (shall I
call it) a Story: And what as yet renders the thing more intolerable is, that
this is spoken out of a Pulpit, where nothing but Truth and Sincerity, should
as much as be mentioned. In short, this is matter of Fact: The Catholic
Divine's Books, on this subject, are still extant; and let even our Adversaries
be the Judges, whether this be not one of the most groundless Mistakes that
ever any serious Man could fall into. 3dly. That he is as far out, when he
says, that to prove a part to be the whole, is all one, as to prove the Roman
Church to be the Catholic Church. Had we said, that the particular Church, and
Diocese of Rome were the Catholic Church, his Comparison would then indeed,
have been Reasonable; but, surely, he could not be ignorant, that we
understand, by the Roman Church, all the Christian Churches over the World in
Communion with the particular Church and See of Rome; which we therefore call
the Roman Catholic Church, because Rome being the Seat of St. Peter's
Successor, is the Center and Principl^ of Catholic Unity.

If the Doctor had a mind to make good his Thesis, he should have proved, that
all other Societies of Christians, who are not in Communion with the Church of
Rome, are notwithstanding their Heresies and Schisms a Part of the Catholic
Church; he should have proved, that the Nestorians and Eutychians, which take
up the greatest part of the Eastern Christians, are a Part of the Catholic
Church, notwithstanding they were excommunicated, and cut off from the Body of
the Catholic Church, by the lawful Authority of two General Councils, whose
Decrees he, and all other learned Protestants do profess to embrace; that the
Grecians are still Members of the Catholic Church, notwithstanding their
willful Schism from its Communion; their ancient Error concerning the
Procession of the Holy Ghost; their having been so often reconciled and united
to it, yet still returning to their Vomit; but more especially, their
self-condemned Perverseness in their late Separation from the Communion and
Fellowship of the Church of Rome, which they solemnly, and in the most
Authentic manner, gave under their Hands, in the Council of Florence, they
would hold and maintain; he should have proved, that Luthor, Calvin, and all
those, who adhered to their new broached Opinions, are a part of the Catholic
Church, notwithstanding their being excommunicated by the Church, and their own
Confession of holding these Opinions in Opposition to all the World besides:
All this, I say, the Doctor should have proved to show, that the Roman Church
is but a part of the Catholic Church: But neither he, nor any Body else did
ever so much as attempt it; on the contrary, most of the learned Men of the
Church of England have readily given up the Cause in regard of all the
aforesaid Sects; and most of all other Sects do as censoriously condemn those
of the Church of England: With what color of Reason then can the Doctor
suggest, that the Roman Church is but a part of the Catholic Church? Nay, can
any thing be more plain, than that the Roman Church, as it is understood by
Catholics, is the whole Catholic Church; since none of the aforesaid Sects can,
with the least color of Reason, pretend to be a part of it; since they
themselves do unchurch one another; since they own, that the Church of Rome is
a Part, at least, of the Catholic Church, and that one Faith and one Communion
are equally essential to the being, or Constitution of the one Catholic Church;
in both which Essential they own themselves to be different from the Church of
Rome. So that, if we had no other Proof besides, this last Reason is a plain
Demonstration, that either the Church of Rome is the whole Catholic Church, or
that it is no part or member of it.

It Is a known Truth, and even vouched by all Protestants whatsoever, that the
Church of Rome is, at least, a Part of the Catholic Church: That one Faith, and
one Communion are equally essential to the Constitution of the Catholic Church
of Christ, is a Doctrine generally received by the Church of England; and, I
suppose, by all the Divines in the World besides; now there is none of all the
aforesaid Sects, as they all unanimously agree, that holds either the same
Faith, or Communion with the Church of Rome, which yet they hold to be a Part
of the Catholic Church, and which together with the said Sects make up the
whole Body of Christians. It is then most evident, that either the Church of
Rome is the whole Catholic Church, or that it is no Part or Member of it. But
the latter no Protestant ever yet durst affirm; for if they should affirm, that
the Church of Rome is no part of the Catholic Church, this would vacate all
their Pretenses to be a Church; since it is from the Church of Rome they
pretend to derive their Mission, Ordination, and spiritual Power, if any they
have. We are then sure, even to a Demonstration, that, if what the Protestants
say be true, the Roman Church is the whole Catholic Church; and no less sure,
that neither the Protestants, nor any other Sect whatsoever, can be any part or
member of the Catholic Church whilst they continue out of the Communion, and
Faith of the Roman Church.

2. To prove the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church, the Doctor requires
the following Particulars should be clearly shown, and made out.

1. A plain Constitution of our Savior, whereby St. Peter, and his Successors
at Rome, are made the Supreme Head, and Pastors of the whole Christian Church,
Of this, says he, we have not the least Intimation in the Gospel, nor in the
Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles; nay, there is clear Evidence, adds he, to
the contrary, that in the Council of Jerusalem, St. James was, if not superior,
at least equal to him. And St. Paul, upon several Occasions, declares himself
equal to St. Peter. But suppose it were true, continues the Doctor That St.
Peter were Head of the Church; where does it appear, that this Authority was
derived to his Successors? And if it were; why to his Successors at Rome,
rather than at Antioch, where ^e was first, and unquestionably Bishop?

Answ. Touching a plain Constitution, etc. methinks a modest good Christian
might well be content with one plain Text of Scripture produced to that
purpose, much more with a great many; and this surely is already done a hundred
times over, both from the Gospel, and Acts of the Apostles; where we plainly
find this Charge committed to St. Peter, and his frequent Exercise of it as
occasion offered.

It Is true, the Scripture makes no mention of his Successor at Rome: Nor do we
say, it is necessary, he should be there rather than any where else: For St.
Peter might, if he pleased, for ought we know, have as well placed his Chair in
Canterbury; but it is matter of Fact, that he did not place, it there, but in
Rome. His making St. James equal, if not superior to St. ^eter in the Counc^l
of Jerusalem, needs no other Confutation than a bare recital of the matter of
Fact, which passed there. I am sure it is as plain, as words can make it, that
St. Peter rose up first, opened the Subject of their Meeting, discoursed upon
the Conversion of the Gentiles by his Ministry, showed the Unreasonableness of
that Yoke the Jews would fain put upon them, and concluded with a peremptory
Sentence to that purpose; which, it is manifest, St. James, and the rest did but
follow; and if this be not sufficient Evidence of his Superiority, even over
St. James, let the World judge. As for St. Paul's declaring himself equal to
St. Peter, it moves me not: For so may any Bishop lawfully ordained do to the
Pope, without the least diminution of his Supremacy; the Equality meant by St.
Paul respecting only the Power of preaching the word of God to those, to whom
he was sent; of administering the Sacraments, and of ordaining Ministers for the
use and benefit of the Faithful: To do all which, I readily grant, every
Apostle's Power to be equal to St. Peter's; and every lawfully ordained
Bishop's, to that of the Pope's As to his Question; Where does it appear that
St. Peter 's Power was derived to his Successors? I am almost unwilling to
honor it with a Confutation; being, in my sense, one of the simplest
Expressions that ever dropped from a Man of his parts. If I should ask, where
does it appear, that he was by Divine Institution, Archbishop of Canterbury; I
believe he would be puzel'd a little, to give a good Answer? Yet he did not
scruple to style himself John, by the Grace of God, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Did ever any Man question, whether the Authority and Power of the Bishop of any
See was derived to his Successor? Was not Christ's Power derived to his
Apostles? As the Father has sent me, even s^ s^nd I you. Was not the Apostle's
Power derived to their Successors? Else how could we pretend to be Christians?
In short, that Heirs and Successors should Inherit the Power and Authority of
their Ancestors, unless there be a positive Law, or Exception to the contrary,
is surely a self evident Maxim grafted in our Hearts by the Law of Nature, and
confirmed by the Common Consent of Mankind: What should then hinder Peter's
Authority to be derived to his Successors, whom all the World, before the rise
of Protestanism did believe to be the Bishops of Rome, and not those of
Antioch, as the Dr. seems here to suggest.

2. To make good, that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church, they are
obliged to affiirm, says the Dr. That the Churches of Asia, and Africa, which
were Excommunicated by the Bishops of Rome, for celebrating Easter after the
Jewish manner, and upon the point of Rebaptizing Heretics, were cut off from
the Catholic Church, and from a possibility of Salvation. This the Church of
Rome themselves will not affirm, continues he, and yet if to be cast out of the
Communion of the Roman, and the Catholic Church be all one, they must affirm it.

Answ. This Argument is grounded upon a Fallacy; and therefore the Inference is
False. Had the Bishop of Rome and the Roman Church been convertible Terms, the
Inference would then, indeed, have been Right, and the Argument True; but
surely Dr. Tillotson knew very well, we never understood these Terms so. The
Fallacy then consists in this, that he joins together the two different Notions
of Roman Church, and Bishop of Rome, and makes them pass for one and the same
thing; and so, by a cunning piece of Sophistry, concludes that whatever is done
by the Bishop of Rome, is likewise the Act and Deed of the whole Roman Church.

3. In consequence of this Proposition, that the Church of Rome is the Catholic
Church, they ought to hold, that all Baptism out of the Communion of their
Church, is void and of none effect. For if it be good, pursues the Dr. then it
makes the Persons Baptized, Members of the Catholic Church; and then those,
that are out of the Communion of the Roman Church, may be true Members of the
Catholic Church: And then the Roman, and the Catholic Church are not all one.
But the Church of Rome holds the Baptism of Heretics to be good; consequently
the Roman Church is not the Catholic Church.

Answ. His Inference is likewise here false, and so is his Consequence. The
Roman Catholics following the Ancient Fathers, and Councils of the Primitive
Church, do believe, that the Baptism conferred by Heretics with due Matter, and
Form is good, and vallid; and that it makes the Baptized True Members of the
Catholic, and consequently of the Roman Church; provided there be no impediment
of Heresy, or Schism on the part of the Persons thus Baptized; but if they are
engaged in any Heresy, or Schism, they hold, indeed, that they receive a true
Character of Baptism; but this alone neither makes them Members of the Catholic
Church, nor availes any thing to their Salvation: For, as St. Austin says, all
the Sacraments may be had out of the Church, but Salvation cannot. Now the
Doctor, to make good this Inference, should do these two things. 1. He should
have proved, that Infants, and such as are not capable of Heresy, or Schism,
being Baptized by Heretics, are out of the Communion of the Roman Church: For
this we utterly deny, and on the contrary, affirm they are true Members of it,
until they forsake or renounce it, by actual Profession of Heresy, or by
Schism. 2. That those who are actually engaged in Heresy, or Schism, being
Baptized in that State, and persisting in it, are notwithstanding, by virtue of
their Baptism, made true Members of the Catholic Church. Could the Dr. but
prove this, he would, I own, both gain his Point, and render glorious Service
to several Thousands of Ancient Heretics, who denied the Divinity of Jesus
Christ, as well as to the present Protestants, by making them all True Members
of the Catholic Church, in spite of all the General Councils, and their
Authority. But alas! This is what neither he, nor any body else will ever
attempt. And indeed, if it were possible to be effected, we should, I am sure,
be as glad of it, and as willing to contribute to the Salvation of these Men,
as he, or any body else; but we have learned from the Word of God, and from the
Principles of true Charity, not to flatter any Society of Men with a false
Peace, and Security, when we have no grounds for it.

4. In consequence of this Proposition, all the Christians in the World, which
do not yield Subjection to the Bishop of Rome, and acknowledge his Supremacy,
are no true parts of the Catholic Church, nor in a possibility of Salvation.
And this does not only exclude those of the Reformed Religion from being
Members of the Catholic Church; but the Greeks, and the Eastern Churches; (i.
e.) four of the five Patriarchal Churches of the Christian World. Hence the Dr.
concludes, that the Roman Church, is not the Catholic Church; because it has
not more Charity than this comes to.

Answ. This Argument is founded upon an Inconveniency; and a great
Inconvenience, I confess, it is; but if we should conclude the Existence, or
Nonexistence; the Truth, or Falsehood of things from their convenience or
inconveniency; the World would be brought to a sine pass. It Is very
inconvenient, that God should condemn all Mankind to death, and to all the
other miseries, and infirmities to which human Nature is now obnoxious, for the
eating of one single Fruit; yet it is never the less True. It Is very
inconvenient, that a Man should be condemned to eternal Flames for one only Sin
wherein he dies unrepented; yet no Man ever questioned this Truth. We must not
then conclude, from the inconvenience that attends a Thing, that is therefore
false; but we ought to weigh the Reasons, and Motives, whereby we are induced
to believe it is so: Now the Roman Catholics believe, that those among the
Greeks and Eastern Churches, which are not in communion with the Church of
Rome, together with the Protestants, are no true Members of the Catholic
Church; because they have the most Authentic Records, and the most invincible
Proof that any matter of Fact is capable of, that the said Greeks, Eastern
Churches, and Protestants fell into Heresy and Schism, in which they do as yet
actually persist. What allowance God-almighty may make, for the invincible
Ignorance and want of Capacity in a great many of these People; and how far he
will be merciful and pardon the other defects of those, who endeavor to live
up to what they know, and want necessary means to come to the knowledge of the
Truth, He alone knows. None, I am sure, is more willing to judge favorably of
their Salvation, than Roman Catholics: But to flatter them with hopes of
Salvation, whilst they persist in their Errors, and have necessary means to
come to the knowledge of the Truth; and to tell them they may be saved with such
Errors, when we are convinced in our Consciences they cannot, is surely no
Christian Charity, but the greatest of Heathenish Cruelty.

5. In consequence of the Truth of this Proposition, and of the importance of
it to the Salvation of Souls; they ought to produce express mention of the
Roman Catholic Church in the ancient Creeds of the Christian Churches. But
this, says the Dr. they are not able to do, on the contrary, Aeneas Sylvius
(who was afterward Pope Pius the second) says, that before the Council of
Nice, little Respect was had to the Roman Church.

Answ. Just so the Arians used to object to the Catholics, that if the word
Consubstantial were of that importance, as it was pretended, they ought to
produce express mention of it, in the ancient Creed of the then present Church;
but as the Catholics then answered, that it was enough, the thing meant by that
Word was in the Creed, though not the Word it self; so say we to the Protestants,
that in these Words of the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, is
implied what we mean by the Words, Roman Catholic Church; though the Word Roman
be not there. What Aeneas Sylvius might, in passion, or upon some private
quarrel with the Pope, have Written, against the Roman Church, considered with
respect only to the Diocese of Rome, I am not much concerned: For I am sure he
never said, nor writ, that the Roman Church, as it includes all the Christian
Churches in communion with the Sea of Rome, (in which sense the Dr. could not
be ignorant, we always take it) was not the true Catholic Church. Besides, if
it be true, that Aeneas Sylvius said what the Dr. makes him here speak; let the
Holy and Learned Martyr St. Irenaeus, who lived very near two hundred years
before the Council of Nice; teach him the contrary. Every Church, says he, that
is, the Faithful on every side, must have recourse to this Church, (the Roman)
by Reason of her more powerful Principallity. Loco. sup. cit.

CHAP. IV. Of Transubstantiation.
WHat we hold to be of Faith concerning this Point, is this: That the whole
Substance of the Bread and Wine is, after Consecration, changed into the Body
and Blood of Christ; without any Alteration in the Accidents, or outward Forms.

This is to all our modern Sectaries, a Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of
Offense. Against this they have whetted their Pens, and Tongues; and pointed
all the Shafts of their Art, and Eloquence, in order to pull down an Edifice,
whose Builder and Maker is God himself.

But however they agree to destroy this mysterious Fabric; yet what to
substitute in its Room, or how to expound those Texts of Scripture on which it
is founded; none can with greater Heat and Passion, even to the most injurious
and provoking Language, be divided; nor fall into more manifest Absurdities and
Contradictions, than these Pretenders to Reformation.

And indeed, if the Disagreement of Witnesses be an Argument of their Falsehood,
as the Evangelists assure us it is; we have all the Reason in the World to
conclude, that these are false Witnesses: For, I am sure, none ever disagreed
more, not only in the Circumstances, but even in the very Nature, and Substance
of their Evidence.

Martin Luther, and his Adherents, expound these Words, This is my Body,
literally, and therefore believe the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament; but being however resolved to Incommode the Pope, Epist. ad Calvin.
as Luther says; they add, that the Substance of the Bread, and Wine, is
likewise there. And to extricate themselves from a difficulty which attends the
Real Presence, they affirm moreover, that the Body of Christ is every where.
And thus they have brought forth two New Points of Faith, never before heard
of, namely Consubstantiation, and Vbiquitie: And this the Church of England
Writers call an absurd and monstrous Doctrine.

Calvin, and his Sectators, in Contradiction to this, expound the same Words
Figuratively; and therefore believe a Real Absence, or, which is all one, that
the Eucharist is but a Type, or Figure of the Body, and Blood of Christ.
Zuinglius tells us, himself was the first, that found out this Exposition, by
the help of a certain Angel, which appeared to him; but whether he was black or
white, he says, he cannot tell. So that, for ought he knew, it may be the
Doctrine of a Devil; I am sure Luther, at least, did think it so; for he calls
Calvin a Devil, Epist. ad Calvin.
and worse than a Devil, for offering to obtrude this Doctrine upon the World;
and for wresting the plain Words of our Savior to such a Sense.

The Church of England neither expounds those Words literally, nor yet
figuratively; for She neither believes Transubstantiation, nor
Consubstantiation; neither Real Presence, nor yet Real Absence. And to deal
ingenuously, I do not well know what she believes in this particular: And what
is worse, to the best of my Understanding, nor she herself. For in the
Catechism, which is put into the Children, and common people's Hands, (where
surely the Articles of Faith, must, if any where, be clearly and plainly
expounded) she teaches, that the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed
taken and received by the Faithful in the Lord's Supper; which, I am sure, is
the very same with the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; her verily and indeed
being the self same thing with that Council's vere and realiter. Yet if you
should ask any of her Divines, whether the Body and Blood of Christ be, verily
and indeed, in the Sacrament? They will answer you no: If you ask them further;
how can you then, verily and indeed, take and receive the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, if it be not there? Some will answer you, that though
his Body and Blood be not there; yet when you take the Bread and Wine, you take
at the same Time the Body and Blood of Christ, to all the Intents and Purposes
of the Sacrament; but this is such a Riddle as passes my Skill to unfold.
Others say, that by an Act of Faith you do verily and indeed, take, and receive
the Body and Blood of Christ, when you receive the Elements. But if you urge
the Difficulty farther, and tell them, that to receive the Body and Blood of
Christ, by Faith, is no more to receive it verily and indeed, than to receive
an Idea, or Representation of a Thing to which you give assent, is to receive
the thing it self: Or suppose it were, you still admit of Christ's Body his
being in several places at once, which is the Inconvenience you would fain
avoid, by rejecting the Real Presence in the Sacrament; for if one, in London,
and another in York, should at the same Time, (which is very possible) verily
and indeed take the Body and Blood of Christ; then, surely the Body of Christ
must needs be in two different places at once; if you urge, I say, the
Difficulty thus far, you are like to get no Answer, which either you, or any
Body else can understand. So that, though the Church of England has in other
things, many signal Advantages of the Lutherans and Calvinists; yet in this,
she is neither so Reasonable as they; nor so consistent with her self, nor yet
with common Sense.

Now to establish the Roman Catholic's Belief on this Subject, and to show the
Unreasonableness of the said Opinions (though of this last there is little need,
their own Author's having in a great measure by their manifest Contradictions,
and Absurdities, already done it to my Hand) I shall endeavor to prove as
clear, and as brief, as I can.

1. That the Words of Scripture on which Transubstantiation is grounded, are to
be understood in a litteral Sense.

2. That such a Sense does necessarily infer Transubstantiation: And

3. That from the Beginning, all the Orthodox Christians in the World were of
that Belief.

I begin with the first.

The Words on which Transubstantiation is grounded, are these, This is my Body
which a given for you, Luke 22.19. Now that these Words are to be taken in a
litteral Sense, nothing can be more plain, both from Christ's Promise of giving
his Body, as we read St. John Chap. 6. from St. Paul's Sense of these Words, in
his Epistle to the Corinthians; and from the very Sense which the Words
themselves must necessarily bear. From Christ's Promise:

I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven: If any Man eat of this
Bread, he shall live for ever: And the Bread that I will give, is my Flesh,
which I will give for the life of the World, Joa. 6.51. Christ promises to give
his Disciples a certain kind of Bread, which they were not as yet acquainted
with: And to let them understand, what sort of Bread it was, he tells them,
that it is his Flesh; The Bread that I will give you is my Flesh. This so
unusual a thing, as eating human Flesh, could not but startle them; however
they could not doubt, but he meant to do as he spoke; since he affirmed, that
the B^ead he would give them was his Flesh: And therefore they strove among
themselves; saying, how can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? But how d^es
Christ here disabuse them? Does he say his Words are not to be taken lirerally?
Does he tell them, they must understand him in a Figurative Sense? No, He is so
far from it, that with a repeated Oath He confirms them in the Sense they
understood his Words: Verily verily, says He, I say unto you, except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye shall have no Life in you.
When Christ said, I am the Door; I am the true Vine, etc. His Disciples were
nothing offended at these Expressions, because they knew them to be Metaphors,
and figurative Sayings commonly used; but here, you see, they are amazed and
confounded. Had Christ only said, I will give you heavenly Bread; or, I will
give you my Body; perhaps they might have taken this in a figurative Sense too.
But when He assures them, that the Bread He would give them is his F^esh; and
protests with a repeated Oath, that except they eat his Flesh, and drink his
Blood, they shall have no Life in them; he must surely renounce his Reason, who
does not see, that he spoke and meant literally. In a word, if those Words be
not understood in a literal Sense, it is utterly impossible to know how any
Phrase may be literally meant, the Words, is my Flesh, being by Christ affirmed
of the Bread for no other End, and his confirming with an Oath that it was so,
for no other Reason, than to persuade them that he meant as he spoke.

This is no less manifest from St. Paul's Sense of the said Words. The Cup of
Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor.
10.16. Here the Apostle, agreeably to what Christ said, puts the Question, as
if the Corinthians doubted it; is not the Cup of Blessing which we bless, the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? etc. Now what is it to communicate, or
partake of the Body and Blood of Christ? Surely it is to eat and drink of his
Body and Blood; as, to communicate, or partake of Bread and Wine, is to eat of
the Bread and drink of the Wine.

Again, Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, or drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But let a Man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and Drink of that Cup, for he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself,
not discerning the Lord's Body, Cap. 11.27, 28, 29. This, surely, is too severe
a Sentence, if St. Paul understood Christ's Words in a figurative Sense. If
that Bread, and that Cup be only a Type and Figure of the Body and Blood of
Christ; whosoever abuses, or takes them unworthily, ought, in Reason, to be
somewh^t less guilty, than if he had, in reality, abused his Body and Blood.
But the Apostle declares, that such a one should be guilty of no less than the
Body and Blood of Christ; which, surely, is to be guilty of the greatest Crime
that can be imagined.

When a Man murders, or spills the Blood of an other, he is but guilty of his
Blood: This is the common Language of Mankind, and no Man, in his W^its, did
ever so much as imagine, that a Man, who should abuse the Figure or Picture of
another, should be therefore guilty of his Body or Blood: Seeing then St. Paul
affirms, that those, who abuse, or take unworthily that Sacred Bread and Cup,
are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; it is a perfect Demonstration, that
he did not believe them to be a Type or Figure, but his Real Flesh and Blood.

The Jews crucified Christ, spilt his Blood, and abused his Body; yet the
Scripture says no where, that they were in that particular, guilty of more,
than of the Blood of Christ; and of more I cannot tell how they could. For
neither human, nor Angelical Wit can invent a heavier Charge. With what
propriety of Speech then? nay, with what Reason can it be affirmed, that Men
should be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, as were the Jews, for doing
no more, than taking unworthily the Type or Figure of his Body and Blood? In a
word, no Man can be guilty of the Blood of another, unless he spills his Blood,
or takes away his Life; but St. Paul here affirms, that, whosoever shall eat
this Bread, or drink this Cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, and shall besides, eat and drink Damnation to
himself: Consequently he believed, and was persuaded, that this Sacred Bread
and Cup were the True and Real Flesh and Blood of Christ. And this is so plain
from his last Words, that I wonder any Man in his Senses can entertain the
least doubt concerning it: For he concludes, that the Reason, why they do eat,
and drink Damnation to themselves, is, because they do not discern, that that
spiritual Food, which they abuse, is the Lord's Body; non dijudicans Corpus
Domini.

This is yet more plain from the Sense, which the Words of the Institution must
necessarily bear. (...). This is my Body, which is given for you, Luke 22.19.
The Evangelist tells us, a little before these words, that Christ took Bread,
and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples; and to let them
understand what sort of Bread it was, or rather, what he intended to make it,
he says, that it is his Body; and to take away all occasion of doubt, whether
he had meant his true and Real Body, or else the Figure of it; he adds, which
is given for you; so that they, who believed the Omnipotent Power of Christ,
could no more doubt, but that that, which he tendered them, was the Body, which
was to be given for them. Now, if that Body, which was given for them, be the
True and Real Body of Jesus Christ; we are sure, that the Body which Christ
gave his Disciples, was his true and Real Body: For he says, it is that Body
which is given for us; this is my Body which is given for you. But all the
World, as well Protestants, as Catholics, agree, that it was the true and real
Body of Christ, which was given, and suffered upon the Cross for us. It is then
a Demonstration, that what Christ tendered to his Apostles was his true and
real Body; consequently his Words must necessarily be taken in a literal Sense.

Had Christ only said, to what he held in his Hand, this is my Body; perhaps
such a proposition, to one, who never heard any thing of the matter before,
might seem Figurative; but when he adds these other Words, which is given for
you, he takes away all occasion of doubt, and determins the Understanding to a
literal Sense. The first part of the Phrase, this is my Body, is indifferent of
it self, and may be capable of either Sense; but add the rest to it, which is
given for you, and the Sense is plainly determined. So that Christ's Words can
no more allow of a figurative Sense, than, if a Man had said, this is my Arm,
which sticks to my Shoulder, he can be understood to mean any thing else but
his true and real Arm. In a Word, these Gentlemen, who are resolved to deny
things so evident, would in my opinion, be less obnoxious to Censure, and more
excusable in human Appearance, if they had either questioned the Truth of these
Texts; or, like the Socinians, denied the Omnipotence of Jesus Christ to effect
this Miracle, than thus to subvert the very Foundation of human Reason.

2. Christ's Words understood in a literal Sense, must necessarily imply
Transubsta^tiation, that is, a Change of one substance into an other: For
Christ having said of the Bread, this is my Body which is given for you: And it
being visible to our Senses, that there is no Alteration, or Change, in the
Accidents, or outward Forms; It is impossible to understand those words in a
literal Sense, but we must at the same Time necessarily conclude, that there
must be a Change in the Substance. For the Bread consisting of Substance, and
Accidents only, we cannot believe the veracity of Jesus Christ, when he affirms
of the Bread, that it is his Body; nor his Omnipotent Power to effect, by his
Word, what he says; unless we likewise believe, that the Bread is changed into
the Body of Christ; but it is evident to our Senses, that there is no change,
as to the Accidents: Consequently the change must be in the Substance. Besides,
it is impossible to verify those Words of Christ, in a literal Sense, without
a substantial Change: For the Greek Demonstrative (...), the Latin Hoc, or the
English, This, cannot with any propriety of Speech, be referred to the Accidents
of the thing whereof it is affirmed; but must necessarily be referred to the
thing it self, which, surely, is the Substance, and not the Accidents: So that
the Sense of these Words, This is my Body, must necessarily be, this substance,
Clothed with these Accidents, is my Body; and then, if we believe those Words,
we must consequently believe, that that Substance is his Body; and then this
necessarily implies Transubstantiation.

Hence it is evident, that those Words cannot with any color of Reason, be
understood in a Sense of Consubstantiation, as the Lutherans would have it: For
the demonstrative Hoc, This, as aforesaid, denoting the Substance affirmed by
Christ to be his Body; common Sense shows, it would be absurd to interpret
these Words, this is my Body, so as to mean, that Christ's Body is there
together with the Substance of the Bread, as the Lutherans grossly maintain;
whereas, if Christ had so meant, he would most certainly have said, here is my
Body, and not, this is my Body. But this is so publicly exploded by all the
Rest of the Protestants, that it needs no farther Confutation.

3. All the Orthodox Christians, from the beginning, understood those Words of
Christ, both in a literal Sense, and in a Sense of Transubstantiation.

I should fill up a Volum, were I to bring all the Passages of Councils, and
Fathers, which make for this Truth; no Mystery of our Religion being ever with
more Care inculcated, and expounded by the Fathers in their Homilies,
Catechisms, and familiar Discourses to the common People; and that, no doubt,
for the difficulty Men naturally have to believe it. But it not being my design
to write all that may be said for it, but what may suffice to evince the truth
of it; I shall content my self with the Testimony of a few Councils, and
Fathers, whose Authority and Weight however, I hope, shall make sufficient
amends for the smalness of their number. And,

1. That the Orthodox Christians, from the beginning, understood Christ's Words
in a literal Sense, or, which is the same thing, believed the Real presence of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament; let St. Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, bear
witness. This great Patriarch, in his Epistle to Nestorius, speaks thus of the
Eucharist, Neque enim illam, ut ^arnem communem, suscipimus, absit hoc, neque
rursum tanquam viri cujuspiam Sanctificati, and dignitatis unitate verbo
consociati; sed tanquam vere vivificam ipsiusque verbi propriam. God forbid we
should receive it as common flesh, nor yet as the flesh of a Man sanctified,
and united to the Word, by a conjunction of dignity; but we receive it, as it
truly is, the quickening and proper flesh of the Word Himself.

This Letter was read, and approved in the third General Council, Council.
Ephesians. puncto 7.
which, no doubt, would never have been, had it contained any thing contrary to
Orthodox Faith; so that having received Authority, and Approbation from those
Fathers, we shall no more consider it, as the Doctrine of a private Man, but as
the Faith of the whole General Council. Now can it be imagined, that this
Council, which represented the whole Catholic Church, should approve, and put
upon Record a Letter, which declares the Real Presence, as clear, and plain, as
is possible for words to express it; unless it had been, at that Time, the
Faith of the whole Catholic Church? And can it be imagined, that the Catholic
Church, in those fair Days of her Youth, as the Calvinists speak, should
believe, that Christ's proper Flesh, as the said Letter words it, was in the
Sacrament; unless they had understood Christ's Words in a literal Sense, and
received the same Doctrine from their immediate Ancestors? Or can it be
imagined, that these Ancestors should be of this Belief; unless they had
likewise received it from their Ancestors, and so up to the very Apostles? This
is, surely, to any Man of Sense, but more especially ought to be to the Church
of England, (who professes to receive the Acts and Decrees of this Council)
instead of a Demonstration, that from the beginning of Christianity to the Time
of this Council, all the Orthodox Christians did both believe the Real
Presence, and understand Christ's Words in a literal Sense.

2. That the Orthodox Christians, from the beginning, understood those Words of
Christ, (this is my Body) in a sense of Transubstantiation, we have the
unanimous consent of the ancient Fathers of the Church; many whereof, in their
familiar Discourses to the common People, Illustrate this Conversion, by the
change of the Water, into Wine; of Aarons Rod, into a Serpent; of the River
Nilus, into Blood; and the like. And it is very observable, that in all their
Discourses upon this Subject; and whenever they speak of this Change, they have
Recourse to the Omnipotent Power of God, to which alone they ascribe it; which
surely, would be very needless, had there been no real Change in the Case. St.
Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, speaks thus, Concerning this Change. Therefore,
since Christ has said of the Bread, this is my Body, who durst any more doubt
it? And since He himself so positively affirmed, saying, this is my Blood, who
ever doubted, so as to say, that it was not his Blood? In Time past, at the
Wedding of Cana in Galilee, he changed Water into Wine, which has a certain
likeness to blood; and shall not we think him worthy to be believed, that he
could change Wine into his Blood? Again, for under the appearance of Bread, he
gives us his Body; and under the appearance of Wine, he gives us his Blood. And
a little after; though your Senses seem in this, to oppose you, yet Faith must
confirm you; do not judge the thing by the Taste, but let Faith assure you,
beyond all doubt, that you partake of the Body and Blood of Christ. Cate.
Mystag. 3.

Here is a great Bishop, an Eminent Witness of Antiquity, one, who flourished
1300 Years since; and who, no doubt, knew very well the Faith of the Catholic
Church of his Time touching this Point: Here is a careful Pastor expounding
Christ's Words, and Catechizing his Flock in the very Language of the present
Roman Catholics. He tells them that, since Christ said, that the Bread and Wine
were his Body and Blood; they must believe that the Bread and Wine were changed
into his Body and Blood. He illustrates this change by a familiar Comparison of
the Water, which Christ changed into Wine; and enforces the belief of the
possibility of the other, by the actual Existence of this change, which they
both read, and believed. He tells them, that under the Appearance of Bread they
receive the Body, and under the Appearance of Wine, they receive the Blood of
Christ; and that though their senses may tell them, that it is still Bread, yet
their Faith must correct that Mistake; that they must not judge what it is by
the Taste, but must believe, that it is the Body and Blood of Christ, whatever
their senses may suggest to them to the contrary.

Did ever any Roman Catholic speak plainer concerning Transubstantiation? Can
any Roman Bishop, or Pastor at present, enforce the belief of this Mystery with
more cogent Arguments, than to tell his Auditors, that since Christ said, this
is my Body, we must believe it is so; since he changed Water into Wine, we have
no Reason to doubt, but his Omnipotence is sufficient to change Wine into his
blood; that though it appears to our Eyes, to our Taste, to our Smell, that the
thing is otherwise, yet we must not, in this business, rely upon the Relation
of these senses, but upon the sense of Hearing; because Faith is by hearing,
and hearing by the Word of God, which Word we are here only required to
believe? All which are the very Reasonings of St. Cyril. Now what the
Protestants may think of this great Man, I shall not determine; but this I am
sure of, that had he written this, since the Reformation, they would have all
reckoned him to be as rank a Papist, as ever put Pen to Paper.

St. Gregory Nissen. speaks thus to the same purpose; Recte Dei Verbo
sanctificatum Panem, in Dei Verbi corpus credo transmutari. I do believe, that
the Bread sanctified by the Word of God, is changed into the Body of God the
Word, Orat. Cate. Cap. 37.

St. Ambrose takes a great deal of pains to inculcate this Truth to the
Ignorant people, instancing in several real Changes; as that of Aarons Rod into
a Serpent; of the Creation of the World out of nothing, etc. I will instance in
one only of his Passages to this purpose. It Is indeed somewhat tedious to be
brought here at length, however, since it cannot be well understood, unless it
be entirely read; I hope the Reader will pardon me so necessary a Fault. Panis
iste (says he) ante Verba Sacramentorum Panis est, etc. That Bread, before the
Sacramental Words, is Bread; but when the Consecration comes to it, of the
Bread is made the Flesh of Christ. Let us prove this. How can that, which is
Bread be the Body of Christ? By Consecration. By what, and by whose Words, is
the Consecration performed? By the Words of the Lord Jesus. For all other
things, which are said, do give Praise to God, there is a Prayer premised for
the People, for Kings, and for others; but when the Priest comes to make the
venerable Sacrament, he does no more use his own, but Christ's Words. Therefore
the Word of Christ makes this Sacrament. What Word of Christ? Even that Word,
by which all things were made. The Lord commanded, and the Earth was made; The
Lord commanded, and every Creature was ingender'd. You see then how efficacious
the Word of Christ is. Seeing then, there is so much Efficacy in the Word of
the Lord Jesus, as to cause things that were not, to have a Being. How much
more efficacious is it, to make the things that are extant, to be changed into
an other thing? Heaven was not, the Sea was not, the Earth was not; but hear
him that says: He said, and they were made; He commanded, and they were
created. That I may answer you then. It was not the Body of Christ before
Consecration, but after Consecration, Note. That some Critics have Doubted
whether the Books, whence this Passage is taken, belong to St. Ambrose, by
Reason that the Style of them is somewhat different from the Rest of the Works
of this Father; but the best and ablest Critics agree, that they are either St.
Ambrose's Works, or some other Bishop's near his Time, who dilates upon what
St. Ambrose wrote concerning the Eucharist.
I say unto you, that it is then the Body of Christ; He said, and it was made;
He commanded, and it was created, Lib. 4. de Sacra. Cap. 4.

I shall not trouble the Reader with any Reflections upon this Passage, being,
in my Opinion, so plain, and so much to the purpose, that it cannot possibly
need any thing to strengthen it. Nor will I tire his Patience with any more,
from Fathers; it being evident to any Man of Sense, that these great Pillars of
the Church, Men so Eminent, both for Learning and Piety, would never have
believed Transubstantiation, nor have taken so much pains to inculcate it to
the People, had it not been the universal belief of the Catholic Church. I
shall only add some Words of the Decree of the Council of Lateran on this
Subject and so conclude. The Words which relate to our purpose are these.
Council. Later. 4. sub Inno. 3.
Transubstantiates Pane and Vino in Corpus and Sanguinem Christi. The Bread and
Wine being transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ.

This, all the Protestants confess, is very plain, in favor of
Transubstantiation; and therefore they do most outragiously declaim against it,
and even force their Lungs and Pipes, both to decry the Decree, and to expose
the Authors of it. For my part, I am in no passion, nor heat; I shall therefore
soberly, and calmly examine what this Council was; what Authority it may justly
claim, and how far it ought to influence our Faith. If it be found, to be only
a Conventicle of Heretics; or a confused assembly of some Bishops met together
without any authority from the Chief Pastor, and other Patriarchs of the
Church; in order to broach new Doctrines in opposition to the Faith, which was
once delivered unto the Saints; then it will be but reasonable, we reject their
Authority: But if, on the contrary, it appears to have been an Ecumenical, or
General Council, representing the whole Catholic Church; and that all the
individual Members of the Catholic Church, at that. Time, received, and
acquiesc'd to its Decrees, especially to that part of it, which relates to our
present purpose; it is but just and reasonable, we pay the same respect, and
deference to it.

Now, after having examined the Authentic Acts of this Council, and consulted
all the (at least) famous Historians, and Ecclesiastical Writers of those
Times; and even the Writings of some of our Learned Adversaries, I find, that
it has all the Marks, and Characters, which even the most Ecumenical Council
ever yet had. I find, that this Council was called by common consent of both
Emperors, and of all the Kings, and free States in Europe; that it was held in
Rome, in the Year of our Lord 1215. Pope Innocent the 3d. Presiding in it. The
best Historians of those Times, tell us, that there were near 1200 Prelates in
this Council; that the Patriachs of Constantinople, and Jerusalem, were there
in Person; that the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antioch, being under the Yoke
of the Sarazen, and Turkish Tyrany; because they could not come in Person, sent
their Deputies instructed with Power to represent their Persons and Churches.
As to Europe, the great number of Prelates there assembled show, even to a
Demonstration, that there were more than sufficient Representatives of the
Western Churches. And what more can be desired to complete a General Council?

Now can any Man imagine, that so August an Assembly as this, so man Grave and
Learned Men of different Humors, Interests, and Manners, should all conspire
together to impose upon themselves, and all Mankind besides, a New Doctrine, in
one of the most essential points of Christian Faith, contrary to what they had
received from their Ancestors; and that not one Honest Man should be found
among them all to discover the Imposture? Or that all Mankind should acquiesce
to such a Doctrine, and none say; this is contrary to what we have been
hitherto taught? Can it be imagined, that the Bishops who met here on purpose
to hear every Individual Prelate tell his own Story; and to declare what Faith
he had received from his Ancestors on this Subject; who aimed at nothing else,
but to find out the Truth; but to see wherein they did all agree; and to reckon
That only as an Article of their Faith, which should be found to be the same in
every Man's Mouth; and yet, that contrary to the main End and Design of their
meeting; and, what is more, to the eternal damnation of their own Souls: they
should unanimously agree to declare as an Article of their Faith, what they
neither received, nor knew, nor believed before? In a word, is it possible,
that any Man of sense could imagine, that in any Age of the Church, the Pope,
Patriarchs, Bishops, Kings, Princes and People should all agree to receive, as
an Article of Faith, that which the Apostles never delivered to their
Ancestors, nor their Ancestors to them? And if this be absurd, and not to be
supposed, as most certainly it is; with what color of Reason can any Man
refuse the Evidence of this Council? What shall we believe, if we do not
believe so great, and so grave an Assembly? Here are, from all parts of the
Christian World, so many hundreds of Learned Prelates, attesting on no less
penalty than their eternal Damnation, if false, that this is the Faith, which
the Apostles delivered to the Church; that this is the Doctrine, which they
received from their Forefathers. Here are all the Rest of the Prelates, and
People of the whole Catholic Church, likewise declaring, by their ready
Acceptance, and Submission to this Doctrine; that it is the same they received
from their Predecessors. And now, if after all this, Men will be so much in
love with their fancies as to believe, that the whole Catholic Church, both in
its Representatives, and in the diffusive Body of Christians, could be induced
to conspire together to deceive their Posterity; against their own plain and
True Interest; against the Trust and Confidence reposed in them; the Duty, and
Piety of Parents to their Children; the tender Care they ought to have for
their Welfare; and contrary to the main End and Design of the Divine goodness,
who put his Word into their Mouths, to the end they might faithfully deliver it
to succeeding Generations; and all this, notwithstanding the terrors of the
Lord, and the wrath of God revealed from Heaven, against all impious Liars;
notwithstanding the dreadful Woes and Curses pronounced in Scripture against
false Seducers, and the horrible aggravation of their own Guilt, for having led
so many millions into Error and Perdition. Add to this the promise of the
Holy-Ghost's guiding the Church into all Truth, the assistance of the Divine
Spirit with it to the End, and consumation of the World; the dear and tender
Love of the great Shepherd of our Souls for his Flock; and the great care and
concern, he has for the preservation of his Church, for which he shed his most
precious Blood: If after all this, I say, Men will be so far deluded, as to
believe such dreams; I shall only say to them, as Joshua did to the Children of
Israel; If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you
will serve -- but for me and my House, Josh. 24.
we will serve the Lord, and believe his holy Word. Thus much concerning the
Proof of this Mystery: Let us now see what the Doctor Objects.

Never Roman Conqueror sung more P^ans after Victory, nor insulted over his
Enemy, with more Ostentation, than Dr. Tillotson has on this Subject, over the
Roman Catholics, and the Church of Rome; and (to complete the Parallel) if his
Railing Eloquence, and Unchristian Contumelies (I am sorry he extorts such
Words from me) were of equal force to bind, with that of Roman Chains; no
Barbarous Captives were ever worse used, by their Insulting Conquerors, than
the Sons of that Mother, whose Piety, and Zeal brought forth, in Christ, his
Ancestors, have the fortune to be treated by the Unchristian Slanders, and
Calumnies of his bitter Tongue and Pen. Besides, that invincible Argument, (if
we believe him) that Achilles, the Evidence of Sense, which he pretends to be
against this Mystery; and which he repeats over and over, in more places of his
Sermons, than I can at present reckon; he has obliged us with a Treatise
written on purpose upon this Subject, which he calls a Discourse against
Transubstantiation. It begins vol. 3. page 297.

In this Piece, I meet with as copious a Collection of scrurrilous, injurious
Language; of Notorious and Manifest Impositions; with so much disingenuity in
citing of Authors, and managing their Authorities, as I believe, was ever
possible for any Man, who had never so little esteem for his Credit, to bring
within so narrow a Compass.

Now to Answer all this Discourse, and to lay open all its Disingenuity; to set
these Passages of the Fathers, which he mangles, and dismembers, in their due
Light; and to show the Scope and End, at which those Fathers aimed; would alone
require a volum of no small bulk, which in no wise agrees with my designed
Brevity; nor yet will my present Affairs. I shall therefore be content at
present, to answer his main Objection taken from the Evidence of Sense, which
is the only Objection I find in all his Sermons; but with as many faces as
Protheus, was said to have; and some three, or four more, taken out of this
Discourse, which are the only Real Difficulties in it; being resolved however
to lay hold on the next Opportunity to answer the whole, Paragraph by Paragraph.

Vol. 3. page 80, 81. Vol. 5. p. 20. etc. Vol. 6. page 165.
1. His main Objection is this: Transubstantiation is contradicted by Sense: The
Evidence of our Senses is against it: It Is contrary to the common Sense, and
Reason of Mankind, etc.

Answ. This He repeats over and over; and to enforce the Belief of it, he tells
us in several places, that it destroys the External Means of Confirming the
Truth of Christianity. But he only repeats it; for I could never yet find in
all his Books, that he has made the least offer to prove it. He would have us,
it seems, be so civil as to take it for granted: For without this, I believe,
nay, I am sure, he did not well know how go about to prove it. And it is a thing
I often admired, with how much Confidence his Good Man and Others, would press
this Argument upon us, without ever offering the least Proof for it; when at
the same time, they knew very well, we firmly deny it. And this seems so much
the more strange; because the more Evident any thing is, as they pretend this
to be, the easier it is to find Mediums to prove it. But neither He, nor all
the Philosophers that ever were, or are to come, shall ever be able to make one
good Argument to prove that Transubstantiation is contradicted by Sense. For,
what is Transubstantiation? The Change of one Substance into another. Of what
Sense then is Substance the Object, that such a Change may be discovered by it?
It Is of no Sense sure, but of the Understanding, as all the World knows. How
can that then contradict Sense, which is not the Object of any Sense; since no
Faculty can be employed, but about its proper Object? They might as well tell
us, that Colors contradict the Sense of Hearing; or Sound the Sense of Seeing.
Had we said, that there is a Trans-Accidentation in that Mystery, the Dr. would
then, indeed, have been in the right to press his Argument; Accidents being the
proper Objects of our Senses; but surely, we never said any such thing;
consequently we never contradicted our Senses upon that Subject. We see with
our Eyes, that the Accidents remain the same as before; we therefore conclude,
that the Change must be in the Substance, which we cannot see; because Christ
told us it was his Body, and because we are sure, he was able, by his
Omnipotent Power, to make it his Body.

But, says the Doctor, there are all the Accidents of the Bread; and where ever
the proper Accidents of any Substance is, there the Substance must necessarily
be.

Answ. 1. Suppose this were true, there is still no contradicting of Senses in
the Case; since we own the Accidents are there, which alone are the Object of
our Senses.

2. Will the Dr. himself say, that this is, and always was, necessarily True?
No, for he tells us, Vol. 2. Page 67. That God may impose upon our Senses, and
if he tells us the thing is otherwise than it appears, we must believe him. All
that this Argument proves then is, that ordinarily, and for the most part, the
matter is so; but why may not God, notwithstanding this, do otherwise upon
extraordinary Occasions; especially in Mysteries of Faith, which are not
subject to the ordinary Rules of Nature? And why may not we believe, that the
Accidents of Bread may exhibit an other Substance to us; especially since we
have the Word of the Son of God for it, as well as the Accidents of a Dove, and
the Appearance of Men could represent the Holy Ghost, and the Angels to St.
John the Baptist, and to Lot. John the Baptist saw, in appearance, a Dove
descend and remain upon Christ; yet He believed it was not a Real Dove; because
he was told by him that sent him (God,) that it was the Holy Ghost, that was to
descend, and remain upon him. And why may not we likewise believe the same God,
when he tells us, that that which appears to us to be Bread, is his Body? John
the Baptist, says, I saw the Spirit descending from Heaven like a Dove, and it
abode upon him, and I knew him not. But he that sent me to baptize with Water,
the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and
remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, John 1.31,
32. Now John the Baptist might have waited till now, and expected to see the
Holy Ghost descend upon Christ, and yet be never the wiser, had he been of the
Doctor's Opinion: For, if he must, in that respect, believe his Senses, he is
never like to see the Holy Ghost, who, surely, has neither Color, Shape, nor
Figure to affect our Senses. And whatever Shape, or Figure the Holy Ghost
appeared in, St. John was still in Right of maintaining his Ground, and of
affirming (if we believe the Doctor) that what he saw was not the Holy Ghost,
but a Dove, or something else: For he might have said with the Doctor; the
Evidence of Sense is Infallible: Whatever my Eyes represent to me I must
believe it: Take away the Evidence of Sense, and you destroy all Knowledge:
What appears to my Eyes, is a Dove; therefore I cannot, nor must not believe it
is the Holy Ghost, or any thing else but a Dove. When you told me I should see
the Holy Ghost descending, etc. I gave Credit to my Hearing, by which I
perceived your Words; and now, I must contradict my Sight, which tells me, this
is a Dove. Or, if I believe it is the Holy Ghost, why may not I as well
question my Hearing, and doubt whether you said any such thing to me; as I must
now disclaim the Evidence of my Sight, which surely, is a Sense every whit as
Infallible, as my Hearing. May not all these Questions, and Reasonings, be
urged by St. John, as well as by the Doctor? But alas! St. John never dreamt of
any such thing: For he knew very well, and so might the Doctor too, if he could
divest himself of his Prejudices; that though we must ordinarily Rely upon the
Evidence of our Senses, yet when God tells us, the thing is otherwise than our
Senses represent it, we ought to give Credit to his Word; because we are sure,
on the one side, his Word cannot be false; and we know, on the other, he may
impose upon our Senses. And sure, this does not destroy any human Knowledge, or
Science; since it does not hinder but that, in all other things, we may rely,
and that must assuredly, upon the Evidence of our Senses, only where the Word,
and Omnipotent Power of God it pleased to interpose. Nor does it, in the least,
shake the External Means of confirming the Truth of Christianity, as the Doctor
would bear the World in Hand it does. For, when our Savior bad the Apostles
have recourse to their Senses, to convince them of the Truth of his
Resurrection; he did not tell them, that they must not believe their Senses in
that particular. Since we are then, in all things, which are not repugnant to
God's Word, not only allowed to follow the Evidence of our Senses, (for that we
always uncontroulably do) but also may safely believe; that the Substance,
which such Accidents, or Objects of our Senses, usually represent, is
infallibly there; how can that Doctrine, which is warranted by the same Divine
Word, in that, wherein it seems to be repugnant to Sense, destroy the external
Means of confirming the Truth of Christianity; it being evident, that wherever
Christ appealed to the Evidence of Sense, for the Proof of any of his Miracles,
he never disclaimed that Evidence; nor said, nor acted any thing, that might
seem to invalidate it.

But, surely, this cannot be said of the Eucharist, nor of St. John's Dove, nor
yet of Lot's young Men: For it is said of the first, that it is the Body of
Christ, though it has the Appearance of Bread; of the second, that it was the
Holy Ghost, though under the Appearance of a Dove; and of the third, that they
were Angels, though under the Appearance of Men. Now, how can the Belief of
Transubstantiation destroy the external Means of confirming the Truth of
Christianity, any more than the Belief of the Holy Ghost, under the Form of a
Dove, or of the Angels, under the Form of Men? Here is a Dove and two Men, in
Appearance, and as far as Corporeal Senses can discover; yet they are beliv'd
to be the Holy Ghost, and two Angels. There is Bread, in appearance, yet it is
beliv'd to be the Body of Christ. Is not the Evidence of our Senses equally
disclaimed in both? Do not we believe contrary to what we see in the one, as
well as in the other? Notwithstanding, no Man ever yet affirmed, that the
Belief of the Holy Ghost, under the Form of a Dove, or of the Angels, under the
Form of Men, did destroy the external Means of confirming the Truth of
Christianity. How can the Belief of Transubstantiation destroy 'em then?

Thus you see how grossly the Common People are abused, on the one hand; when
they are made to believe, that Transubstantiation is so monstrously absurd, as
the Dr. would fain here paint it: And how hardy He himself must needs have
been, on the other, when he had the Courage to deliver out of the very Pulpit,
the Chair of Truth, that it was, as evidently contrary to the common Sense of
Mankind, as it is evident that twice two make four. vol. 5. page 18, 19. But I
have an other Challenge to him yet: He tells us in the foregoing Page, that in
things doubtful, a modest Man would be very apt to be staggered by the judgment
of a very Wise Man; and much more, of many such, and especially by the
unanimous Judgment of the Generality of Men, the General Voice and Opinion of
Mankind, being next to the Voice of God himself. And, a little after, He gives
this Reason for it; because in things lawful and indifferent, we are bound by
the Rules of Decency, and Civility not to thwart the General Practice, and by
the Commands of God, we are certainly obliged to obey the lawful Commands of
lawful Authority. Since then the falsehood of Transubstantiation is not only
doubtful, but the Truth of it is established upon the firmest Foundation,
either in Heaven, or on Earth; even upon that Word, which shall never pass
away, though Heaven and Earth shall; and since the belief of it, when the
Reformation began, was grounded upon the General Voice and Opinion of the
Generality of Mankind, as the Doctor, and all those of his Persuasion do
acknowledge; and upon the lawful Commands of lawful Authority, if any such thing
were on Earth; I appeal to his own Judgment, if every Man be not bound, both in
Decency, and Civility; and by the Commands of God, not to thwart, or contradict
a Point of Faith so firmly established.

And now, if, after all this, any Man will undertake to justify the Doctor's
Conduct, and Vindicate what he writ against Transubstantiation; I here make him
this fair offer, for his encouragement; that though this good Doctor is pleased
to say, Vol. 3. page 299.
that in the business of Transubstantiation, it is not a Controversy of
Scripture against Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of down right
Impudence (civily spoken) against the plain meaning of Scripture, and the
Sense, and Reason of Mankind: If He, I say, or any body else will bring but one
single Argument in Mood, and Figure, to prove that Transubstantiation does
either contradict Sense or Reason, I do sincerely promise him, I will be of his
Opinion the very next Moment. And this I do the more confidently affirm,
because I am sure, Transubstantiation cannot possibly contradict, or be against
Sense or Reason. Sense it cannot; for it is not the Object of any of our
Senses; and, surely, it is not against Reason, that one Substance should be
changed into an other; since all Generations, and Corruptions are thus
performed; and even daily Experience teaches us, that the Meat, on which we
feed, does not nourish us, but in as much, as it is changed into the substance
of our Flesh. And to let the World know, it is not the Roman Catholics alone,
who see the absurdity of this Pretense, I will Transcribe the Words of an
Ingenious Soci^tan upon this Subject, who, surely, is no more a Friend to the
Roman Catholics, than to the Protestants. They are taken out of a Book
Intitul'd; Considerations on the Explication of the Trinity, etc. Page 21. He
cites the Words of the Bishop of Sarum, taken out of his Discourse concerning
the Divinity, and Death of Christ, page 94. which are these: Transubstantiation
must not be a Mystery, because there is against it, the Evidence of Sense, in
an Object of Sense: For Sense plainly represents to us the Bread and Wine, to
be still the same, that they were before the Consecration.

And thus he speaks his own Thoughts of them.

This is, (says he) every way faulty; for it is not pretended by the Papists,
that the Bread and Wine have received any the least Change, in what is an
Object of Sense. The Papists following the Philosophy of Aristotle, distinguish
in Bodies these two things; the Accidents (such as the quantity, figure, color,
smell, taste, and such like) which are Objects of our Senses: And the Substance
which bears, and is clothed (as it were) with these visible, and sensible
Accidents; but is it self invisible, and the Object of our Understanding, not
of our Senses. They say hereupon, our Savior having called the Sacrament, his
Body and Blood, because our Senses assure us, there is no change of the
(sensible) Accidents; therefore the change, that is made, must be in the
(invisible) Substance: Which change they therefore call Transubstantiation. Nor
do they say, that Christ is corporally (or bodily) present in the Sacrament,
but that His Body is present, in a spiritual manner: As Cardinal Bellarmin
largely discourses. De Eucharist. l. 1. c. 2.

His Lordship therefore is greatly out, in pretending that the
Transubstantiation, as held by the Papists, is contradicted by Sense, in an
Object of Sense. Thus far this Ingenious Man. Whence it is evident how miserably
weak the Doctor's pretense to Evidence of Sense against this Mystery is; and
how grossly he abuses Mankind, when alluding to Transubstantiation, he tells
them, they do not come to learn from their Guids, or Pastors the difference
between Sea, and dry Land, Vol. 3. page 100.
or between North and South; as if they had the same Evidence, that there is no
Transubstantiation in the Eucharist, as they have of the difference of Sea from
dry Land, or of North from South.

2. The four Objections taken out of the Dr's Discourse against
Transubstantiation, are these.

Vol. 3. page 315.
1. Tertullian speaks thus of the Eucharist: The Bread, which our Savior took,
and distributed to his Disciples, he made his own Body, saying; this is my
Body, that is, the Figure of my Body; but it could not have been the Figure of
his Body, if there had not been a True, and Real Body. Advers. Marcion. l. 4.
Here Tertullian seems to insinuate, that the Eucharist is the Figure of
Christ's Body.

Vol. 3. page 318.
2. St. Austin seems to be of the same Opinion: Our Lord, says he, did not doubt
to say, this is my Body, when he gave the sign of his Body. lib. contra.
Adimant.

3. Theodoret speaks to the same purpose, in his second Dialogue between a
Catholic, Vol. 3. page 324.
under the Name of Orthodoxus, and an Heretic under the Name of Eranistes;
where he makes Eranistes speak these Words; As the Symbols of the Lord's Body,
and Blood, are one thing before the Invocation of the Priest, but after the
Invocation are changed, and become an other thing; so the Body of our Lord,
after his Ascension, is changed into the Divine Substance. To which the
Catholic Orthodoxus answers thus; thou art caught in thine own Net; because the
Mystical Symbols after Consecration, do not pass out of their own Nature; for
they remain in their former Substance, Figure and Appearance; and may be seen,
and handled as before.

page 325.
4. Pope Gelasius seems to be of the same mind: Surely, says he, the Sacraments,
which we receive of the Body, and Blood of our Lord are a Divine Thing; so that
by them we are made partakers of a Divine Nature, and yet it cease not to be
the Substance, or Nature of Bread, and Wine; and certainly the Image, and
resemblance of Christ's Body, and Blood are celebrated in the Action of the
Mysteries. Bib Patr. tom. 4.

These and some more of less moment are, by the Dr. very much magnified and
cried up; and, to do him justice, he spares no Art, nor Industry to improve
them to the best Advantage; peremptorily concluding at the Foot of each
Passage, that Transubstantiation was unknown to Antiquity. But before I answer
them, it will be requisite, for the better Understanding of these Fathers, to
observe,

1. What Conduct the ancient Fathers generally held, when they treated of the
Mystery of the Lord's Body and Blood, in the Sacrament.

2. What was the ancient Father's Belief concerning this Mystery; and

3. Whence these Passages objected are taken: Which if well considered, I doubt
not to make it appear, that these Objections, notwithstanding their plausible
appearance, do not, in the least, prejudice the Truth of Transubstantiation,
nor clash with the Father's Opinions, who Favor this Doctrine.

1. The Fathers here objected, and most of the Ancients, were very cautious how
they spoke any thing on this Subject, which might increase the Suspicion the
Gentiles had conceived of them, as if they used to eat Human Flesh, in the
Celebration of their Mysteries; which, no doubt, was occasioned by the
Information of some Apostat Christians, who, upon renouncing of their Faith,
declared, that the Christians used to eat the Flesh and Blood of Christ. They
were therefore, to avoid the Reproach and Odium, which they must hereupon
necessarily incur, (the Gentiles thinking they eat this Flesh, as Men do that,
which is fold in the Shambles) very careful to conceal this Mystery; and to
write nothing, that was to be exposed to the Infidels, which might seem to
insinuate any such Doctrine; being content to glance at it, and (when they
must) to deliver their Thoughts obscurely; knowing very well, that, by this
prudent Conduct, the Pagans would have no just Reason to reproach them, and the
Christians, who were carefully instructed in this Point, would easily
understand what they hinted at. So that, in their Treatises against Heretics,
in the Books they must have exposed to public view, for the comfort, and
instruction of the Christians, and the conversion of the Gentiles; but more
especially, in their public Sermons and Homilies, where they apprehended any
Pagans were present, they were very careful to speak nothing out, touching this
Point; but by hints and glances, to insinuate their meaning to the Christians,
so as the Pagans could not understand what they meant. Thus Tertulian, in the
Book, which he wrote to diswade his Wife from Marrying after his Decease; Non
sciet Maritus quid ante omnem cibum gustes, and si sciverit, Panem esse credet,
and non quod dicitur. Your Husband will not know that, which you taste before
all other Meat; and if he does, he will think it is Bread, and not what it is
called. Here a Pagan knows not what he means, but his Wife, and all other
Christians might easily understand, that he means the Body of Christ. Thus St.
Austin, in several places, insinuates this Mystery in obscure words, and then
adds, these famed Words; Norunt fideles, Norunt fideles quod dico: The Faithful
know, the Faithful know what I say. Thus Theodoret, in that very Dialogue
objected by the Doctor, puts these Words in Orthodoxus his Mouth; Oro te ut
obscurius respondeas, adsunt enim fortasse aliqui Mysteriis non initiati. I
beseech you answer more obscurely; for there are some perhaps here present, who
are not initiated in the Mysteries. This he said, because they were about to
talk of the Eucharist, as appears by the Words of the Dialogue. Eranistes
answers him; sic audiam, and sic respondebo: So I will hear, and so I will
answer.

It were needless to bring any more Authorities from Fathers to prove this
Truth, it being evident from the Conduct observed in respect of the
Catechumens, that this was the universal Practice of the primitive Church.
These Catechumens were Candidates for Christianity; they were taught, and
instructed in all the other Mysteries of the Christian Faith; but not one Word
did they hear of, or relating to the Eucharist, till they had, by long Trial
and Experience, given sufficient Proof of their Good Resolutions; and solemnly
promised to believe, whatever the Catholic Church taught and professed. Though
they were taught the Mystery of the Trinity, and Incarnation; though they were
allowed to hear the Gospel read and expounded, and to assist at the Rest of the
Divine Service; yet, when the Consecration, and Communion of the Eucharist was
to be performed, they were by no means admitted to be present, nor as much as
know any thing of it; but were dismissed, and excluded from that part of the
Service, till by long, and careful Instructions they were deemed competent
hence the name of Competentes and missa Catechume norum so often mentioned by
the Canons.
to assist at it, as they then phras'd it. So careful were the Primitive
Fathers, that none, should come to the Knowledge of this Mystery, but such as
were very well disposed to believe, and embrace it.

And now can any Man of Sense imagine, that these Holy and Learned Fathers
should keep such a stir about the Eucharist, or be so careful to conceal it;
were it but a Type, or Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ? What is more
easy to be believed, than that Bread represents the Body of Christ; and Wine,
his Blood; and that both are taken in remembrance of his Death, and Passion?
Surely, there is nothing in the world so easy to be persuaded; since all
Mankind knows, that such arbitrary Signs or Representations, depend merely of
the Will of him that institutes them; and that there is nothing to be done to
persuade their Belief, but to tell, that they are so. Certainly no Pagan, or
Gentil could ever be offended at a thing so plain, or offer the least Reproach
to the Christian Religion upon the account of it: Consequently there would be
no need to conceal, or speak obscurely of it; nor to hinder, not only
Catechumens, but even Pagans, or Infidels, to hear it taught and delivered. But
to proceed:

2. What the ancient Fathers believed, touching the Eucharist, was this; that
the Substance of the Bread and Wine, was changed into the Body and Blood of
Christ; as appears by the passages produced from their Works, where the
Fathers, in their Catechisms and Homilies, make it their Business to explain
this Mystery to the Faithful. And because their Senses gave them to understand,
that the outward Forms, or Accidents remained; these they called the Sign, or
Figure of Christ's Body; because they represent unto us the Body of Christ,
which is, as it were clothed with these Accidents. So that the ancient Fathers
believed this Sacrament to be both the Figure, and Reality of the Body of
Christ, according to the two different things they discovered in it; viz. the
outward Signs or Simbols, and the Body and Blood of Christ, which are veiled
and covered by them. Hence St. Cyril of Jerusalem says; under the Type and
Figure of Bread he gives you his Body, and under the Figure of Wine he gives
you his Blood. And Gratian Distinct. 2. C. Hoc est de Consecrat. says; Hoc est
quod dicimus, etc. This is what we say, and what by all means we endeavor to
prove; that the Sacrifice of the Church is made of two Things, consists of two
Things; of the visible Appearance of the Elements, and of the invisible Flesh
and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; of the Sacrament, that is, of the External
and Sacred Sign; and of the thing of the Sacrament, Re Sacramenti, that is, of
the Flesh and Blood of Christ. Again, Caro ejus est, etc. It Is his Flesh, which
we receive, in the Sacrament, veiled with the Form of Bread; and his Blood,
which we drink, under the Appearance, and taste of Wine. But for all, the
Fathers do very often, especially in their Disputes with Heretics; and when
they apprehend their Writings should fall into the Hands of the Pagans, call
the Eucharist, the Sign or Figure of Christ's Body and Blood; because in effect
it is so, in regard of the Accidents, or outward Forms; yet we do not find,
that they ever called it a Sign, or Figure only, with exclusion to the Reality
of Christ's Flesh and Blood.

3. It Is very material to our present Dispute to know whence those Passages
objected by the Doctor are taken. And this he himself is careful to tell us;
namely, that they are taken out of those Father's Disputes with Heretics; In
which sort of Writing, it is natural for any Man to take all kind of just
advantage of his Adversary, in order to confute him; even to the silencing of
some part of the Truth, when it is not to his purpose, nor absolutely
neccessary to be declared. So that it is very hard to gather those Father's
Opinions from such Passages, much more, to establish an Article of Faith upon
their Ambiguous Expressions. Whereas the Passages, which we allege for
Transubstantiation, are taken from Catechisms, Homilies, Sermons, and familiar
Discourses, where the Fathers on purpose, and as Pastors, and Doctors of the
Church, expound this Mystery to the people, and tell them what they are to
believe concerning it. This supposed:

1. I answer, 1. That Tertullian here disputed with an Heretic, and that, at
such a Time, as was neither convenient, nor agreeable to his Prudence, to
publish the whole Truth concerning this Mystery: Consequently that it is not to
be admired he spoke somewhat obscurely. 2. That by these Words; this is my
Body. that is, the Figure of my Body, he meant the outward Forms, or Accidents
of the Sacrament: For he knew very well, that the Sacrament consisted of two
things, viz. of the outward Accidents, or Forms of Bread and Wine, and of the
Body and Blood of Christ contained under these Accidents. The first, Tertullian
calls the Figure of Christ's Body, and so do all the R. Catholics at present;
because these outward forms exhibit, and represent unto us the Body and Blood
of Christ, which they cover. Now this gave Tertullian a signal Advantage over
his Antagonist, who denied, that Christ had a Real Body; because it proved,
that the Sacrament could not be called the Figure of Christ's Body, unless he
had a True and Real Body; and therefore he insisted upon it, without declaring
what was contained under that Figure; Which (though it may be blameable in a
Sermon, or Discourse designed for the Instruction of the People, yet) may very
well be allowed in a Dispute; considering the advantage it gave to his Cause,
on the one side, but without prejudice to Truth; and the Scorn, and Contempt it
would expose the Christian Religion to, on the other; had he at that time of
day, fully expounded that Mystery. Now that Tertullian did not believe, that
the Sacrament was a Figure only, with exclusion to the Reality of the Body, and
blood of Christ, is evident from that Passage before cited, non sciet Maritus,
etc.

2. St. Austin's Words are to be understood in the same sense: For he here
disputed with Adimantus the Manichean, who affirmed that the Soul, or Life of
Animals consisted in their Blood. Now St. Austin to refute this Error, tells
him, that the Blood of Animals, in Scripture, is taken for their Life; because
it represents and contains Life. And so, says he, God calls Blood, Soul or
Life; for our Lord did not doubt to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign
of his Body. Which words, surely, if the comparison be just, must signify,
that that Sign of Christ's Body, contained his true Body; as the blood, which
is the Sign of the Soul, or Life in Animals, contains their Life or Soul.

But that the Doctor may see how far St. Austin was from believing, that the
Sacrament was only a Sign or Figure of Christ's Body; I will transcribe a
passage taken out of his Comments upon the Psalms, where he speaks plainly and
familiarly for the People's Instruction. It Is upon these Words of the Psalmist,
adorate Scabellum pedum ejus quoniam Sanetum est; adore ye his Footstool
because it is holy. Behold Brethren, says he, what he commands us to adore: The
Scripture says elsewhere, Heaven is my Seat, but the Earth is my Footstool: He
commands us then to adore the Earth; because he said. in another place, that
the Earth was God's Footstool; and how shall we adore the Earth; since the
Scripture expressly says; thou shall adore thy Lord thy God? And this (Psalmist)
says, adore ye his Footstool: But explaining to me what his Footstool is, he
says: The Earth is my Footstool. I am at a stand. I fear to adore the Earth,
lest he should damn me, who made Heaven and Earth. Again I fear, if I do not
adore the Footstool of my Lord; because the Psalm says to me, adore ye his
Footstool. I ask what his Footstool is, and the Scripture tells me: The Earth
is my Footstool. Being in doubt, I turn me to Christ; for it is He whom I here
seek, and I find, how without impiety the Earth may be adored. For he took
Earth of Earth; because flesh is of Earth; and he took Flesh of Mary's Flesh;
and because he here walked in that Flesh, and gave us that flesh to eat for our
Salvation. But no Man eats it except he first adores it. It is found how such a
Footstool of the Lord may be adored; and we do not only not sin, in adoring it,
but we should sin if we do not adore it. Enar. in Psalm. 98.

Here St. Austin says, that Christ gave us that Flesh to eat, in which He
walked here on Earth; and that we are so far from sin, in adoring that Flesh,
that we sin if we do not adore it. Christ walked here in the flesh, and he gave
us that flesh to eat; and we shall sin if we do not adore that flesh, says this
Father. What flesh did Christ here walk in? Was it in the Sign or Figure of His
Flesh? No sure, 'twas in his real Flesh. It Is evident then, that Christ gave us
his Real Flesh, in this Father's sense. Here St. Austin speaks plainly, and
familiarly to the common People; here is no Dispute in the Case, no Advantage
to be taken of a Sophistical Heretic; no fear of expounding the Mystery to the
full: Consequently he spoke his mind plainly. In a word; he must have lost his
Reason, who does not see, that it is from such Passages as this, where the
Fathers speak to their Flock, and expound the Scriptures, and the Mysteries of
our Religion, that we are to Learn, what they hold concerning any Point of
Faith; and not from some Abstruse, and dark Expressions culled out of their
Disputes with Hereties; where the Fathers purposely design to conceal the depth
of this Mystery, when ever they must mention it. But the truth of the matter
is; the Doctor's Cause would afford him no better Arguments, and rather than
fail, he was resolved to catch at any thing.

3. Theodoret, and Gelasius their Words are likewise to be understood of the
Accidents, or outward Forms of the Sacrament.

That these Fathers gave the Name of substance, and nature to the Accidents
will appear, if we consider the Equivocation of the Word Symbol, here mentioned
by Theodoret. This Word is sometimes taken for the Bread and Wine it self before
Consecration, and sometimes, but most properly, for the External Form, and
Appearance of Bread and Wine, which remain after Consecration. Eranistes, or
the Eutychian Heretic took it in the first sense; and therefore affirmed, that,
as the Symbols after Consecration are changed into an other thing; so the Body
of our Lord, after his Ascension, is changed into the Divine Substance. This he
said of the Sacrament, because he was so taught, and because he knew there was
no difference between him, and the Orthodoxus on that Subject. But what does
the Orthodoxus, to take advantage by that similitude? Why, he takes the Word
Symbol in its more proper meaning, namely for the Accidents, or outward Forms,
and tells the Heretic, he is caught in his own Net; because, says he, the
Mystical Symbols after Consecration, do not pass out of their own Nature; for
they remain in their former Substance, Figure, and Appearance, and may be seen
and handled as before. Now, that by the Mystical Symbols, he meant the
Accidents, methinks it is plain; for the Reason he gives, why these Symbols are
not changed, is, because they may be seen and handled as before. But this
proves plainly, that he must have meant the Accidents; since only Accidents can
be seen and felt. Nor does it move me, that he seems to give partly for his
Reason, that the Substance of the Symbols remain; for that is said gratis, and
could never be proved, if he had meant the real Substance of the Bread.
Besides, there is nothing more common in human Language, than to give the
Denomination of Substance to mere Accidents; as we usually say, the Substance
of his Discourse was this; the Substance of what he said, etc. though all
Discourses and Sayings, are pure Accidents. And however this Solution, at first
sight, may seem strange; yet, whoever will take the pains to examine well the
Sayings of both these Disputants, and believes they were in their Wits, he
cannot possibly deny what I say to be True. The one positively affirms of the
Symbols, that they are changed into an other thing; the other as stiffly
maintains, that they do not change at all. I ask now, whether these Symbols are
Objects of Sense, or not? If you say they are. I ask again; whether two Men in
their Wits, and Senses, can be so mistaken in a plain Object of Sense, as to
affirm contradictory things of it at once? For instance: Can two Men be so
mistaken about a white Wall, which they plainly see; as that one should affirm
it is white, and the other, that it is not? It Is plain they cannot: It Is then
manifest, that if the Symbols be Objects of Sense, Eranistes and Orthodoxus,
did not both consider them as such; otherwise they must have lost their Reason,
to affirm such contradictory things of them at once. It Is then evident, that
Eranistes, who affirmed, the Symbols were changed, did not consider them as
they are Objects of Sense; otherwise he must have spoken contrary to the
Evidence of his own Senses: Consequently his meaning was, that the Change
happened in the Substance of the Bread, and not in the Accidents. It Is no less
evident, on the other hand, that Orthodoxus considered the Symbols, as Objects
of Sense; else he could, with no Color of Reason, affirm, that they did not
pass out of their Nature, Substance, etc. For, let us suppose with the Doctor,
that he meant the real Substance of the Symbols, or Bread and Wine: How does he
prove that there is no real Change in them? Because the Mystical Symbols, says
he, do not pass out of their own Nature, for they remain in their former
Substance, etc. this is only said, but wants to be be proved. Well! How does he
prove it? Because, continues he, they may be seen, and handled, as before. Why
this the Heretic Eranistes acknowledges; and yet he affirms, that the Symbols
are changed: And, which is more, he therefore believes, that it is the real
Substance of the Symbols, and not the Accidents that are changed; because the
Accidents may be seen, and handled, as before. And now, would it not be a very
pleasant way to persuade him, that the Substance of the Bread and Wine was not
changed, for that very Reason, for which he believed it was? Or let us suppose,
that they both considered the Symbols as the true, and real Substance of the
Bread and Wine, and not as Accidents, or Objects of our Senses: Well! What
follows? The Heretic Era^istes affirms, that the Symbols, in this Sense, were
changed, ^ho' he saw with his Eyes the Accidents were no^; and then how could
the Orthodoxus convince him by his own Words, or tell him, he was caught in his
own Net; unless he could prove to him, that the Symbols taken in that Sense
were not changed? But this he is so far from doing, that the Reason he offers,
to evince that he was so caught, proves no more, than that the Accidents, or
Objects of Sense still remain, namely, that which may be seen and handled;
which the Hetetic Eranistes never denied. It Is then evident, that he understood
the Word Symbol in a different Sense from that of Eranistes. Consequently his
meaning must have been, that the Accidents, which he calls Symbols, did not
pass out of their Nature, etc. And all his Advantage consisted in the
Equivocation of the Word Symbol, which his Adversary took in a vulgar Sense,
and, by that, gave him an Opportunity to perplex him, and tell him he was
caught in his own Net. And, God knows, he must be hard put to it, who would
fain squeez Proof for his Faith from such intricate Disputes.

I have nothing to add, in answer to Gelasius his Passage, to what is here
said: For it is plain from the Scope and Design of this Father, (who likewise
disputed with an Entychian Heretic) that he meant, by substance or nature of
Bread, the Qualities of it, which (we confess) remain still in the Sacrament;
nothing being more usual in common Discourse, than to give the name of Nature
to the Quality, as we commonly say, a Man of ill nature, that is, of ill
Qualities.

One Word more with the Doctor, and I take leave of this Subject.

He tells us: Discourse against Transubstantiation, page 328, 329. That
Transubstantiation was first introduced into the Catholic Religion, about the
latter End of the Eight Century in the Second Council of Nice. And page 333.
that it was almost 300 Years before this Misshapen Monster, as he Religiously
terms it, could be Licked into that Form in which it is now settled and
established in the Church of Rome.

What I shall say to the matter of Fact here mentioned (leaving the Doctor to
his own Master to account for his civil Language) is, that I could wish he were
alive, that he might now, at least, consult his own Protestant Authors to
correct his Error; since he was then in two much haste to do it. Doctor
Humfrey, a Famous Divine of his own Country, and persuasion, would better
inform him; that Austin the great Monk, as he calls him, Jesuiti^mi part ^
sent by Gregory the Great Pope, taught the English a Burden of Ceremonies --
Purgatory, Mass, Prayer for the Dead, Transubstantiation, Relics, etc. Now
all the World knows, that Austin the Monk taught the English about the latter
end of the sixth Century, and the Beginning of the seventh; almost two hundred
Years before the Second Council of Nice. Cent. 6. de. Oper. Sti. Greg.
The Centuriators of Magdeburg, the Doctor's own good Friends, would tell Him,
that the same Gregory the Great wrought a Miracle in the presence of an
uncredulous Woman, to confirm her in the Belief of the substantial Change of
the Bread into the Body of Christ, as the Centurists Phrase it. And, surely, it
was no less these Gentlemen's Interest than his (could they but d^vest
themselves of all honesty and sincerity) to make it of a Fresher Date, than
even the Council of Nice. But the Doctor was so intent upon baffling Monsieur
Arnauld's Demonstration, of the Impossibility of obtruding this Doctrine upon
the Faithful, without Great, and Violent Commotions, both in Church and State;
which, he saw, he could not well effect, unless he had fixed a certain Epoch,
whence this Doctrine should take its rise; that rather than fail, he would hit
at a venture upon the Second Council of Nice, and there fix his Foot: Being
persuaded, as he says, that this was the fittest Time for such a Change. And is
not this a miserable Shift to which this Ingenious Man is reduced, when he is
forced, (to make good his undertaking) to have recourse to such known, and
manifest (I am ashamed to say it) falsehoods? Which surely do better become
Impostors than Grave Divines, whose very Names, and Character, should prompt
them to candor and sincerity; it being evident, that disingenuity, and false
dealing (whatever they may do for a time) serve to no other end at last, than
to discredit the Cause, and confound its Patrons.

CHAP. V. Of the Communion in one kind.
TO give the Communion in one, or in both kinds, is no matter of Faith, but
respects the Discipline of the Church, which, according to the different
Circumstances, and Exigencies of Affairs, for the increase of Piety and
Devotion; and in Condescension to the Infirmity of her Children, is often
necessitated to alter some things in her Discipline; it being Evident, that
what in one Age was good and profitable, an other Age will in no wise bear. And
since it is agreed upon, that the care of feeding the Flock was committed to
the Church; that she alone is Commissioned to dispense the Divine Mysteries,
and has a peculiar promise of the Assistance of the Holy Spirit to guide her
into all Truth; none can reasonably doubt, but She is the most Competent Judge,
what in her Discipline to change, what to retain.

Now the main stress lies upon this, whether or no it be in the Power of the
Church to alter her Discipline, in a matter of this Importance, so as to
restrain the Faithful to the receiving of the Sacrament in one kind only? It
being acknowledged by our selves, that, in the Primitive Times, this Sacrament
was indifferently administered, sometimes in Both, sometimes in one kind: Tho
it is hard to conceive, why Men should rather conclude, that it is not in the
Power of the Church to restrain the Faithful to one kind; because the Communion
was sometimes given in Both, than the contrary, that it is in the Power of the
Church so to do; because it was likewise sometimes given in one kind? To
justify then the conduct of the Church in this particular, I shall only
examine, whether the Receiving of the Eucharist, in both kinds, be Essential to
a True, and Real Participation of the Sacrament? For if both kinds be
Essential, then it is certain, the Church cannot take away any Essential part of
the Sacrament without destroying the whole; and consequently in giving but
part, would give nothing at all: Therefore could not restrain the Faithful to
one kind; it being evident, that the Church is only empowered to dispense, and
not to destroy the Mysterys of God. But if I can make out, that the
Participation of the Euchurist, in Both Kinds, is not Essential to the worthy
receiving of the Sacrament, then it will evidently follow, that the Church may
lawfully command the forbearance of one kind. For if you should ask any of our
Learned Protestants; why they do not give the Communion at night, or after
Supper, or sitting down, or lying on Couches, as, it is confessed, Christ gave
it? They will tell you; because it is not Essential to the Sacrament to give it
so. Or why they do not plunge the Children into the Water, when they baptize
them; as the Apostles, and primitive Church have done? They answer, as before,
that it is not Essential to the spiritual Lotion of the Soul, that the Body
should be washed by Plunging, rather than any other way; but that, whether it
be performed by Immersion, or Aspersion, or in any other manner, it is the same
thing to all the Intents, and Purposes of the Sacrament: So that it is plain,
and even confessed by our Adversaries, that the Church has Power to alter, and
change all the Circumstances, which are not of the Essence, and Nature of the
Sacraments. All the Difficulty then consists in this, whether it be Essential
to the Communion to receive it in both kinds? Or whether One kind be not
sufficient? And if it be made out, that it is not Essential to the Communion to
receive both; but that it is enough to receive it in One kind; then the
Protestants must confess, that the Church may lawfully command the Forbearance
of the other.

Now, that the receiving of the Eucharist in Both Kinds, is not Essential to
the True, and Real Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, to all the
Intents, and Purposes of the Sacrament; but that One Kind alone is sufficient,
I shall endeavor to show;

1. From several Texts of Scripture which affords us sufficient Grounds to
conclude, that for the due Participation of the Sacrament, it is not necessary
to receive it in Both kinds.

2. From the General Practice of the Church in all Ages; even in those days, in
which the Protestants do own, the pure Word of God (as they speak) was
preached, and the Sacraments duly administered.

3. From the Consent of our Adversaries, if consistent with themselves. I begin
with the first.

And that our Adversaries may not think, I design to impose upon them; I will
quote those places of Scripture, that seem to make against, as well as for me.
Christ says, John c. 6. ver. 50. This is the Bread which comes down from
Heaven, that a Man may eat thereof, and not die. Ver. 51. I am the living Bread
which came down from Heaven: If any Man eat of this Bread he shall live for
ever; and the Bread that I will give is my Flesh. Ver. 53. Verily I say unto
you, except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His Blood, ye have no
Life in you. Ver. 54. Who so eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has
eternal Life. Ver. 56. He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells
in Me, and I in Him. Ver. 58. This is that Bread, which came down from Heaven
-- he that eats of this Bread shall live for ever. Here are six Passages,
whereof three seem to be expressly for the Communion in one kind; and the other
three seem to be against it. What shall we say to this? Must we believe all? Or
shall we believe but three of them? For they seem to contradict one another.
One says; Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye
have no Life in you. An other; If any Man eat of this Bread he shall live for
ever: If it be True, that the Man, who eats of this Bread shall live for
ever; how can it be at the same time true, that he cannot live, except he eat
the Bread, and drink the Cup? Must we then hold to three of these Passages and
reject the rest? As to the Protestants, I do not see, how it should stand with
their Principles to do otherwise: For they are so far from believing, that the
Man, who eats of this Bread shall live for ever; that they constantly assert,
that except he drinks also of the Cup, he is guilty of a Horrid Sacrilege;
Vol. 2. page 70.
it is what Dr. Tillotson expressly affirms. This is no Addition to Christianity
(says he, speaking of the Communion in One Kind) but a sacrilegious taking away
of an Essential Part of the Sacrament; they must then necessarily deny three of
these Passages, if they be True to their own Principles. But for R. Catholics,
they are not in the least perplexed at this seeming Contradiction; they believe
them all to be both true in themselves, and agreeable to their Principles: For
they belive, that whosoever eats of this Bread, the same eats and drinks
the Flesh and Blood of the Son of Man, in the Sense he meant they should eat
and drink his Flesh and Blood; which is not to be understood (as Protestants as
well as Catholics must confess, though upon different Grounds) in the strict, and
proper meaning of the Words, as if eating, and drinking his Flesh and Blood
were to be performed by two different Acts, whereof one is conversant about a
sollid, and the other about a liquid Thing, as the Words usually and properly
import; but that to eat, and drink his Flesh and Blood, signifies no more than
to participate of, or to take by the Mouth his Flesh and Blood, whether with
one or different Acts it matters not. R. Catholics then find no Difficulty in
reconciling these places; they believe the Flesh of Jesus Christ is the Flesh
of a Living Man, which cannot be so without Blood; and therefore, when they
take it, they are sure, they eat and drink his Body and Blood; that is, they
are Partakers of his Body and Blood. And hence it is, they do most certainly
conclude, that it is not Essential to the Communion to receive it in both
Kinds; because they receive in one, all that Christ requires of the Faithful to
receive, that is, his Body and Blood. I say Protestants as well as Catholics
must confess, that in this Passage, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, the Words eat, and drink, are not to be taken in the
strict, and usual Sense they commonly bear: For seeing they believe, that, in
the Eucharist, there is neither Flesh nor Blood, nothing but Bread and Wine;
and that in eating and drinking these Elements to the Letter, they do eat, and
drink the Body and Blood of Christ by Faith, as it is said in the 39 Articles,
it cannot be said, that they eat and drink the Flesh and Blood of Christ, in
the literal and usual Sense of the Words; it being impossible to eat and drink
in the Elements, in a literal Sense, that, which, in a literal Sense, they do
not really contain, as Protestants hold. They must then necessarily conclude,
that to eat and drink the Body and Blood of Christ, is not to be understood in
a literal, but in a figurative Sense; and then the meaning of these Words must
be, To (...), and drink the Body and Blood of Christ; that is, to be Partakers
of the Body and Blood of Christ; and if so, then it is certain, that in eating
only the Body of Christ, which, being a living Human Body, must needs contain
his Blood; we eat and drink his Flesh and Blood, that is, we are made Partakers
of his Flesh and Blood, which surely, is all that is requisite to the Essence
or Nature of the Sacrament.

And now, who would believe, that the R. Catholics had such grounds, in
Scripture, for the Communion in one kind; considering the loud, and clamorous
accusations, yea and the horrible Sacrileges they are charged with, upon this
Subject? Well! And who are those, who charge us thus? Why they are Great, and
Eminent Men: Great indeed, not only for the Rank, and Station wherein the
Powers of this World have placed them; but also Great for their Learning, and
other Excellent Endowments. But then, it is that they must so do: The Protestant
Religion (as all the World knows) was planted in these Kingdoms by open Force
and Violence. These Gentlemen's Predecessors possessed Themselves of the Rich
Benefices of the Church; and when Men's Interest, and Honor, are once engaged,
it is hard, if they do not stand by them.

Now there is no way left to justify these Proceedings, but by railing at the
Church of Rome, and exposing her pretended Corruptions; and therefore it is no
marvel, they should lay these, and a great deal more to her charge. But take
away these Fatal Byasses: Let Benefices be laid a side: Let the Riches of the
Church be proposed, as the Reward of Virtue, and Merit; and then we shall see
how many Eyes this will open; then we shall see the Scales fall off, and those,
who have been hitherto our Greatest Persecutors, become, like St. Paul, the
most Zealous Assertors of our Faith and Religion. But this by the way.

There is an other Passage in St. Luke, which favors the Communion in One
Kind. Evangelist tells us, that Christ, after his Resurrection, appeared to two
of his Disciples, as they went to Emans, who, adds St. Luke, constrained Him to
a^ide with them; and when he sat at Meat, He took Bread, and blessed it, and
brake and gave to them, and their Eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he
vanished out of their sight. Now, it is certain, that, if this Bread, which
Christ blessed and brake, was the Eucharist, we have, at least, one instance in
which Christ himself gave the Communion in one kind: For it is said, that after
he had broke the Bread, and gave it to them, he vanished out of their sight.
And indeed, it is very hard to conceive how the breaking of ordinary Bread, as
it is usually done at Meat, should open these Disciples Eyes, so as to know him
that did it to be Christ. Besides, the breaking of Bread, in the Acts of the
Apostles, is always understood of the Communion: and St. Chrisostom, St.
Augustine, venerable Bede, and Theophilactus, in their comments upon this place,
teach us, that this Bread, which Christ brake, was the Eucharist; which surely
they would not have done, had there been the least doubt of the lawfulness of
the Communion in one kind. However, because it is not thus interpreted by the
universal consent of the Church, I shall lay no more weight upon it, than it
can reasonably bear; leaving the Reader to judge, what impression the Authority
of four such Great Men, so well read in Antiquity, is apt to make upon an
unprejudiced Mind. I now proceed to show, that the Communion, in Both Kinds, is
not Essential to the Sacrament.

2. from the general practice of the Church in all Ages, even in those days
wherein the Protestants do confess, the Pure Word of God was preached, and the
Sacraments duly administered.

The Protestants do pretend to pay a great deal of Respect, and veneration to
Antiquity; and in all their Debates, and Controversies of Religion; whether
with Us, or among Themselves, they are willing to Appeal to the Primitive
Church, which they look upon as the Rule and Measure of their Faith and
Practice. Now, if it appears by the Practice of the Primitive Church, that the
Communion was given in One Kind without the other; and that this was neither
prohibited by the Governors of the Church, nor found fault with by the People,
nor yet wrote against by any Man whatsoever; then it is but reasonable to hope,
that every Ingenious Protestant will easily be persuaded, that neither the
Pastors, nor the People of the Primitive Church did ever believe, that both
kinds were Essential to the worthy participation of the Sacrament. This I
shall, by God's Assistance, endeavor to evince from the best Records, and the
most unquestionable Witnesses, and Writers of the Primitive Times.

And here I find four sorts of Communion; the Communion of the Sick, the
Communion of Infants, and little Children; the Communion of Private Families,
commonly called the Domestic Communion; and the Public, and Solemn Communion of
the Church. And in regard of all these, I shall undertake to prove, that, for
the first six hundred Years, the Eucharist was given, 1. in the Communion of
the Sick, under the Species of Bread alone. 2. In the Communion of Infants, and
little Children, under the species of Wine alone. 3. In the Domestic, or
Private Communion, under the species of Bread; but so as to be sometimes given,
though seldom in both kinds: And lastly, in the public, and solemn Communion of
the Church, sometimes in one, sometimes in both kinds; as the Piety and
Devotion of the People carried them to participate of one or Both.

Touching the Communion of the Sick- Eusebius, One of the Best, Hist. Eccles.
lib. 6. cap. 44.
and most Celebrated Historians of the Primitive Church, gives us an entire
Letter of the Great Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria upon this Subject. In this
Letter, Dionysus relates the Story of a certain Old Man called Serapion, who
being under Public Penance, and falling Sick, sent a Boy to a Priest, that
was at some distance from him, to desire him to come to him, and give him the
sacred Communion before he had departed this Life; but the Priest happening at
the same time to be sick, and not able to go so far, gave a Piece of the sacred
Bread to the Boy, and ordered him to carry it to Serapion, and enjoined him
moreover to moisten it in some Liquor, and then to give it to him as his last
Viaticum; which when he had done, says Dionysius, the good Old Man immediately
gave up the Ghost.

Here is a Communion in one kind related by a Man, who was as Great a Saint as
he was a Bishop; and Recorded by an other Great, and Learned Bishop: Both very
ancient Witnesses, both much celebrated by Antiquity: Yet neither the one, nor
the other finds any fault with the Priest, nor with Serapion for this
Communion, which our Adversaries would now abhor as sacrilegious and
detestable; on the contrary, they both admire the Goodness of God, as the said
Letter witnesses, in sparing this poor Man's Life 'till he had received the
sacred Pledge of his Redemption. And now, can it be imagined, that these two
Great Men, who lived so near the Times of the Apostles, and were so well
instructed in the Faith and Discipline of the Church, should not rather be
surprised at the Rashness of the Priest, than admire the Mercy of God in this
Affair, if the Practice and Discipline of the Church had not authorized such a
Communion? Nay that Eusebius, who was so Nice, and Severe in his Remarks, and
Censures upon the least Slips, and Mistakes of other Clergymen, should be
silent in a business of this Weight, is sure what no Man can Reasonably
suppose. This the Protestants could not but see; and therefore the most
Ingenuous among them, as Bishop Jewel, Answ. to Hard.
Mr. Smith Epist. de Eccles. grac. hod. stat. page 107.
and others have freely confessed, that the Communion here mentioned, was given
only in one kind: But others, who resolve to say any thing rather than
acknowledge the Truth, would maintain, that that Liquor wherein the Boy was
ordered to moisten the Piece of the sacred Bread, was the consecrated Wine;
whereas, it is plain from the Words of the Letter, the Priest gave him no
Liquor at all, but ordered him to steep the sacred Bread in any Liquor he could
find at Home. Besides, suppose he had dipped the Bread in the sacred Wine, and
gave it so to the sick Man; no Protestant, who understands the Principles of
his Religion, will say, that this is to eat, and drink the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, For Protestants hold, that it is therefore necessary to eat, and drink
the Elements apart; because in so doing, they show the Death of our Lord, whose
Body was Broken, and separated from his Blood. But this Evasion is so Vain and
Groundless, that it merits no farther Confutation.

An other Instance of this Communion, is that of St. Ambrose, We have this
Great Bishop's Life written by Paulinus his own Deacon, who was present at his
Death, and dedicated his Life to St. Austin, at whose Request he wrote it; so
that his Authority is beyond all Exception. This Deacon tells us, that St.
Honoratus Bishop of Verceil, who came to visit St. Ambrose, as he lay on his
Death Bed; Heard, in the dead of the Night, a Voice say to him thrice, Arise,
delay not; for he is going to depart. He came down, adds Paulinus, gave him the
Body of our Lord, and the Saint no sooner received it Eoque reverentissime
accepto.
when he gave up the Ghost. Here the Body of our Lord is given to St. Ambrose,
but no mention of his Blood: Here it is said, he no sooner received it when he
gave up the Ghost. The word It is remarkable; for being of the Singular Number,
and denoting only one thing, it cannot be understood but of the Body to which
it refers; whereas if Paulinus had meant, that he had received the Body and
Blood, under both Species, he should have spoken in the Plural Number, and
said; he no sooner received them, when he gave up the Ghost. Well, what say our
Adversaries to a Decision so plain? For something must be said. Some say, St.
Ambrose received the Communion as well as he could; being prevented by a sudden
Death before he could receive the Sacred Cup. Vain fancy! As if the Divine
Power, which sent a Voice from Heaven to order the Communion to be given to
him, could not keep him alive 'till he had received the Sacrament Entirely.
Others, not satisfied with this Answer, say, St. Ambrose received both kinds,
though one only is expressed, by the Grammatical Figure Synecdoche, where a part
is taken for the whole. But this is as groundless as the former: For, besides,
that the precise and express Terms in which that Phrase is conceived, will
admit of no figurative Sense; such Grammatical Figures are not used by any
Ecclesiastical Writers, when they speak of the Communion; nor did any
Protestant ever yet instance in one single Passage wherein it is so taken;
which is an Evident Argument that they had none to Instance in. I might farther
instance in the Council of Carthage, in the Communion of St. Basil; but let
this suffice for the Communion of the sick; for I would not be tedious.

The same Practice we find observed in the Communion of Infants and little
Children, only with this difference, that, whereas the Communion was given to
the Sick, under the Species of Bread; here it is given under the Species Wine.
And the Reason of this Difference, I conceive was this. In the Beginning, whilst
the Church groaned under the Tyranny, and Persecution of the Pagan Emperors,
and their Magistrates; the Bishops, and Priests, being forced to wander from
place to place, when they light upon any Christians with little Children, or
newborn Infants, being uncertain, whether they should ever return that way
again, they used to administer the Sacraments to them; the Bishops, the
Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and the Eucharist; and the Priests, the
First and the Last. And because the newborn Babes were not capable of
receiving any thing that was sollid, they gave them always the Eucharist under
the Form of Wine. And this Custom, thus settled in the first Persecutions,
continued in the Church until the latter end of the Tenth Century; yet all this
while it never entered into any Man's Head, to say, that this was an Imperfect,
much less a Sacrilegious Communion.

The first Instance we find of this Communion, is in St. Cyprian's Time, about
the Year of our Lord 240. This holy Martyr tells us what happened in his own
Presence to a little Girl, Trat. de Lapsis.
who had eaten a little of the Bread, that was offered to the Idols. Her Mother
knowing nothing of what She had taken, carried her, as the custom was, to the
place where the Christians were assembled. During the the time of Prayer, adds
this Father, this Child was troubled, and disordered, as if for want of Words,
(which her tender Age was not capable of) she would by this means, declare the
Misfortune which befell her. After the usual solemnity, the Deacon, who
presented the sacred Cup to the Faithful, continues St. Cyprian, coming to the
rank where this Child was; she turned her face aside, not being able to bear
the presence of such a Majesty. She shut her Mouth, she refused the Cup. But
being compelled to swallow some drops of the Precious Blood, she was not able,
pursues this Father, to hold it in her sullied Entrals, but violently gave it
up; so great is the Power and Majesty of our Lord.

Here is a fact so plain, that nothing can be adedd to it; all the
Circumstances of it are attended with such Marks of a Communion in one kind,
that nothing but mere Prejudice, or rather Blindness, can make any Man doubt
it. I know some Protestants have been so vain as to pretend, that this Child
did receive the Body of Christ, before the Deacon came with the sacred Cup; but
this is so contrary to St. Cyprian's Design, in relating this surprising Story,
that I wonder any Man, in his Senses, should imagine it. What, a Child, that eat
of the Sacrifice of Devils, is troubled and confounded (by the Instinct, (...)
doubt, of the Holy Ghost, for Reason she was not capable of) because she was to
partake of the Cup of our Lord! And would she not, think you, be in the same
Trouble and Confusion, were she to receive the Lord's Body? At the presence of
the sacred Cup, she turns her face aside, and shuts her mouth, and that by
divine instinct, for Reason she had not; her sullied Entrals are not able to
bear the Majesty of our Lord in his Blood, but are forced to give it up. And
would She have done less, at the Presence, and Participation of the same Lord's
Body? Is the Majesty, or Power of the Lord's Body less than that of His Blood,
that it should not cause the like Disorder? At the receiving of the Lord's
Blood, here are a great many surprising Accidents; and why not the like at the
Receipt of His Body? Truly the Reason is plain; because, in very deed, She
neither did, nor was to receive the Lord's Body otherwise, than in the sacred
Cup.

This Practice of giving the Commmunion to Children, under the Species of Wine,
was not confined to the three first Ages, but is still in force in the Greek,
and continued in the Latin Church to the 12th Century. Touching the Greek
Church; Allatius Trat. de Cons. utr. Eccles. Annotat. ad Com. orient.
a R. Catholic, and Mr. Smith Epist de Eccles. graec. hod. statu. p. 104. ed. 1.
a Church of England Divine, tells us, Children are still communicated in that
Church under the Species of Wine. As to the General Practice of the whole
Church; Jobius, a Learned Author of the sixth Century, gives us this Account of
it, ^ib. Pho. Cod. 222.
lib. 3. de Verb. Inca^n. cap. 18. where he speaks of the Three Sacraments
conferred upon little Children all at once. We are (says he) first Baptized,
then we are Anointed, that is, Confirmed, afterward, the precious Blood is
given to us. Erud. Theo. l. 3. c. 20.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, a Learned Writer of the 11th Century, and much
commended by St. Bernard, says expressly, that the Practice of the Church was,
to give the Children after Baptism, the Sacrament under the Form of Wine only;
and teaches afterward, that the Body and Blood of Christ are wholely, and
entirely received in either kind. Thus much concerning the Communion of Infants.

As to the Domestic, or Private Communion: For the three first Centuries,
whilst the Fervor of the Primitive Devotion lasted; and the Blood of Jesus
Christ (as the Fathers speak) was reeking Hot: The Christians, who being led
like Sheep to the Slaughter, considering the Sacred Eucharist, as the best, and
most efficacious Armor and Support, to enable them to bear up against the
Fiery Trials they must undergo; were very careful, when they met, on great
Festivals, at their pious Assemblies, to carry home, every Man and Woman, as
much of Sacred Food, as would suffice to take some part of it every day; that
being thereby united to Jesus Christ, they might be the better prepared for the
Assaults of their Violent Persecutors. And because these Holy Assemblies could
not be very frequent, in the Rage of Persecutions; nor the dispersed
Christians, who lived far off, come easily to them; and that the Species of the
Sacred Wine was apt to be soon altered, especially in so small a quantity, as
they must have taken it; and besides, subject to other Accidents, which, in
those troublesome Times, they could not well prevent; they were content to
carry along with them the Sacred Body of our Lord, under the Form of Bread
only; being persuaded, that when they eat of this Bread, they were Partakers of
the Body and Blood of Christ, and of the Grace and Sanctification thereunto
annexed. And here I should tire the Readers Patience, should I bring all, that
can be said in Confirmation of this Truth; but I shall instance only in some
few of the best, and most approved Authors; for I perceive I have been longer
upon this Subject than I designed. Tertullian, a Learned Author of the second
Century speaks thus of the Private Communion, in the Book, which he wrote to
his Wife to diswade her from marrying after his Death. Thy Husband (says he)
will not know that, which thou take before all other meat, and if he should,
he will think it is Bread, and not what it is called; that is, the Body of
Christ. Here Tertullian tells us, that his Wife, after the manner of other
Christian Women, used to take a certain Thing, before she tasted any other
Food; and that her future Husband, whom he supposes a Pagan, if he should know
it, would think it to be Bread; because it was so in Appearance, though in
Reality it was the Body of Christ; but under the Form of Bread, and no other.

The great St. Basil, a Greek Father of the fourth Century, Epist. 289.
delivers this Practice more at large in his Letter to Cesaria, who, it seems,
would know, whether it was lawful to receive the Communion otherwise, than by
the Hands of a Priest, or Deacon. To which He answers thus; As to this, that it
is not grievous to take the Communion with one's own Hands, when there is no
Priest nor Deacon present, being forced thereunto in Time of Persecution, it is
needless to tell you; because it has been confirmed by long Use and Custom: For
all those, who lead solitary Lives in Deserts, where no Priests are, keep the
Communion in their Houses, and communicate themselves. Besides, in Alexandria
and in Egypt, all the People do commonly keep the Communion at home; for when
the Priest consecrates the Host, and distributes it; we may reasonably believe,
they partake of it, and carry it with them.

I need not go about to prove, that this Communion was nothing else but the
Sacred Bread; for it is plain, St. Basil speaks only of that which is touched
with the hand. Besides, it is certain he could not mean the Sacred Cup, when he
speaks of the Communion in the Deserts; it being evident, that the Species of
Wine could not be preserved, for any time, in so small a Quantity, as they must
have taken it.

St. Ambrose gives us much such an other Account of this Communion: He tells
us, how his Brother Satyrus was miraculously said from drowning, de Obit.
Satyr.
by the Faith he had in the Sacred Host. For being in a Storm, where all were
given for lost, he begged of one of the Christians, who were aboard, to give
him a piece of the Sacred Bread which he had; and having, by the Earnestness of
his Prayers, obtained that Favor, he wrapped this Divine Sacrament (says St.
Ambrose) in a Cloth, and tied it about his Neck, (for being a Cathecumen only,
he would not eat it) cast himself into the Sea; and God, to recompense the
Greatness of his Faith, brought him safe from that boisterous Element. Here you
see the Christians, agreeably to what St. Basil says, used to carry the Sacred
Bread about them, that they may eat of it, in Case of any Hazard or Danger: But
of this enough.

Touching the Public and solemn Communion of the Church; I own we have no
instances from Fathers or Ecclesiastical Writers, for the first four Centuries
to prove, that the Communion was publicly given, in one kind, to any, except
Infants and little Children; nor can our Adversaries instance in any, who says
it was not so given: And so far we are upon the Level. But methinks (the Scales
being thus even) the Practice and Custom of the Church, expressly Recorded and
Delivered by the Writers, and Liturgies of the Fifth, Sixth, and all other
succeeding Ages, in Favor of the public Communion in one, as well as in both
kinds, ought to weigh down the Balance, and determine any reasonable Man to
conclude, that this same Practice was derived from the foregoing Ages.

We find, indeed, in the latter End of the fifth Age, a Decree of Pope
Gelasius, which forbids certain People to receive the Communion in one kind;
but if we attend to the Motives and Circumstances of this Decree, and to the
Persons there meant, we shall find, it is so far from destroying our
Hypothesis, that it plainly confirms it. What gave Occasion to it was this: In
the Time of St. Leo, Pope Gelasius his Predecessor, there were a great many
Manichees in Rome, who, the better to spread their wicked Errors, feigned
themselves Catholics, and frequented the Churches and Sacraments like others;
but it being part of their Belief, that Wine was created by the Devil, and that
Jesus Christ did not spill his Blood for us; but that his Passion was
Fantastic, not Real, they abhorred Wine above all things, and therefore
abstained from the Sacred Cup in the Communion.

St. Leo complains of the Disorders, which they caused in the Church; He
declaims against their wicked and hellish Devices; He tells us, they were so
bold, as to presume to mix themselves with the Faithful, and receive the Lord's
Body, but abstained from the Sacred Cup; and gives that, as a Mark to discern
them by. But because the Faithful were at Liberty to take One, or both Kinds,
and that many devont Christians received the Body, without the Sacred Cup; it
was hard to find out by that Mark, who these Manichees were. However, St. Leo
did not think fit to alter the Discipline of the Church, nor take away their
Liberty from the Faithful; but was content to insinuate, that whosoever should
refuse to take the Sacred Cup, as abhorring Wine, or in Detestation to the
Blood of Christ, should be reputed of that Sect. But this Remedy proving
ineffectual, Pope Gelasius was forced to Decree, that whosoever abstained from
the Sacred Cup, upon any such superstitious Pretense, should be altogether
deprived of the Communion. It may not be amiss to subjoin his very Words: Gr.
Did. 2 can. comper. de consecrat.
We have found out, that some People do take, only the Body, and abstain from
the Sacred Blood, who, seeing they are engaged in I know not what Superstition,
must either take both parts, or be depri^'d of both; because the Division of
one, and the same Mystery, cannot be done without great Sacrilege.

Now, to give you my Thoughts upon this Decree; I think it is plain,

First, that there was no need of making such a Decree, if all the Catholics,
in those days, had received the Communion in both kinds: For this being made,
on purpose, to discover the Manichees, who never drank Wine, there was nothing
so easy as to find out, who they were, upon their refusal of the Sacred Cup;
consequently there needed no Decree to discover them. But since it is
confessed, that these Heretics did mix themselves with the Catholics, and
received the Communion only in one kind, and that notwithstanding all St. Leo's
Care, and Diligence to find them out, they were still undiscovered; I think it
is a Demonstration, that some Catholics, as well as the Manichecs, did receive
the Communion in One Kind only. And this being all that I undertook to evince,
I might now take leave of this Decree. But I shall observe,

Secondly, that the prohibition here made affects only those, who were engaged
in a certain Superstition; who, seeing they are engaged in I know not what
Superstition, must either take both parts, or be deprived of both: For the
Reason why they are to be deprived of both parts of the Sacrament, unless they
take both, is because they were engaged in a certain superstition, which tended
to destroy the Sacrifice of our Redmption, by the Belief they had, that
Christ's Blood was only an Illusion; and to divide that Mystery, which,
Gelasius says, cannot be done without great Sacrilege, by the like wicked
opinion, that Wine being created by the Devil, Christ would never have
instituted the Memorial of his passion in that Liquor Whence it is evident, that
the Catholics, who were in no manner engaged in these superstitious Errors, are
nothing concerned in this Decree; nor barred of the liberty, they always had of
receiving the Sacrament in one, or both kinds, as suited best with their
Devotion. And this is so true, that we find the practice of it recommended by a
Canon of a very Famous, if not General Council, held in Constantinople in the
sixth Century, Can. 52.
known to the Ancients, by the Name of Concilium Trullanum. This Council
confirms the Ancient Custom of the Greek Church, which was to celebrate Mass in
Lent only on Saturdays and Sundays; it being by the Ancients Judged improper to
consecrate on any of those Days, on which they fasted; because they would not
(as they commonly speak) mix the solemnity of the Sacrifice with the sadness of
the Fast. But on these two days, in which they did not fast, they used to
consecrate, and reserve as much of the sacred Oblation, as would suffice for
the Clergy, and Laity to take every day, till the Saturday following; and this
they called the Mass of the Presanctified, than which nothing is more
frequently mentioned in the Greek Church.

Now, to know what was offered, and distributed to the People in this Mass: All
the Ancient Greek Liturgies tell us, that there was nothing reserved, but the
sacred Bread; that this Bread was carried in Procession, from the Sacrifice
into the Church; Eucho. Goar. Bib. P. P. Paris, T. 2.
exposed to be adored by the People, and, after some Ceremony, distributed to
all the Faithful. So that here is a Public, and Solemn Communion given in One
Kind, for five Days every Week Yearly, while Lent holds. But this Practice was
not peculiar to the Greek; for we find it as early, and as solemnly used in the
Latin Church. The Roman Ordinal, Bib. P. P Var. T. de Div. Off.
whose Antiquity, I suppose, no body will question, being that, which St.
Gregory the Great made use of, in the sixth Century, gives us the same Account
of Good, Friday-Service with that, which is expressed in the Rubrics of our
present Mass Book. Alcuinus; De Div. Off.
a Famous Author of the eigth Century, relates the same thing: So does
Rupertus, Lib. 2. c. 9. de Div. Off.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, and other Writers of the Eleventh Century. They tell
us, that, on Good Friday, there was no Consecration made; but that the Body of
our Lord, which was consecrated the day before, was reserved for that day's
Communion; that the Priest took the Lord's Body, and some unconsecrated Wine
and Water, and then gave the Communion to the People, under the Form of Bread
alone. So that there has been a perpetual Practice in the Latin Church, of
giving the Communion, in one kind solemnly once every Year, both to Clergy and
Laity, even to this very Time.

I might, further, bring the Authority of Sozomenus, Evagrius, Authors of the
sixth Century, and of several Great, and Learned Men of the Gallican Church, to
confirm this Practice; but I think it is sufficiently evident from what is
said, that the Communion was publicly giv^ng in one kind ever since Christians
had Churches for public and solemn Service. I shall therefore proceed to show,
in the last place;

That to take the Communion, in both kinds, is not Essential to the Sacrament,
from the Consent of our Adversaries, if consistent with Themselves.

I suppose Martin Luther's Opinion in this Matter, is of no small Authority;
for it is but reasonable to suppose, that those, who have followed the Scheme,
which he drew, should pay their just tribute of Respect to his Opinion in this
Point. Let us then hear him speak. If any Council (says he) should chance to
Decree (the Communion in both kinds) we should by no means make use of Both, De
Miffa Ang.
nay, we would sooner, in contempt of the Council, take one, or neither, than
both; and curse those, who should, by the Authority of such a Council, make use
of both kinds. Here, I think, it is very plain, Luther was of opinion, that
both kinds was not essential to the Sacrament, else, surely, he would not have
said, that he would sooner make use of neither, than of both; nor curse those,
who should take both kinds. But the Discipline of the French Protestants will
afford us a more ample Testimony in this Matter.

In a Synod held in Potiers, Anno. 1560. and in an other, in Rochel, 1571. It
is provided, that those, who cannot drink Wine, may receive the Communion under
the Form of Bread. It may not be amiss to subjoin their very Words, as they are
read in the 12th. Chapter of their Discipline, Tit. Of the Lord's Sup. Art. 7.
The Bread of the Lord's Supper ought to be administered to those, who cannot
drink Wine, upon their making Protestation, that it is not out of Contempt; and
upon their endeavoring, what they can, to obviate all Scandal, even by
approaching the Cup, as near their Mouths, as they are able. Now it is not to be
imagined, that these Gentlemen should think both kinds essential to the
Communion, and yet make such a Decision: For there is no Body, who is never so
little Read in Philosophy, but knows, that the Essence of Things is
indivisible; that, by separating one essential Part from the other, you destroy
the nature of the whole; that in giving only an essential part of a thing, you
give nothing, in regard of that, whose essential part it was; consequently he
that gives but part of the Sacrament, gives no Sacrament at all: Therefore
these Gentlemen, who knew better Things, in ordering the Bread alone to be
given to those, who could not drink Wine, cannot, in Reason, be supposed to
believe, that the Cup was Essential to the Communion; else they would have
absolutely refused the Sacrament to those, who could not receive it in both
kinds; since to give it in one kind, were to give nothing at all, but rather to
profane, and abuse that, which is most Sacred and August in the Christian
Religion; whereas the natural disability of those, who cannot drink Wine, might
reasonably excuse them from taking either kind. And thus I have endeavored, as
briefly as I could, to prove from the practice and discipline of the Church in
all Ages; from public, as well as private Communion; from Liturgies, Fathers
and Historians; and even from the consent of our Adversaries, manifestly
implied in their Discipline, and Practice; that neither the Primitive
Christians, nor the Catholic Church, in any Age; nor yet any Orthodox Believer
did ever think, that to take the Sacrament in both kinds, was essential to the
Communion. And if so, then it is plain and evident, that the Church has Power
to, and may lawfully, restrain the Faithful from the Cup, and confine them to
One kind only. Let us now see what Dr. Tillotson objects to all this.

And here I shall not abuse the Reader's Patience, by repeating the same thing
over again; for, since all that can, with any color of Reason, be objected, is
contained in one short Paragraph (though the things there insisted on are often
repeated in several of his Sermons, but with no material Addition) I will only
transcribe it, and offer my Exceptions to it.

And then (says he) the Communion, in One kind, is plainly contrary to our
Saviors Institution in both kinds; as they themselves acknowledge. And
therefore the Council of Constance being sensible of this, was forced to decree
it with an express non Obstante to the Institution of Christ, and the Practice
of the Apostles, and the Primitive Church. And their Doctrine of Concomitancy
(as if the Blood were in the Flesh, and together with it) will not help the
matter; because, in the Sacrament, Christ's, Body is represented as broken, and
pierced, and exhausted, and drained of his Blood; and his Blood is represented
as shed and poured out; so that one kind can by no means contain and exhibit
both.

Three things the Doctor here insists upon. 1. That We our selves acknowledge
the the Communion in one kind to be contrary to our Savior's Institution. 2.
That the Council of Constance was forced to decree it with a non obstante to
the Institution of Christ. 3. That the Doctrine of Concomitancy will not help
the matter; because, in the Sacrament, Christ's Body is represented as broken,
and exhausted, and drained of His Blood.

I may say, of these three Propositions; the first is neither True, nor to the
purpose. The second is something to the Purpose, but not True. The third is
like the first, neither True, nor to the Purpose. I begin with the first:

We our selves acknowledge, that the Communion in one Kind is contrary to our
Savior's Institution. For my own part, I have read, at least, some of the best
R. Catholic Casuists and Divines, upon this Subject; and have conversed with
many more. Yet I declare, I neither read, nor heard any of them say, that to
give the Communion in one kind, was contrary to our Savior's Institution; nay,
I think, all R. Catholics do believe, that the Administration of the Communion,
whether in one, or both kinds, is quite an other thing from the Institution of
it. We say, indeed, that when Christ instituted the Sacrifice of his Body and
Blood, He consecrated not in One, but in both Kinds; because He designed to
leave these Symbols to his Church, as a perpetual and everlasting Memorial of
His Body broken; and Blood shed upon the Cross, which is expressed by the
Separation of one Symbol from the other; and this, I hope, we are careful to do,
as often as we offer that Sacrifice: But to eat or partake of the Sacrifice it
self, in one, or both kinds, is, sure, no part of the Institution, but belongs
to the Modus, or manner of administering it.

Christ instituted the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and Matrimony; yet
we do not find, that ever he gave, or administered any of these Sacraments to
any Body; which, surely, he would not have omitted, were it any part of their
Institution: It Is then plain, that to give the Communion in One, or both kinds,
is neither for, nor against our Savior's Institution, but respects merely
Administration and Use. But let us suppose with the Doctor, that to administer
the Communion in One kind, is contrary (I do not say to Christ's Institution,
for that it cannot be, but) to the manner in which our Savior gave it; yet
still I do not see how this can help the matter: For the Question is not
whether Christ gave it in both kinds, but whether we ought necessarily to give
it in both kinds; because he did so? This the Doctor affirms, and we deny. But
how does He prove it? Why, because Christ gave it in both kinds. This is
begging the Qustion: Well, because Christ gave it in both kinds, we ought to do
so too: This is to say, (if it be to purpose) that we are bound to do all those
things, that Christ did, at the institution and administration of the
Communion. If so; then we must fall to wash the Disciples Feet, to eat Suppers
before the Sacrament, to administer the Communion at Night; and (which is more
strange) we must command all those to whom we give the Communion, to do the
same thing we do, that is, to consecrate and administer the Sacrament, and
consequently make them all Priests; all these things, I say, we are bound to
do: For Christ did all, and every particular here mentioned to all those, to
whom he gave the Communion in both kinds. But since neither He, nor any Man in
his Wits will say, that we are bound to do all these Things; because the
Discipline and Practice of the Church, and the Living Members of it have
determined, that all those particulars are now neither Necessary, nor
Expedient, I hope he will give us leave to conclude, that we are not bound, to
give the Communion in both kinds neither.

Touching the second Proposition, The Council of Constance was forced to decree
it with a Non obstante to the Institution of Christ.

The Doctor is not the only Man, who affirms this; for I find it in the Works
of one, or two more of his Brethren, upon this Subject. But Good God! What may
not Men undertake, who have the Confidence to give out such Calumnies for
Truth? It Is a vulgar Observation, but a True one, that when Mountebanks pretend
most to infallible Cures, they are then furthest from them; just so it is with
these Gentlemen (for there are Mountebanks in Religion, as well as in Physic)
when they pretend most to Evidence and Demonstration, in matters of Religion,
then they have the least Color, or reasonable Pretense to it. But the best way
to refute this Calumny, is to cite the very Words of the Council; and then let
the Reader judge what Faith is to be given to Men, who vend such Impostures for
Truth.

In the In nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Patris and Filii and
Spiritus sancti, Amen -- Licet Christus post Caenam instituerit and suis
discipulis administraverit, sub utraque Specie Panis and Vini, hoc venerabile
Sacramentum; tamen hoc non obstante, Sacrorum Canorum Authoritas, laudabilis
and aprobata Ecclesiae consuetudo servavit and servat, quod hujusmodi
Sacramentum non debet confici post Caenam, neque a f^lelibus recipi non
jejunis, nisi in casu Infirmitatis aut alterius necessitatis, a jure vel ab
Ecclesia, concesso vel admisso.
Name of the Holy and undivided Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen --
Though Christ has instituted this venerable Sacrament after Supper, and has
administered it to his Disciples under both Kinds of Bread and Wine, tamen hoc
non obstante, yet this notwithstanding, the Authority of the sacred Canons, the
Laudable and Approved Custom of the Church, has held, and does hold, that this
Sacrament ought not to be made after Supper, nor received by the Faithful not
fasting; except in case of Infirmity, or some other Necessity, approved and
allowed by Law, or by the Church.

This is all, in this Decree, that has any Relation to the Dr's. Non obstante.
And now, I appeal to the most partial of our Adversaries, whether he had the
least Color, or Pretense to what he here suggests? There is, indeed, a Non
obstante to the making of this Sacrament after Supper, and giving it to those,
who were not fasting, and no more: And if this be a sin, sure, he is not
qualified to throw the first Stone at us for it: For he, and his Brethren, are
confessedly involved in the same Crime; seeing they do not make the Sacrament
after Supper, nor give it (to the best of their knowledge) to any, but such as
are fasting.

As to the third Proposition: The Doctrine of Concomitancy will not help the
matter; because in the Sacrament, Christ's Body is represented as broken, and
exhausted, and drained of his Blood. Hence the Doctor infers, that the Sacred
Bread, which represents his Body under these circumstances, cannot be said to
contain, or exhibit his Blood. But methinks he should have proved his
Postulatum, before he would persuade us of the Truth of this Inference: For, I
suppose, he was too well acquainted with us, to think we should believe it,
upon his Word. That our blessed Lord shed a great deal of His Precious Blood,
as much as was sufficient for the Redemption of Mankind, we readily grant; but
that His Body was exhausted, and drained of His Blood, so as to have none at
all left in it, we can by no means assent to. If Christ's Body had been drained
of His Blood, He would have died of Weakness, and Loss of Blood; but the
Centurion, who, it seems, was a better Naturalist than the Doctor, thought
quite otherwise: For he concluded from the Force and Vigor, wherewith our
Blessed Lord gave up the Ghost, that he was the Son of God; Vere Filius Dei
erat iste. Nor will it avail the Doctor, that, when the Soldier pierced his
side with a Spear, there came out Blood and Water: For Christ being then dead,
and the Blood, as Anatomists, and Experience teach us, being, by the last
motion of the Heart, conveyed from the Arteries into the Veins, where it stands
still, when there is no more Circulation; it is impossible to conceive, how all
the Blood in his Body should come out of his Side, especially in the Posture he
then lay in: So that that, which the Doctor would have us take for granted, has
no Degree of Truth in it. Well, but suppose we should grant, that Christ's Body
was exhausted, and drained of his Blood; will this destroy the Doctrine of
Concomitancy? by no means: For since we believe, that under the Species of
Bread, is really, or (as his own Cathechism says) verily and indeed, contained
the Body of Christ, which (being now a human living Body) must necessarily have
Blood in it; though we should suppose it had none when it was ^ead; we have all
the Reason in the World to believe, that when we take the Lord's Body, we do,
at the same time, by Concomitancy, that is, together with it, take the Blood
which it contains. So that, though it were true, that the Body of Christ was
exhausted, and drained of his Blood, in his Passion; yet it would not at all
prejudice our Doctrine of Concomitancy, nor make any thing for the Doctor's
Purpose.

But, you will say: If the Communion, in One Kind, be sufficient; If it
contains the Body and Blood of Christ; why did the Christians heretofore
sometimes receive it in both kinds? I answer, because the Representation of the
Death of our Lord is more fully expressed in both kinds, than in One. But then
we must consider, that this Representation is not of that Importance, as to
balance all the weighty Considerations, that moved the Church to command the
use only of One kind. We have the Death of our Lord sufficiently represented to
us, when we take the Communion in One kind; because we believe, and are put in
mind, that it is the Flesh and Blood of our Lord, which we receive in
Remembrance of his Death and Passion; and we have this Representation fully
expressed in the Sacrifice of the Mass, where his Body and Blood are shown
Mystically separated under different Forms; and that, almost, as often as we
receive the Communion. So that there is nothing wanting in our Communion to
give us a lively Representation of the Death and Passion of our Blessed Lord;
and if there were, it is not of that moment, as to make amends for the Horrid
Prophanations and Abuses, which must inevitably attend the Communion in both
kinds, in a degenerate Age, in which all Piety and Godliness are almost
extinguished; and whereof we have sad Instances in our Adversaries Practice, it
being frequently boasted by many of their Libertins, that after hard drinking
over Night, they come in the Morning to receive the Communion, and drink off
whole Communion-Cups of consecrated Wine, to quench their brutish Thirst.
Besides, the Manner of administering the Sacrament of Baptism at present, which
our Adversaries do also follow and practice; though very different from that of
the primitive Church, does sufficiently justify our Conduct in this Particular.

It Is certain, that the Regeneration of the Faithful is more lively expressed,
and represented by Immersion, or plunging into the Water, as the Primitive
Church did always Baptize, than by Infusion or Aspersion as we now do: For the
Faithful, being plunged into the Water of Baptism, Romans 6.^.
is (as St. Paul says) buried with Christ; and in rising out of it, he seems
to rise out of the Tomb with his Savior; and therefore fully represents that
Mystery by which he was regenerated; whereas a simple Infusion or Aspersion,
such as we use, does scarce shadow it. Moreover, when the Faithful is immersed
or dipped into the Water, or Four, where all the Parts of the Body are washed,
this Lotion does more fully express the cleansing of the Soul from all its
sins, than if one part only had been washed: Yet no body doubts, but that the
Baptism conferred by Infusion, or sprinkling of Water upon one Part only of the
Body, is sufficient to all the Intents and Purposes of the Sacrament; because
the main thing is there represented, namely, the washing of the Soul. So that
it is enough to express the Mystery as to the Substance, and the Effect, and
the Grace that is annexed to it; and not scrupulously to inquire after every
minute-Circumstance of it, especially when there are weighty Reasons and
Motives, to diswade us from it.

In like manner, though we do not so fully represent the Death of our Lord, when
we take the Communion in One kind, as we should by taking it in Both; yet we
are persuaded, that there is nothing ( Essential to the Sacrament) wanting to
it; because we do both express and receive the Substance, the Effect, and the
Grace of the Sacrament; that is, the Body and Blood of Christ, the spiritual
Food of our Souls, and that strict Union with Christ, which (as he himself
says) makes us dwell in Him, and Him in us. And if the Church did forbid the
Laity the Use of the Sacred Cup, 'twas not with an Intent to rob them of any
thing, that might tend to increase their Devotion, as our Adversaries do most
injustly suggest; but in Respect to the Precious Blood of Christ, for which,
surely, we cannot have too much Veneration. She saw, that, as the Piety and
Devotion of the people diminished, so their Negligence to receive the sacred
Cup, in such a manner as may secure it from spilling, abounded. She found by
Experience, that many Infirm and Old, and even Folks in perfect Health, what
with coughing, or other Convulsions, as they received the Sacred Cup, gave up
their Stomachs into the Chalice, or shed the Precious Blood, to the great
Horror of the Spectators, and their own greater Confusion; that others, what
with trembling and quaking, did very often, notwithstanding all their care,
spill some Drops of the Sacred Blood; in fine, that in Cities, where some
thousands use to communicate at a time, Crowds of People pressing upon the
Priest, have sometimes spilt the Sacred Chalice in his Hands; and (which I
cannot mention without Horror) Trod upon that Precious Blood, by which they
were Redeemed. These and the like Considerations moved the Church, or rather
the People (for the Church did only confirm the Custom, which was introduced
for many Years before) to abstain from the Sacred Cup; and to content
themselves with the Body and Blood of Christ, under the Form of Bread, which is
easily received with due Respect, and without Danger; and to which nothing is
wanting, only a more full Representation of the Mystery, which yet is supplied
by other means, and which (in the Opinion of any Reasonable Man) is not
sufficient to atone for the aforesaid Prophanations.

CHAP. VI. Of Prayers in an Unknown Tongue.
I May Reasonably presume it will not be expected, I should speak much to this
Head; for the Scandal, which our Adversaries would here fasten upon us, is so
Gross and Palpable, that it were to abuse the Reader's Patience to insist long
upon our Vindication. They say, we pray in an Unknown Tongue; and we say, and
are ready to prove, that we pray in the Tongue the best known in Europe. And we
farther say, that therefore we pray in it; because it is so. And I am sure,
They Themselves (what ever they may say in the Heat of Disputes) are, upon all
other Occasions, ready to acknowledge this Truth. However, because we are
commanded by St. Peter to be ready always to give an Answer to every Man, 1
Pet. 3.15.
that asks us a Reason of the hope that is in us; I shall endeavor to offer
some of the Reasons, why we pray in that Tongue which they call Unknown; and
leave the Reader to judge, whether our Adversaries have all the Reason, they
pretend, to cry so loud.

1. We make use of the Latin Tongue in our Liturgy, because we would not Recede
from the Example and Practice of our Ancestors, who, from the first planting of
Christianity to this Day, whether in Rome, or in any other Part of the Western
Church, used no other Language in the Liturgy, than Latin. And thus to follow
the Model, our Holy and Pious Forefathers left us, the Scripture not only
warrants, but commands us to do. Remember the Days of Old; Deuteronomy. 32.7.
consider the Years of many Generations; Ask thy Father, and he will show thee;
thy Elders, and they will tell thee. It Is certain, and even acknowledged by our
Aversaries, that when the Christian Religion was first Preached in the West,
every Country had then, as well as now, its own peculiar Language different
from the Latin; which (though it was cultivated by Men of Letters and Business,
in all Countries to which the Romans extended their Conquest, yet) the common
people, or Natives, were generally Ignorant of: And it is no less Evident, that
the Apostles and Apostolical Men, who preached, and Propagated the Christian
Religion in these Countries, were endued with a Power of working Miracles in
Confirmation of the Truth of it; and by their readiness to lay down their
Lives, and to shed their Blood for it, gave sufficient Testimony of their Zeal
and Charity for the common People, as well as for the great Ones; yet all the
Records of Antiquity, all the Ancient and Modern Liturgies, together with the
Universal Tradition of the Western Church, and even the Consent of our
Adversaries; all these, I say, bear witness, that neither the Apostles, nor the
Apostolical Men, who first planted the Christian Faith in these Parts, nor any
succeeding Generation of Catholics, did ever use in the public Liturgy of the
Church, any other Language than the Latin; which, it is confessed, the common
People, Generally Speaking of all Countries (except Italy) are, and have always
been Ignorant of. And therefore, I think we may very safely tred in the steps
of these our Holy Ancestors, and be content with the Liturgy and Language, they
left us; at least, if we must be condemned for so doing, we have the comfort to
be condemned in Company with these Great and Holy Men, to whose Doctrine and
Practice, God Himself was pleased to put His Seal.

2. We must make use of this Language, because we conceive it very necessary to
have an Uniformity, as much as is possible, both in Faith and Practice, that we
may with one Heart, and one Tongue, Praise the Lord, and Magnify His holy Name.

The Catholic Church is One in Communion, as well as in Faith. Now, how much
one common Tongue, in which the public Service of the Church is performed,
contributes to foment this Union, the miserable Distractions and Divisions of
our modern Reformers, who have as many different Religions, as they have
different Tongues, do but too manifestly Evince. All the Members of the
Catholic Religion ought to have Communion, and Fellowship one with another:
They should all be united in one common Faith, and one uniform Worship of one
God; they ought all to be qualified for the Participation of the same
Sacrament, and to assist together at the same Public Divine Service wherever
they meet; else, how can the Unity of their Faith and Communion subsist? Now,
it is hard, to conceive, how all this can be performed, if we have our Liturgy,
in as many different Tongues, as there are Countries in the Catholic Church: For
how can I have fellowship with a Man whose Language I do not understand? How
can I join in Prayer, or in God's public Worship with any Society of People,
when I cannot discern by any thing they do or say, whether they are Catholics,
or Heretics? Or how shall I receive the Sacrament in the Society of those, who,
for any thing I can see or understand, may be Jews, or Blasphemers of my Holy
Religion? So that if we take away that Common Band, that Common Language, that
unites, and Cements all the Members of Christ's mystical Body, the whole Frame
of the Catholic Church will dissolve and falls to Pieces; and we shall have as
many different Churches, as we have Tongues.

3. We do not see what great loss the Common People suffer by not having the
Liturgy in vulgar Tongues; and if we had, we are sure the good, that might
acrew to them by having it so, is not so valuable as to be purchased at the
Expense of the common Union, and Peace of the whole Catholic Church, which, as
experience shows, is necessarily consequent upon such an Indulgence. The most
Part of the common People are taught, at least, to read in their own Language;
and if we except some of the Commonality of Ireland, and the Highlands of
Scotland, who are industriously barred all sort of Education; there is not one
in a hundred, even of the meanest of the Common sort, who want this Help. And
then they have the whole Mass, the Epistles, and Gospels, and Collects of all
the Sundays in the Year, together with all the Psalms in vulgar Languages, in
their Prayer-books; which they may read to themselves in their own Tongue,
whilst the Priest reads them, in Latin; and which no doubt, contributes more to
their Edification, than if the Priest had spoke in their own Tongue;
considering, that in Catholic Countries, where some Thousands are assembled, it
is not possible for the hundredth part of the Audience to hear what is said, in
what ever Language he speaks. Add, that the greatest part of the Mass is
pronounced so low, that scarce any, that is present, hears what is said; the
Rubric so commanding, that the Priest may, in the Silence of Recollection and
Meditation, be the better disposed to perform the Office in that August and
Adorable Mystery, with the Gravity and Decency that becomes it. Besides, on all
Sundays, and great Festivals throughout the Year, there are, in Catholic
Countries, public Sermons and Exhortations performed in Vulgar Language; yea,
and public Prayers read in the Pulpit, either before or after the Sermon, in
which the people are instructed in their Duty to God and their Neighbors; and
excited to do Works of Charity, to forgive their Enemies, and to repent of
their Sins; to pray for the King and his Magistrates, and for one onother: In a
word, in which all the Duties and Obligations of a Christian are duly
inculcated; and all this, I am sure, they are, at least, in the Countries where
I have been, as careful to perform, as they are to say the Mass. So that
(notwithstanding what Protestants say) all the Difference between them and us,
in this particular, is, that we do in vulgar Language very near all, that they
do; and, over and above, give the people an Opportunity of adoring Jesus
Christ, and of quickening their Memory by the Representation of his Death and
Passion, which is performed in the Latin Mass.

Lastly, (If there were no other Reasons) the Difficulty of translating the
Liturgy into vulgar Languages, and preserving it, in its purity, is enough to
diswade us from the Undertaking. The uniformity of our Liturgy is the best
standing Monument we have of the Faith and Practice of our Ancestors: It Is it
that shows us, how they used to administer the Sacraments, and what sort of
Ceremonies they judged most proper to excite, and stir up Devotion; and to
perform God's Service with that Gravity and Decency suitable to His Holy
Religion. Now, if this Liturgy were translated into all the Vulgar Languages,
which Catholics use, and which is so much subject to Alteration and Corruption,
even to that degree, that what is spoken in one Age, is scarce understood in an
other; at least, is so nauseous and grateing, that none but the meaner sort of
People will hear it without disgust; What endless Labor would it prove to be
thus every Age modeling, and reforming, and changing our Liturgies? What
Confusion and Disorders would the Unskilfulness, or the Fancy of Translators
occasion? Nay, what Tumults and Uproars would such frequent Alterations create
both in Church and State; whilst some (to use King Henry VIII. his Phrase)
stood up for their Old Mumpsimus, and others for their New Sumpsimus, is not
easily Imagined. And, whatever our Adversaries may think on it, Experience shows
us, that this is no Imaginary, but a Real and, almost, insuperable Difficulty.
For instance:

The Calvinist^ in France, made use of Marot's Translation of the Psalms, and
Sung them in their Temples, (as the French call them) for a considerable Time;
but some of their Learned Ministers, finding that this Translation was not
agreeable to the Original, nor even to decency and good behavior; but, on the
contrary, was full of ridiculous, lewd, and profane expressions, resolved to
give the People a better, and more perfect Translation. Now what confusions and
divisions this last created among the Brethren, whoever is curious to know, may
consult the Writers of those Times. Again, The Church of England, which,
without doubt, is the best (because the least Reformed) of the Protestant
Party, Translated the Scripture, Composed a new Ordinal, and a set Form of
Prayer in Vulgar Language, in Edward the Sixth's Time; but these being found in
Queen Elizabeth and King James's Days, (if we believe their own Writers)
deficient in many things, and in others not agreeable to the then Protestant
Religion, which was not, as yet, perfectly licked into Shape and Form, other
new Translations are undertaken; but how much confusion and trouble these also
occasioned, the said Writers can best inform us. Farther, The Church of England
is the Richest, and (if we may judge by their Works) the most Charitable of all
the Reformation; yet there passed a hundred Years of the Reign of Protestanism
before the Welsh were provided of a Liturgy in their own Language; though most of
the common People of that Country do not understand any other Tongue. And to
this day, they have not furnished the Irish with a Liturgy in their own
Language, though many thousands in the North of Ireland, and in the High-lands of
Scotland, go to Church, which yet understand nothing but the Irish Tongue. So
that it is no such easy matter to furnish even the Subjects of one Crown with
Liturgies in their own Language. Now, if it be so difficult to supply a few
People with Liturgies in their own Tongue, and so hard to contain them in their
Duty, when the said Liturgies must be altered; Who can imagine all the
Difficulties that would attend the attempt, should the Catholic Church propose
to translate her Liturgy into all the several Languages used in Europe? Or who
can conceive, how it were possible for her to keep an Uniformity in Practice
and Ceremony, or to contain the People in their Duty, if she must change her
Liturgy every hundred Years or less, and speak a new Language?

The Gentry, and Better sort of People cannot abide to have their Ears grated
with Obsolete, Antic Expressions; and the common People, who think the
Substance changed with the Words, will not part with their old Mumpsimus. And
then, what fine work would this make! Marot, in one of his Psalms, gives us
this Ridiculous Phrase; I will cast my Slipper at him. The common People, who
minded only the Rhyme and Gingle of the Words, no sooner understood, that this
Phrase was altered, though indeed for the better; when they were so incensed upon
the matter, that the Ministers were like to have (not slippers but) sticks, and
stones, and such Arms, as a popular Fury administered, cast at them. And what,
do you think, should happen in in the Church of Rome, where there are so many
different Languages; so many different Humors, so hard to be satisfied; so
many uncouth, unpolished people, so difficult to be governed; should she
undertake to give them the Liturgy in their own Tongues, and continue, changing
and altering the same, as often as the Languages change. Truly for my part, as
I am persuaded, that the Design is as vain, as it is needless; so I may
reasonably presume, the Holy Catholic Church will never attempt it. And thus I
have endeavored to touch upon some of the Reasons, that moved the Church in
all Ages, to hold to one Universal Language, which is always the same, not
subject to Alteration or Corruption, no more than the Faith and Religion which
it teaches; nor less Pure and Perfect now, than it was seventeen hundred Years
since. And, surely, such a Language, so lofty, in its Expressions; so beautiful
and Majesty, in its Numbers; so Energic and Expressive, in its Sense; and, as
I may say, so immortal and indefectible, in its Duration; is the fittest to
have the public, and solemn Service of the Immortal, and Eternal God performed
in it. And in this, methinks, we do but what the Light of Nature teaches all
Nations; and what our Adversaries could not but see, would they but divest
Themselves of their Prejudices.

It Is well known, the Jews lost their Mother Tongue in the Capativity of
Babylon; yet they never read the Law of Moses, or the Psalms, in their public
Prayers, from that Time to This, in any other Language than the Hebrew; though
(if we except their Rabbis) very few, if any, of that Nation understand any
thing of it.

The Grecians have long since corrupted their Language, as all the World knows;
and the common People among them know no more of the Genuine Greek, than ours
do of the Latin; yet the Greek Church never changed a Syllable in their
Liturgy; but do still say their Mass in the same Pure Greek, which was used
when they first embraced the Christian Faith. All other Sects of Christians,
See Father Symon's Critical History of the Old and New Testament.
in the Earstern Churches, have likewise Corrupted their Languages; yet, they
continue to Celebrate Divine Service in the Languages they first used; though the
Communion People do not understand them. And (if I may be allowed to borrow an
instance from Infidels) the Turks still retain the Arabic Language in their
Alcaron; nor did they ever permit it to be read in any other Tongue, in their
public Prayers; though it is confessed their common People understand it not. But
of this enough. Let us now see what the Doctor objects to this Point.

And here I do not intend to pursue him in all the Repetitions, He makes of the
same thing, without any material Addition; for then I should transcribe
several, almost, entire Sermons; but shall for the Reader's ease, and my own,
bring all his Real, or Apparent Difficulties within the compass of these few
Heads.

First, he says, That the celebrating of Divine Service in an unknown Tongue
is contrary to the Practice of the Primitive Church; and the Great Design, and
End of Religious Worship; which (being a Reasonable Service) ought to be
Directed by our Understanding, and accompanied with our Hearts and Affections.

Secondly, That to pray in an unknown Tongue is contrary to St. Paul's
Doctrine, who has no less than a whole Chapter wherein he confutes and condemns
this Practice.

Thirdly, Vol. 1. edit. post. obit. page 126, 161.
That we lock up the Scriptures in an unknown Tongue, and forbid the People the
use of them; which is contrary to Christ's own Design, who exhorts the Jews to
search the Scriptures; to St. Luke, who commends the Bereans for examining the
Scriptures, and trying the Apostles Doctrine by that Test; and to the ancient
Fathers, who do most earnestly recommend to the People the Reading and Study of
the Scriptures.

Fourthly, That the Scripture being, Vol. 1. edit post obit page 264.
by our own Confession, a principal Part of the Rule of Faith, it cannot be
imagined, how People should square, or measure their Faith by this Ride, unless
they are allowed to read and understand it.

Lastly, Vol. 2. edit post obit page 369.
That we therefore look up the Scriptures in an unknown Tongue; because it is
certain, that if the People were once brought to understand the Scriptures,
they would soon quit our Religion, and go over to them. This is the Sum of what
he says upon this Subject, to which I shall return my Exceptions as plainly,
and briefly as I can.

First, he says, That the celebrating of Divine Service in an unknown Tongue
is contrary to the Practice of the Primitive Church. I answer, if he means, by
unknown Tongue, such a Tongue as no body understands; it is very True, but not
to the purpose: For the Tongue, in which we celebrate divine Service, is not
such, but, on the contrary, the Tongue in the World, I believe, the best known.
But if he means by it, a Tongue unknown to most of the common people, his
Assertion has no Degree of Truth in it: For, first, he himself acknowledges,
and so does all Mankind, that the Primitive Church, and all succeeding
Generations (I mean in the Latin Church) till the Reformation appeared, did
celebrate divine Service in the same Latin Tongue we now use. And secondly,
even Malice it self cannot deny but that, generally speaking, all the common
people, (except the Italians) were always Ignorant of the Latin Tongue. It Is
then manifest, our Conduct in this particular is altogether conformable to the
Practice of the primitive Church; and then the Doctor is out in his first
Attempt. This he could not but see, and therefore in an other place he
endeavors to Insinuate (though he durst not speak it out) that the common people
spoke all Latin. Vol. 3. page 469.
But this only shows what the Wit of Man is capable of, when he must, and will
maintain a thing. What, the common people of Spain, France, Germany, Sweden,
Denmark, Norway, England, Ireland, Scotland, etc. spoke all Latin! It Is indeed
confessed, all these People were in Communion with the Church of Rome; all
received their Faith and Liturgy from her; all celebrated divine Service in the
same Tongue, and after the same manner with her; but that they all spoke and
understood the Roman, or Latin Tongue, is, surely, so ridiculously absurd, that
I rather believe, I mistook his meaning, than that a Man of his Parts should be
guilty of so great a Mistake.

As to what he says, that Religious Worship (being a reasonable Service) ought
to be directed by our Understandings, and accompanied with our Hearts and
Affections, I readily agree with him: And for that Reason, I hope, we are as
careful to teach the common People their prayers in their own Tongue, and to
exhort them to say 'em in the same Tongue, as our Neighbors: Yet this
notwithstanding, it did not seem good to the Holy Spirit of God, who guides his
Church into all Truth, and consequently into all good Practices, to alter that
Tongue, which venerable Antiquity, and a Prescription of now almost seventeen
hundred Years, have consecrated to His divine Worship. The Reasons whereof I
have partly touched upon before.

Touching the Second, viz. That to pray in an unknown Tongue is contrary to St.
Pau^'s Doctrine, who has no less than a whole Chapter wherein he confutes and
condemns this Practice.

Answ. The Chapter the Doctor here refers to, is the 14th of the first to the
Corinthians, which, had it been faithfully translated either from their own
Greek, or our Latin; would leave no Room for this Objection. The Question is,
whether St. Paul condemns public prayers in a Tongue, which all the common
people do not understand? This the Doctor affirms, and vouches the Authority of
the English Translation in the aforesaid Chapter, where St. Paul, as he says,
condemns Prayers in an unknown Tongue. We say, first, St. Paul has no such
thing as unknown Tongue; but the word, Unknown, is an Addition of their own.
Secondly, St. Paul does not condemn speaking or praying with Tongues, which is
the only thing there mentioned. And both these we are able to make appear; the
first, from their own Translation, in which (though they give it to us in their
Sermons, and Disputes for current Scripture, yet) they put the word, Unknown,
in small Italic Characters, to distinguish it from what is truly Scripture. The
Second, from St. Paul's own Words, in the same place; where he says, I would
that ye all spoke with Tongues, Ver. 5. But sure he would not condemn that in
them which he would have them do.

But to take away all doubt, I shall transcribe those words of St. Paul from
the Original, on which the Doctor lays all the Stress, and examine the whole
Scope and Design of this Chapter; and then let even Malice it self judge,
whether he has any Grounds for this Objection. St. Paul's words are thus;
(...), Ver. 2.
he that speaks with a Tongue. This the English Translation renders, he that
speaks in an unknown Tongue. The Latin Vulgat, agreeable to the Greek; qui
enim Lingua loquitur, non hominibus sed Deo loquitur. Again: Ver. 13.
(...), wherefore he that speaks with a Tongue. The English Version says,
wherefore he that speaks in an unknown Tongue. Farther; (...), Ver. 14.
for if I pray with a Tongue, in the English Version it is; for if I pray in an
unknown Tongue. And thus it is rendered four or five Times more, as often as St.
Paul seems to speak against this Practice (though it is evident from the Tenure of
the whole Chapter he does not speak against it, but prefers prophesying to it)
but where he seems to favor it; they alter their Style, leave out the word
Unknown, and render St. Paul's words as I do; though St. Paul uses the self same
Terms in both places. For instance, (...). This they render, I would that ye
all spoke with Tongues. I wonder they did not render it thus; I would that ye
all spoke with unknown Tongues! Ay, but that will take away all the Force of
the Objection! Again; (...). This they render. I thank my God I speak with
Tongues more than you all. In these two Verses where praying or speaking with
Tongues is commended, the same Word is interpreted, with Tongues, which in the
former Verses must signify unknown Tongue. And thus St. Paul is made to speak
what these Gentlemen please. When the Word Unknown seems to make for them, it
must be inserted; but when it is against them, it must be left out. Well, but
what are these Tongues whereof St. Paul here speaks? And why does he hold forth
to the Corinthians so long upon upon this Argument.

I Answer. 1. St. Paul here speaks of those Extraordinary and Surprising
Tongues wherewith the first Believers were inspired, by the Holy Ghost, which
was Poured down upon them, as appears from several places in the Acts of the
Apostles, where it is said; The Holy Ghost fell upon them -- and they spoke with
Tongues. Secondly, St. Paul holds forth to the Corinthians so long upon this
Argument, in order to give some cautions concerning these Tongues. He know,
that such Extraordinary Tongues were intended rather as a Sign to the
Unbelievers, than for the Instruction of the Faithful. He foresaw, the said
Tongues would occasion a great deal of Confusion and Disorder among the
Christians, if all those, who were inspired with them, were allowed to rise up,
and speak all at once; and that the Progress of the Gospel would be very much
retarded, if such Proceedings were not moderated. Therefore he instructs the
Corinthians in what they were to do upon this Occasion: He tells them, that
though he would have them all speaks with Tongues; yet that he had rather they
should Prophecy; and upon this Argument he takes up more than half the
Chapter, to enforce the Necessity of Prophesying more than of Speaking with
Tongues. But that if they would speak with Tongues, he desires it should be
done by two, or at most by three, and that by course. And now let even the most
partial of our Adversaries judge, whether there be any thing in all this, which
does, in the least, insinuate, that St. Paul condemns praying, or speaking with
Tongues; nay, does not he positively say; that he would have them all speak
with Tongues; Ver. 5.
or whether these Surprising Tongues, which were the Effects of the Impulse of
the Holy Ghost, and which many hundred^ Years since have ceased, are any way
applicable to our present Latin, than which no Tongue on Earth is better or
more universally known?

As to the third, viz. That we lock up the Scriptures in an unkown Tongue, and
forbid the Common People the Use of them, which is contrary to Christ's own
Design, who exhorts the Jews to search the Scriptures, etc.

Answ. This Proposition, as to the first Part, is notoriously false, and
unworthy the Character, and Reputation Dr. Tillason was otherwise deservedly
possessed of: For He might as well have said, that it is Midnight when the Sun
shines over our Heads, as tell us we lock up the Scriptures in an unknown
Tongue; when it is evident in Fact, that we have them in all the vulgar
Languages spoken in those parts of the World, published and set forth in all
Catholic Countries, by, and for the Use and Benefit of Roman Catholics. Sure a
Man that was so Curious, and Inquisitive how Affairs went both at Home and
Abroad, could not, at least, be Ignorant, that the Roman Catholics in England
have the Striptures in their own Tongue: Did he never hear of the Doway Bible,
or the Rheim's Testament? Are not these Books in their Hands, and read, and
used with all the Freedom and Liberty imaginable? As for the French Bible;
whoever desires it, may find enough, done not only by Protestants, but by
Catholic Divines also; at the French Stationer's Shops in London, without being
a^ the Trouble of going any farther for it. Touching, Spain, Germany, Italy,
and other Catholic Countries; the Enquiry is not very difficult, whether they
have the Scriptures in vulgar Languages: For we may easily meet with Men of
Credit and Probility out of these Countries, who can assure us, they have the
Scriptures in their Native Tongues. So that it is hard to imagine, what should
put him upon asserting a thing so barefaced, and destitute of the least color
of Truth; and so peremptorily affirming what the Evidence of our Eyes and Ears,
and even daily Experience, can so easily contradict.

I know, He, and Others of his Mind, do vouch the Decree of the Council of
Trent concerning Prohibited Books, for what they say; and found all the Railing
Accusations they bring against the R. Catholics thereupon: Which is as much as
to say, that, though we have the Bible in all Vulgar Languages, and see, and read
it in the same Languages; yet we must believe it is locked up in an unknown
Tongue, which we do not understand; because these Gentlemen will have it, that
the Council of Trent has so decreed. But, besides that it is a hard Case to
which these Gentlemen would reduce us, viz. that we must not believe what we
see, feel, hear, and understand; contrary to their own Ordinary Rule; the
Council of Trent, does not in the least favor their Pretension. I shall
subjoin the very Words of that Council, and leave it to speak for it self.
Since Experience shows, that, Cum experimento manifestumsit si Sacra Biblia
vulgari lingua passim sine discrimne permittantur, plus inde, ob Hominum
temeritatem, detrimenti quam utilitatis oriri; hac in part, Judicio Episcopi
aut Inquisitoris stetur: ut cum consilio Patochi vel Confessarij Bibliorum a
Catholicis authoribus verlorum lectionem in vulgari lingua eis concedere
possint, quos intellexerint ex hujusmodi lectione non damnum, sed fidei atque
pietatis augmentum capere posse: quam facultatem in scriptis habeant. De lib.
proh. Reg. 4.
if the Sacred Bible were permitted Indifferently, and without Distinction, in
vulgar Language; such a Liberty (by reason of Men's Rashness) would occasion
more hurt than good; Be it left to the Bishop's, or Inquisitor's Judgment; by,
and with the Advice of the Parish priest, or Confessor to give leave to read
the Versions of Catholic Authors in vulgar Language, to such, as may, in their
Opinion, receive not a Loss, but an Increase of Faith and Piety thereby: Which
Leave they are to have in Writing. De lib. prob. Reg. 4.

Hence I think it is plain, the Council is so far from locking up the Scripture
in an unknown Tongue, that it gives free Leave to every one, whom the Bishop,
or Inquisitor, with the Advice of the Parish priest, or Confessor, shall judge
meet to read it in vulgar Language. And since there is nothing so proper, nor
so powerful to increase Faith and Piety, in a Meek and Humble Soul, as the
Sacred Scripture; it is plain, that no sincere Christian is barred, by this
Decree, from the use of it in vulgar Language. And if any such should happen to
be refused leave to read it, which we have no Reason to suppose; it is contrary
to the Spirit, and Intention of the Council, who orders that Persons so
disposed, may have the free use of them. And however this (no great) Restraint
was necessary in those Days, when Men's minds were in a Ferment, and the Itch of
Novelty had seized them, as it commonly happens when any new Opinions are
broached; yet, when they began to see with their own Eyes, and became more
Still and Calm, the Governors of the Church were so far from hindering them the
use of the Scripture, or putting this Decree in execution, that they exhort all
Persons to Read and Meditate upon them, as the most effectual means to bring
them acquainted with the Will of God, and their Duty to Him. And now methinks,
Dr. Tillotson and his Party are, of all Others, the unfittest to reproach us
this Conduct; considering that most of the Learned Men of his Church do
ingenuously own, that the promiscuous use of the Scripture allowed to all sorts
of Persons, and their private Interpretations thereof, was, in a great measure,
the cause of all the Different Sects, that sprung up, and divided themselves
from their Communion.

As to what he says, that Christ exhorts the Jews to search the Scriptures;
that St. Luke commends the Ber^ans, for so doing, and that the Holy Fathers do
earnestly, recommend the Reading and Study of the Scriptures, I acknowledge the
truth of this saying; I will add to it, that all the Art and Industry, all the
Rhetoric and Eloquence in the World have not that Force and Efficacy upon Pious
and Virtuous Souls, that the serious Reading, and Meditating upon the Holy
Scriptures has: yet this notwithstanding, since Experience has taught us,
that, as the Spider extracts Poison out of the same Flower, whence the Be
gathers Honey; so I believe, no Man can doubt (considering all the Schism, and
horrid Impieties now maintained) but that the rankest Soul-killing Poison, has
been often extracted out of the sacred Scriptures; not out of any Defect in
them, but through the depraved Disposition, and Supercilious Pride of the
Readers: And therefore, I think, it is the least the Church could do in a time
of confutation and disorder; such as was that of the Council of Trent, when so
many were gapeing after Novelty, and setting up for Heads of new Sects, to
moderate the Use and Reading of those Sacred Writings: But still so as not to
shut up the Fountain of Life, nor hinder all Good and Virtuous Christians to
drink of that Living-Water; which (though little) Restraint was yet by Degrees
abated, as Men began to entertain Thoughts of Peace, and Quiet; and, in a few
Years after, was insensibly taken away in many Countries, by a Tacit Admission
of the Reading of Scripture in vulgar Languages to all sorts of people. And
this I am sure no Body can justly deny to be the Case of the R. Catholic Church
in regard of the present Debate; which how agreeable to Sense and Reason, and
to the Piety and Care of a Tender Mother, let even the most Inveterate of our
Adversaries judge.

Touching the fourth, viz. It cannot be imagined how people should square, or
measure their Faith by this Rule, unless they were allowed to Read and
Understand it.

Answ. The Answer to this Objection, is sufficiently implied in what I spoke to
the former: I shall therefore add these few Words only; That the Word of God is
the Rule of our Faith, but whether it be conveyed to us by Writing, or by Word
of Mouth; methinks the Scripture it self declares in favor of the latter: For
Christ our Lord, as the Evangelists say, commanded his Disciples to go and
preach the Gospel; but we do not find, that He gave any Injunction about giving
his Word in Writing to the people, in order to learn their Faith. However,
since it is confessed, that the Sacred Scriptures are excellent Means to edify
our Faith, and compose our Manners; we do earnestly and heartily recommend them
to the Study and Meditation of the People.

Concerning the last, viz. That we therefore lock up the Scripture in an
unknown Tongue; because it is certain, that if the common people were once
brought to understand the Scripture, they would soon quit us, and go over to
them.

Answ. This Proposition is false in all its Circumstances. 1. That we do not
lock up the Scripture in an unknown Tongue, is already proved. 2. That the
common People would not quit our Religion, etc. will easily appear, if we
consider, that, by the same Rule, our Scholars, and Men of Letters, who
understand the Scripture in that Language, which they call unknown, should have
quitted us, which he well knew, they do not. Men of Breeding and Sense, are
less apt to be pleased with Superstition and Error, than the common ordinary
People; and we cannot suppose, they should have less Regard for the good of
their Souls, than ordinary people; and yet, since those Men from whom we
cannot, if we would, conceal any thing in our Faith or Practice, do not go over
to them, but persist in our Communion; I think I may reasonable conclude, that
the common people would do the same were they never so well read in the
Scriptures; unless we suppose, that the Protestant Religion has some Virtue to
attract the common people, upon the readding of Scripture, in a vulgar Tongue,
which is incommunicable to Men of Letters when they read the same.

But, methinks, the stand the Protestant Religion has been at, now upwards of
an hundred Years, without gaining one Foot of Ground; nay, hardly, keeping what
it had, notwithstanding, all the liberty and Indulgence it gives to Flesh and
Blood, is an evident Argument, that it was not a serious Meditation and Study
of Scripture; but rather a popular fury, and something like madness, that
brought over so many of the common People to embrace it in the Beginning. And
indeed, if the Fences, and Bulworks, wherewith the Protestant Religion is
fortified, were taken away; if the Tests, and Penal-Laws, and other grievous
Burdens laid upon R. Catholics, were taken off; if all the scandalous and
opprobrious Language, which Ministers thunder out in their Pulpits against the
Church, and Bishop of Rome; all the False and Ridiculous Tenets, which are
ascribed to R. Catholics, and managed with all the Art and Industry proper to
inflame the People's hatred, and to give them a perpetual aversion to R.
Catholics, and their Religion; all the marks of Infamy and Dishonor put upon
them, being not permitted to bear any Civil, or Military Office; nay, scarce
allowed, in some Countries, to exercise such honest Professions, or Callings,
as may enable them to get their Bread; if all these fatal Engines, I say, were
laid aside, and every Man left to choose his Religion, without the hopes of
Reward, on the one side, or the Fear of loss of Goods and Temporal Punishment
on the other; I doubt, the Protestant Religion would soon fall to pieces, and
many a Prodigal Child would return to their Father's Houses, whence they have
so long strayed. But these Fences, and Barriers (shall I call them) of
Religion, being so Rivetted, and interwoven with the Temporal Laws, and
Constitutions of most Governments, where the Protestant Religion sways; I fear,
all Reasons and Arguments, though never so Evident, are too weak to encounter
them; unless God of His Mercy be pleased to put His Hand to the Work: To whose
infinite Goodness and Mercy, I do from my Heart most earnestly recommend it.

CHAP. VII. Of the Invocation of Saints.
WHat we believe to be of Faith, on this Head, is thus declared by the Council
of Trent: That the Saints, who Reign with Jesus Christ, offer up to God their
Prayers for Men; that it is Good and Profitable to Invocate them after an
Humble Manner, and to have Recourse to their Prayers, Aid, and Assistance, to
obtain of God His, Benefits through our Lord Jesus Christ His Son, who is our
only Savior and Redeemer, Sess. 25. This the Council declares to be the Faith
of the Church concerning this point; but does not Command, or Oblige any of the
Laity to pray to the Saints, or Invocate them. It Is a Practice received from
the Primitive Church, and used by the Greatest, and most Learned, and virtuous
of the Holy Fathers of those Times; as appears by their Works; and handed Down
to us by an uninterrupted Tradition. But, because, it is not absolutely
necessary, the Church leaves every one the liberty to make use of it, or not,
a^ they think fit: Yet, to see how Dr. Tillotson lays about him, upon this
Subject, and what pains he takes to confute it; one would think, we have
nothing in our Liturgies, and public Prayer-books, but Prayers to Saints; and
that we do nothing else, in the public and solemn Service of the Church, but
pray to Saints, and worship them.

Here it may be expected, I should give a Specimen of his Laborious Endeavors
in this matter; but I think a Pattern would not do, and therefore I shall refer
the Reader to three entire Sermons, Vol. 2. edit post obit. Ser. 2, 3, 4.
where this Business is handled to some purpose.

Now to justify our Proceedings from these imputations, and to show the
Reasonableness of this Practice, as by us used; I shall do these Four Things:

1. I will endeavor to show, that to invocate the Saints, by which Words we
protest and declare (and it is hard if we may not be allowed to interpret our
own Words) that we mean nothing else, but to desire them to pray for us; is not
repugnant to the Word of God.

2. that in the public and solemn Service of the Church, (excepting the
Litanies of the Saints, which are read, or sung solemnly four times a Year; the
General Confession of Sins, in the beginning of the Mass, a few Hymns, Anthems
and Versicles, which are not Prayers strictly and properly so called; and most
of which are read only once a Year, excepting these I say) we put up no Prayers
to Saints, or Angels; but all our Prayers are addressed to Almighty God, and to
Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Not but that we hold it lawful, even in
the public, and solemn Service of the Church, to pray to the Saints, that is,
to desire them to pray for us; since all the Addresses we make to the Saints,
do finally Terminate in Jesus Christ, in virtue of whose Death and Passion, we
believe the Saints are enabled to pray for us; but because it is matter of
Fact, that we do not address our Prayers in the solemn Service of the Church,
but to God alone.

3. I will make it appear from the very Words of the Holy Fathers, that the
Practice of praying to Saints, was used in the Primitive Church. And

Lastly, I shall endeavor to return a brief Answer to what the Dr. thought fit
to bring against this Point.

1. I will endeavor to show, that to invocate the Saints, or (which is the
same thing) to desire them to pray for us; is not repugnant to the Word of God.
The Texts of Scripture, which seems to be against this Practice, and which the
Doctor urges, are taken out of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.5. where he says; There is
one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. And again,
Heb. 9.15. For this Cause, He (Christ) is the Mediator of the New Testament,
etc. Hence the Doctor concludes, that it is contrary to the Word of God, and
(which he mostly insists upon) derogatory to the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ,
to pray to any Saint, or Angel; since to do so, were to constitute them
Mediators between God and Men, contrary to the Express Words of St. Paul.

But, sure he was not aware how far this Inference would carry him, else he
would be a little more reserved. We are exhorted by the Scriptures, and by the
Rules of Charity, we are bound to pray to God for one another: Ephesians. 6.19. 1 Timothy 2.
Yea, and St. Paul himself desires the Ephesians to pray for him, and exhorts
Timothy to have Prayers, and Supplications put up for all Men. Do not we then
constitute one another Mediators between God and our selves? Does not St. Paul
make the Ephesians Mediators between God and himself? Most certainly, as much
as we make the Saints; for we only desire the Saints to pray for us, and St.
Paul desired the Ephesians to pray for him; and we desire every Day the same
thing of our Brethren. And do these Mediators derogate from the Mediatorship of
Jesus Christ? God forbid! Ay but, says the Doctor, the Saints are in Heaven,
and these Men were on Earth: Well, and does their being Present, or Absent,
their being in Heaven, or on Earth, make them the more or less Mediators, when
they are made such, or do the Office of Mediators? Is any Man the less a
Mediator, who sues for the Pardon of an other; because he is present, or in the
same Town, or Country with him, for whom he sues? Sure there is not (to use the
Doctor's own Phrase) a Controversy of Scripture against Scripture, or of
Reason against Reason; but of down right Imp Discourse against Transub. Vol. 3.
p 299.
-- against the plain meaning of Scripture, and all the Sense and Reason of
Mankind: I forbear that uncivil Word; the Reader may find it at Length with the
Dr. in the place pointed at in the Margin. Well! But the Saints are in Heaven.
What then? Why, if we desire them to pray for us, we make them Mediators. But
do not the Saints in Heaven pray for us? Yes, the Dr. grants they do: Vol. 2.
2. edit. obit. page 93.
They make themselves Mediators then. No, says he, they are not Mediators and
Intercessors properly so called; for (continues He) all Intercession, strictly
and properly so called, is in virtue of a Sacrifice offered by him that
intercedes. Here He pulls down all that He built before, and justifies our
Practice, as fully as we could desire. All Intercession strictly and properly
so called, is in virtue of a Sacrifice offered by him that intercedes: Say you
so! Why then the Saints can by no means be Mediators, or Intercessors properly
so called, whether we desire them to pray for us, or they do it of themselves;
since they did not offer any Sacrifice by virtue whereof they may, in a strict
and proper sense, be called Mediators, or Intercessors; and then we may desire
them to pray for us, or they may do it of themselves; and yet be no Mediators,
or Intercessors; and consequently not derogate from the Mediatorship of Jesus
Christ. And thus the Doctor has very judiciously, and, in my Opinion, very
truly interpreted St. Paul's Words, and justified us into the bargain.

2. That in the public and solemnly Service of the Church, excepting the
Litanies, etc. as aforesaid, we put up no Prayers to Saints, or Angels; but all
our Prayers are addressed to Almighty God, and to Jesus Christ, our only
Savior and Redeemer.

This will appear by a thoro' Examination of those Books, wherein the public
Service of our Church is contained; which are the Mass Book, and the Breviary;
the first, containing the solemn Service of the Mass; and the latter, the
Canonical Office, namely Matins, Hours, Even-song, and Compline. And here I can
in truth aver, that I have read both these Books, at least ten Times; yet,
excepting the Litanies, the general Confession, some few Hymns, Anthems and
Versicles; whereof, one or two are read in the Breviary on the Feasts of B V.
Mary, and other Saints; which yet are not properly Prayers, and which only
mention these Words, ( Pray for us, intercede for us, or the like) I do profess
I do not know one single Prayer appointed for the public, and solemn Service of
the Church, in either of them addressed directly to either Saint, or Angel, or
the B. V. Mary. As for the Mass Book, which is the public Liturgy of the
Church, excepting the General Confession, there is not one Prayer in it
aderess'd to any but God-Almighty; no, not on the Feasts of Saints, or of the
B. V. Mary; no, nor in the Book at all, excepting this one Versicle, (which is,
I think, four times read) Mother of God, intercede for us. Which yet is seldom
read in any public and solemn Service of the Church; and one single Anthem
wherein the like Words are found on the Feast of St. Michael. And for the Truth
of all this, I appeal to the Books themselves. There is indeed a Little Office
of the Virgin Mary annexed to the Breviary, wherein the aforesaid Words, Pray
for us, intercede for us; or the like, are some nine, or ten times repeated in
Hymns, Anthems, and Versicles; but this being read neither Publicly, nor
Privately in the Church Service, cannot Reasonably be said to pertain to it.

Now these two Books are an Extract, the Mass Book, of what is most Moving, and
Ravishing, in the Psalms of David; of what is most Edifying and Instructive,
and most sit to declare the Praises of God, and to show his loving Kindness and
Mercy to Mankind, in the Old Testament; and of the most useful, and necessary
Precepts and Instructions of Faith and Good Manners, contained in the New;
suited, and adapted to all the Seasons of the Year; together with many Devout
and Fervent Prayers, all tending to praise Almighty God, to thank him for His
Benefits and Blessings, and to implore Mercy and Pardon for our Sins. The
Breviary, of all the Psalms; most of the History of the Old Testament; a
Summary of all the Epistles of the Apostles, and the Revelations; some Verses
of the Gospel of every Feast and Sunday in the Year, with the Homilies of the
Ancient Fathers of the Church upon these Texts; together with a Brief Account
of the Lives of the most Eminent Saints, and Martyrs, that flourished in the
Church; with a great many Pious and Godly Prayers, Anthems, Hymns, and
Versicles, addressed to God-Almighty; and put up in the Name, and through the
Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. We do, indeed, Commemorate the holy Apostles,
the B. V. Mary, and the Saints in the Public Service of the Church; because we
have sufficient Warrant for it in the Scripture and Practice of the Primitive
Church. David says; the Righteous shall be in Everlasting Remembrance, Psalm.
112. and Dr. Tillotson himself has a Sermon upon this Subject, wherein he
proves from the Practice of the Fathers, and from Reason, that it is Lawful to
give due Honor, and Respect to the Saints; but we do not put up any Formal
Prayers to them in the public Service. And this will appear from the Collects
in the Mass Book and Breviary, where their Names are mentioned. I will
transcribe two, or three of them, and leave the Reader, who desires farther
Satisfaction, to consult these Books; whether all the Rest of the Collects
where the Saints are mentioned, be not of the same Tenor.

A Collect on the Annunciation of the B. V. Mary.
O God, who have been pleased, that thy Word should take Flesh in the Womb of
the B. V. Mary, when the Angel declared it; grant us thy humble Petitioners,
who believe Her to be truly the Mother of God, that, by Her intercession, we
may with Thee be assisted; through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Amen.

A Collect on the Feast of St. Peter, and St. Paul.
O God, who have consecrated this Day by the Martyrdom of Peter and Paul, grant
to thy Church to follow their Example in all things, by whom the Religion
began; through our Lord Jesus, etc. Amen.

A Collect on the Nativity of St. John Baptist.
O God, who have Honored this Day with the Nativity of St. John, give to thy
People the Grace of Spiritual Joy; and guide the Minds of all the Faithful in
the way of eternal Salvation; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here, you see, all these Prayers are addressed to God alone. And thus, indeed,
are all the Collects in the Mass Book and Breviary, which I willingly submit to
any Man's Trial ad Paenam libri. As to the Office and Litanies of the B. V.
Mary, which are found in Manuals, and read by some R. Catholics; there is no
Reason to charge them upon the Public Office, and Service of the Church; since
they are not used by the Church, nor published by public Authority. The Church
does, indeed, allow such Prayers to be said, as far as they hold within the
Compass of mere Intercession; because they are founded in the Practice of the
Primitive Church, and all succeeding Ages. But if any of them contain any Terms
or Expressions bordering upon the Prerogative of the Mediatorship of Jesus
Christ; she does as heartily, and as earnestly, desire they should be abolished
as any Protestant whatsoever.

Touching the Rosary, or Beads, in which the Dr. reproaches us for saying ten
Ave Marias for one Pater Noster: I believe every one knows the Church obliges
no body to say it; I am sure there are Millions of R. Catholics who never do.
Besides, there is nothing in the Ave Maria, but the very Words of Scripture,
except these last, pray for us now and in the Hour of our Death; and if it be a
good thing to desire the Mother of God to pray for us, sure, the oftener we
desire it, the better it is. As to the Disproportion between the Pater Nosters,
and the Ave Marias; I must confess it were something, if those, who use the
Rosary, made all their Devotion to consist in it. But it is well known, that
such as say it, do to their Power, discharge all other Christian Duties; at
least do pretend to no Exemption, upon the Score of their Beads, or Rosary,
from Praying to Almighty God, from Adoring and Worshipping Him, and giving Him
their Humble and Hearty Thanks for his Benefits and Blessings; from
commemorating the Death and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and having
recourse to the Merits thereof, for Mercy and Pardon of their Sins. And now
when they have endeavored to discharge all these Essential Duties, where lies
the harm, if they spend some part of their spare Hours, in saying, over and
above, so many Ave Marias, especially since they are founded in the Merits of
the Death and Passion of our Lord and Savior; in Virtue whereof, all Catholics
do hope and trust, that the Virgin Mary and all the Saints, will pray for them?
Or how can it be counted a Fault to desire the Virgin Mary to do that for us,
which even the Dr. himself, and all the Learned Protestants in the world, do
acknowledge, She, and all the Saints in Heaven, constantly do; though we should
not ask it of them? Now this is plainly the Case: All R. Catholics are taught
and exhorted by the Church, to discharge first their Duty to God, to worship
and adore him, to put up their Prayers to Him, to thank him for His Benefits,
to be sorry for their sins, to beg Mercy and Forgiveness through the Merits of
the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ; and when this is done, if they will take
the Lady's Office, or the Litanies of the Saints, or the V. Mary, or their
Beads, and beg those great Friends and Favorites, of Jesus Christ, who shed
their Blood, and lay down their Lives for the Truth of His Gospel; to recommend
them to Him, and his Heavenly Father, is it not better, (since the mind of Man
must always be in Action) than spend the Time in Idleness, or, perhaps, in Evil
Conversation? In a Word, these are Devotions, which certain Fraternities, and
Regular Societies have taken upon them to discharge over and above the
necessary, and Essential Duties of Christianity; and which other Catholics, (to
be Partakers of the Prayers of the said Fraternities and Societies) do also
perform. But in saying their Beads, they do not always, as the Dr. would
suggest, say ten Ave Maria's for one Pater Noster: For several Fraternities and
Catholics, say all Pater Nosters without ever an Ave Maria. But of this enough.
I proceed to show,

3. From the very Words of the Holy Fathers, that this Practice of praying to
Saints was used in the primitive Church.

St. Ambrose delivers his Thoughts in these Words: We ought to pray to the
Angels in our own Behalf, who are given as a Guard to Us: We ought to pray to
the Martyrs, whose Bodies remaining with Us, seem to be, as it were, a Pledge
of their Protection. Lib de Viduis prope Fin.

Gregory Nissen, speaks thus to the Martyr St. Theodorus; Intercede and Pray
for your Country with our Common Lord, and King. Orat. in St. Theodor.

St. Austin: We do not Commemorate the Martyrs at the Lord's Table, as We do
those, who die in the Peace of the Church; but We do Commemorate them, that
they may pray for Us, that we may follow their Steps. Tract. 84. in Joa. Again:
Holy Mary Note, that the Sermon, whence this Passage is taken, is ascribed, by
some Critics, to St. Fulgentius; but whether of the two it belongs to, it
matters not, being both Fathers of Great Renown, and of the same Age.
succor the Distressed, help the Pusillanimous, cherish those that Mourn, pray
for the People, mediate for the Clergy, intercede for the Devout Female Sex,
let every one perceive thy Assistance, who celebrate thy Commemoration. Ser.
18. de Sanctis.

Theodoret: We do not address our Selves unto the Martyrs, as unto Gods, but we
pray unto them as Divine Men, that they would please to become Legates (or
Intercessors) for us. Ser. 8. de Martyr. lib. Curat. Grae^. Affect.

The Council of Calcedon. Act. 11. has these Words: (...), Flavianus Lives
after his Death; the Martyr will pray for us; or, as the Translators render it,
Let the Martyr pray for us; it being usual with the Orientals to put the Future
Tense for the Imperative.

Here is a General Council of more than 600 Bishops desiring the Martyr
Flavianus to pray for Them. This Council was held in the Year 451, and is one
of the four first General Councils, whose Acts and Decrees the Church of
England Divines do profess to receive. So that it cannot be enough admired,
what should induce them to reject the Invocation of Saints.

I should never end, if I should bring all the Sayings of the Fathers on this
Subject. St. Austin has a long Discourse upon it against Faustus the Manichean,
where He gives at large the Reasons why the Catholic Church gives due Honor to
the Martyrs, and desires the Assistance of their Prayers: And St. Jerome wrote a
Book against Vigilantius upon this Subject, and calls him Heretic for denying
the Lawfulness of praying to Saints.

I shall therefore conclude with this Reflection; that it is not reasonable to
believe, nay it is incredible, that these Holy Fathers, who took so much pains
to propagate the Faith and Gospel of Jesus Christ; who wrote so many Learned
and Voluminous Works, which breath so much Piety and Christian Devotion; spent
all their Lives in Holy, and Religious Exercises; consecrated their Time and
Labor to the Service of the True and Living God, and were ready to lay down
their Lives for the Truth of the Doctrine, which they taught and practiced, if
Occasion required; should at the same Time, write, and practice a Doctrine,
which derogates from the Honor, and Mediatorship of Jesus Christ; it being
their chief Study and Care, to inculcate to the World, that He was the only
Lord and Mediator, in whose Name and no other, Salvation was to be had. But if
the Doctor should say (as many of his Brethren have) that all these Holy
Fathers erred, and consequently did not understand the Doctrine they labored
so earnestly to Propagate. I answer him, as St. Austin did a certain, Man to
whom, I fear, the Doctor was in some Things, but too near akin; Mallem cum eis
errare, quam tecum consentire: I had rather err with the Fathers, than agree
with Him.

Thus I have endeavored, as plainly and briefly as I could, to show how
Reasonable, how Harmless, how Inoffensive, the Invocation of Saints is, and how
agreeable to the Practice of the Holy Fathers, and the Primitive Church. I now
proceed.

Lastly, to return a brief Answer to what Dr. Tillotson thought fit to bring
against this Point.

Here I would not be understood, as if I meant to answer all the little
Objections, and pretty qu^rks of Wit, which he endeavors to improve with all
his Art and Eloquence; in order, no doubt, to catch the well-meaning, but
weaker sort of People, with this Fig-leaf Cover; which yet all sober thinking
Men may easily see through. My Design is to answer only such Objections as have
any real or apparent Difficulties, being convinced that things naked, or so
thinly covered, need no Reading upon.

His first Objection is taken out of St. Paul, Colos. 2.18, Vol. ^. edit. post
obit. page 43, 44, 45
19. Where the Apostle says, Let no Man beguile you of your Reward in a
voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, not holding the Head. By which
Words, says the Doctor, St. Paul intimates, that for Christians to address
themselves to God by any other Mediator, than Jesus Christ only, was a
Defection from the Head. This, He says, is Theodoret's Interpretation of that
Passage in his Comment upon it, and the third Chapter, ver. 17. of the same
Epistle; and to enforce this Interpretation, he cites a Canon of the Council of
Laodicea, which says; That Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God,
and go away from it, and to invocate Angels, and to make Conventicles, all
which are forbidden; if therefore any be found giving himself to this secret
Idolatry, let him be Anathema, because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ
the Son of God, and is gone over to Idolatry. After which Words, the Dr. breaks
out into this Exclamation: What shall be said to them, who do not only secretly
and in their Private Devotions, but in the public Assemblies of Christians, and
in the most public Offices of their Church, invocate Angels, and pray to them.

Before I answer this Objection, it will not be amiss to clear the Equivocation,
which, in most controversial Disputes, commonly attends these two words,
Worship, and Invocation. I worship is rendered in Latin, colo, or adoro; in
Greek, (...); in Hebrew, (...); and in these three Languages, it is used in
Scripture, and in common Discourse, not only to signify the supreme Worship
and Honor, we pay to Almighty God, but also for all sort of Respect and
Reverence done to Kings, Princes, and Persons of Condition. Of this we have
innumerable Examples in Scripture; and not only so, but the very Word, which we
use to signify the supreme Worship due to God alone, is sometimes applied to
human Affairs: For, as we say, colere Deum, to worship God; colere Parents, to
honor our Parents; colere Vineam, colere Agrum, Hortum, etc. to till the
Vineyard, to till the Ground, etc. Yet no Man ever said, that we rob God of his
due Honor, by using the same Expression to signify the Respect we pay some
Creatures, which we use when we express the Honor due only to Him; because the
different Ideas, or Notions we have of God, and these Creatures, sufficiently
determine our meaning; though the want of Words, or rather the Convenience of
delivering our Thoughts in fewer Words, oblige us to make use of the same Term
to express these different Services.

In like Manner, the Word Invocation is used in Scripture not only to signify
our calling upon God, as our Sovereign Lord and Maker; but is also used, and
applied in several places to ordinary Men. For instance; Isaiah says, Seven
Women shall take hold of one Man, saying, we will eat our own Bread, and wear
our own Apparel, only let thy Name be invocated upon us, to take away our
Reproach: Tantum invocetur Nomen tuum super. nos. Cap. 4.1. So that if we do
not attend to the Subject Matter, to which these Words are applied, the
Scripture will afford us sufficient Grounds for Worshipping, and invocating not
only God, Angels, and Saints, but even common ordinary Men. To worship and
invocate then, must necessarily mean, to exhibit a Service, and Duty to those,
whom we worship and call upon, according to the Notion, or Idea we have of
their Excellency and Perfection; and of the Power and Ability we conceive in
them to help and assist us: And then to Worship God, and invocate Him, must
mean, to pay Him the Supreme Honor and Respect which is due only to the Great
Creator and Redeemer of the World; and to beg Mercy and Forgiveness of Him, as
the Source and Fountain of all Goodness; but to Worship and Invocate the Angels
and Saints, must mean no more than to show them that respect and honor, which
is due to the Friends and Courtiers of our Sovereign Lord, and to ask their
Help and Assistance in those things, which we conceive they are able to do,
that is, to pray for us, and to recommend us to their, and our Great Master;
because these only are the Excellencies and Abilities we conceive the Angels
and Saints to be endued with, and for which we respect them. This supposed, I
answer,

1. That St. Paul speaks here of Certain Heretics, who separated from the
Faithful, and gave to Angels the supreme Worship and Honor, which is due only
to God; as these words of his, not holding the Head, do plainly denote: For, by
these Words, He give us to understand, that these Heretics departed from
Christ, which is the Head; and by these other words, Worshipping of Angels,
that they offered Sacrifice to Angels, whom they believed to have been the
Mediators of the New Covenant; or, as Theodoret phrases it, that the Law was
given by Angels. But this, I hope, the Protestants will not say, we believe, or
hold.

2. That the Dr's. Interpretation of St. Paul's words is altogether forced, and
by no means warranted by Theodoret, or any ancient Father of the Church; on the
contrary, Theodoret is entirely ours; For He says, in that very Place cited by
the Doctor, that therefore these Heretics worshipped Angels; because they
believed, Vol. 2. edit. post ob. page 44.
the Law was given by Them. He says, indeed, in an other place, which the
Doctor quotes, that we must send up Thanksgivings to God and the Father, by
Christ, and not by the Angels. And this, I hope, we are careful to do; for I am
sure we put up all our Prayers to God and the Father, by, or through the Merits
of Jesus Christ, and not of any Angel or Saint. But sure it is not reasonable
to believe, that Theodoret there meant, that we ought not to desire the Angels
or Saints, to pray for us; since he himself, as I observed before, so expressly
says, We not address our selves to the Saints as Gods, but we pray unto them as
Divine Men, that they would please to be Legates (or Intercessors) for us.

Comment. in Epist. ^d Colos. c. 3. v. 17.
3. That the Canon of the Council of La^dicea, as Theodoret tells us, speaks
only of these Heretics meant by St. Paul, who forsook the Church, and gave
themselves to secret Idolatry, that is, (as the Fathers have always understood
that word) offered Sacrifice to Angels. But the words of the Canon are so plain
and full to this purpose, that there needs no reading upon it.

4. That the Doctor might very well have forborne his Exclamation; for I assure
him, that excepting the General Confession, a^ aforesaid, we do not invocate,
or pray to Angels in the Public Offices of the Church. We have but one Feast in
the Year, wherein we Commemorate Angels, which is that of St. Michael the
Archangel; and in this (excepting one Anthem, in the Breviary; and one
Versile, in the Mass, which are not properly Prayers, where it is said, in the
first; Archangel Michael be mindful of us, and pray for us to the Son of God;
and in the second; Holy Michael defend us in Battle, that we perish not in the
dreadful Judgment; there is no invocating or putting up of Prayers to St.
Michael, or any other Angel. But it seems the Doctor was warm upon the Matter,
and in such a Case, Rhetorical Exclamations are more pardonable; pray God they
may be pardoned him in Heaven.

His second Objection is to this purpose. Mediation and Intercession is founded
in the Merit and Virtue of the Sacrifice, Vol. 2. edit. post ob. page 56, 57.
by which Expiation for Sin is made; but this Jesus Christ and no other has
done: Therefore He only is Mediator, and Intercessor.

Answ. This Argument proves too much: For it proves, that neither our Brethren,
on Earth; nor the Saints, in Heaven; ought, or can lawfully pray or intercede
for us; because they did not offer the Sacrifice by which Expiation for sin is
made. Yet the Doctor grants, that both our Brethren, on Earth; and the Saints,
in Heaven; may, and do pray for us. Well, but granting that Mediation and
Intercession is founded in the Virtue and Merit of the Sacrifice, by which
Expiation for Sin is made. Does it therefore follow, that the Saints may not
charitably beg of God to forgive us our Sins? It Is true, Christ only has a
Right and Title to mediate and intercede for us; because he alone paid the
Ransom, and full Value of our Sins, and therefore may, in Justice, ask of His
Father to forgive us. But sure, this does not hinder, but that the Saints may
do Us that Charitable Office, as to pray to God to have Mercy upon Us; though
they cannot in Justice demand it. May not a Friend and Favorite of the King
beg the Life of a ^enitent Criminal? And have not Kings and Princes often
granted such Favors to their Friends; though they were not in Justice bound to
do so? And are not the Saints in Heaven Christ's Favorites? Does not He call
them his Friends? Vos Amici mei estis. Job. 15.14. Mat. 19.28.
And, what is more, Does not He tell His Apostles, that they shall sit upon
Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel? And why may not then these
Judges, and Friends, and Favorites of Jesus Christ, beg of Him to have Mercy
upon poor miserable Sinners; though they cannot in Justice require it at his
Hands? But the Doctor's Mistake consists in this, that he does not, (or rather
will not) distinguish between an Intercession founded in Justice and Equity,
and an Intercession founded only in Favor and good Will: The first, I grant,
is peculiar only to Christ, for the Reasons offered by the Doctor; but the
second, which is the Effect of Charity, is common to every one, who is possessed
of that Divine Virtue. Well, but, says the Doctor, the Mediation or
Intercession of Saints is not properly speaking Intercession. So say I; for I
own, that, in the Sense, in which Christ is both our Mediator and Intercessor,
the Saints and Angels, in the same sense, cannot be called Intercessors; but
whether he calls them Intercessors in a proper, or an improper Sense, it is all
one to me. Since he acknowledges, they do pray for us, and intercede with God
in our behalf, I am satisfied; for I am sure we desire no more of them.

After this, the Dr. gives us a great many Passages out of the Fathers, ibid
page 76, 77, 78. 79. 80, 81 82, 83.
to prove the Invocation of Saints unlawful; namely out of St. Ireneus, Origin,
Novatian (for he must be a Father too) Clemens Romanus, St. Athanasius, St.
Epiphanius, St. Chrys^stom, and (which I must admire at) out of St. Austin, who
(if Invocation of Saints be Popery) was, I am sure, a Rank Papist. But the
Doctor might have spared Himself the Labor of quoting these Passages; for
there is not one of them all, to which any Roman Catholic would refuse to
Subscribe; and therefore I have no Temptation to vex or trouble them.

His third Objection is levelled at the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church; which says,

We pray to the Saints in Heaven, in the same order of Brotherly Society, with
which we entreat our Brethren upon Earth to pray for us. But that this (says
he) is not a true Representation of their Doctrine, will appear by these
Considerations.

1. That they pray (continues He) to the Saints and Angels in Heaven with the
same solemn Circumstances of Religious Worship, that they pray to God himself.

2. That, in their Prayers and Thanksgiving, they join the Angels, and the B.
Virgin, and the Saints together with God and Christ.

3. That in the Creed of Pope Pius 4. it is expressly said, the Saints, which
reign with Christ, are to be Worshipped and Invocated.

4. That in the Public Offices of their Church, they do not only pray to the
Saints to pray for them, but they direct their Prayers and Thanksgivings
immediately to them for all those Blessings and Benefits, which they ask of
God, and thank Him for, of which innumerable Examples (adds He) might be given
out of their Public Offices; particularly in the Office of the B. Virgin, they
pray to the Angels thus; deliver us we beseech you, by your command from all
our Sins.

To which I answer,

1. That there never was a Book more universally commended and approved in the
Latin Church, than the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church. The Pope highly commended, and approved it; as appears by his
Brief to this Bishop, annexed to the said Book. All the Cardinals and
Consistory in Rome approved it; as the Letters of the Master of the Sacred
Palace, and the Consultor of the Holy Office, do witness; And all the Learned
Bishops and Prelates of the R. Catholic Church have very much approved, and
commended t; as appears by the Letters of many of them to the said Bishop, and
his Friends; all which are likewise annexed to the said Book. it has been
translated into, almost, all the Vulgar Tongues in Europe, and is read, and
perused by all R. Catholics, with all the satisfaction and content imaginable;
so that to say, this Exposition is not a true Representation of the Doctrine,
and Practice of the R. Catholic Church in this matter, is as Unreasonable in it
self, as it is injurious to that Great and Learned Prelate, and to the whole
Catholic Church, which has so universally approved it.

2. As to his first Consideration; I have already proved, that we address no
Prayers to Saints, or Angels in the Public Service of the Church, but that all
our Prayers are directed to God only; and, as to our Posture in the Church, or
at our private Devotions, whether kneeling, or standing, or bowing, we declare
our intention is to adore God alone, and none else.

Touching his second Consideration, viz. that in their Prayers and
Thanksgiving, ibid page 80, 81.
they join the Angels, and the B. Virgin, and the Saints together with God and
Christ. Of this He gives us, in an other place, these instances. Nothing so
frequent with them, says He, as to join the blessed Virgin with God and our
Savior in the same breath; nothing so common in their Mouth, as Jesus Maria,
-- glory to God and the B. Virgin; and in the Roman Missal, adds He, they make
Confession of their Sins to God-Almighty and the blessed Virgin, and to St.
Michael the Archangel, and to all the Saints.

To which I answer,

3. That it is very True, we join God, and his Saints together in the same
breath, as the Dr. says; but, then our Plea is, that we are taught both by the
Old, and New Testament so to do. For Instance. All the Congregation blessed the
Lord God of their Fathers; and bowing their Heads, Worshipped the Lord and the
King. 1 Chronicles. 29.20. Here, at the same time, and in the same act, and in the
same breath too, it is said, that the Israelites Worshipped God, and the King.
Had we but any such thing in our Public Offices, what work would the Dr. make
on it! Again, The people greatly feared the Lord, and Samuel, 1 Kings 12.18.
Here again, God and Samuel are joined together in the same Breath. Again, It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to Us, to lay upon you no other Burden, Acts
15.28. Again, I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect
Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. St. John writes to the Seven Churches in Asia; Grace be
unto you, and Peace from Him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and
from the Seven Spirits, which are before His Throne; and from Jesus Christ,
Rev. chap. 1. Had we offered Peace from the Angels to our Flocks and placed
them before Jesus Christ, how loud would He Cry! Yet no less than an Apostle of
Jesus Christ has done it. What will the Doctor say to all this? Is not God
here joined with Angels, and Saints and Men, in the same Breath? And must it be
a Crime in us to do that, whereof we have such manifest Precedents in the very
words of the Scripture. Truly, to weigh well the matter, one would almost
swear, the Doctor was not in earnest; but were I of council for him, I should
have advised Him, if He had a mind to exhibit such Ridiculous Scenes, not to
make the Religion of Jesus Christ, a Theater of Laughter and Sport; for God is
not mocked.

As to his third Consideration: I answer,

4. That Pope Pius 4. his worshipping and invocating the Saints, is to be
understood in the same order of brotherly Society in which we worship and
reverence our holy Brethren on Earth, upon Account of their Piety and Virtue;
and in which we entreat them to pray for us, as the Bishop of Meaux says, and
as St. Austin said long since: Colimus Martyrs eo cultu dilectionis and
societatis, quo in hac vita coluntur sancti Dei homines. We worship the Martyrs
with that Worship of Love and Fellowship wherewith the holy Men of God are
worshipped in this Life, Lib. 20. cap. 22. contra Faust. All the difficulty
then of these and the like Phrases, which we read in Scripture, in the Fathers,
and in the Decrees of Councils and Popes, consists in the Ambiguity of these
Words, Worship and Invocate, which I have on purpose explained in the beginning
of this Dispute, to avoid Confusion; and which the Catechism published by Order
of the Council of Trent, and many other learned Divines have so clearly and
fully explained. So that nothing but an Itch of Contention, and a Spirit of
Wrangling could make any Man doubt of our Sense of these Words. But the Passage
of St. Austin is so clear and full to the purpose, that I hope the Reader will
not be sorry to have it at large, though it be something long; and the rather,
because it is in answer to a Certain Manichee, who, about twelve Hundred Years
since, reproached St. Austin with what the Doctor and his Party charge the
Roman Catholics at present.

The Christian People (says this Father) do celebrate the Memory of the Martyrs
with a Religious Solemnity, to excite us to their Imitation, to be Partakers of
their Merits, and to be assisted by their Prayers. Yet so as, that we erect no
Altars to the Martyrs, but to the God of Martyrs; though in Remembrance of the
Martyrs. For, who of the Prelates standing at the Altar, where the Bodies of
the Saints are, ever said, I offer to you Peter, Paul, or Cyprian? But that
which is offered, is offered to God, who crowned the Martyrs, at the Memorial
Altars where the Relics of Martyrs were kept.
of those, whom he crowned; to the End, that from the Remembrance of those
places, greater Affection may rise in us, to whet our Love toward those we may
imitate, and toward Him (God) by whose Help, we shall be able to imitate. We
worship then the Martyrs, with that Worship of Love and Fellowship wherewith
Holy Men in this Life are worshipped, whose Hearts we perceive prepared for the
like Passion, in defense of the Truth of the Gospel; but the Martyrs we worship
so much the more devoutly by how much the more securely, when the Fight is
over; and by how much the more confidently we may praise the Conquerors now in
a happy State, than those, who, as yet, are fighting in ^his Life. But with
that worship which the Greeks call (...), and in Latin cannot be rendered in
one word; since it is a certain Service properly due to God alone, we do not
worship, nor teach to be worshipped but one God. And since the offering
Sacrifice pertains to this Worship, whence Idolatry is imputed to those, who
give it to Idols; we do by no means offer any such thing, nor command to be
offered either to any Martyr, or any Holy Soul, or Angel. And whosoever falls
into any such Error, he is reprehended by wholesome Doctrine to the End he may
amend or be shunned. Lib. 20. Cap. 22. contra Faust. Manich.

As to his last Consideration, viz. That in the public Offices of their Church,
they do not only pray to the Saints to pray for them; but they direct their
Prayers and Thanksgivings immediately to them, for all those Blessings and
Benefits, which they ask of God, and thank him for. I answer.

5. That this is a notorious Imposition upon us, and as great a Mark of
Insincerity; as it is a sign of a sinking Cause, which needs such foul play to
support it. In short, there is nothing more common than the Roman Missal and
Breviary, which contain all the public Offices of the Church; and I challenge
any Man to find as much as one single Prayer in either of these Books, read in
the public Offices of the Church, which is directed immediately to either Angel
or Saint for all those Benefits and Blessings, which we ask of God and thank
Him for. As for that Example, which he gives us out of the Office of the B.
Virgin, as he says; namely, that we pray to the Angels thus; Deliver us, we
beseech you, by your Command from all our Sins: If it were true, that there is
such a Prayer in it, it is not to the Doctor's purpose; for that Office is no
part of the public Offices of the Church; nor was it ever publicly read in the
Church. But that it is not True, I am an Eye Witness; for I have, upon this
very occasion read every Word of that Office (I mean the Office of the B.
Virgin annexed to the Breviary) and I can in Truth aver, that I found no such
Prayer or Anthem, or Versicle in it. As to any other Offices of the B. Virgin,
made and published by private Men, whether there be any such prayer in them,
it is more than I can tell; for I have not read them all. This I am certain,
that if there be, it is more than any Man is warranted by the Church to do.
However, since none of these Offices of the Virgin Mary make any part of the
public Offices, and Service of the Church; nor are ever publicly read in it:
The Doctor had no Reason to charge such Prayers upon the public Offices of the
Church; though they were found in those private Offices of the B. Virgin.

Vol. 2. page 70.
His fourth Objection is to this purpose: To pray to Saints in all places, and
at all times, and for all sorts of Blessings, does suppose them to have the
Incommunicable Perfections of the Divine Nature imparted to them, or inherent
in them; namely, Omnipotence, and Omniscience, and Immense-presence.

Answ. This is the great popular Argument, that takes so much with the weaker
sort of People; who measure all things by their own capacity, and do not
conceive how Saints and Angels should hear at so great a distance; because they
cannot do so themselves. It will be therefore requisite to take some pains to
clear this difficulty, and, if it be possible, to disabuse these simple, but
wellmeaning People, concerning these gross and carnal thoughts; which, that I
may the more plainly do, I shall lay down these known, and evident Grounds.

1. That Angels and Saints in Heaven, have naturally a faculty of
understanding, and communicating their Thoughts; that is, a power connatural to
their being, of perceiving the thoughts of others, that are directed to them,
and of imparting their own thoughts to others; for these are essential
Properties of Intelligent Beings.

2. That Angels and Saints in Heaven, do neither see, nor hear in the sense we
commonly take these Words: For, seeing they neither have Eyes, nor Ears, which
are the Organs of Seeing and Hearing; they cannot be said properly to See or
Hear, but only to Vnderstard; which is what we mean, when we say, the Saints do
hear us.

3. Hence follows, that Saints and Angels may Hear, that is, Understand us,
when we direct our thoughts to them, at any distance, even at Ten Millions of
Miles, as well as if they had been in the same Room with us: For, since our
Words or Thoughts are not conveyed to them by means of any Organs, nor by the
motion or impulse of the Air, as it happens with us; it is evident, that
distance or neerness of place can have no part in their way of understanding.

4. That God-Almighty is able to reveal in an Instant all our Prayers to the
Angels and Saints, be they never so far distant from us; though Angels and Saints
are not, properly speaking, distant from us; distance, in propriety of Speech,
being that space, which is between two Bodies

Now, whether we conceive that the Angels and Saints, when we direct our
thoughts to them, do hear, or rather understand us, by that natural faculty,
which is essential to all Intelligent Beings; or that God reveals our thoughts
to them, we do not ascribe any of the incommunicable perfections of the Divine
Nature to them, namely Omnipotence, Omniscience, Immense-Presence, etc.

Not, if we conceive, that they understand our prayers by that natural faculty,
which is essential to their Being.

1. We do not ascribe Omnipotence to them; for Omnipotence supposes a power of
doing all things whatsoever possible; whereas, we suppose in the Angels and
Saints, at most, but a power of obtaining of God those benefits and blessings
we have need of.

2. Nor Omniscience; for Omniscience supposes a knowledge of all things past,
present, and possible to be: And we only suppose, in the Saints, aknowledge of
those few prayers we put up to them.

3. Nor Immense-presence; for this supposes an immensity, or a being present
not only to all the things in the World, but to hundreds of Worlds, if there
had been so many; whereas the utmost of what we suppose, can amount to no more,
than that the Angels and Saints are present to those Christians, who beg their
Charitable Assistance.

Nor do we ascribe any of those divine Perfections to them, if we conceive,
that God reveals our prayers to them. This the Dr. himself does not say, but
endeavors to elude our Reasons, by saying, that if God reveals our prayers to
the Saints, we should pray to Him, before every prayer we make to the Saints,
that He would be pleased to reveal that prayer to them, -- but this says he, is
such away about, as no Man would take, that could help it. To which I answer,
that such Reasonings are only fit to amuse the common People, who, as I said
above, measure all things, even the most sublime, by the notions they have of
those things they are here on Earth acquainted with; whereas the Scripture, and
the Fathers tell us, that the manner of God's revealing His Will to His Angels
and Saints, is so mysterious, and the knowledge and power of these blessed
Spirits so vast, and, to us, so incomprehensible, that nothing on Earth, much
less such poor stuff as the Dr. brings, is able to give us the least glimpse
how these things are performed.

Vol. 2. edit. post ob. page 46.
The Dr's. last Objection is founded in a Parallel, which he makes between the
Pagan Saints (as he calls them) and the Christian Saints. He tells us, the
Gentiles addressed themselves to God by innumerable Mediators, by Angels and the
Souls of their departed Her^es, which were the Pagan Saints. This he repeats in
several places, with no material Addition, only that, in speaking to the
pretended Worship, we give to Images; he adds, that all our distinctions are no
other, ibid page 100.
but what the Heathens used in the same Case. And taking this for granted, He
leaves his Auditors to conclude, that, as it was Idolatry in the Heathens to
Worship these Pagan Saints, so it is in the Church of Rome to worship the
Christian Saints.

Answ. The best way, in my opinion, to remove this difficulty, is to take a
short view of the Character, and Worship, which the Heathens gave to their
Pagan Saints, as the Dr. is pleased to call them; (though without any Warrant
from the Heathen Writers, who always call them Gods) and see, whether, upon the
Comparison, the Christian Saints be, in any thing, by us treated like Them. And
here I shall not distrust any Man's knowledge so far, as to bring any
Authorites from Heathen Writers to confirm what I say; being resolved to
instance only in such plain things, as our very Schoolboys are not ignorant
of, And,

First, As to their Character, it is no less evident, that the Heathens gave
these Saints the Attributes of the Supreme Being, than that they are
represented in their Writings under such Circumstances of Debauchery, Lewdness,
and Intemperance, as the greatest Debauchees are hardly capable of. The Doctor
cannot deny, but Jupiter (to omit several others) was reckoned a Hero in his
Time, according to the Pagan Belief. We are told, his Father was Saturn, that
he was born in Crete, and that after his Death, he was, for his great Feats,
Deified and got the Supreme Dominion in Heaven; as his Brothers Pluto and
Neptune got that of Hell, and the Sea. This departed Hero is described every
where with the Majesty of the true God; He has Omnipotence put into His hands:
He is represented as the Great Rector and Governor of the World; and, at the
same time, is said to be sullied with all the Lewdness and Debauchery
imaginable.

Now the Christian Heroes, or Saints, are quite of another Complexion: We give
them none of the Attributes of the true God. We believe they fought stoutly
under the Banner of Jesus Christ, reduced Kings and Princes, (not by their
Swords, but by their Sufferings) to his Subjection, and laid down their Lives
for the Truth of his Doctrine; but we do not put Omnipotence into their Hands.
We believe they did work Miracles, and wondrous Things; but then we do not say,
they did these Things by their own Power and Virtue; but that they were the
happy Instruments by which God wrought these Miracles, in Confirmation of the
Word, which he put in their Mouth. We believe the Saints are Great Friends, and
Favorites of the true God; because Jesus Christ has so declared. He tells us,
that, as his Father has appointed unto Him, so ha^^ He appointed unto them a
Kingdom, Luke 22.30.
that they might eat and drink at His Table in His Kingdom; by which Metaphor
of Eating and Drinking, He gives us to understand, that they are Partakers of
the same Glory and Bliss with himself in Heaven. But we say, the Saints can do
nothing of themselves; but that all their Sufficiency is from God, who made
them what they are.

And then, as to their Lives and Conversation; I hope the Doctor would not put
me upon proving, that the Apostles, and the B. V. Mary, and the Saints in
Heaven are in no manner concerned in the Lewdness, and Intemperance of the
Pagan Saints; or that we do not ascribe any such thing to them. So that, as to
the Character, the Pagan and Christian Saints have no more Resemblance than
Black and White.

Secondly, as to the Worship: The Heathens worshipped their Gods, or Pagan
Saints (as the Doctor would have it) upon a false Pretense of their Power and
Greatness in Heaven; whereas there was no such Gods, or Saints. But we honor
and respect the Christian Saints, because we are warranted by the Word of God,
that they are such as we represent them. The Heathens erected Altars to their
Gods; but we make Altars for none, but one God only. They offered Sacrifice to
all their Gods and Saints, which is the chief Mark of supreme Worship; but we
offer Sacrifice only to the true and living God, as Malice it self cannot deny.
They made Idols, and believed that their Gods came, and dwelt in them; and that
many of them spoke, and eat, and drank; and for that Reason they worshipped
them, and therefore are justly called Idolaters; because they worshipped things
that were not; but we only put up in our Churches, the Images and Pictures of
Jesus Christ, the Living God, and of such as, we are sure, are truly Saints;
but do not believe that there is any Virtue or Divinity in them for which they
ought to be worshipped: On the contrary, we are expressly forbid to give these
Pictures or Images, any manner of Worship for their own Sake; but that the
respect, which we show them, is to be referred to the Originals, namely to
Christ, and his Saints. And sure these things, which represent Christ and his
Saints to our Eyes, and put us in mind of the Death and Passion of the One, and
of the Patience and Sufferings of the Others, are worthy of some Respect; and
may very well be honored upon Account of what they represent, without any
Danger of Idolatry, as the Pictures of Kings, and Princes, and other Men by
whom we receive Benefits, are, in their own degree, confessedly respected, and
had in Esteem, without any such Suspicion. In one Word the Heathens called all
their Heroes, or Saints, Gods; sacrificed to them, as such; worshipped them, as
such; called upon them, as such; but we do not call the Christian Saints, Gods;
we do by no means sacrifice to them, nor worship them, as Gods; nor call upon
them, as Gods. So that, upon the whole matter, the Doctor might as well
resemble Sea to dry Land, or Light to Darkness, or the obscurest Night to the
brightest Day; as compare the Worship we give the Christian Saints to that,
which the Heathens paid to their Heroes, or Saints, as the Doctor is pleased to
call them.

CHAP. VIII. Of Images.
WHat the Council of Trent declares concerning Images is this: That the Images
of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints are to be had, and
kept, especially in Churches; and that due Honor and Respect is to be given
them; not that we believe any virtue, or Divinity to be in them, for which they
ought to be worshipped; or that we should ask any thing of them, or put any
trust or confidence in them; as was formerly done by the Gentiles, who put their
trust in Idols; but because the Honor done to them, is referred to the
Originals, which they represent. So that by those Images, which we kiss, and
before which we uncover our Heads and bow down, we adore Christ, and reverence
the Saints, whose likeness they bear. Ses. 25. Dec. de invocat. Sanct.

Here, you see, this Council only requires, that we give du^ honor and respect
to Images; which signifies no more, than that we ought to give them the honor
which is due to them. But this is not all; for the Council adds, that when we
uncover our Heads, or bow toward Images, we adore Christ and reverence the
Saints, whose likeness these Images bear. So that it is not so much the Images
we honor, as Christ and His Saints. And since it is confessed, that the Types
and Figures of all sacred things, are worthy of some Respect, in propotion to
what they represent; how mnch more ought the Types and Figures of Jesus Christ,
who is the Source and Fountain of all Holiness and Sanctification; and of the
Saints, (to whose Charity and goodness we owe under God our Faith and Religion)
to be had in Honor and Esteem. We honor and respect the Bible more than
ordinary Books, though it is but Paper and Ink like other Books; because the
Characters therein contained are sacred Signs, which represent to us the Word
and Will of God: And even Nature teaches us to honor and respect the Pictures
and Images of Kings and Princes, and of our Friends, for the Excellency of
these Persons, and the Benefits we receive by them. And why may not we likewise
honor and respect those Signs or Images, which represent to us that, which is
most Excellent, and most August in the Christian Religion namely Christ and His
Saints.

The Chief End of Images, and Pictures, is to adorn our Churches, to put us in
mind of the Passion of Christ, and of the Piety and Virtue of the Saints; and
to be Books to the Ignorant. And what Ornament so proper for the Church of God,
as the Picture of Jesus Christ, who planted it with His Blood? What, in the
next Place, as the Pictures of Saints, who watered it with their's; and are
now, in their own Degree, the great Ornaments of the Heavens? What can be more
powerful to excite us to a greatful Remembrance of the Passion of Jesus Christ,
then to behold a Crucifix, which represents Him to us, with Arms stretched out,
as it were, to embrace us, and Hands, and Feet, and Side pierced for our Sins?
What pious Christian can then abstain from expressing the Sense of his Heart,
by some exterior Act of Honor and Respect to such a Representation, if not for
its own, at least, for the sake of that, which it represents? And, as to the
Ignorant, it cannot be denied, but that when they are taught, that such a
Picture represents Jesus Christ, who in that posture Sacrificed Himself for
their Sins; that such other Pictures represent the Apostles and Saints, who
preached, and delivered that Faith and Religion to them, by which they are to
be eternally happy; it cannot be denied, I say, but that such lessons are
easily retained, and create in their Minds a greatful acknowledement of the
Mercies of their Redeemer, and a desire to imitate the Virtue and Piety of the
Saints. And then the Respect which they show to these Pictures, is but the
Natural Result of their Sense of the Benefits they receive by the Passion of
Christ, and by the Piety and Charity of the Saints.

These were the chief motives, that induced the Church in all Ages, to have,
and to keep the Pictures of Jesus Christ, and His Saints. I say in all Ages.
Eusebius the Great and Famous Ecclesiastical Historian, ^ist. Eccles. lib. 7.
cap. 18 edit. vol.
who flourished in the Beginning of the fourth Age, tells us, that the
Christians had from the Beginning, the Pictures of Christ, and of St. Peter and
St. Paul; that he himself had seen the Statue, which the Woman, whom Christ had
healed of the bloody flux, erected for Him at Paneas; and that, at the Foot of
this Statue, there grew an Herb, which, when it touched the Skirt of the
Statue, had a virtue of curing Diseases. And Helena's seeking and finding the
Cross, on which our Lord suffered; and the Miracle by which it was discovered,
are too well known to be questioned.

But what need I insist upon proofs of the lawfulness of Pictures and Images in
Churches, or of the respect that is due to them; since the Protestants
themselves acknowledge both. They say, they only exclaim against the Abuses
committed in the Church of Rome, upon this account: But for the Thing it self,
they say, they willingly own it. This is the Declaration, The Ingenious Author
of The Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in answer to the
Bishop of Meaux, makes in the Name of that Church. page 18.
It may not be amiss to subjoin his very Words: We will honor, says he, the
Relics of the Saints, as the primitive Church did: We will respect the Images
of our Savior, and the B. Virgin: And as some of us now bow toward the Altar,
and all of us are enjoyed to do so, at the Name of Jesus; so will we not fail
to testify all due Respect to this Representation. Now we do-likewise declare,
and have upon all occasions done, that we neither mean, nor intend to give any
more to the Images of Christ, or the V. Mary, or the Saints, but due Honor and
Respect. But if neither the express Decree of the Council of Trent, which
commands us to give them no more; nor the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition of our
Doctrine, in which this is so manifestly declared; nor our own often repeated
Protestations to that Effect, will prevail upon them to believe us; all we can
say is, that we are sorry for their Incredulity, but cannot help it. As to
those Abuses, which this Ingenious Man says have crept in upon Account of
Images: If there be any such, we protest and declare, that we abhor and detest
them, no less than he, or any of his Persuasion; or (to use the Council of
Trent's Phrase) we earnestly desire, they should be entirely abolished. But
sure he was too reasonable to think, that the abuse of a thing was a good
Argument against the use of it.

Nor will his Example of Hezekiahis destroying the Brazen Serpent help the
matter: For he may please to consider, that the Children of Israel lived in a
Country, where they were surrounded, and as I may say, hedged in, on every
side, with Idolatry, and the Worship of false Gods; and not only so, but they
themselves were very much given to that Worship, as appears by the Groves, and
high Places, and Idols set up among them, by their wicked Kings and Rulers; and
which this pious King pulled down and destroyed; and therefore is deservedly
commended in Scripture for breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent, to which the
People, no doubt, sacrificed. But, blessed be God, we have no such thing to
fear: We have no Idolaters among us, nor near us; we have no Groves nor high
Places, nor Idols in the land. We do not burn Incense to any false Gods, nor
worship them. We make only the Images, and Pictures of the true God, and his
Saints; and it cannot be denied, but these same Pictures and Images, have been
kept in our Churches; and have had the same respect given them, which we now
give, at least these nine hundred years; and, in the Opinion of many learned
Protestants, for four hundred Years before. Yet all this while no Heathen
Idolatry was ever introduced into the Church, upon Account of our Images: No
Defection from Christianity to Pagan Worship was heard among us. So that the
Example of Hezekiah is not to the purpose, the Parallel is not just, we are
nothing concerned in it. Besides, the Brazen Serpent was a Monument of no such
great Moment to be long preserved: 'Twas only kept, to put the Children of
Israel in mind of the Miraculous Cure of those, who were bitten by the Serpents
in the Wilderness; and when they left that Land, and were no more vexed by
these Serpents, it was of no great use. But the Remembrance of the Death and
Passion of our Lord, by whom the Sins of the World was taken away; and of his
Holy Apostles and Saints, by whom his Doctrine was propagated and transmitted
to us, is of that high Importance and Concern to all the World, that these
Monuments, which put us in mind of them, ought to be for ever most carefully
preserved.

Page 14.
As to what he says, that, in the Hymns for the day of the Invention of the
Cross, and Good-Fryday, we desire the Cross to strengthen the Righteous, and
give Pardon to the Guilty, etc. And that in the Service on Good-Fryday we say,
Behold the Wood of the Cross! Come let us adore it. I answer,

First, That Poetical Hymns and Verses have, in all Writings, a greater
Latitude than Prose.

Secondly, That these Expressions are Apostrophes and Exclamations addressed to
Jesus Christ upon the Cross, whom we represent to our minds as there hanging,
when we salute the Cross. And that this is our meaning (whatever the words may
import upon any other occasion) I think is plain, from the Words of the Council
of Trent, which expressly forbids us to believe, that there is any Virtue or
Divinity in Images, or to demand any thing of them; which if we believe (as we
profess and declare we do) it cannot, with any color of Reason, be presumed,
that we should ask Strength or Pardon of the Wood of the Cross, contrary to the
express commands of the Council, and to the Faith, which we profess.

Touching the Words in the Service, on Good-Frida^: Behold the Wood of the
Cross! Come, let us adore it. I am sorry to see so Ingenious a Man, and who
otherwise professes to be so great a Friend to Sincerity and Truth, swerve so
manifestly from both, in this Point. He gives us here an Anthem sung on
Good-Fryday maimed, in the middle; and added to, in the End. The Words in the
Roman Missal are thus; Ecce Lignum Crucis in quo salus mundi pependit! Venice
Adoremus. Behold the Wood of the Cross on which the Savior of the World hung!
Come let us adore. Here is no (It) as he adds. And sure, it is more reasonable,
and more agreeable to Grammatical Construction, to refer the word Adore, to
Savior of the World, which imediately goes before it, than to Wood of the
Cross, which goes before that: And then the sense is plainly this; Behold the
Wood of the Cross on which the Savior of the World hung! Come let us adore
Him. And that this, and no other, is the Sense, in which the Roman Catholic
Church takes these Words; I wonder any Man, that ever read the Council of Trent
should be ignorant of; seeing the Church, in that Council, has expressly
declared, that by the Images, which we kiss, and before which we uncover our
Heads and bow down, we adore Christ, and reverence the Saints. Here is a
Crucifix proposed to us, a Representation of Jesus Christ upon Mount Calvary;
we kiss it, and bow to it; and when we say, Come let us adore; we must surely
mean, come let us adore Christ; else we should contradict the express words of
the Council. I own indeed, that we mean likewise by Kissing the Crucifix, and
bowing to it that day, to give it due Honor and Respect; and that we make use
of the words, Crucem Adoramus, several Times on Good-Fryday, to express the
Respect we give it. But then we are warranted so to do by the Scripture, which
uses the same Term to express the Honor exhibited to several Creatures; as
appears by these Texts, Adorem te Filii Matris tuae; Let thy Mother's Sons
adore Thee, says Isaac to his Son Jacob, Genesis 27.29. Et omnis Multitudo --
inclinantes capita adoraverunt Dominum and Regem; and all the Congregation --
bowing their Heads, adored the Lord and the King, 1 Chronicles. 29.20. Adorate
Scabellum podum ejus, Psalm. 99. Adore ye His Footstool. Here is Adoration with
a Witness, and all, to one, given to mere Creatures; and though in all these
Phrases, the very Term is used in the Hebrew and Greek, as well as in the
Latin, which the Scripture uses to express the Supreme Adoration given to the
true God; yet no Man ever said, that these Creatures ought to be adored in the
strict Propriety of Adoration or Supreme Worship; but the Sense is, that they
ought to be worshipped with the Honor and Respect, that is due to Them. In like
manner; though we say (in Scripture Language) Crucem Adoramus, we do not mean,
nor intend to give the Cross any other Worship than that, which is due to a
Type or Figure, which represents our Savior and Redeemer to us. Thus much
concerning this Ingenious Man's Exceptions to Images. I now come to Dr.
Tillotson's Objections.

And here his Difficulties are neither great, nor many in number. Two things
only I observe in his Sermons, that deserve some consideration. The first; that
worshipping of Images is as point blank against the Second (He should have said
the First) Commandment, Vol. 2. page 7^
as a deliberate and malicious killing of a Man is against the Sixth; Fifth
would have been more true. The Second, (...) edit post. ob. page 291.
That to secure the People from discerning our guilt in this matter, we are put
upon that shameful shift, (as he is pleased to term it) of leaving out the
Second Commandment in our common Catechisms and Manuals; lest the People,
seeing so plain a Law of God against so common a Practice of our Church,
should, upon that discovery, have broken off from us.

As to the First, I answer: If He means by Worship, to give the Supreme Worship
and Adoration to Images, which is d^o only to God; he is very much in the
right, and, I hope, shall never be contradicted by me. But if He understands by
Worship; to give Images that Honor and Respect, which is due to Things, that
represent Jesus Christ and His Saints; he is contradicted by Scripture, by all
Antiquity, and even by his own Church, as well as by us. Now that we give
Images no other Worship than the latter; or that the Decrees of our Church
enjoin no more, I think I have already sufficiently proved.

Touching the Second; I answer, that we never left out any of God's
Commandments, either in Catechism, or Manual; and that that, which he says is
left out (which yet is not the Second Commandment, but part of the First) is to
be found in hundreds of Manuals and Catechisms in England it self. And at this
Time, I have, upon my Table, a Manual and Catechism, wherein all, He says we
left out, are contained: The first bears this Title; a Manual of Prayers, and
Christian Devotions; the later, An Abridgment of Christian Doctrine with Proofs
out of Scripture. etc. The first Edition printed, Anno. 1649. Now a Man that
can dispense with his Conscience and honor so far, as to publish, from Press
and Pulpit, untruths so easily discovered; what Paradox may not he undertake to
maintain? It Is true, there are some Manuals and Catechisms, in which the Ten
Commandments are comprehended, as it were, in so many Verses; that Children,
and People of weak Capacity may learn them with more case: But in no Manual or
Catechism, that pretends to give the Commandments, was ever the Second
Commandment left out. That which he calls the Second Commandment, viz. Thou
shall not Make to thy Self any graven Image, etc. is undoubtedly part of the
First; and only added to inculcate to a Gross Ignorant People, what they were
to avoid, in consequence of the One God, which the First Commandment obliges
them to have: For it is evident, that in these Words, Thou shall have no other
Gods but me, is necessarily implied, that they should not make to themselves
any Graven Images, or Idols to Worship them; which to do, were to have other
Gods: And therefore these two Negatives make but one Commandment. Unless the
Dr. will have it, that it is a distinct Commandment from the first; because it
begins a Verse, or contains some Words, which are not expressed in the first.
But he may please to consider, that the Law of Moses was extant, at least a
Thousand Years, before it was digested into Verses, or that any Points were
added to it; during which Time, there was nothing to distinguish one
Commandment from an other, but the very Reason and Nature of the things
commanded; and then, since this, which the Dr. would have to be the Second
Commandment, is altogether of the same Nature with the First, and prohibits
nothing but what the First prohibits, namely, the having or worshipping more
than one God; we have all the Reason in the World to conclude, that it is but
One, and the same Commandment with the First. And thus all our Ancestors, and
all the Ancient's Comments upon this Chapter of Moses, at least, as many as I
have seen, understood it; and even Martin Luther in those Books, which he wrote
against the Church of Rome, makes but one Commandment of the Doctor's First and
Second. But if He will have it, that it is a distinct Commandment, because it
has a distinct prohibition; then it will follow, that we must have as many
Commandments as we have distinct Prohibitions in that Chapter, besides the
affirmative Precepts; and then we shall have 13 or 14 Commandments at least.
Thou shall not make to thy Self any graven Image, must be the Second; thou
shall not how down to them, the Third; thou shall not take the Name of thy Lord
thy God in vain, the Fourth; remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, the Fifth;
thou shall do no manner of Work, the Sixth; and so on. But as the Dr. would
not, I suppose, allow of this distribution, so He may please to give us leave
to stick to the Old Ten Commandments, in the same order and manner, we received
them from our Ancestors of Blessed Memory.

CHAP. IX. Of Purgatory.
WHat we hold, as of Faith concerning this Point, is thus declared by the
Council of Trent: That there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained,
are helped by the Prayers of the Faithful, but especially by the acceptable
Sacrifice of the Mass.

Here the Council does not determine what sort of Place Purgatory is, or what
manner of Pain Souls endure in it; nor whether they are purged by material
Fire, or by other Torments or Anguishes of Mind; but is content to declare with
the Ancient Fathers, that there is a Place, wherein Souls departed are
detained, without entering upon curious and need less Questions concerning the
Manner, or Duration of the Pains they there suffer. In handling therefore this
Argument, I shall endeavor to tred in the Steps of the Ancient Fathers, and
follow the Pattern of this Council, waving all superfluous and needless
Questions relating to this Subject; which, that I may the more plainly and
distinctly do, I shall proceed in this Method.

1. I will endeavor to show, that the Doctrine of Purgatory is founded in
Scripture, as interpreted by the Ancient Fathers of the Church.

2. But more especially, that it is founded in the Practice observed in the
primitive Church, of Praying for the Dead. This I take to be an unanswerable
Argument; for if it appears, that the Primitive Church did pray for the Dead,
that their Sins might be forgiven them; then it will necessarily follow, that
they believed those Souls, they thus prayed for, to be in a place, where they
might be helped, and benefited by their Prayers. This is evident; for, if the
Primitive Church were of Opinion, that all Souls departed, did go strait to
Heaven, or to Hell; it were vain and superfluous to pray for them. They knew,
there was no getting of Souls out of Hell; for, out of Hell there is no
Redemption: And therefore it were in vain to attempt it. And it were
superfluous to pray for the Souls in Heaven, for the Remision of their Sins:
For, why should they pray for that, which they knew they had no need of. So
that, if they did pray for the Remission of Sins of Souls departed, the
Consequence is inevitable, that they did believe, there was a Third Place, were
some Souls were detained, and might be assisted by their Prayers, which is what
we call Purgatory.

3. I shall answer what Doctor Tillotson brings against this Point.

1. I shall endeavor to show that the Doctrine of Purgatory is founded in
Scripture, as interpreted by the Ancient Fathers of the Church. To prove this
Head; I will produce some Texts of Scripture, with the Readings of the Fathers
upon Them. 1. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way
with him: Lest at any time, the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the
Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cost into Prison. Verify I say
unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost
Farthing, Mat. 5.25.26. Tertullian, a Father of the Second Age, ^. de Anima.
cap. 58.
re^ds thus upon this Text. Seeing we understand that Prison which the Gospel
demonstrates to be places below; and the uttermost Farthing, we interpret every
small fault there to be punished by the delay of the Resurrection; no Man can
doubt but the Soul may pay something in the places below. St. Cyprian, a Father
of the third Age: It is one thing to be cast into Prison, not to go out thence,
till he pays the uttermost Farthing; an other, Epist. 52. ad Anton.
presently to receive the Reward of Faith; one thing to be afflicted with long
pains for Sins to be mended and purged long with Fire; another, to have purged
all Sins by sufferings. Here this Father, alluding to the foregoing Text, says,
that some Souls are cast into Prison 'till they pay the uttermost Fathing; that
others immediately receive their Reward, that is, Heaven. Some are afflicted
and purged by Fire, in order to their Amendment, whilst others have purged all
their Sins by Sufferings or Martyrdom; The very Language of the present R.
Catholic Church. St. Jerome, a Father of the fourth Age, who, for his
extraordinary Learning and Knowledge in the Scriptures, was called Magister
Mundi, the Master of the World, in his comment upon the said Text, has these
Words; This is that which he says, Comment. in 5. Matt.
thou shall not go out of Prison till thou pay, even thy little Sins, There is
then such a Prison, in this Great Master's Opinion.

2. Every Man's Work shall be made manifest; for the Day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by Fire; and the Fire shall try every Man's Work
of what sort it is. If any Man's Work abide, which he has built thereupon, he
shall receive a Reward. If any Man's Work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss;
but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by Fire, 1 Cor. 3.13.14, 15. St.
Ambrose, or the Author of the Commentaries upon the Epistles of St. Paul
annexed to his Works, which the ablest Critics do, with good Reason, ascribe to
Hilary, Deacon of the Church of Rome, and Contemporary to St. Ambrose; speaks
thus of this Passage: But when he (St. Paul) says; Yet so as by Fire; he shows
indeed, that he shall be saved; but yet shall suffer the Punishmen^ of Fire;
that being purged by Fire, he may be saved, and not tormented for ever, as the
Infidels are, with Everlasting Fire. In cap. 3. Epist. 1. ad Cor. St. Gregory
of Nisse is so plain and full upon this Subject, that no R. Catholic can at
this Time speak plainer. (...). A Man is cleansed, says he, either in this
present Life by Prayer and the Love of Wisdom, or after his Death by the
Furnace of a Purging Fire. And a little after. (...). After his Departure out
of the Body, knowing the Difference between Virtue and Vice, it is impossible
to be Partakers of the Divinity, unless Purgatory Fire does cleanse the Soul
from the Spots that stick to it. Orat. pro. Mortuis prope Fin.

St. Austin speaks much to the same purpose: Purge me (O Lord) says he, in this
Life, and make me such, as shall not need that Pu^ifying Fire. And a little
after he adds; He shall be saved, yet so as by Fire: And because it is said, He
shall be saved; this Fire is contemned; yet it will be more grievous, than any
Thing that a Man can suffer in this Life. Enar. in Psalm 37.

I might insist upon several other Passages of St. Austin, and bring more Texts
of Scripture with the Sense of the Fathers upon them, with Respect to this
Subject; but, I think what is here offered is sufficient to show, that our
Doctrine concerning Purgatory, is founded in Scripture; and that the Ancient
Fathers did believe it to be so. I shall now proceed to show,

2. That the Doctrine of Purgatory is founded in the Practice, observed in the
Primitive Church, of praying for the Dead, for the Remission of Sins. This, as
I said before, if made out, will plainly establish our Tenet: For, if the
Primitive Church did pray for the Dead, for the Remission of their Sins; it
follows necessarily, that they supposed them capable of being assisted by their
Prayers; and consequently neither in Heaven, nor in Hell, but in a third Place,
which is what we believe, and call Purgatory.

Now, that the Primitive Church, and all succeeding Generations used to pray
for the Dead, for the Remission of their Sins; no one Point in the Christian
Religion is more Universally attested. St. Epiphanius tells us, that Aerius was
reputed an Heretic for denying the Lawfulness of it; and besides him, I do not
find since Christianity began, till the Beginning of the last Age, any one
single Person, that ever denied or questioned it. Never was there found any
Liturgy without it; nothing so frequent in the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical
Writers, as the Recommendation of it: In a Word, there is not one Doctrine or
Practice of the Catholic Religion delivered with so full, and unquestionable a
Tradition; no not the Mystery of the Trinity, no nor the Incarnation, nor the
Necessity of Baptism, nor even the Truth of the Scriptures. So that a Man may,
lib. de Cor. Militis. lib. de Monog. de vita Constable. lib. 4. c. 71. In Enchir.
cap. 110. lib. 9. Confess. cap. 13.
as well, make an Apology for being a Christian, as for this. Tertulian tells
us, that, in his Days, they made yearly Oblations for the Dead, and prayed for
their Souls. Eusebius, that all the Congregation prayed for the Soul of the
Emperor Constantin the Great. St. Austin, that it is not to be denied, that the
Souls of the Dead are eased by the Pity of their living Friends, when the
Sacrifice of the Mediator is offered for them. That his Mother Monica her last
Injunctions to him was to remember her at the Altar. That the Tradition of the
Fathers is observed by the whole Church, Sermon. 32. de Verb. Apost.
viz. That they should pray for those who died in the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ, in that place of the Sacrifice, where the Dead are
recommended. In short, I should never end, should I relate all the Sayings of
Fath rs, and Councils, and Eccl siastical Writ^rs upon this Subject; so that I
may confidently affirm, there is not one Point in the Christian Religion more
unanimously believed, or more religiously practiced over all the Catholic
Church, in all Ages, than this of praying for the Dead, and offering the
S^crifice of the Mass for their Souls. And this is so well known, that ^o Sober
and Learned Protestant ever yet denied the immemorial Antiquity of it, at
least, that ever I met with. But being sensible how necessarily, and inevitably
the Belief of Purgatory, or a Third Place, where Souls are detained for a Time,
is consequent upon this Practice, they have recourse to certain su^terfuges and
Evasions. They tell us, that Prayers were made from the second Age for the
Apostles and Martyrs, and Confessors, Exposit. of the Doctrine of the Church of
England. page 31.
and even for the Blessed Virgin Mary; all which they thought in Happiness, and
never touched at Purgatory; that therefore it does not follow, there is a
Purgatory; because they prayed for the Dead. To which I answer, that these
Gentlemen would very much oblige us, if they would be so good, as to instance
in some of those Prayers, which they say were put up for the Apostles and
Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary; which I never yet met with, in any of their
Writings. And this very thing gives me a shrewd Suspicion, that they are not
able to produce any Examples of that kind, at least, to the purpose;
considering how liberal, and even prodigal, they are of Quotations of Fathers,
and Ecclesiastical Writers, when they seem to make for them. This I am certain
of, that the primitive Church did only believe their Prayers available for
those, whom they thought not to have so well lived, as that they should not
need their Charitable Assistance. It Is what St. Austin says; De Civit. Dei lib.
21. cap. 24.
Pro defunctis quibusdam Ecclesiae exanditur oration, quorum in Christo
regeneratorum, nec usque adeo vita in corpore male gesta est, ut tali
Misericordia judicentur digni non esse, nec usque adeo bear, ut talem
Misericordiam reperiantur necessariam non habere. The Prayers of the Church are
heard for such as are regenerated in Christ, whose Lives have not been
altogether so bad, as not to be thought worthy of such a Mercy, nor altogether
so good, as not to need such a Mercy. And the same Father tells us, that it
were to injure the Martyrs to pray for them, to whose Prayers we ought rather
to have our selves commended.

But do not the Ancient Liturgies make mention of Prayers and Thanksgivings put
up to God for, or in Honor of the Apostles and Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary?
And does not the Roman Missal, we now use, do the same? Yes, most certainly;
for we pray to God, and thank Him for, and in Honor of the Apostles and
Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary; and so did all Antiquity: But then these Prayers
are not intended for the Delivery of their Souls from any Pains, but to thank
Almighty God for crowning the Martyrs and Saints; and to praise his Holy Name
for bringing them to that happy State they how are in; as the Prayers and
Oblations of the Pr^^ative Church, and those we new make for the Souls of such
as die in the Communion of the Church, of whose perfect Innocence and Holiness
we are not assured; are intended to beg of God, that he would be merciful to
them; and forgive them those sins, for which they did not fully satisfy in
this Life. And this St. Austin tells us was the Design and End of all the
Prayers put up for the Dead, whether Apostles or Martyrs, or other Christian
Souls. These are his Words; The Oblations and Alms usually offered in the
Church for all the Dead, De Enchiridio ad Lau. cap. 100.
who received Baptism, were Thanksgivings for such as were very Good,
Propitiations for such as were not very Bad; but for such as were very wicked,
though they gave no Relief to the Dead, yet were they some Consolation to the
Living. And is not this the very Doctrine we hold this Day? Do not we offer the
Sacrifice of Christ's Body, as this Father calls it, on the Feasts of the
Apostles and Martyrs, etc. in Thanksgiving to God for the blessed Estate of the
Saints in Heaven? And do not we pray, and give Alms and offer the same
Sacrifice for the Propitiation of those, whom we charitably believe to have
died in the Peace, and Communion of the Church? Does our praying to God for the
Apostles and Martyrs, and the Virgin Mary, as aforesaid, hinder us to believe,
that there is a Place wherein other Souls are detained till they have satisfied
the Divine Justice? No sure: And why must the like Prayers hinder the Primitive
Church to believe the same? Nay rather does it not necessarily follow, that the
Primitive Church, as well as We, did believe there was such a place; because
they put up Prayers to God for Pardon and Forgiveness of Sins, for such as they
reasonably believed to have died in the Communion of the Body of Christ (as the
Fathers speak) but not so perfect, as that they should not need their Prayers;
since it were both vain and superfluous to have prayed for them upon this
Score, had they believed, they were immediately received into Heaven, or thrust
into Hell. This I am confident no Man of Sense can reasonably deny: So that it
is a most shameful Evasion, to conclude, that the Primitive Church did not
believe Purgatory; because they prayed for the Virgin Mary, and the Apostles
and Martyrs, etc. else why do they not conclude, that we do not believe it;
because we do the same?

To sum up all these Evidences then, I reason thus: The Primitive Church prayed
to God for some Souls departed, that they might be delivered out of Prison;
that their Faults, and Sins might be forgiven them; that they might be eased of
their Pain; that they might be saved from the Punishment of Fire; that they
might be received into Heaven; but such Prayers are inconsistent with a Belief,
that the Souls departed are immediately taken into Heaven, or condemned to
Hell. Therefore the Primitive Church believed there was a Third Place, wherein
some souls departed were detained, and were capable of being assisted and
bettered by their Prayers.

The first Proposition is taken from the very Words of the Fathers, and
acknowledged by our Adversaries to be true. The second, a very small portion of
Natural Reason, with never so little insight in Scripture, and Christian
Religion (which assure us that Prayers of that nature, for those that are in
Heaven or Hell, are needless and vain) will easily discover to be likewise
True. And I think, the consequence is rightly inferred; I now proceed to the
Objections.

3. The Doctor objects first, Vol. 2 Page 63.
that the Doctrine of Purgatory is not founded in Scripture, nor can be proved
from it; and that some of our own Eminent Men do acknowledge it cannot. To which

I answer, that I have produced two Passages from Scripture, and could produce
as many more; which the most Eminent Fathers of the Primitive Church have
interpreted of Purgatory, and therefore I think, I may safely tell the Dr.
that, with submission, He was mistaken. As to those Eminent Men of our Church,
who say, that the Doctrine of Purgatory cannot be proved from Scripture; when
any one, in his behalf, names them, and points at the place in their Works
where they say so, I will return him as satisfactory an Answer as I can. In the
mean time, I may reasonably presume, they say no such thing: Seeing he was
never backward in giving citations, when they made any thing for him. All the
Eminent Men, He vouches for this, is Estius, who, by the Dr's. own confession,
only says, that, in his Opinion, the Passage of St. Paul above cited, does not
evince Purgatory; but does not say, that other Passages of Scripture do not;
and if he had, I should oppose to his Opinion that of Tertulian, St. Cyprian,
St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Austin, and many more of the Ancient Fathers, whose
Authority, in this matter, ought I think, to weigh more with any reasonable
Man, than that of any modern Writer whatsoever.

Vol. 2. edit. post ob. page 307.
His second Objection is borrowed from a Text in the Revelations: Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, from hence forth: Yea says the Spirit that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them, cap. 14.13.
Here, says the Dr. the Spirit pronounces them happy who die in the Lord,
because they rest from their Labors, which, adds He, they would not do, were
they to be tormented in Purgatory Fire: Ergo, etc.

Answ. This Passage is confessedly obscure, as to the meaning of some Words in
it, and the Time whence the blessing there mentioned is to Commence; and the
Doctor's bestowing six full Pages, upon the Explication of it, shows it to be
so; and for that Reason, I think it is against the Rules of Logic, to pretend
to more Evidence in the conclusion, than the Premises will afford. But it seems
he forgot in his second Sermon upon this Text, that in his First, he had told
us, that the Dead, which die in the Lord, in Scripture Phrase, are those who
die, or are put to death for the Lord's Cause, that is, as he expressly says,
suffer Martyrdom for the Lord; I say, he must have forgot this, else he would
not have objected that Text against Purgatory; since he could not be ignorant,
that we believe, that all the Martyrs, who suffer for the Faith of Christ, and
even other Eminent Saints, who do not suffer Martyrdom, but live the life of
Martyrs, do rest from their Labors, and pass not through the Fire of Purgatory.
Wherefore in my opinion, he should have given us an other Interpretation of
this Text, or have let Purgatory alone, but it is no new thing to find the
Doctor pulldown in one place what he had built in an other; and therefore I am
not surpised to see Purgatory brought in by Head and Shoulders, and spoken
against in Season, and out of Season. It Is Purgatory that reproaches the
Sacrileges, and Depredations of the Doctor's Ancestors of worthy Memory, and
Bears hard upon their Posterity; and upon that account, it must be Cried down,
lest the horrid guilt of the Sacrileges of the Fathers, should fly in the Face
of their Children, and give them that Purgatory in this Life, which, He would
persuade them, they shall not meet with, in the next.

For a third Objection, the Doctor tells us, Vol. 2. Edit. Post. ob. Page 310.
we have a very considerable, and substantial Reason to exempt as few, as
possibly we can, from going to Purgatory; because, says he, the more we put in
fear of going thither, the Market of Indulgences (as he calls it) rises the
higher, and the profit thence accruing to the Pope's C^ffers; and the more and
greater Legacies will be less ^o the Priests, to hire their saying of Masses
for the delivery of Souls out of the Place of Torments.

Answ. After my hearty thanks to the Dr. for his Charitable Opinion of us, I
must observe, from what is above said, that, it seems, this Market of
Indulgences is of a very long standing; and that the Ancient Fathers of the
Church, took great care it should not sink. But to be serious: It Is well known,
and even acknowledged by the Learned of his Church, that in the Time of Gregory
the Great, now a Thousand Years since, the Doctrine of Purgatory, and all the
Practices consequent upon it, were believed and used, as they are now. And did
that great Saint exempt as few as he could from Purgatory, only to raise the
Market of Indulgences? Did all the Bishops of the Western Church, nay and of
all the World, concur with him in this, only to fill his Coffers? Alas! The
good Holy Man had but few Coffers, and as little Money to fill them with:
Conversion of Souls, not Money was his business. Did St. Austin design the
raising of the Market of Indulgences, or the putting of the People into a fear
of going to Purgatory, when he earnestly desires, the Readers of his
Confessions to pray for his Mother Monica's Soul for the remission of her Sins?
And had St. Jerome any thoughts of filling the Pope's Coffers, when he wrote,
that much benefit would accrue to the Souls departed, by the commemoration made
of them in the venerable and dreadful Mysteries? For shame Doctor! Away with
such unchristian Scandals, and do not put us upon exposing your Credit and
Character any farther. But perhaps the Legacies left for the bireing of Priests
(as he odly phrases it) to say Mass, for the delivery of Souls out of the place
of Torments, will mend the matter. Indeed, if the Priests were allowed to
determine matters of Faith, the thing (coming from the Doctor) would not appear
altogether so unreasonable; for, considering how very remarkable his Charity is
to Priests, I do not question, He would judge they would deal well for
themselves, had they but the handling of these matters. But, it is no less
evident, that no simple Priest has ever yet had any Vote in declaring matters
of Faith, than that no other is hired (as He calls it) or will receive any
Money for saying Masses for the Living, or the Dead; but the poorer, or more
indigent sort of Priests, who have not a sufficient Patrimony, or Maintenance
to subsist without it. And the matter being undeniably so; where is the
Conscience in saying, that the Councils and Prelates of the Church, should
possess the People with the fear of Purgatory, only to oblige them to hire some
indigent Priests to say Mass for their Souls? But the Scandal is so gross and
palpable, that the best answer I can make it is to contemn it.

The Doctor has some two, or three Objections more upon this Subject; but they
are either solved in the Proofs brought for this Point, or coincident with
those Objections already spoken to; or else have no particular Difficulty: And
so I take leave of him for this Time.

CHAP. X. Of Indulgences.
THE Power of Indulgences is founded in the Power of the Keys wherewith Jesus
Christ was pleased to entrust the Pastors and Governors of the Church; by
which Emblem of Keys, is denoted the Power of opening and shutting the Kingdom
of Heaven; of letting in, and keeping out, as Christians shall be found worthy,
of the one, or the other. This Power is promised to Saint Peter, in a special
Manner, and in his Person to all his lawful Successors, in these Words: I say
unto thee, that thou art Peter^ (i. e. a Rock) and upon this Rock I will build
my Church; and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give
unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall
be loosed in Heaven, Mat. 16.18.19. Again, the Promise of binding and loosing
is made, in another Place, to all the Apostles, in the same Words: Verily I say
unto you, whatsoever ye bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: And whatsoever
ye loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, Matt. 18.18. And Christ, a little
before his Ascension, actually conferred this power upon them, and told them
wherein it consists. Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whosoever Sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them, and whosoever Sins ye retain, they are retained. Joa.
20.22, 23. So that the Power of the Keys consists in remitting of Sins, and
retaining them; that is, in loosing Men from those Bands of Iniquity, wherewith
they tie themselves, and in binding them up, or keeping them bound, till they
have satisfied for their Sins, according to the Rules prescribed for that
purpose. In a Word, in opening the Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven, and letting
some in; and in shutting the same, and excluding others, as they shall be found
to have deserved it.

But, whereas our Blessed Savior did not intend, that the Apostles, and their
Successors should bind Sinners so, as finally to exclude them from the Kingdom
of Heaven; but only to keep them under Discipline for a Time, till they had
fulfilled the Terms of the Covenant upon which he offers them Salvation; which
consists in Obedience to His Laws, in Repentance and Satisfaction for their
Sins, and Amendment of Life for the Time to come; so the Church in all Ages
never retained the Sins of Men for any other End, than to keep them in a
wholesome and saving Discipline; till, by penitential and laborious Works, they
had given Marks of their Sorrow and Repentance, in Proportion to the Greatness
of their Sins. And as the Apostles and their Successors are commissioned by
Christ to retain Sins, so likewise are they to loose them: And therefore may
remit, abate, or alter these penitential and laborious Works, as their Prudence
and Wisdom shall judge it most expedient.

Now Indulgence is nothing else but a Relaxation, or Remission of some part of
(or all) these penitential Works to which a Sinner is liable by the Canons of
the Church; which Remission is granted by the Pastors, but especially by the
Chief Pastor of the Church, upon some weighty Considerations, for the greater
Benefit, and Advantage of the Faithful in general: Which that we may the better
understand, it will be requisite, to lay open some part of the Discipline of
the Primitive Church with Respect to this Matter.

We have 50 Canons, that go under the Name of the Apostles; which, if not of
them, are undoubtedly of some Apostolical Bishops of the first or second Age;
their Use and Authority being very great since that Time. We have likewise the
Canons of several Provincial Councils of the third and fourth Age, which have
been in great Esteem and Veneration among the Ancients; and for the pure and
wholesome Discipline contained in them, have been inserted in the Codex
Canonum, or Book of Canons of the Universal Church, as the Ancient Writers term
it. These Canons, among other Matters of Discipline, prescribe the different
Penances, which were to be imposed upon Sinners in proportion to the greatness
of their Sins; whence came the Name of Penitential Canons, so famous in
Antiquity. Some Canons prescribe seven Years Penance to certain Sins; others,
eight Years to other sins; some prescribe ten Years, some fifteen, some to the
Hour of Death. Some Penitents, by order of these Canons, fasted three Days
every Week, during the Time of their Penance; using no other Sustenance, during
that Time, but Bread and Water; others stood covered with Sackcloath at the
Church Doors sub dio, in the open Air, on Sundays and Festivals, while their
Penance lasted; others stood within Doors clothed in the same Raiment, weeping
and lamenting their sins; some lay prostrate upon the Floor begging and praying
their Brethren to intercede for them; others were admitted to hear divine
Service, in the Weeds of Penitents after they had gone through the forementioned
Stations; whence the Names of Hyemantes, Flentes, Prostrati, Audientes, so
often mentioned in the Canons.

Now these Rigorous Penances (very Rigorous I am sure they would appear in our
Days) or Exomologeses, as some of the Fathers call them, were sometimes abated
and remitted; partly upon Account of the Fervor of the Penitents, who, before
they had gone through all their Stations, gave such Marks of sincere Repentance,
that, to encourage others to follow their Examples, they were admitted to the
Communion and Fellowship of the Faithful; though they had not completed, the
Time prescribed by the Canons: Partly, but more especially, at the Intercession
of the Martyrs: For when any Martyrs were to be executed, and had begged of the
Bishops to indulge those Penitents, whom they recommended to them; the Bishops,
who could not in Reason, refuse any thing in their Power, to Men, who were
ready to lay down their Lives, and shed their Blood for the Christian Faith;
did commonly grant their Requests. And this the Fathers called (as in very deed
it is) Indulgence.

It were endless to instance in all the Examples, which might be brought from
the Fathers of the second and third Age upon this Subject. St. Cyprian is most
remarkable in this Business. We have several of his Epistles, wherein he tells
us, that having very often granted Indulgences to Penitents, at the request of
Martyrs; he was forced at last (being too much importuned for People, who did
not deserve that Favor) to write to the Martyrs themselves, to beg of them,
that they would not recommend, but such as were worthy of that Grace; at least,
that they should not take it ill, if he should not grant their Request; lest
the Discipline of the Church should be enervated upon that Score. The same
Father complains in his Letters to the Clergy of Rome, and to others, that some
of his own Priests, in his Absence, had presumed to give Indulgences, which the
Bishops only could do. In short, there is nothing more frequently mentioned
both by Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Writers; or more universally practiced for
the four first Ages, than these Indulgences.

Now the Roman Catholic Church neither means by Indulgences. nor pretends to
any more than the same Power, which the Primitive Fathers both had and
practiced; that is, of dispensing with, or remitting the Ronances prescribed by
the Canons; nor did she ever pretend to dispense with any Man from Repentance
for Sins, or Obedience to the Law of God. On the contrary, the R. C. Church
teaches, and has always taught, that all the Indulgences in the World do
signify nothing, without a hearty Contrition and sincere Sorrow for Sin, which
is the Spirit and Essence of Christian Devotion. But Canonical penances being
merely of Ecclesiastical Institution, and pertaining to Discipline; it cannot
be denied, but that the Church has Power to Intend, or Remit them, according to
the different Circumstances of Time, Place and Persons; especially since Christ
himself has given her Power to remit and retain Sins, in which Power this
Relaxation is manifestly implied.

It Is true, the R. C. Church does not now impose such rigorous Penances upon
Sinners, as the primitive Church did. Nor does she expose them publicly in the
Church in Penitential Weeds, as was practiced in the primitive Times; but then
the Reason on it is, because no Body now would undertake these Penances; because
she is convinced, that Men would sooner break off with Christ, and turn
Heathens, than purchase Heaven at so dear a Rate: So far has Wickedness and
Dissolution prevailed in the World!

In the Infancy of the Church, Piety, Devotion, Mortification, Austerity were
lovely Things: Christians affected them very much of themselves, and therefore
readily undertook them, when they had the misfortune to fall into any grievous
Sin. Besides, they had before their Eyes frequent Examples of the Constancy and
Resolution of their Pastors. They saw them expose their Lives with the greatest
contempt of the World, and bear the Torments of Racks, Gridirons, Wheels, and
other hellish Instruments (Episcopacy in those days being but one remove from
Martyrdom) with as much cheerfulness, and as little concern, as if these cruel
Engines had been Bays and Laurels; and therefore it is not to be admired, that
the Blood of Martyrs, then reeking hot, should warm their inclinations to
sufferings and mortification; and stir them up to a contempt of the allurements
and pleasures of a wicked World; not knowing how soon they themselves should be
called to the like Fiery Trial. But no sooner did the Blood of Martyrs grow
cold, and the Terrors of Death were taken away, by the Peace and Quiet, which
Constantine the Great restored to the Church, when the Primitive Piety and
Devotion began to decay, and Christians multiplied their Sins, as they did
their Riches. No sooner were the Sangninary Laws, and cruel Edicts of Pagan
Emperors repealed; and Christians put in Possession of great Fortunes, and
promoted to Honors and Dignities; when they forgot their former Condition,
waxed wanton against Christ, and spurned at Discipline. So that, in a few Ages
after, you might as well expect Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles, as
the primitive Penances from modern Christians: And therefore it was necessary
to mitigate the Severity of that Discipline, lest the generality of (I may say
all) Christians should throw off all care of their Salvation, and either return
to Pagan Idolatry, or follow the Delusions of their own Fancies.

However, since the Apostles, and Apostolical Bishops (whose Conduct ought to
be the Rule and Measure of all future Ages) have prescribed, and declared what
Penances ought to be imposed upon Sinners, according to the degree of their
Sins; the Church has always taught, that all Christians, who have been, or are
so unfortunate as to fall into grievous Sins; are still liable to these
Penances, unless they are dispensed with by the Church, or Commuted for some
other Works of Piety. And, that the discipline of the Church, might be
preserved and upheld, as much as the Wickedness of the Times will bear; all
Pastors and Confessors are commandded to impose such Penances upon Sinners as
will bear some proportion with the greatness of their Sins; though not to that
degree as the primitive Canons require: Leaving the rest to be dispensed with,
or Indulged by the Chief Pastors of the Church, according to the power which
Christ has given them, and as general Councils have determined. And this, in as
few Words as I could well deliver it, is truly and plainly the Case of
Indulgences; and the reason, why they are so often given, is the great decay of
Piety and Devotion in Christians, and the tender affection of the Church for
their eternal Welfare; not a desire of Money, or any filthy Lucre, as our
Adversaries do most injustly suggest. On the contrary, I am confident that
there is not one Divine or Casuist in our Church, who does not hold, that it is
Sinful and Diabolical, even the Sin of Simon Magus, to give, or receive any
Money for Indulgences. And several General Councils and Pope's Decrees have
expressly declared that to give, or receive any sort of Gift, either directly,
or indirectly, for either Indulgences, or any other Spiritual Grace is perfect
S^mony; which, surely, is sufficient to justify us from any sinister dealing
in this particular.

As to the Abuses of Indulgences, which I do not deny to have sometimes
happened; we are so far from countenancing, or abbetting them, that it is our
earnest wishes, and the desire of our Hearts, that all such should be entirely
abolished and taken away. We cover no more, than that all Christians in Time of
Jubile^s, and Plenary Indulgences; should think on their way, in the bitterness
of their S^als; should repent, and be sorry for their Sins; should have a
strong hope and confidence in the Mercy of Almighty God; gi^^ Al^^^ to the
Poor, and, by their (...) and servent Prayers, dispose themselves, (...) God is
Grace, to receive the Indul^^^^, of Permission of those Canonical Penances,
which, neither the Condition of the Persons, nor the Wickedness of the Times,
nor yet the great Decay of Piety will permit us to require they should fully
perform. And this we do; because we find the same thing practiced in the best
and purest Times of Christianity, even in the First, Second, Third and Fourth
Ages; especially, being warranted by the Word of God, who gave to his Church
the Power of remitting and retaining Sins.

And now, having found nothing in Dr. Tillotson's Sermons upon this Subject,
that requires any particular Consideration, besides what is here explained; I
shall conclude this Treatise with my Hearty Prayers to the Father of Light,
that He would be mercifully pleased to open the Eyes of our Adversaries, that
they may see the Innocence, and Reasonableness of our Doctrine; and give them
the Grace to lay seriously to Heart, how dangerous it is to reject those
Things, which the Catholic Church declares to have been delivered by Christ and
His Apostles. Our, and Their Creed says; I believe the Holy Catholic Church:
And they own, that the Catholic Church, before the Reformation, did hold and
Declare those Things, wherein we differ from them, to be Truths delivered by
Christ and His Apostles: How then can they believe the Catholic Church, when
She declares these Things, if they do not hold and believe these Things
themselves? Or how can they in Reason reject them, if they believe the Catholic
Church, which tells them, they are Divine Truths?

But there is yet something more desperate, which I beg of Almighty God to give
them the Grace to consider. Our Savior says to His Apostles: Go, and teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you, Mat. c. 28.19, 20. And St. Mark adds: He that believes, and is Baptized,
shall be Saved; but he that believes not, shall be Damned, Cap. 16.16. Now if
those Things, which make the Subject of our Dispute, be Truths given in charge
to the Apostles, then our Adversaries are (to my great grief I must say it)
lost for ever: For it is not enough, according to Christ's own Words, to
Believe in the Trinity, to Believe the Incarnation, to believe in the
Holy Ghost, to believe Baptism, the Eucharist, etc. But we must believe all
Things whatsoever Christ commanded; and that on pain of Damnation. But if it
should happen (as no doubt it cannot) that the Points in Dispute, were not
commanded by Christ or His Apostles; where is the harm in believing them, since
we are commanded to do so by the Church, which our Creed tells us we must
believe?

Christ our Savior does often reproach the Jews for their Incredulity, and the
Scripture, in several places, gives us an Account of the Punishment of such as
would not believe the Messengers sent by God to declare His Will to them: But
we do not find, that ever He reproached any Body for having too much Faith;
especially when the Things to be believed, were declared to them, by the
Messengers of God, which, sure, the Bishops and Priests of the Church are: On
the contrary, we read in the Scripture, that Christ has, upon several
Occasions, highly commended and extolled Men's readiness to believe. O Woman,
Great is thy Faith! Mat. 14.28.
Where lies then the Harm of believing Transubstantiation, or the Real
Presence, which are so plainly delivered in Scripture? Where is the Harm of
allowing due Honor, and Respect to be given to Saints, and of desiring them to
pray for us; since it is what we do, and are commanded to do to one another in
this Life? If they hear our Prayers, and Intercede for us, well and good: But
if they do not, what do we loose by it? Where is the Harm in praying for our
deceased Friends? Sure, we do but declare our pious Affections to them, though
our Prayers had done them no good. And where is the Harm in all this? How can
it hurt any Body to believe that the Church has Power to give Indulgences,
that is, to Remit all, or part of the Temporal Punishment due for Sins; since
it is plainly expressed in Scripture, that Christ gave to His Apostles, and the
Apostles to their Successors, the Power of Remitting, and Retaining Sins; and
that whatsoever they Loose on Earth, shall be Loosed in Heaven? How can this
hurt any Body, I say, or where lies the Hazard in believing those Things; though
we had not as much assurance of their being Divine Truths, as of other Things;
since they are not contrary to any other Article of our Faith, nor to Right
Reason, or Good Manners? But there is Infinite Hazard in not believing them;
since they have been declared by the Church, which our Creed and the Scripture
command as to believe and hear, on pain of being reputed Heathens and Publicans.

Now that they are Divine Truths, (besides what is already offered to prove
each Point in particular) We have all the Eastern Churches on our side. All the
Greek Church, together with the Nestorians, Eu^ychians, Monothelites, the
Christians of St. Thomas; in a Word, all the Oriental Sects of what
Denomination soever, do Practice and Believe Transubstantiation, the Real
Presence, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Seven Sacraments, the Use of the Liturgy,
in a Tongue which the Common People do not understand, Invocation of Saints,
Veneration of Relics and Images, and Prayers for the Dead. See the Critical
History of the Learn-Father Simon, Of the Religion and Customs of the Eastern
Churches: It Is done into English, printed in London, and very much esteemed by
the Learned. Seeing then, that the Latin Church, which together with the Greek
and other Eastern Churches, make up the whole Body of the Christian World; and
that all these Churches did hold and profess the said Doctrine, when the
Reformation began, and do still hold and believe the same; I think, I may
confidently affirm, that it is Catholic and Orthodox.

I shall therefore, once more, beg of Almighty God, through the Merits of the
Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ; and by that Blood, which was shed for our
Redemption, that he would please in His Mercy to Soften the Hearts of our
Adversaries, and give them Grace to entertain Thoughts of Peace of His Holy
Church, from which they have so long gone astray: To the end, that They and We
may with one Heart, and one Tongue praise and magnify His Holy Name all the
Days of our Lives; and, when it shall please His Infinite Goodness to call us
to Himself, that we may meet together at the Resurrection of the Just; through
the Merits of the Death and Passion of our only Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ, to whom, with the Father and Holy Ghost, be Honor and Glory now, and
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

