THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH Growing out of the Root of Jesse, and healing the Nations.

Held forth in several Sermons upon Isai. Chap. 11. from verse. 1. to 10.

Together with some few Sermons relating to all who live under the shadow of
the BRANCH.

By Mr. William Colvill Minister of the Gospel, and Primair of King James's
College in Edinburgh.

Jer. 23.5. Behold, the days come, that I will raise unto David a righteous
Branch; and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and
justice in the earth. Zech. 6.12. -- Behold the man, whose name is the BRANCH,
and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the
Lord. Edinburgh, Printed by George Swintoun, James Glen, and Thomas Brown, Anno
DOM. 1673.

To the Religious and truly Noble Ladies, my Lady Napier, and to my Lady Mary
Erskine, Aunts to my Noble Lord, the Earl of Mar.
Noble Ladies,
IT is a true saying of the wise Solomon, Train up a child in the way he should
go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it. The first part of this, was
made out by your gracious and noble Mother of blessed memory; who trained you
up from your Childhood in the holy Scriptures, and in the fear of the Lord, as
also in all virtue beseeming your Quality and Sex; whereof I have had the
honor and happiness to be a witness for many years. I know it is a Christian
duty, in the due time to make honorable mention of the virtues of the deceased
Saints, to the end these who survive them, may in a godly emulation follow
their good example. Your Noble Mother, was like to Annah in her private and
public Devotions; like to Dorcas in her Christian compassion and supply to the
necessitous; like to Sarah in her dutiful deportment toward her Noble Lord your
Father; and like to Eunice, in the Christian and tender education of her
Children. The other part of that Golden Sentence, ye your selves endeavor,
through Gods grace to make good; by resembling her in her Graces and Virtues;
and by transmitting the same in your careful education of these hopeful young
Ladies, happy in your example and breeding.

The like great obligation of Gratitude, that strongly inclined me to dedicat a
Book to your gracious Mother, has also prompted me to present this small
Treatise unto your Ladyships, and to honor the same by prefixing your Names
thereto. The main subject and design of both Books is the same: In the first,
were some refreshing streams flowing forth from the fountain opened to the
house of David, for refreshing weary and thirsty souls; and in this, is held
forth the Righteous BRANCH, even the blessed Lord Jesus Christ also, for the
reviving of fainting souls, by the sweet savor of his grace and power, to
convert and save lost man.

It is not in such a dress, as will please the fancy of some others; but I know
well, if the stuff be upright and solid, your sober minds can easily dispense
with the want of embroideries of Humane Eloquence: That it may be profitable to
your Ladyships, and to all who shall be pleased to peruse the same, is the
humble prayer of him, who is in all duty,

Noble Ladies, Your most humble and devouted Servant, Mr. Will. Colvill.

TO THE READER.
THe desire of light and knowledge to the understanding, is natural unto every
man; as by the outward light, things visible are seen by the eye of the body,
So things intelligible, are perceived by the light and the knowledge in the
mind: but of all knowledge, the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ his blessed
Son our Mediator, is most to be desired. It is most necessar, because the
specular knowledge of this in the holy Scriptures, is the Rudiment of that full
and perfect knowledge the Saints have in Heaven; for to know this, is life
eternal, Joh 17.3. It is the foundation of our spiritual practical duties;
without it, man cannot believe in God and whom he sent Jesus Christ; for, how
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14. without
this knowledge, we cannot desire nor seek after Christ and his benefits;
therefore our blessed Lord said to that poor sinful woman, Joh. 4.10. If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, give me to drink,
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
For, the will cannot love and choose Christ for our portion, till first he be
represented in his beauty of holiness by light and knowledge in the
understanding. This knowledge is most excellent in respect of the subject, who
is the brightness of the Fathers glory, in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge: All natural knowledge, though never so profound, as was that of
Solomon, who knew and spoke of all Trees from the Cedar to the Hysop; yet, if
we be ignorant of the true Vine, and of the righteous BRANCH that heals the
Nations, all our secular knowledge will prove unsavory and gustless at the hour
of death: but if we know, love and obey in sincerity the Lord Jesus Christ,
then at the end of our life, we shall rejoice in our longing desire, and lively
hope to be with him after death, and to know him as now we are known of him.
This knowledge is not dull, but active; by our knowledge of him, we are
justified, Is. 53.11. Saving faith, whereof knowledge is a special and first
ingredient, receives Christ wholly in all his Offices, and with him pardon of
our sins; as all who were stung in the wilderness, if they looked to the brazen
Serpent, were healed; So whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
eternal life. This knowledge is active also for our Sanctification; because
this knowledge, by the obsignation of the holy Spirit, makes such a deep
impression of Christ known, upon the minds and hearts of believers, that they
become like and conform unto him, 2 Pet. 1.4. and by the knowledge and light of
the Gospel, representing him, they are changed from glory to glory, 2 Cor.
3.18. that is, from one degree of grace to another in the course and progress
of Sanctification, which is no other thing, but the commencement of that glory
we look for in heaven. This saving knowledge, which true believers have of
Christ, is an humbling and increasing knowledge; Paul became very humble,
thinking himself the chief of sinners, and least of Saints; it is a growing
light and knowledge, the more they know him, they love him the more; and the
more they love him, they desire to know the more of him. When they grow old,
and the natural faculty of understanding waxes weak and dim, though they grow
not in the knowledge of the literal apprehension, yet they grow in the
knowledge of appretiation and estimation; as the motion of every thing, the
nearer it comes to its center, is the swifter; So the sound believer, the
nearer he draws to the term of his life and the hoped for fruition, the center
of all his desires and hopes, the motion of his heart toward God is the
greater, and he vehemently desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which
is best of all.

This knowledge, in some abstruse and supernatural mysteries, is but confuse
and general; we know from divine revelation something of the matter, but little
or nothing of the manner; It is our duty to acquiesce on divine testimony, and
refer the knowledge of the manner unto that day, wherein we shall see God face
to face. It is with us here in this dark valley of Baca, as it was with that
blind man of Bethsaida, Mark 9. who at the first touch of his eyes by Christ,
did see objects more generally and confusedly, but afterward at the second
touch, more particularly and distinctly: So here in this life, by his first
touch and illumination of our mind with the light of faith, we see something of
these great mysteries in a confused and general notion but at his second touch
in heaven, by the beatifick vision, we shall know distinctly and more
particularly, at the least we shall know so much in these high mysteries, as
will satisfy the desire of the soul, and will rejoice the heart, without all
anxious or painful desire to know more.

Therefore (Christian Reader) I made choice to speak in the public
Congregation, for some time, on this portion of Scripture, wherein the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Righteous BRANCH, is held forth to us, that coming to him, we
may be healed, both of sin, in our justification through him, who is JEHOVAH
our Righteousness; and that we may be sanctified, and daily purified from all
uncleanness of the flesh and spirit by him, who also is made of God,
sanctification unto us, who bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness. This knowledge is most to be
sought after; for as the fashion of this world passes away, so certainly, the
knowledge of things worldly will be out of fashion after death: but the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, begun in the Elect here by faith unto the
Gospel, will be perfect and everlasting in that day of eternity, when the Lamb
will be our light for ever.

If thou (ingenuous Reader) shall reap, as I pray God thou may, any
spiritual benefit by this small Treatise, published at the desire of some pious
and sober minded hearers, give all praise to the Righteous BRANCH, who, as he
is in himself most precious, so he makes himself savoury and precious to
believers: And that it may be seen he is so to thee, let thy conversation smell
of the BRANCH. What escapes thou perceivest (as in the multitude of words there
want not failings) impute them merely to the weakness of the trembling hand
here, that holds forth the BRANCH, but no ways to the BRANCH it self. Though
possibly thou cannot construct some expressions in this Treatise, with thine
own sentiment and opinion; yet certainly, the intention of the Author, to
magnify the riches and power of Gospel Grace in the conversion of chief
sinners, and his earnest endeavors to stir up Converts unto a suitable
conversation in Christian duties, and unto Christian communion in love and
peace among themselves, cannot be disrellished by any person of the
Gospel Spirit. Farewell.

ERRATA.
Page Lin. Read. 16 23 facility. 67 20 Acts 16. ibid 27 have heard. 75 30
loffes. 76 6 nor on. 116 29 thou have. 125 1 Acts 10.1. 132 20 Mat. 25.30. 175
16 diversity. 202 29 42 220 20 because of 241 24 ingenuous 259 20 jealous God.
261 30 lenitives. 263 23 special. 279 19 of conscience.

THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH, Growing out of the Root of Jesse, and healing the
Nations.
ISAI. Chap. 11. from verse. 1. to 10. And there shall come forth a Rod out of
the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his Roots.
IT is usual and worthy of the holy Prophets, in speaking of temporal mercies
and deliveries of the people of God from their enemies, to insert something, by
way of Prophecy, like a bright color, to give luster to temporal benefits, by
speaking something anent our spiritual and eternal redemption by the promised
Messiah: Thus the same Prophet, having prophesied of the temporal deliverance
of the Jews, from the combination of the Kings of Assyria and Israel, subjoyns
an Evangelical Prophecy concerning the coming of the Messiah, Isa. 7.14. The
Prophet Jeremiah having spoken, ( Chap. 23.) of the return of the Jews from the
captivity of Babylon, subjoyns, ( verse. 6) a Prophecy of the kingdom and
benefits of the Messiah; as also, the like is done, Jer. 33.15.

In like manner, the Prophet here having foretold their deliverance from
Sennacherib, King of Assyria, subjoyns a gracious and comfortable Prophecy of
the Messiah his birth, government, and the deliverance and redemption both of
Jews and Gentiles from their spiritual enemies, by their happy conversion to
the faith of the promised Messiah.

In this Chapter, from the beginning to verse. 10. we have these particulars; 1.
The low beginning and original of the Messiah, set forth in borrowed
expressions. 2. His singular endowments and qualifications for executing the
office of Mediator, and for governing his Church, verse. 2. 3. The manner of his
government, verse. 3, 4, 5. 4. The effects of his government, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.
5. The cause of these effects, in the end of verse. 9. For the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

Verse. 1. By rod, or twigg, we understand the Lord Jesus Christ as a small
twigg, sprouting up from Jesse the father of David: He is so called, in respect
of his outward, low and humble condition in the world; as it is also said,
Isai. 53.2. He shall grow up as a root out of a dry ground: he has no form nor
comeliness, etc. Which is not to be understood, in relation to the outward form
or feature of his body, which, without all question, was most comely, having
its constitution and complexion framed in a singular manner by the Holy Ghost;
but it is spoken in respect of his outward condition and estate in the world;
because he was born in a poor Cortage, without all outward Pomp and State, Luke
2.7. This prophecy of Christ's descending from the loins of David and Jesse,
was accordingly fulfilled, Act. 13.23.

By Branch, is meant our blessed Lord, who is so called, Jer. 23.5. Zechar.
3.8. and 6.12. In which places the 70. Interpreters render it (...), Oriens;
and in this Text they render it (...), Flos; because he was in dignity the
firstborn and flower of all the creatures. To these places of holy Scripture,
wherein our blessed Lord is called the Branch, many learned Interpreters do
think, that place, Matthew. 2.23. he shall be called a Nazaren, does relate; he
was called a Nazaren, that is, the Branch, from the City Nazareth, where he had
his education, it being a City compassed about with bushy trees; as even at
this day, the Jews call a Christian, Natzar.

It is said, out of his roots; because at the time of Christ's birth, tbe family
of David, the son of Jesse, was like a root hid under the ground in time of
Winter; because after the captivity of Babylon, none of the Tribe of Judah had
the government; but at that time the Maccabees, of the Tribe of Levi, were the
supreme Rulers: at the birth of our Lord, Herod the Great, the son of
Antipater, slew all of the Sanedrim, who were for the most part of the royal
Tribe of Judah: then was fulfilled that Prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob,
concerning the departure of the Scepter from Judah, and of a Lawgiver from
between his feet, when Shiloh was born into the world, Genesis 49.10. At our Lords
birth, the family of David, in respect of any outward splendour, was like a root
hid under the ground in Wintertime: but the Lord who quickens the dead, made
this root to sprout, and bring forth this Plant of Renown, even the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Observe. 1. It is the duty of the people of God to raise up their thoughts,
from any temporal deliverance promised or received, unto the meditation, and
consideration of that spiritual and eternal redemption, wrought be Jesus
Christ: This is clear from the coherence of this Chapter with the preceding;
1. Because all our temporal mercies and deliverances, are nothing in comparison
of that precious, full and eternal redemption, purchased by Jesus Christ: if we
consider the price of our Redemption, even the precious blood of the Lamb of
God, of infinite worth and value above all things corruptible, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
we are redeemed and delivered from all our enemies, Luke 1.74. and it is an
eternal redemption, that in the effects of it endures for ever, Heb. 9.12. 2.
Temporal deliverances are common to the wicked, as well as to the godly; in
which respect, Christ is called the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. 3. Wicked
men may receive a great temporal deliverance, who are yet reserved for wrath to
come, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. v. 13. Cursed Cham was delivered from the deluge, and
many damned Sodomites were delivered by Abraham from captivity, at the rescue
of Lot from his enemies.

Obser. 2. Our blessed Lord humbled himself to a low condition here on earth;
he was as a rod or small twigg, out of the family of Jesse, one of the smallest
in the Tribe of Judah. Consider well his Humiliation, 1. It was voluntar and
free, Philip. 2.7, 8. he emptied himself; as he laid aside his upper garment to
wash the feet of his Disciples, so he laid aside outward state and glory, that
he might suffer for us, and wash us in his precious blood. 2. It was a gracious
and bountiful Humiliation and Exinanition on our behalf, that by the merit
thereof, he might enrich us with his unsearchable and durable riches, even with
the graces of the holy Spirit, obtained to us by the merit of his death, 2 Cor.
8, 9. Though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through
his poverty might be made rich, and thereby also to exalt us unto glory, and
set us in heavenly places together with himself, Heb. 2.10. For it became him
for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto
glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. The
merit of his Humiliation was as a Ladder fixed on the earth, for us to ascend
thereby unto glory. 3. He came in a low condition, for the comfort of many of
the godly, who are born and live in a poor and low condition here on earth;
their low and despicable condition in the world, shall not be any prejudice to
the salvation of their souls, for Christ shall be all to them, and all in them,
Colos. 3.11. Lazarus a poor man, and Onesimus a servant, are accepted of God in
him. 4. He became low, and subjected himself to infirmities, that thereby we
might have confidence of pity and help to us in the day of our infirmities,
Heb. 4.15, 16. He knows from experience, what it is to have an heart
overwhelmed with grief, or astonished with fear; for his soul was in an agony,
Luke 22.44 and he was sore amazed through fear, and very heavy in heart through
grief, Mark 14.33.

5. He came in a low condition, to teach us to be content in our lowest estate;
in thy low Cottage be content, and look to the Heir of heaven, born in a poor
out-house: though thou have course fair, be content, and look to him, who in
his ordinar entertainment, had but a few barley Loaves and some small Fishes:
at the evening of the day, though thou get a hard bed, look up to him and be
content, for he had not whereon to lay his head, Mat. 8.20.

Use 1. Be not offended at Christ's low estate, Blessed is the man, says our
Lord, that is not offended in me: remember, 1. he was brought low for our
cause, he was bruised for our iniquities; our lifting up of our selves in the
pride and rebellion of our hearts against God, brought him low to suffer and
satisfy the Divine Justice in our nature for us. Should a Debtor be ashamed
of, or despise his Cautioner, brought low only by his suretyship for his debts,
and not for any of his own person? 2. That thou may not be offended at his
outward low condition, look by the piercing eye of Faith, into the inside of
Jesus Christ, in him the Godhead dwells bodily, Col. 2.9. His Humane Nature was
like the vail, that hid what was within the most holy place; but draw aside the
vail, and by Faith behold in him, the most holy One, that Mercy-seat and
Propitiatory, in whom and by whom we get a gracious answer of peace from the
Father, Joh. 16.23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you. He is our propitiation, 1 John 2.2. By
Faith, look through the vail of the Humane Nature, and behold in him the pot of
heavenly Manna, which descended, not only from the clouds, as that Manna in the
wilderness, but from the third heaven, to give life unto the world: By Faith,
behold in him the rod of Aaron the high Priest, ever blossoming; for he is our
great high Priest, living for ever in the most holy place, Heb. 7.24. and by
the special assistance of the holy Ghost, according to his promise, Mat. 28.20.
he makes the preaching of the Gospel by his Ministers, not only to blossom in
a fair outward profession, but also to be fruitful in the conversation of his
people. 3. Consider, although our blessed Lord was born, and lived in a low
condition, yet some glimpses of the glory of his Divine Nature, did now and
then at his own pleasure, break through the vail of his Humane Nature: although
he was low in the place of his birth, yet at the same time he was attended by
an heavenly host of Angels, and was worshipped both by the wise men that came
from the east, and by the shepherds: after he was tempted as a man in the
wilderness, yet the Angels ministered unto him as the Son of God: after his
sleeping as a man in the ship, he rebuked the Sea and the Winds as the Son of
God: yea, in his lowest condition upon the Cross, he by the power of his
Godhead, did shake the earth and raise the dead.

Use 2. Meditate oft-times for thy comfort, upon his lowing and humbling
himself in his birth, life and death, look upon it as the greatest token of his
love: Jacobs service in so low a condition, was a great token of his love to
Rachel; but the Prince of Glory, even Jacobs Lord, was in the form of a
servant, near-by thirty four years, to espouse us who were by nature enemies to
God. Look upon his low condition and humiliation, as a special mean to engage
thy heart and affection to himself, who took upon him thy nature, to make thee
partaker of the Divine Nature, by a conformity to God in holiness in this life,
and in glory and happiness for ever in the other life. Look upon his
humiliation, as thy pattern in thy behavior to thy inferiors; he condescended
to us in our low estate, therefore be not high-minded, neither in a
supercilious arrogance stand upon your punctilio's; but let the like mind be in
you which was in Christ Jesus, who humbled himself to do us good: So should we,
after his example, condescend to do good one to another, Phil. 2.3, 4, 5.

VERSE II. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and
of the fear of the Lord.
FOr the better clearing these words, we would answer three questions; 1. Seeing
God gave him the Spirit not in measure, Joh. 3.34. How is it that the graces of
the Spirit bestowed upon him, are here stinted and limited to the number of
six? 2. Seeing he had these graces from all eternity, being equal in
understanding, wisdom, counsel, might and knowledge with the Father, how is the
Spirit said to rest upon him in his Incarnation, as if he had not been endowed
with those graces before that time? 3. What is meant by these several graces
and gifts mentioned here?

I answer to the first, The graces reckoned up here, are such as were bestowed
upon him, as Man and Mediator in our nature at his Incarnation, and were
requisite for him in the Government of his Church and people; although all other
graces were habitually and eminently in him, as humility, meekness, patience,
etc. yet such graces are mentioned here, as in a special manner qualified him
for the actual discharge of the Mediatory-office: as for that spoken of our
blessed Lord, Joh. 3.34. He received not the spirit by measure; it is not to be
understood simply, as if the Humane Nature of Christ, by way of transfusion,
had received an infinite measure of grace; for a finit creature cannot receive
such a measure, seeing every thing is received according to the measure and
capacity of the receiver: but it is spoken by way of comparison, with all the
intelligent creatures, Angels, or Men, who received not such a measure of the
graces of the Spirit, as Christ did in his Humane Nature, wherein he was
anointed above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. Ephesians. 4.7.

To the second Question I answer, Our blessed Lord, in respect of his Divine
Nature, was of infinite understanding, wisdom, counsel, might and knowledge: but
these graces, in a finit measure, were communicate to the Humane Nature, in the
personal union thereof with the Divine Nature in his Incarnation, but in a
measure far above the capacity of Angels or Men; because the nearer the
creature is united to God, the perfection of it is the greater: therefore it is
even so among believers in the Church here on earth, some of them are more
perfect then others, because united to God by more of faith and love then
others: and in Heaven, the Saints glorified, are more perfect then the Saints
militant on earth; because they are united and near to God in the facial vision
of God by full knowledge and perfect love: Now, of all creatures, the Humane
Nature of Christ, was and is most perfect, because united and nearest to the
Divine Nature in a personal union.

To the third I answer; We understand by the Spirit of understanding, his large
capacity in perceiving and up-taking, what was incumbent for himself to do and
suffer as our Mediator; and also, what the elect should do for attaining
eternal life through him: By the Spirit of wisdom, we understand the gift of
active prudence, whereby he was enabled for doing and performing the duty,
which he understood was incumbent to him as our Mediator, Psalm. 40.8, 9, 10. I
have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation; I have not concealed thy loving kindness and
thy truth from the great congregation. By the Spirit of counsel, we understand
his ability to reveal the eternal counsel and purpose of the Father, concerning
the way of man's salvation, Joh. 6.40. And this it the will of him that sent me,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life. By the Spirit of might, we understand that power and dominion over all
creatures, given to him as Mediator and Head of his Church, Mat. 28.18. All
power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. An exceeding power of invincible
grace toward the Elect in their effectual calling and conversion, Ephesians. 1.19.
and also a power and mighty force to subdue his obstinat and incorrigible
enemies, 1 Cor. 15.25. For he must reign, till he has put all enemies under
his feet. By the Spirit of knowledge, we understand, not only his certain and
infallible knowledge of all things to be done and suffered by him, for the
salvation of lost man; but also his knowledge and dexterity for instructing his
Church in the truth and way of salvation. As in the Breastplate of the High
Priest was Vrim and Thummim, rendered by the 70. Interpreters (...),
Manifestation and Truth: So our Lord knew the truth, and had a transcendent
gift of a convincing gravity and authority, as also a persuasive clearness upon
the spirits and hearts of his hearers, Psalm. 45.2. Grace is poured into thy
lips. Mat. 7.28, 29. And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings,
the people were astonished at his doctrine: For he taught them as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes. Luke 24.32. And they said one to another,
Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while
he opened to us the Scriptures? This knowledge infused into the Humane Nature
of Christ, was not an absolute Omniscience, which is incommunicable to any
creature, yea, not to the Son of man, Mark 13.32. This knowledge in the Humane
Nature of Christ, was intrinsecal, communicate from the personal union: for it
is said, He knew in himself, to wit, from the Godhead dwelling in him
personally, Luke 8.46. Joh. 6.61. but the knowledge of the Prophets and
Apostles was extrinsecal by inspiration, and extraordinary revelation. By the
spirit of the fear of the Lord, we understand that heavenly grace of unspotted
holiness and purity in his Humane Nature; for such an High Priest became us,
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, etc. Heb. 7.26. therefore is he called by way
of singularity and excellency (...), that Holy Thing, Luke 1.35. The words
being thus explained, two things may be observed, 1. The variety of the graces
and gifts powered forth upon our Lord Jesus Christ for the good of his Church.
2. The permanency and continuance of these graces and gifts in vigor and
exercise; it is said, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him.

Observe. 1. Variety of graces and gifts were poured forth upon Jesus Christ our
Head, for the good of all the members of his mystical body the Church: this is
evident from this place, as also from Joh. 1.14, 16. He was full of grace and
truth, and of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. As the
ointment poured forth upon the head of Aaron, the High Priest, did flow down to
the skirts of his garment, Psalm. 133.1. in like manner, the virtue of the
graces of the Spirit poured forth on Jesus Christ our great High Priest, does
descend to the meanest member of his mystical body for sanctifying them
throughout, and for gladning their hearts with that oil of gladness spoken of,
Psalm. 45.7, 8. It is said ( Ephesians. 4.10.) He asscended up far above all Heavens,
that he might fill all things. It is true, believers were filled in some
measure with grace through him, before his ascending into Heaven; yet a greater
measure of the Spirit was poured forth upon them after his ascension, Acts
2.33. as the Sun after its rising fills the earth with light; but the higher it
ascends in its course, the earth is filled with more of light; so there is a
greater measure of spiritual knowledge and grace in believers after the
ascension of Christ, then was before his birth, or during the time of his abode
upon the earth in the time of his humiliation.

Use 1. Seeing the Lord Jesus Christ received all these graces and gifts of the
Spirit, as Mediator for the good of his Church, we should in all our wants and
spiritual indigencies, have our recourse by prayer to him, that out of his
fullness we might receive grace for grace: It is a sure ground of our confidence
and comfort, that he received all these graces and gifts for our benefit;
therefore we should go to him, as Children of the Family to the Stewart, sealed
and appointed by the Father, who to their certain knowledge, has got provision
both of grace and glory for all of the household of Faith; and we may be assured
he is faithful in all the House of God, to give unto the children their Fathers
allowance, Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that
meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto
you; for him has God the Father sealed. Art thou dull in understanding, and
has little or no sharpness of wit to understand and discern spiritual and
supernatural truths, no more then a blind man has sight to discern colors? Go
to the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom was and is the spirit of understanding; be
thou humble under the sense of thy spiritual blindness; and by prayer seek that
eye salve which is called the Unction from the holy One, 1 John 2.20. and is
called the Spirit of revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. Seek it with a sincere purpose of
heart to improve thy understanding of the truth revealed unto practice, and
doing what thou shall understand to be Gods will and thy duty. Go with
confidence to the Lord Jesus Christ, who is both able and willing to open thy
understanding, and to give a heavenly faculty to perceive and understand divine
truths. He not only taught the Disciples going to Emmaus, by word of mouth; but
also opened their understandings, Luke 24.44. And if thou have an honest
purpose of heart, to do revealed duties, thy Lord will make thee to understand
and discern the truths that are necessary for the saving of thy soul, Joh.
7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be
of God, or whether I speak of my self.

Would thou have spiritual wisdom and prudence for ordering thy conversation,
and doing of revealed duties? Go to him, upon whom was poured the spirit of
wisdom; by prayer seek it of him who gives liberally, Jam. 1.4. Make conscience
of frequent hearing and reading the Word of God, which is the book of heavenly
wisdom, making men wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

In difficulties and perplexities, wherein thou knows no more what to do, then
Jehoshaphat did in a great strait, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. go to him for counsel, Prove.
8.14. Counsel is mine. And here it is said, The spirit of counsel was upon him:
He is called, by way of excellency, The Counselor, Isai. 9.6. He has promised
to give counsel to our hearts in times of greatest difficulties, Luke 21.15.
and accordingly he did so to his faithful servants, as to Stephen, Act. 6.10.
and to Paul, Act. 23.6.

In an hour of temptation from the power of thine own corruption, from Satan,
and from the world, go to the Lord Jesus Christ for obtaining might and power
to resist, and in end to overcome thy spiritual enemies; thus did Paul in an
hour of darkness and temptation, 2 Cor. 12.9. remember, the spirit of might was
poured on him; he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by
him: Go to him for strength and protection in times of great trials and
persecutions; keep fast the word of his patience, that is, his direction for
carrying thy self in such a time humbly, patiently and peaceably, Rev 3.10. Go
to him in a time of fainting, that from him thou may get quickening and might
to run the ways of his Commandments: Because the spirit of might was poured
forth upon the Captain of our Salvation, to help forward poor willing souls,
now and then fainting in the way of their Christian race: it is not enough in
your regeneration at first to be quickened unto a new life; but in respect of
your faintings in the race and course of Sanctification, ye have need of daily
quickening and up-stirring to the duties of the new life: Therefore it is that
David, a man according to Gods heart, being already in the state of grace, and
partaker of the new life, prays frequently for quickening unto duty, Psalm.
119.25, 37, 88, 107, 159. and Psalm. 143.3.

Would thou have the knowledge and persuasion of divine and supernatural
truths? Go to him for light and knowledge, the spirit of knowledge rested on
him, Prove. 1.23. Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. Rev. 3.18. He is by Office the great Doctor
of Israel, and will give his Spirit to persuade the heart to receive and
embrace the precious truths revealed in the Word, even unto all who seek to him
for instruction, and humbly submit to his discipline and correction. Have thou
a profane, loose and godless heart, void of the fear of God? go to him on whom
was poured the spirit of the fear of the Lord, that he may put the fear of God
in thy heart, that thou may be sanctified throughout in spirit, soul and
body, in a conformity to him, on whom the spirit of the fear of the Lord did
rest: To this end he died, that he might ratify and confirm that promise of
the new Covenant, I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me, Jer. 32.40.

Use 2. Seeing these graces and gifts of the Spirit were given to Jesus Christ
the Mediator, for the benefit of his Church, it is our duty to search our
selves, and try if we have received of the spirit of Christ: because, if any
man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. And hereby know
we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit,
1 John 4.13. As a member of the body not animated by the soul, is not formally
and properly a member thereof; so a man not quickened by the Spirit of Christ,
is not an actual member of his Mystical Body the Church.

His Spirit is a Spirit of understanding; If thou understand the fundamental
and necessary saving truths, and followest Christ by says, as a Scholar
following and maintaining the opinion of his Teacher; and if thou set thy heart
to follow him by obedience, in the way of his holy Commandments, as a Servant
following the direction of his Lord; For a good understanding have all they
that do his Commandments, Psalm. 111.10. If thy understanding be seconded with
an hatred of every false way, Psalm. 119.104. then may thou be assured the
Spirit of Christ is in thee; even the spirit of sound judgment and
understanding.

The Spirit of Christ is a Spirit of spiritual and heavenly wisdom, which is
pure without guile, and peaceable without faction and sedition, Jam. 3.17. It
is true, there is a wisdom that passes under that name in this present world,
but it is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3.19. there are many wise in their own
generation, but are fools in the great business of Regeneration; such as put
forth all their wit and pains for attaining the deceitful pleasures of sin,
which is called a plowing of iniquity, Job 4.8. a sowing to the flesh, Gal.
6.8. a drawing of iniquity with cart-ropes, Is. 5.18. a traveling with
iniquity, Ps. 7.14. and making provision for the flesh, Romans 13.14. Such as lay
forth all their wit and pains for attaining uncertain riches, or unconstant
honor of a present world, these men are like unto stupid Idiots, preferring
base metal to the Pearl of price; and the others are like to mad men, running
with all their speed into a precipice or gulf for their own destruction. Such
men are worldly wise, who lay all the stress of their trust upon the uncertain,
insufficient and perishing things of this world, as that miserable worldling,
Luke 12.20.

Such also who are nimble wits, to meddle in all business, except the business
of their own salvation, of such fools we read, Prove. 20.3. And there be also
too many hypocritical fools, that have a frame and set form of some good holy
words, without any foundation of new obedience in their heart, and without good
works in their life and conversation: such a man was that foolish builder, Mat.
7. and the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. But, has thou that wisdom which is from
above, which appears in the choice of the best thing, Mat. 13.46. in active
intentions for attaining the chief end, even Gods glory and thine own
salvation; which appears also in strong desires following after the means of
salvation, Ps. 27.4. One thing have I desired, and that I will desire, etc. It
appears in an heavenly conversation, and minding things that are above, Prove.
15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell
beneath, and in providing wisely for the time to come, by doing works of piety
and charity, 1 Timothy 6.19. If thou be wise in this manner, then thou may be
assured thou have received of the Spirit of wisdom, that rested on Christ thy
Head.

The Spirit of Christ was a Spirit of sound counsel; if thou has received of
that Spirit, thou will not give pernicious counsel to others, as Jonadab did to
Ammon, to further them in any sinful course; nor will thou give counsel against
others to their hurt or ruin, as Achitophel did against David: But thou will
give good counsel, as Daniel did to Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.27. If thy counsels
be according to the Word of God, as the testimonies of God were David's faithful
counselors, Ps. 119.24. then may thou be assured thou art of the Spirit of
Christ, who according to the Word of God, did delight to do the will of the
Father, Ps. 48. If thou rejectest, with an holy indignation, evil counsel and
suggestion, though given by a friend, when he would dissuade thee from duty to
God, or to men in God, this is an evidence thou art of the Spirit of Christ,
who rejected such evil counsel, Matthew. 16.24.

Have thou power and might to resist the onsets and bickerings of inward
corruption? It is an evidence thou art partaker of the virtue of the Spirit of
Christ, Romans 8.37. We are more then conquerors, through him that loved us. Gal.
5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts. Have thou power and ability to walk equally and evenly, both in
prosperity and in adversity, humble and moderat in that, and patient in this?
thou art partaker of the Spirit of Christ, who was of a moderat and sober mind;
when they would have made him a King, he withdrew himself, Joh. 6.15. he was
patient in adversity, as a sheep before the shearer, Is. 53. Art thou able,
through his grace, to do Christian-duties with some measure of sincerity,
fervency and cheerfulness? then art thou of the Spirit of Christ; for it was
his meat and drink to do the will of the Father, Joh. 4.34.

If the Spirit of sound and heavenly knowledge be in thee, not only will thou
have the knowledge of simple apprehension, in thine uptaking the literal sense
of Scripture truths; but also, thou will have a knowledge of discerning the
sublime majesty, the admirable simplicity and infallibility of Divine Truths,
both in promises and threatenings, far above all humane Writings, that thou will
say from persuasion, never man spoke as he spoke: and thy knowledge will be
joined with an high estimation of Divine Truths, more then men has of thousands
of gold, of honey and of spoil or plunder (as was in David) Then may thou be
assured thou art partaker, in some measure, of that Spirit of knowledge that
was poured forth and rested on Christ thine Head, Ps. 119.72, 103, 162. Thou
art one of his sheep, effectually called and elected to be set on his right
hand, for his sheep know his voice, Joh. 10.4.

If the Spirit of the fear of the Lord be in thine heart, a fear with humble
submission to the will of God, both for doing and suffering his will, Is.
50.10. a fear joined with hope and confidence on his mercy, Ps. 145.11. a fear
joined with reverence in his holy worship, Ps. 5.7. a fear joined with zeal,
provoking others by word and good example, to worship and fear the Lord, Act.
10.2, 3. Then may thou be assured thou art of the Spirit of Christ; for the
Spirit of the fear of the Lord rested on him: there was in him a fear joined
with submission in the day of his sad affliction, for he said, not my will, but
thine be done: there was in him a fear joined with active and passive
obedience, Philip. 2.8. a fear joined with confidence, even in his greatest
desertion and sad complaint, my God, my God, etc. a fear joined with reverence
in prayer, Luke 22.44. and a fear joined with zeal, provoking others to fear
the mighty God above all things, Mat. 10.28.

Use 3. Here is sure ground of unspeakable comfort to the Church and company of
Believers, against all their fears from the worldly wisdom and power of the
enemies of the Kingdom of Christ; there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor
counsel against the Lord, Pro. 21.30. The spirit of wisdom in him, who is set
over the house of God, does far surpass and overreach all their wisdom, falsely
so called; the enemies of the people of God, said, Let us deal wisely with
them, Exodus 1.10. but the Lord, in the depth of his wisdom, turned their cruel
policy to the good and increase of his Church and People; it was as the heavy
weight unto the Palm Tree, to raise them the higher; and as the inundation of
Nilus, to make them the more fruitful in every good work: there is no counsel
against the Lord, for he thoroughly sees the devices and plots, even in the
heart of the enemies, Is. 10.7. He is the stone with the seven eyes, Zachar.
3.9. he can discover their secret designs, as he did to his servant Elisha, 2
King. 6.12. He discovered the secret conspiracy against Paul, Act. 23.16.

The power of the wicked is finit and limited, but his power, being God, is
infinite, and there is no proportion between finit and infinite. He can limit
their power and say, as to the proud waves, come no farther; though he permit
them to come to the neck, yet they shall not drown them, Is. 8.8. Their Head,
the Lord Jesus Christ, is now far above all the waters of affliction and
persecution; he can restrain their malice; he cuts the horn of the wicked, he
breaks their teeth, Ps. 3.7. although they bark, yet they bite not; or if he
permit them to bite, yet their bite is not deadly, like that of some mad dogs;
he can put a bridle in the jaws of Sennacherib; he can defeat their counsels
and contrivances, as he did that of Achitophel, turned it to folly and ruin to
himself: he did defeat and wonderfully disappoint the counsel of Haman against
Mordecai, according to that of Job 5.13. He takes the wise in their own
craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong: and in his
unsearchable wisdom, he turns their malice to the praise of his great Name, who
is mighty to save his people, maugre all opposition, Ps. 76.10. Surely the
wrath of man shall praise thee.

There is no might nor power worldly, that can overthrow the Church of Christ,
The gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. Because it is built
on him who is the Rock of Ages, and is the strength of all, who by faith are
built on him; they are kept by the Father, Joh. 10.29. and by the power of God
through says, 1 Pet. 1.5. The Church and company of Believers, is compared to
a strong City, fortified with strong Walls, and with a deep and broad Ditch,
Isa. 26.1. Isa. 33.21. because the mighty Lord is in the midst of them. It is
true, the Lord does not always show his might in holding off the trouble from
them; yet he makes manifest his might and power in upholding them under
troubles, and in strengthening them to patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness: they are cast down, but not destroyed; persecuted, but not
forsaken; perplexed, but not in despair, 2 Cor. 4.9. Psalm. 46.5. He that dwells
in the bush, though he suffer fire to enter into it, yet he keeps it from being
consumed; because he strengthens his own children to bear afflictions, Isa.
41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I
will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. Likeas a Physician, holding his Patient by the
hand, does encourage him under the present pain and throws from a bitter
potion, by confirming him in the hope of better health thereafter, Joh. 16.20.
2 Cor. 4.17. Sometimes he comforts them with a sense of his love, shed abroad
in their hearts by the Holy Ghost; which, as a cordial, does preserve and
revive them, that they faint not altogether in times of great trouble, 2 Cor.
1.3, 4. As a tender father speaks more kindly to his sick child, then he was
wont to do formerly in time of his better health; so the Lord speaks comfort
to them by his Spirit according to the word of promise, when they are in a
desolate condition, like unto a wilderness, wherein they have none or few to
speak a word of comfort unto them, Hos. 2.14. Stephen the Martyr, had never
such a manifestation of Gods gracious presence, as in the day of his greatest
affliction and persecution, Acts 7.56. And the young Confessor Theodorus (as
testifies Eusebius) felt never more sweetness, then in the time he was upon the
rack. Consider, the merciful Lord moderats their afflictions in the specie or
kind in not sending always his sorest plagues: Sometimes in the number, he
lays not on all his rods, he stays his rough wind, in the day of the
east wind, Isa. 27.8. Sometimes in the degree and measure, in not afflicting
them in extremity, The Lord has chastised me sore, (says David) but he has
not given me over to death, Psalm. 118.18. And he moderats the afflictions in
respect of the time and endurance, Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not
rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hands
unto iniquity. The Lord by the spirit of wisdom and power, turns all their
afflictions, in end, for their spiritual advantage, By this shall the iniquity
of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, Isa. 27.9.
Dan. 12.10. They shall be made white, etc. And many times he orders their
afflictions to the good of others, who are confirmed in the way of truth and
righteousness, from the example of their patience in suffering for the truth,
Phil. 1.12. The dispersing of some Christians in that persecution against
Stephen, was in the wisdom and power of God, ordered for the in gathering of
many people in Samaria unto the Christian faith, Acts 8.

Observe. 2. As the gifts and graces of the Spirit were poured forth upon Christ
in great variety, so they were permanent and abiding in him, without any
change, and without remitting of their vigor and exercise upon all occasions,
the Spirit of the Lord shall rest on him. The Spirit which descended from
Heaven like a Dove, did abide upon him, Joh. 1.32. The extraordinary gift of
revealing things secret, by the light of Prophecy, was not at all times
permanent in the Prophets, 2 King. 4.27. As light within the house occasioned
by lightning in the air, is transient and not permanent, so neither was the
gift of miracles, or healing the sick, always permanent in our Lords
Disciples, Mark 9.18. Yea Paul left his beloved Trophimus, sick at Miletum, 2 Timothy 4.20. But our blessed Lord healed all, whom and when he pleased. It is
true, the sanctifying graces in the Elect, are always permanent, Joh. 4.14. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains
in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. They are permanent in
respect of the root, of the seed, and of the habit; but not in respect of the
fruit and exercise; but the graces of Christ were ever flourishing and
fruitful, Graces in the godly, have decays and changes; even Abraham, the
father of the faithful, had a fit of diffidence, when in his fear he dissembled
twice, to wit, in Gerar and in Egypt; but our blessed Lord, his confidence was
permanent in the hour of temptation, for he witnessed a good confession, even
to the last, before Pontius Pilat. Moses was a meek man, yet was surprised with
a fit of bitterness at Meribah: but our blessed Lord was meek at all times;
for, his scourging out the profaners of the Temple, ( Joh. 2.) was not a fit of
passion and perturbation, but an heroic act of holy zeal, proceeding from
judgment and deliberation, because it was written, His Fathers house should be
the house of prayer.

The habits of grace in Christ, were full and perfect: whereas it is said, Luke
2.52. He increased in wisdom. We grant he increast in wisdom and in knowledge
experimental, he learned obedience, by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5.8.
as a Physician, who has an habitual gift of healing such and such a disease,
may grow in his experience, although his knowledge of healing, grows not in
the habit: It is a growth extensive in respect of diverse objects, toward which
it is extended; but it is not intensive in respect of the habit it self. The
graces of Christ were permanent in their fullness, and not more remiss at one
time, and more intense at another; because the absolute fullness of grace in his
Humane Nature (so far as it could be capable) being a sequel of the personal
union, did exclude all intensive growth: It is true, there were different
degrees in the manifestations and expressions of his graces at one time more
than at another. Christ his dying for us, was an higher expression of his love
to lost man, than was his suffering of poverty, hunger, etc. yet all the
expressions of his love to the elect, did proceed from love in his heart,
equally intense, at all times: More of his patience was manifested in his agony
and bloody sweat, than in his suffering of reproaches and buffettings: His love
and devotion toward God, was full at all times, and did not admit of degrees:
whereas it is said, Luke 22.44. he prayed, (...), more earnestly: and therefore
it might appear, he was more servent in his devotion and religious affection,
at one time than at another. I answer, 1. Some render it prolixius, he prayed
longer, which did proceed from a deeper impression of his sufferings upon his
spirit; but his love and devotion toward God, was still equally intense in his
soul: For even in godly men, short ejaculations, at one time, and prayers
longer at another time, may proceed from devotion in the heart, equal at both
times. 2. Though he prayed more earnestly, yet this earnestness, was not in
respect of his devotion toward God, unto whom he prayed, whom Christ, as man,
loved fully and perfectly at all times: but this greater earnestness, was in
respect of the great and inexpressible sufferings against which he prayed,
being in an agony, and under the sense of greater inward pains, than any he had
felt formerly. This manner of expression, will not infer any intenseness of his
devotion and love to God, but only that there was an intenseness of pain and
agony in his spirit from what he suffered, and against which he prayed, yet
always with submission to the will of the Father.

Use. In all our intermittings of the exercise of grace, or in the remittings
of degrees in gracious actings, we should go to Christ on whom the Spirit
rested, as in time of drought when waters fail, we go to the fountain; because
the dearest children of God, are subject to decay of grace, in respect of
degrees, and to intermission in the exercise of grace, through their own
sluggishness: in prayer they have sometime a great freedom and out-flowing of
the Spirit, Job 32.13. At another time, they are so bound up and overwhelmed
with griefs and fears, that they cannot speak to God, Ps. 77.4. At one time,
their faith and confidence is very strong, Ps. 27.10. but at another time very
weak, Ps, 31.22. At one time they have a soft heart and abundance of tears, Ps.
6.7. but at another time their heart, like Nabal, is dead and stupid, and their
eyes are dry; as was in David for some time, till the Prophet Nathan did awake
him: At one time they have great joy and comfort, Ps. 23.4. but at another
time, especially after relapses into sins against the light of their own
conscience, they have much heaviness and suppression of spirit, Ps. 51.8. At
one time they have great zeal, as David, dancing before the Ark; and at another
time they are much damped and disheartened in the course of Godliness, by reason
of some cross dispensation in their course, as David was in bringing up the
Ark, when he saw the breach made upon Vzza, 2 Samuel 6.8, 9.

Quest. What is the cause of such intermiting and remitting of the exercise and
degrees of grace in the godly? Ans. The causes are especially, 1. Pride and
conceit of our own ability to improve the habit and stock of grace, after we
have once received it; this provokes God to leave us to our own managing of
grace received, and we being left to our selves, do soon and easily miscarry in
the exercise of grace: Peter failed in the exercise and confession of faith,
after he had been very confident of his own strength, Matthew. 26.33. he denied
the Lord at the voice of a damsel. 2. Excessive worldly fears, make our says
greatly to abate, in respect of the degrees of it at one time and another, Mark
4.40. 3. Ingratitude, when we neglect or forget to praise God for his
assistance and help in our former gracious actings, and when we begin to
sacrifice to our own dragg, then it faireth with us in any new occasion of
acting, as with Samson, after his strength had departed from him: We imagine,
from former experience of Gods help, notwithstanding our unthankfulness, that
we shall be able to act and exercise grace, as in former times; but we find, in
our sad experience, that God, to punish our ingratitude, does leave us to our
own counsels and miscarryings in duties, as he did leave Samson, Judge. 16.20.
4. Our inadvertance unto the first beginnings of a decay in grace, makes us
insensible until the decay become visible to others, and in end sensible to
our selves; as it was with Ephraim, Hos. 7.9. Gray hairs are here and there
upon him, yet he knows not, till there was a visible change upon all the
hairs of his head.

Quest. 2. What shall be done for preveening a decay in the degrees of grace?
Ans. 1. The exercise of the graces and gifts of the Spirit, is a blessed mean
to preveen such a decay; this mean Paul did use, Act 24.16. and all that are
strong in the faith should do the same, Heb. 5.14. Who by reason of use, have
their senses exercised to discern both good and evil; because sluggishness and
carelessness to do spiritual duties, when God gives occasion and opportunity,
does make us more and more remiss, till in end we are overcome with a spirit of
slumber. 2. Be not discouraged from setting about commanded duties, because
possibly at first thou finds not such vigor or quickness of spirit, as is
requisite: it was strange and strong delusion in some in these latter times,
that they would not pray to God, till first they should find an impulse of the
Spirit for prayer; but, should not the precept of God, commanding the duty, be
sufficient for moving us to endeavor after it? Were it not a folly in a weak
sick person, that had little or no appetite to meat, to resolve he would
forbear to eat, until he should get sharpness of appetite? such forbearing
were the ready way to make him lose all appetite, and in end his life: but as
eating little and little brings forward appetite, so thy doing duty from
conscience to Gods Commandments, brings forward and increases thy desire to
spiritual duties, and in end, procures thy delight in them. Have not the
children of God, many times at the beginning of prayer, been sad and heartless,
and yet before they have ended (as the countenance of our blessed Lord was
changed in prayer,) so their hearts and countenances have been changed to joy
and cheerfulness, as we see, Ps. 6. and Ps. 13. by comparing the end of the
Psalm, with the beginning thereof? Therefore, though thou find not such an
impulse and strong motion for the duty as thou would, yet make conscience of
obedience to the holy Commandment, and go about duty, trusting to him who has
promised to bless the diligent; and when God, besides the Commandment, calls
thee forth to duty by strong motions upon thy spirit, neglect not the call of
such invitations, but let thine heart come forward to the duty, lest otherwise
thou provoke the Spirit of God both to withdraw those good motions, and also
his assistance, which thou might have had for doing the duty, if thou had
embraced the opportunity, Cant. 5.1, 2, 3. 3 Observe well the beginnings of a
decay and fainting in duty, and at first, run by prayer to Christ for
quickening thee to duty, and for preventing a farther decay, as Peter did when
he began to sink, notwithstanding he was in the way of duty, he cried to
Christ, and was helped, Mat. 14.32. 4. Whenever thou enters upon commanded
duty, pray for the assistance of the Spirit, for without him we can do nothing,
Joh. 15.5. because, an habit or stock of grace is not sufficient, without the
assistance of his Spirit, impowering and enabling us to manage the stock of
received grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. His grace which was bestowed on me, was not in
vain: but I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me. As it is not enough, that the Ship be furnished with
Tacklings and Sails, unless there be a prosperous gale of wind upon the Sails,
there is no progress.

VERSE III. And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord.
--
SOme read it, God shall make the Messiah to be of a sweet smell to all who
believe, among whom he shall be preached in the Gospel; according to that, 2
Cor. 2.16. We are a savor of life unto life to those that are saved. And so
they take the words in a passive signification, that Believers and the fearers
of the Lord shall receive from him a sweet and pleasant sent of his
excellencies and bounty through the Preaching of the Gospel: Others (whom we
follow rather) understand the words in an active signification, to wit, that
God shall make him of a quick sentiment and sagacity of judgment, to discern
who fear God and serve him uprightly. Thus our blessed Lord did discern
Hypocrites and Pharisees, notwithstanding all their fair outward pretenses of
gravity in their smooth speeches: He did also discern a true Nathanael before
he had seen him with his bodily eyes, Joh. 1.48. Likewise he discerned the
hypocrisy of many fair professors, Mat. 22.18. John 2.24.

By the fear of the Lord, we understand all things that concern the service and
worship of God; as ordinarily in holy Scripture, the fear of the Lord is taken,
if we compare Deuteronomy. 6.13. with Matthew. 4.10.

Observe. 1. Spiritual discretion in the matters of God, is from the Spirit of
God; for it is said, he shall make him, etc. As the Lord Christ, the King of
Saints, had that gift in a special and superexcellent manner from the Spirit of
God; so all his subjects in the Church, have in some measure, the gift of
discerning truth and error, good and evil, from the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14,
15. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned: but he that is spiritual, judges all things. This is evident by
induction,

1. It is the Spirit of the Lord, which opens the understanding to perceive
and discern heavenly truths, Mat. 13.11. Mat. 16.17. Luke 24.44. As it is not
enough, that an object to be seen in a due distance be set before the eye,
unless the same be enabled to see it; (for blind men see not what is set before
them) so it is not enough, that the object of faith be set before us in the
Word, unless the eye of our understanding be opened to perceive it.

2. The Lord makes us by the inward illumination of the Spirit, and by the
light of his Word, to discern and put a difference between temptations and
duties; as for example, when it is born in upon the spirit of an unlettered and
unqualified man, in these our days, to preach the Gospel, a
spiritual-discerning private Christian looks upon it as a temptation from the
Spirit of error; and not upon it as a duty: because he knows and discerns by
the Spirit of the Lord from the holy Word, 1 Timothy 2. and Tit. 1.9. The Minister
of the Gospel, should be a man able to teach, and to convince the gainsayers.

3. The Spirit of the Lord makes us to discern between sin and duty. Ab^shai
through want of this gift of spiritual discerning, thought it a duty incumbent
on David to kill Saul: because God in a providence, by appearance, had cast his
enemy into his hand: but holy David by the Spirit of God discerned it to be a
sin, if he should make such use of that opportunity; and he looked upon it
rather as an occasion to try his loyalty to King Saul, and to stop the mouths
of calumniators, who spoke of him as an enemy to the King.

4. He makes us to discern the opportunities of speaking and doing things in
due season; it was the Lord that put it in the heart of Jacob to seek the
blessing in time; for soon after he went out from his father Isaac, his brother
Esau came in, Genesis 27.30. It was the Lord who put it in the heart of Abigail,
both for her own and David's good, to meet David in the way before he came to
the house of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.5. He makes us to discern our own spiritual
estate, that we are under the banner of his love; and makes us, by a reflex
act, to know the saving graces of the Spirit bestowed upon us, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now
we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

5. He gives us the gift of wisdom and discerning matters civil and moral: He
gave sagacity unto David to smell out Joabs subtilty, and to perceive his hand
in suborning the woman of Tekoa, 2 Samuel 14.19. He made Solomon in his sagacity
to discern between the true and counterfeit mother, by the affection of the
one, and the unnaturalness of the other. Thus God put it in the heart of King
James, of blessed memory, to smell out the Powder Plot, and horrid treason,
Anno Dom. 1605. from a word in an unsubscribed Letter, by one of the
Conspirators, to the Lord Mont-eagle, desiring him to keep himself out of the
Parliament House on such a day, whereon there would be a sudden clap or blast:
which the King by an act of special discerning, given him of God, did presage
was to be by Powder; and so after a narrow search, the Plot was discovered, and
through Gods gracious providence, and the Kings sagacity, was disappointed.

6. God gives the gift of skill unto men, both in their public and private
employments, as the spirit of Government to Rulers, whether supreme or
subordinat; and also to men for their private employments, Isa. 28.26.

Use 1. This should humble us under the sense of our own silliness and want of
knowledge of many things, that we may and should know, in respect of the many
means given to instruct us in things that differ; and also to humble us when we
compare our knowledge with others, who know much more than we, though we have
had the same or greater opportunities for learning. Socrates, upon a time,
showing the universal Mapp of the World to that vocky young man Alcibiades,
said unto him, Look there, and see how little your parcel of ground is: in
like-manner, the knowledge of any particular person, is very little, in
comparison of that vast and universal knowledge men would have had, if they had
continued in that first estate of primitive integrity.

Use 2. To convince many in this generation of petulant and luxuriant spirits,
or the wits (as they are called) who are of quick understanding in many curious
and unnecessar speculations, which the Apostle calls the Raveries of a sick and
distempered mind, 1 Timothy 6.4. and yet how slow and dull are they to discern and
take up the necessar and fundamental truths of Religion? Of such men we may
speak in the words of Eliphaz, Job 15.2. Should a wise man utter vain
knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind? How many are quick and
sagacious in their worldly matters, and no man is able to overreach them? but
they have little or no understanding in the great bargain of Salvation: to
these I may say, as our blessed Lord said to the Pharisees, This ye should have
done, and not left the other undone.

Use 3. As thou would have the gift of spiritual discerning, 1. Pray to the
Father of lights to open the eyes of thine understanding, Psalm. 119.18. Open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. 2. Labor
diligently to keep thine heart pure from carnal lusts, which as gross vapors
many times obscure the judgment, that it cannot discern spiritual matters in
the right colors, but oftentimes the judgment is miscarried to a wrong
sentence by a deceived heart. The intemperat person discerns not the evil of
intemperance, nor the incontinent the evil of his unclean ways, because these
vile lusts do distemper their judgment: The worldly-minded man discerns not
the excellency of things heavenly, because his heart is not purged from the
love of the world, and his surfeit of worldly cares, obstructs the smelling and
rellishing of things heavenly to his taste. 3. Beware of curiosity in desiring
to know things unnecessar, or secret, which God has reserved to himself, Deuteronomy.
29.29. for it is just with God, when men misimploy the quickness of their
natural understanding, many times so to blunt their understanding, in order to
supernatural truths, that they become more dull and incapable, even than many
others, whom they despised as silly ignorants: As the sharper the edge of the
new polished Knife be, if it be used to cut hard Metalls, especially at first
it becomes so blunt, that it cannot cut such things as are soft and more easy
to cut, even by these who had not such a sharp edge, as themselves seemed to
have had.

Observe. 2. Our blessed Lord is quick of understanding; he has a piercing eye
to discern the hearts of all his subjects, Heb. 4.13. All things are naked in
his eyes, (...), as blemishes and bruises are clearly seen upon the carcass
after the skin is taken off. Rev. 2.18. His eyes are like unto a flame of fire
for pierceing, and his feet are like brass for crushing his enemies.

Use. Therefore let us walk humbly and circumspectly in the fear of our Lord,
who observes our most secret counsels, courses and ways. 1. Look to thy
thoughts and purposes, although men see them not, yet the Lord is of quick
understanding to perceive them and see through them, Is. 10.7. Luke 24.39. 2.
He knows the secret frettings of the heart at his Word, when at any time thou
murmurest against the Word preached, because contrair to thine opinion or
interest, Luke 5.21, 22. he knows the secret fretting of the heart against
his holy Commands, when they are contrair to flesh and blood, and to our carnal
desires, Numb. 14.27. he knows our frettings at the reproof of his Ministers,
Exodus 16.7, 8. he sees our frettings of heart at the prosperity of others,
Genesis 4.6. and our frettings against our own personal afflictions, Jonah 4.9. 3.
He knows our secret speeches, Ps. 139.4. our secret reasonings of unbelief,
Mat. 16.8. our secret whisperings and backbitings to separate friends, Ps.
50.20, 21. Mat. 9.11. 4. He sees our most secret actions, Job 26.6. Ps.
139.12. 2 Samuel 12.12. Joh. 4.18. He knew Judas his secret bargaining with the
Pharisees, and said to him, What thou do, do quickly. Remember as now he
knows, so there is a day when he will judge the secrets of all hearts; he
will make many then to know, what now they will not believe and lay to heart,
for their more humble and circumspect walking in time coming; then shall the
damned acknowledge their sins, and their neglect of the day of their merciful
visitation on earth; which convincing light of conscience will not comfort
them, but confound them with shame and horror.

Observe. 3. Our blessed Lord improved and exercised his quickness of
understanding, not about the matters of this present world; but especially in
matters of Religion, pertaining to his spiritual kingdom; for it is said, he
shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. In the days of
his Humiliation on earth, he would not interpose as a Judge in civil debates,
Luke 12.24. nor in criminal causes, Joh. 8.10. because the condition of his
Kingdom and Government is spiritual; the Ordinances of his Kingdom are
spiritual, to wit, Word, Sacraments and Prayer; the Benefits and Privileges
are spiritual, Romans 14.17. Righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. The
duties are spiritual, to wit, repentance, faith, hope, love and new obedience:
the end of the Administration is spiritual, to wit, to make a man wise unto
salvation; and the means whereby his Kingdom is enlarged are spiritual, Zechar.
6.4. 2 Cor. 10.4.

Use 1. The use of this Doctrine is specially to correct four errors, which
arise from the mistake of the nature of the Kingdom of Christ.

1. The jealousies of the secular powers of this world, as if the Kingdom of
Christ within his Church, were not consisting with their civil power: Herod the
King was troubled, when he heard that the King of the Jews was born, Mat. 2.3.
But our blessed Lord shows them, they need not be so jealous and fearful, Joh.
18 36. My kingdom is not of this world. It is in it, but not of it, but of men
separate from the evil of the world. Augustine, Tractat. on John, says to the
powers on earth, Venite credendo, and nolite metuere saeviendo; Come to Christ
by believing, and do not fear by raging against the Church. He who gives an
heavenly Kingdom, does not by his Government in the Church, take away mortal
Kingdoms from them; whatever has been the pride, violence and usurpation of
Churchmen on the civil Government in diverse Ages, it was altogether from their
own corruption, and not from the nature of the Kingdom of Christ, who clearly
teaches his subjects in his spiritual Kingdom, to give unto Caesar that which
is Cesars, and to God, that which is Gods, Mat. 22.21. Our blessed Lord and
King of Saints teaches them, not only subjection and subordination at all
times to lawful Authority, but also obedience to all their lawful commands,
Tit. 3.1. and forbids them to use their Christian liberty, as a cloak of
maliciousness against lawful Authority, 1 Pet. 2.16.

2. This Doctrine serves to correct the encroachments of the spiritual Guides
at any time upon the civil Authority; as was that of Pope Gregory the 7th,
because Henry 4th the Emperor, would not come to a synodical Answer for his
investiture of Churchmen in Ecclesiastical Dignities: For this cause did the
Pope excommunicate him, absolve the Subjects from their Allegiance, stirred
them up to rebellion, and in end, gave the Imperial Crown to Rodolph Duke of
Swabland. Pope Alexander the third, did insolently insult and trample upon the
Emperor Fredericus Barbarossa, and blasphemously, to his wicked purpose, abused
that place of holy Scripture, Ps. 91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion, etc.
This is not to be quick and active in the fear of the Lord, as our blessed Lord
was; but in the pride and violence of their own sinful courses: How far is such
insolent usurpation from the precept and practice of Christ and his Apostles,
and also from the humble subjection of the primitive Christians unto lawful
powers? How disadvantagious such pride and violence has proven unto the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and propagation of the Christian
Religion, sad experience has made it evident, both in former and latter
Generations: Such violent dealing has made many men become either open enemies
to all true Religion, or hypocrites, and secret bitter enemies, waiting for a
time of revenge. Devout Bernard, his advice to Pope Eugenius 4th. was, Seeing
thou art appointed to be a planter in Christ's Vineyard, know that thou has need
of the Dible, and not of the Scepter: If thou be content with Christ's Legacy,
(to wit) Feed my sheep, thou shall not inherit glory and pomp, but care and
labor.

It serves to curb the inconsiderat zeal of too many, who would have this
Kingdom to be propagat by force of arms; they consider not that it is
spiritual about Religion and the fear of the Lord, and suitably to be enlarged
by spiritual means and midses; such as are especially the preaching of the
Word, Mat. 28.19. frequent and fervent prayer to God, 2 These. 3.1. a
Gospel-like conversation, 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.1. and patient, suffering
persecution for the truth, without tumult or sedition, Phil. 1.12. Phil. 1 29.
Revel. 13.10. Therefore it was a bold and arrogant speech of Nestorius unto
Theodosius the younger, Give thou to me, O Emperor, the earth purged from
heretics, and I shall give unto thee heaven; scatter thou the heretics, and I
shall with thee scatter the Persians thy enemies. These speeches became not a
Churchman, whose weapons are not carnal, but spiritual; our blessed Lord,
though he had power and might, would not command fire to destroy the
Samaritans, who refused to receive him into their City, Luke 9.55, 56.

4. And it is of good use to correct the obstinat unbelief of the Jews, who
wait for a Messiah in outward pomp and glory; they mistake the nature of this
Kingdom, by misunderstanding such places of holy Scripture, wherein the Spirit
of God speaks of the inward beauty of his Kingdom, in an allusion to the
outward beauty of earthly Kingdoms, Psalm. 45.3. But (if they were not prejudged
and obstinat^) they might learn something of the nature of this Kingdom, from
Isa. 53.2. and Zechar. 9.9. where the Prophets foretell, that the Messiah shall
not come in outward pomp and glory.

Use 2. The Spiritual Guides and Ministers of the Church, in imitation of
Christ the chief shepherd of our souls, should go about the business of this
spiritual Kingdom, and therein especially exercise their quickness and
activity: this was most minded by the holy Apostles, Act. 6.4. Col. 1.28, 29.
The sense of the burden of this great work made the Apostle Paul to cry out,
Who is sufficient for these things? It was the Apostles counsel, 1 Timothy 4.15.
Meditate on these things, and give thy self wholly unto them. Famous Gerson,
lib. de vit. Spirit. speaking to Churchmen, Tell me (says he) whether it is a
more holy thing to serve the world by thy self, and to serve God by a Viccar
and Substitute; or to serve God by thy self, and the world by a Substitute?
Pope Damasus compared the Ministers of the Church, who, to attend their worldly
affairs, did commit their flocks unto Substitutes or Suffragans, he compared
them (I say) unto some wanton women, who having full breasts, yet that they
might give themselves to their pleasures, did give out their Infants to be
nursed by others.

VERSE III. -- And he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, etc.
IN the former part of the verse. we have the manner of our blessed Lord his
judging and governing his subjects with great wisdom and prudence; In these
words, we have his equity and justice set down, negatively, verse. 3. and
positively, verse. 4.

Whereas it is said here, He shall not judge after the sight of his eyes; it
may be demanded, if it be a fault for men to judge according to their seeing
and hearing; because men on earth cannot ordinarily understand any cause or
action, till first they have it in their sense and imagination? Answ. Certain
it is, that Judges should determine according to matters alleged and proven,
and therefore must judge according to things heard or seen, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. The
Priest under the Law was appointed to look with his eyes upon the leprous
person, before he judged and pronounced sentence, whether he was clean or
unclean: But Judges would not be rash to judge according to fama clamosa, the
common report: because in so doing, men judged amiss of the Apostles
themselves, who were commonly, but falsely reported to be seditious persons,
Acts 17.6. As also of their Doctrine, calling it heresy, Acts 24.14. Whereas a
flagrant report is only a ground for inquiring, but not for a judicial
sentence, Deuteronomy. 17.4. Neither must men in Judgment, judge according to the
seeing of their eyes, as by looking to the person of the poor man, to take no
notice of his cause, Deuteronomy. 1.17. nor should they judge partially out of respect
to the man whom they see to be of outward grandour or prosperity in the world,
Lev. 19.15 Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall not respect
the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty; but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. Our blessed Lord judged not of
the Pharisees according to his hearing of their fair words, nor according to
their seeming holiness; but he judged righteous judgment of them, that they
were a generation of vipers.

The words may be also taken for the way of judging, that was peculiar to
Christ, wherein he excelled all the Judges of the earth; in so far as he needed
not the help of the outward senses of hearing and seeing, because he did
discern and judge the secrets of the heart. Solomon, in judging which of the
two women was the true mother of the child, made good use of hearing both the
one and the other; but our blessed Lord knows the hearts and thoughts of men,
though they speak nothing, Joh. 2.24. yea, he knew the wickedness of their
hearts, notwithstanding their flattering speeches of dissimulation.

Use. This equity of our Lord in Judgment, serves for our imitation, both in
public and private Judgment: Men in public Judgment, should not upon
hearsay and ba^e information proceed to a sentence of absolution or
condemnation; but they should inquire diligently, if the matter be so as is
reported: God himself does teach Judges this duty by his manner of proceeding
to judge Sodom, Genesis 18.21. and by his precept, Deuteronomy. 13.14. For if it were
enough upon hearsay and common report, to judge and condemn, then innocent
persons should suffer many times. Jeremiah was reported to be a factious man,
who by his preaching did weaken the hands of the people; and Paul to be a
seditious man, that stirred up the people: neither should Judges be rash upon
hearing only the one party, to pronounce sentence against the other; for if it
be enough to accuse, who shall be innocent? Prove. 18.17. He that is first in
his own cause, seems just; but his neighbor comes and searches him. Such
rashness in judging was contrair to the Law of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 1.17. Joh. 7.51.
Job searched out the cause which he knew not, Job 29.16. It was contrair to the
Law of Nature and of Nations among the Heathens: Alexander the Great, in time
of judging, laid his hand closs upon the one of his ears, that he might reserve
it (as he said) for the party that was accused. Neither should they judge
according to the seeing of the eye, as they perceive the party to be a friend
or an enemy, rich or poor, a great or a mean man, Levit. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 33.9.
because the Judge who is a respecter of persons, is easily biased and
perverted in judgment, Prove. 28.21. The partial Judge says, Show me the man,
and then I will show you the Law; but the impartial and unbyassed Judge says,
I will show you the Law, be the man what he will. It was Tertullian his
complaint against the Judges of that time, persecuting the Christians; there is
(says he) inquisitio nominis, sed non examinatio criminis, an inquiry after
the name, if they be called Christians, but no examination of the crime. It was
well spoken by the Heathen Judge Aristides, fitting in Judgment; when one of
the Competitors, pleading before him, said, This fellow has also done great
wrong to thy self in speaking evil of thee: My friend (said Aristides) I pray
thee, tell me only the wrong he has done unto thee, for I am Judge here to do
right unto thee, and not to judge the personal wrongs done to my self. Rashness
in Judgment does bring guiltiness upon the Judge, and damage upon the
innocent Party: David his rash Judgment against Mephibosheth, did no small
prejudice both to himself, and to the poor innocent lame man.

In your private Judgment, be not rash, Mat. 7.1. as in judging wicked men to
be in a good cause, or course, from their outward prosperity, Mal. 3 15. or in
judging a cause to be evil, because men are crossed in it: This was the error
of Asaph, till he recollected himself, Psa. 73.17. Jonah in fleeing from the
Lord, was in an evil course, and yet found a Ship ready at the first, and also
fair weather at his Embarqueing; but God met with him in end, and crossed his
course. The Disciples of our Lord were in a right course commanded by himself,
Joh. 6. and yet were crossed with a mighty contrary wind; but in end had an
happy and safe landing. Of this purpose see more, Sermon. Joh. 7.24. Neither
should men be rash in judging one another about matters indifferent, in the
practice whereof they differ one from another, Romans 14.2 This Magisterial
censuring one of another, is a great impediment to peace and unity. Augustine
his advice is good, Epist. 106. to Casul. We must always beware (says he) to
overcloud the fair face of Christian Charity by the tempest of contention. And
to the same purpose speaks judicious Calvin, Institut. Lib. 4. Cap. 10. Sect.
32. We must always take heed (says he) that one Church do not despise or
contemn another, for the difference of outward Discipline.

VERSE IV. But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with
equity, for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
HIs justice in the Government of his subjects, is set down here positively;
where we understand by judging the poor, his delivering of them out of the hand
of their oppressors, by taking them and their cause into his own cognizance and
protection, and in end doing justice to them and upon their oppressors, Ps.
140.12. I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor.

By the meek we understand both the great and small, who being wronged, bear
the wrongs with a meek spirit, (not avenging themselves by reviling, or by
rendering evil for evil) as was the disposition of David, though a great man,
Ps. 38.13, 14. But I as a deaf man heard not, and I was as a dumb man that
opens not his mouth: thus I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth
are no reproofs.

By reproving for the meek of the earth, we understand our blessed Lord his
appearing for them in his gracious providence, and in the course of vindicative
justice, when under their afflictions and persecutions, they are quiet and
peaceable; then does the Lord, unto whom they commit their cause in
righteousness, ofttimes arise, and in their stead reproves their oppressors and
injurers, not only by his Word, as he did David by Nathan, for the wrong done
to Vriah; but also many times by his rod and sad judgments, Ps. 105.14. He
suffered no man to do them wrong; yea he reproved Kings for their sakes. Or
sometimes he reproves them by awaking and tormenting their guilty consciences,
Job 20.19, 20. Because he has oppressed, etc. he shall not surely feel
quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that he desired: And ver. 26. a
fire not blown shall consume him.

Observe. 1. The Lord God is the judge and defender of the poor, even of such as
are in a destitute and desolat condition, as of the widow, the fatherless and
the strangers, Ps. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the
needy, now will I arise, says the Lord. As a Judge he will arise in judgment,
to decide in their favors: thus he arose in judgment for oppressed Naboth,
and by a visible judgment upon Achab the oppressor, declared to all the world
the innocence of Naboth, who had been unjustly condemned as a blasphemer: the
Lord recommends such oppressed persons as his special Clients, unto his
Deputies and Vicegerents upon earth, Ps. 82 3. Is. 1.17. He commends in all
Judges, the care they have of the poor and destitute, Ps. 72.12. speaking of
Solomon, He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also and him that
has no helper. Upon this account, good Josiah is much commended by the Lord,
Jer. 22.16. He judged the cause of the poor and needy* then it was well with
him; was not this to know me, says the Lord? Prove. 29.7. The righteous
considers the cause of the poor, but the wicked regards not to know it. And
he threaten sad judgments against such Judges, who respect persons, and turn
away the right from the poor, Job 13.10. Amos 2.6. Micah 3 10.

Use 1. For imitation unto all men in place of public judgment; they should
in judging, follow the example of our blessed Lord, who in judging and
governing, did plead and assert the cause of the poor and destitute, 2 Chronicles.
19.6, 7. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who
is with you in the judgment: wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you; take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. The poor are frequently recommended in
holy Scripture by God himself unto the Judges on earth; and we know, subordinat
Judges take special notice of these who are recommended to them by the supreme
Judge and Ruler of the Land; and their cause is expeded with all possible and
convenient diligence.

Use 2. For admonition to men of power on earth, not to oppress the poor, for
the Lord is their Judge, and will own their cause, Exo. 22.22. Job 34. from
ver. 24. to 29. what the oppressor at a time gets by oppression, the supreme
Judge of the earth in his justice and providence, does oft-times revocke from
him or his posterity, Job 20.15. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall
vomit them up again; God shall cast them out of his belly. Sometimes the Lord
smites him with terror in his conscience, which is as a fire not blown or
visible to the world, but secretly he torments him, Job 15.21. Job 20.26. This
oppression of the poor brings great houses to desolation. Hab 2.9, 10, 11. Woe
to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his
nest on high The Lord God oft-times in his justice, raises up one oppressor
against another, as one Pyrat for robbing of another, Is. 33.1. Woe to thee that
spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt
not treacherously with thee; when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal
treacherously with thee.

Use 3. For comfort to the poor, who are despised and oppressed; let them not
be altogether discouraged, nor despair of redress: but let them quietly,
without tumult, noise or sedition, make their address and appeal to the supreme
Judge and Lord, who judges righteously, Ps. 10.14. The poor leaves himself
upon thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless. Thus did our blessed Lord, (1
Pet. 2.23.) not cry bitterly against the oppressor; but cry quietly to God, who
will comfort the oppres'd, and redress the wrongs done to them, Job 35.9, 10,
14. Although thou say thou shall not see him, yet judgment is before him,
therefore trust thou in him.

Observe. 2. God avenges the cause of the meek and humble in spirit; for it is
said here, he shall reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. David was
meek and silent when foul-mouthed Shimei railed against him, and was confident
God would do him good for his cursing, and one time or other give to the
insolent and insulting railer a sad reproof, as the Lord did afterward by
Solomon punishing him. In like manner, the people of Israel were silent at the
blasphemous railing of Rabshekah; and God gave a sad reproof both to him and
his Master, by that extraordinar and visible judgment upon that great Army.

Use 1. For admonition to proud insolent brawlers, not to injure and affront
the meek, and therefore insult over them, as silly base-spirited men, because
they are quiet, and do not render evil for evil: although they are sensible of
the wrong done to themselves; yet they are sensible of their duty to God and
his holy Commandment, Romans 12.19. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place
unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the
Lord. And from sense of the wrong done, they lay it forth in secret before the
Lord, who will reprove for them, and speak by his judgments in their behalf,
as many times he has plagued the wicked, who oppress the meek of the earth:
yea, sometimes he punishes even the godly, when they out of a fit of envy, do
wrong to the meek: God gave a sad reproof by a visible judgment to Miriam,
when out of envy she spoke against meek Moses, Numb. 12.

Use 2. For admonition to these who are wronged and oppressed in any manner or
measure; let them study to be of a meek spirit, and of a quiet deportment;
avenge not thy self by contumely or injury: for if thou do so, God will look on
and suffer thee to be doing; but in so doing, thou will spoil and mar thy own
cause; not unlike to some poor ignorant Contrymen, who presuming to speak
for themselves at the Bar of Justice, do oft-times mar their own Cause: But if
thou be meek and patient, God will stand up in his own good time, he will plead
thy cause, and make thy just possession of thy good name and estate, to outlive
the unjust calumny, oppression or violent intrusion of thine adversaries, Ps.
37.6, 11. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noon day: the meek shall inherit the earth and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace. Mat. 5.5. Blessed are the meek, for they
shall inherit the earth.

VERSE IV. -- And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; and with
the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
WE have heard of our Lords wisdom and sagacity for governing his subjects; we
have heard also here of his justice and equity; now he speaks of his power
and faithfulness in governing.

In these words, and he shall smite, etc. we have, 1. a description and
designation of the Word of God, the rod of his mouth. 2. The power of the Word
preached and applied, he shall smite, etc. 3. The subject matter or object that
he shall smite, the earth. 4. The sad judgment of God upon such as continue
obstinat in their evil ways, he shall slay the wicked.

By the rod of his mouth, is meant the Word of God, inspired into the Prophets
and Apostles by the Spirit of God: as men do communicate their mind and
thoughts one to another by the expression of the tongue; So God, in an
extraordinary manner, did communicate his mind and counsel by the inspiration
of the holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.19. Justine Martyr compares the
inspiration of the Spirit unto a quill or pen, descending from heaven; and he
compares the Prophets and Apostles unto a Sittern or Lute touched by it, and
sending forth the sound of heavenly Doctrine; therefore what they spoke, the
mouth of the Lord is said to have spoken it, Is. 1.20. because the Spirit of
God did direct them both in the matter and manner of expression.

Observe. 1. The word of God is fitly called a Rod, 1. in respect of its
usefulness for describing and pointing forth to us our heavenly inheritance,
Jer. 51.19. Israel is called the rod of his inheritance: men measured their
earthly inheritance with a measuring rod, or with a line or cord. In
like-manner, the Word of God, but more especially the Holy Gospel, does point
forth to us our heavenly inheritance, in and with Christ; for which cause it is
called the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4.23. 2. The Word of God is compared to
a rod, for direction; as a man by a rod in his hand points out the way, wherein
the passenger should walk: So the word of God shows unto us, in this time of
our sojourning, the way wherein we should walk toward our Country that is
above, to wit, the way of repentance, of faith in Christ, and of new obedience,
Act. 3.19. Act. 16.31. Heb. 5.8. 3. It is compared to a rod, for correction; as
the shepherds rod serves to smite the sheep when they go astray; So the Word
of God does sharply convince the understanding, and withal smites the heart
with sorrow for erring and departing from the Lord, Isa. 58.1. 2 Timothy 3.15. 4.
It is compared to a rod, because it strengthens and comfort the fainting
spirit, and weary heart; as a weak or weary man leans upon his rod or staff:
the sweet promises of the Gospel are like unto the honey, touched and applied
by Jonathans rod, it did revive him and quicken him unto the pursuit of his
enemies, therefore it is called the rod of his strength, Ps. 110.2. The
promises of the Gospel do minister comfort to Believers in their greatest
extremities, Ps. 23.4. Ps. 119.92. as the rods ( Genesis 30.) laid before the
sheep in the troughs or gutters, made them to conceive with young; So the
promises of God laid forth in the Word before believers in their weak and
feeble condition, makes them to conceive with comfort in the hid man of the
heart.

Use 1. For admonition, not to despise the holy Word, which is called here the
rod of his mouth, although it be spoken by weak men, who carry this heavenly
treasure in earthen vessels; who would refuse precious gold, though offered in
a pot of earth? Ministers are the Lords Heralds, and the affront done to the
Heralds, does reflect upon the Prince who sent them: David was highly
provoked by the affront done to his Ambassadors, 2 Samuel 10. And he punished
it severely, 2 Samuel 12.31. In like manner, our blessed Lord takes the contempt
done to his Ministers, as done unto himself, Luke 10.16.

Use 2. For exhortation to receive this sacred Word, as the Word of God, It is
the rod of his mouth: the whole Scripture is given by inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16.
It is the Lanthorn, which shows us the way to Heaven, Psalm. 119.100. 2 Pet.
1.19. It is the rule of our faith, Joh. 20.31. and of our obedience and
conversation, Gal. 6.16. It works effectually only in these, who with a
single heart receive it, as the Word of God, 1 These. 2.13.

Observe. 2. The Word of God is powerful, He shall smite, etc. This is evident,
1. From these things unto which it is compared; as ( Jer. 23.29.) to fire,
which so smites and pierces the hard rock with heat, that the same is rent in
pieces; and to an hammer, which breaks the hard stone: It is compared unto a
sword, Heb. 4.12. which opens up and discovers the heart, like the Anatomists
razor, and shows the inward vileness of our hearts. 2. It is evident from the
high Elogies given to the Word: it is called the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 12 8.
and the reproof of wisdom does come home to the heart, and smite it soundly.
The wise reproof given by Nathan to David, in a parable, did smartly smite the
heart of David. The Word is called the power of God, Romans 1.16. not that any
natural power is inherent in the letters or syllables of the words, as may be
seen, Acts 19.15. but because God does ordinarily with the power of the Holy
Ghost accompany his own sacred Ordinance, spoken in simplicity of words, and in
sincerity of affection unto the hearts of his Elect, that so they are
powerfully induced to believe the Word, and tu^n unto the Lord, Acts 11.21. 3.
It is evident from examples, as in Josiah, humbled at the heart by the reading
of this word, 2 Chronicles. 24 27. The convert-Jews were pricked at the heart by
this word, Acts 2.37.

We have a memorable example of the power of the Word, recorded by Cyrill,
Bishop of Alexandria, an eyewitness of the same. At the first Council of Nice
(says he) there came out of curiosity thither an Heathen Philosoph, who was a
subtle and acute Logician, but a great adversary to the Christian Religion:
some of the learned Fathers there, reasoned with him by way of School-disputes,
but he by one or other distinction did elude the force of their Arguments:
whereupon one of the most simple in that famous Council, being a very pious,
though not a learned man, came against him like David against Goliath; and in
great simplicity of words, with much zeal, says to him, O Philosopher, in the
Name of Jesus Christ hearken to these things that are truths: there is one God,
who made Heaven and Earth, who made man of the earth, and breathed life into
him; who created all things visible and invisible by the power of his Word, and
upholds all things by the same: this Word and Wisdom, which we call the Son of
God, having pity on man in his lost condition, was born of a Virgin, and by his
suffering of death, has delivered us from eternal death; by his resurrection
he applies to us eternal life, and we look for him to come and to judge us
according to the things done in the body: O Philosopher, believe thou it to
be so? Then he without all contradiction, as astonished with the power of the
Word, could only answer this, that it was a truth indeed which he had spoken.
Thereafter the aged Father desired him to follow after himself, and to receive
Christian an Baptism, the seal of his faith into that saving truth: whereupon
he immediately followed, and turning himself toward his Scholars, that came
along with him, and to the other hearers, said, So long as men did deal with me
by bare words only, I did oppose words to words, and by artifice of words I did
elude what they spoke; but when power came forth from the mouth of the speaker,
my naked words could not resist divine power, neither could man withstand God;
and therefore (says he to his Scholars) believe ye in Christ, and together
with me follow this aged man, in and by whom God has spoken to me at this
time. Ruffinus Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. relating this History, says, It was from
God, for verifying that place of holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 4.20. The kingdom of
God is not in word, but in power: for when the Spirit of God is with the Word,
we see it can so smite the heart, that it brings all our imaginations captive
to it, 2 Cor. 10.4.

Quest. How does the Word of God smite the heart? Ans. 1. By light, showing and
convincing the understanding of the errors and dangers of our sinful ways;
for by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Rom 7.7. And in the Word, as in a
mirror, the vileness of sin, which is compared to things most vile, as to the
dross of metal, to the scum of a pot, to putrified sores, to leprosy, to
dung, to swine wallowing in the mire, and to a dog licking up his own vomit:
but the vileness of sin is most seen in the mirror of the Gospel; because
nothing could cleanse us from the filth of sin, but the precious blood of the
Son of God. And the danger of sin is seen in consequents thereof, to wit, all
misery in this life, not only the first, but also the second death, and
damnation eternal, unless it be preveened by true repentance and faith in Jesus
Christ, Luke 13.5. Joh. 3.18. 2. The heart is smitten after conviction, by
grief and sorrow, Acts 2.37. The convert-Jews being convinced of the wickedness
and hainousness of their sin by Peter's Sermon, were pricked in their hearts,
cried out from fear, Men and brethren, what shall we do? And the af^^g^ted
Jaylour, being afrighted, from apprehension of the dange^ of his sins, cried
out, Acts 16.30. Sirs, What must I do to be saved? In like manner, Felix the
Governor, being convinced of his sins, and afrighted with the apprehension of
Judgment to come, did tremble, Acts 24.25. 3. After the conscience is awakened
with fear, then the will is pained and confounded with shame and displeasure,
Jer. 31.18, 19. Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye
are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death.

Use 1. For admonition unto men of an hard and stupid heart, to resort often
unto the hearing and reading of the Word of God; for who can tell but God one
time or another will smite the earthy and obdured heart, and open it, as he did
the heart of Lydia? Acts 14.

Object. 1. But many have heard the Word, and yet their hearts have not been
moved and smitten with it: The threatenings of the Lord by Moses, did not move
the heart of Pharaoh, but rather he was the more hardened? Answ. The cause of
this is, 1. Their own unbelief: although they have, yet they lay not the
threatenings to heart, but put the evil day far from them: As the hammer breaks
not the hard stone, except it be laid to it with some force; the old world laid
not to heart the threatening of the deluge by Noah, Mat. 24.39. but the
Ninivites believed the threatening by Jonah, and repented, Jonah 3.5. 2. Love of
some gainful sin, keeps the will in an obstinacy against the Word, that they
will not be convinced of the sinfulness of their ways: they love darkness more
than light, and therefore they hate the light of the Word, which makes their
da^kness manifest, Joh. 3.19. The Crafts-men in Ephesus, (Acts 19.) have such
love to their gainful idolatry, that they will not be convinced of the
absurdity and unreasonableness thereof. 3. Pride and arrogance will not suffer
some men to be informed of the truth that is contrary to their own opinion and
way; and so because they will not be informed, they cannot be convinced: such
was the pride and arrogance of the Pharisees, Joh. 9.34. 4. Preposterous love
of sinful company and society, does make some men senseless and fearless of the
judgments threatened against such a society: Lot his Sons in Law, out of their
love to Sodom, were not moved with his preaching and threatening of sad
judgment against that City. Therefore, as ye would be convinced of the evil
and danger of sin, by the Word of God, and by his severe threatenings, lay them
to heart by believing: Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God; forsake
the love of sin though never so gainful or pleasant; and forsake all communion
and fellowship with the workers of iniquity in their works of darkness.

Object. 2. But wicked and reprobat men may be heart-smitten at a time with a
convincing Sermon, as Felix was. How shall we discern the smiting of our heart
by the Word to be from mercy, and from a purpose to heal the soul wounded and
pierced with sorrow and fear? Ans. 1. A wicked and reprobat person may be
heart-smitten with grief and fear for some great and heinous sins, whereof they
are convinced not only by the light of the Word, but also by the light and
sorce of a natural conscience, as was Cain and Judas: Yea, the morning light is
to the adulterer, even as the shadow of death, Job 24.17. but the children of
God their heart will smite them, even for smaller offenses: David's heart smote
him for the cutting of Saul's garment; and Paul is convinced, not only that his
persecution of the Saints was a sin, but also that his inordinat concupiscence,
and its first stirrings, was a transgression of the Law, Romans 7.7. 2. In wicked
and obstinat sinners, the pain of heart-smiting lasts not, but as a
Sea-sickness, it evanisheth in a short time, and is forgot, as in Pharaoh,
Exodus 9.27. But it is not so in the children of God; though their pain and
remorse of conscience, continues not always in a sense of present grief and
pain, yet it remains in their memory: they remember the gall and wormwood; and
in the remembrance thereof, their heart is kept humble, Psalm. 38.17. I am ready
to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me. Wicked and obstinat sinners,
when the terrors of conscience are over at a time, they do return, like a
deceitful Bow, to their old posture and way: but the godly, with penitent
Peter, not only do weep for their former sinful courses, but also they forsake
the company of evil doers. 3. The wicked and obstinat sinners, when they are
smitten with the word of reproof, do hate him who reproves in the gate, as Ahab
did Elijah: but the godly take well with the word of reproof, as with a
precious ointment, that makes them afterward to shine in their conversation,
Psalm. 141.5. 4. Wicked men, who continue obstinat in their sins, make no good
use of their former heart-smiteing and pain of conscience: like some men,
having at a time a great pain in their stomach and head from former excess in
drinking, make not good use thereof, to shun the occasion of excess and riot in
time coming: but the children of God make better use of heart-smiting, when
they are again tempted to run in the excess of riot, they remember their former
distempers, and consider the peace they have in their conscience for the
present, and do make good use of that admonition given by our Lord, Joh 5.14.
Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee.

Use 2. It is our duty to take well with the word of reproof; although it
smite, yet it will do good and heal again, when it is received by an obedient
ear and heart; for to such it is an ear-ring and ornament of gold, and adorns
them in their after-conversation, Prove. 25.12. It is as the lopping of a
luxuriant branch, it does the tree no evil, but makes it more fruitful, Prove.
27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend. It is a fearful thing to despise the
word of reproof in the mouth of those who have a calling from God: for in that
case, God many times takes the rod into his own immediate hand, and smites the
obstinat sinner severely and visibly, as he did the old world, who contemned
the reproof of Noah; as he did Sodom, who contemned the reproof of Lot; as he
did Amaziah, who rejected the counsel of the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. as he did
severely punish the people of Israel, who despised the counsel of the Prophets,
2 Chronicles. 36.16. and Jerusalem, who persecuted the Prophets that spoke unto
them, Luke 19.42. Therefore the faithful Ministers of God, must not desist from
their seasonable reprovings; though possibly at first they be not well
received, yet afterward with the true children of God, they shall be
entertained as Medicaments for their recovery, Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes a
man, afterward shall find more favor, then he that flattereth with the tongue.

To this purpose says Cyprian, Though some people, like way-ward sick
children, baul and cry against the Physician, yet let him wait on and do his
duty; if the child shall recover, he will be ashamed of his per^ishness, and be
the more thankful to his careful, prudent and patient Physician; vociferetur
licet, post tamen gratias aget: although, says he, the child cry out in the
time of his pain, yet afterward he will render thanks.

Observe. 3. Earthly-mindedness is very displeasing unto God, he shall smite the
earth, and men are much displeased with those whom they smite: Because
worldly-mindedness is a great impediment to our hearing and obeying the good
Word of God, Mat. 13.22. So is it unto Prayer, which is a lifting up of the
soul unto God; and earthly-mindedness is like a paise or weight of Lead, bowing
down the soul; it is inconsisting with sincere love toward God, 1 John 2 15.
And it makes a man unwilling to die, Luke 12.19, 20. as the Jews, who were
joined in marriage with the Babylonians, had no will to come out of Babylon; in
like manner earthly-minded men, whose hearts are espoused to this present
world, have no will to depart out of it at their death.

Quest. 1. Wh^t call ye earthly-mindedness? Answ. A man may and should be
diligent in seeking the good things of this world; because we are commanded of
God to be diligent in our lawful Callings and Employments, Prove. 27.23. 1 These.
4.11. It is commended 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Timothy 5.8. It consists well with true
devotion and with the fear of God, Romans 12.11. Not slothful in business,
fervent in spirit, and serving the Lord Joseph was a man fearing God, and
diligent in his business, Genesis 41.48. Such was Shecaniah, Neh. 7.12. and
Daniel, Dan. 8.27. But we must not labor for the things of this present world
only, without any regard to our immortal condition in the world to come; as
these Epicures did, Isai. 22.13. who said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall die. 2. We must not labor for them principally, as our chief and
supreme good, Joh. 6.27. by preferring them (as profane Esau did) unto
spiritual blessings; by preferring worldly profits and emoluments to the
precious truths of God, and to a good conscience, as Demas did; nor by
preferring honor and praise from men to our honoring of Christ and his truth
in time of persecution, as many of the chief Rulers amongst the Jews did, Joh.
12.42. Because temporal things are to be sought always in order to the great
end, which is the glorifying of God by these things which we seek after, 1 Cor.
10.31. Yea, our life and all things belonging to this life, are to be desired
and employed toward that great and chief end, Psalm. 80.18. Psalm. 119.175. 3. We
must not labor for them anxiously by tormenting our spirits, about the event
and success of our labors, in our lawful employments, Phil. 4.6. but we should
cast all our care, for the event and success, upon God, 1 Pet. 4.7. 4. We must
not labor for them in an unlawful manner, by covetousness and immoderate
desire of them, Heb. 13.5. because the Lord does abhor the covetous man, Ps.
10.3. We must not labor for them by fraud and circumveening of the simple, 1
These. 4.2, 6. nor by violence and oppression, Mic. 2.2. Such men the Lord
punishes with great terrors in their consciences, when in his fury he does
awake them out of their secure stattering of themselves in their ways of
oppression, and one time or other, spoils them or their postesterity of their
unjust and violent purchases, Job 20.19, 20. etc.

Quest. 2. What difference is there between an earthly-minded man, and a frugal
Christian? Ans. They differ, 1. in their desires of the things of this world;
the earthly-minded man his heart is set on the things of this world, as his
chief good and place of rest, Luke 12.14. but the frugal Christian, though he
may desire them, with submission to the good will of God, yet his heart is most
set upon heavenly blessings, Ps. 4.6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us. The earthly-minded man, in his desires worldly, is
immoderat and insatiable, Eccl. 5.10. but the frugal Christian is moderat and
sober, Pro. 30.8, 9. 2. They differ in their endeavors; The earthly-minded
man, has a conscience as large as his desires; he makes haste toward his
worldly ends, and advises not with God and a good conscience, Pro. 28.20. 1 Timothy 6.9. but the frugal Christian, in using means and endeavors, does consult
with God and a good conscience: if he perceive the thing to be against justice
and prejudicial to his neighbor, he says, as Joseph, How can I do this, and
sin against God? for he knows, that a little with righteousness, is better
than great revenues without right, Prove. 16.8. 3. They differ in their
affections of joy and sorrow, in order to the things of this present world: the
earthly-minded man, through his ignorance of better things, does rejoice most
in things worldly, like young children, rejoicing and glorying in Crystal or
Lamber-beeds; for they know not yet the worth and excellency of Pearls: but the
frugal Christian, though he rejoice in things worldly, as some common tokens of
the love of God; yet he rejoices most in spiritual and heavenly commodities,
Ps. 119.72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and
silver. The earthly-minded man, being disappointed of his hope, or deprived of
the possession of the things of this world, he howls like Micah, robbed of his
idol, Judge. 18.24. like Nabal, his heart is dead within him: But the frugal
Christian, in disappointments or losses, does reverence the good and wise
providence of God, Job 1.21. and takes joyfully all his osses, which he
suffers for keeping a good concience, Heb. 10.34. 4. In using the things of
this present world, which are called by the Apostle, 1. John 3. ((...)) the
earthly-minded man does want, in re^pect of a sober and honest use, even what
he enjoyes by possession, Eccl. 6.2. He has neither a heart to bestow upon
himself for honesty, nor for others for their supply: But the frugal Christian
takes his own sober use of his worldly enjoyments; he blesses God for them,
and refreshes the bowels of the needy. 5. The earthly-minded man trusts in his
worldly goods, but the frugal Christian does not so, Job 31.24. Job did not
make gold his hope, neither said he to the fine gold, thou art my confidence.
6. The earthly-minded man is proud of his worldly enjoyments, Ps. 49.6. They
boast themselves in the multitude of their riches: but the frugal Christian is
the more humble, as Jacob was, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy, said he, of the
least of all the mercies and of all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
bands. For he knows well, the greater his receipt be, his reckoning will be the
greater in that day.

Obser. 4. The sad judgment of God will overtake, one time or other, such as
are wicked and obstinat in their evil ways, for it is said, he will slay the
wicked by the breath of his lips; that is, by his Word he shall destroy the
wicked and obstinat sinners: which he does, 1. by blinding and hardening them
judicially by his Word, Is. 6.9, 10. And he said, go and tell this people, hear
ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the
heart of this people fat, etc. Like as clay, which in its own natural temper is
hard, yet is more hardened by the heat of the Sun; So, wicked men, though by
nature of a hard heart, unless God preveen them with his rich mercy and mighty
grace, are more hardened by the Word of God, through the fault of their own
natural perverseness and corruption, bending them the more against sins
forbidden in the Word and Law of God, Romans 7.8. But sin taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. 2. If wicked men
continue obstinat in their evil ways, they shall be destroyed in the great
day, according to the threatenings of the Word, Ps. 7.12, 13. Ps. 9.17. Romans
2.16.

Use. For admonition; Therefore, let us not be obstinat in any sinful course;
but obey in time that warning, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Be not stiff-necked, but yield
your selves unto the Lord, and serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of
his wrath may turn away from you.

Quest. What call ye obstinacy in sin, that I may know whether my sin be of
infirmity or obstinacy? Ans. 1. The obstinat man is one, who goes on in his
sinful course, notwithstanding frequent reproofs of the Word of God, spoken by
the Ministers thereof, and secret challenges from his own conscience; such was
the obstinacy of some Jews, Jer. 44.16, 17. As for the word which thou have
spoken unto us, in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we
will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, etc. The
obstinat man being reproved, speaks, or in heart resolves, that he will act
the evil deed over again, Jer. 2.25. I have loved strangers, and after them
will I go. Such obstinacy provokes God in his justice, to give a man over unto
himself, Ps. 81.13. and when God gives him over, Satan finds such a man, and
drives him on in his sinful course, as he did the swine into the lake of
perdition. 2. He is an obstinat man, who notwithstanding God has met with him
by some sad judgment in his evil way, whereof he is convinced in conscience,
yet goes on in it, as Balaam did toward Balak, with whom in end he perished:
such an obstinat wicked man was Ahaz, who in the time of his great distress,
did trespass yet more and more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This obstinacy
is a fearful sin, and presagious of a sad ensuing judgment, Prove. 29.1. He
that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy. 3. When a man hardens himself against the frequent
challenges and reproofs of his own conscience, he provokes God to give him over
unto a mind past feeling, to commit sin with greediness. Therefore, despise
thou not such warnings; for if our heart condemn us; God is greater then our
heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. It is meet for us, under such
challenges, to say unto God, as Job 34.32. That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

VERSE V. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness
the girdle of his reins.
IN these words is set down that great and necessary qualification, required
for right governing of people, to wit, righteousness and faithfulness; this
breeds and entertains great respect and confidence in the hearts of the
Subjects toward their Governor. The righteousness and faithfulness of Christ
in governing his Church and people, is evident, especially in these four, 1.
His veracity and faithfulness in all his assertions; for he is the faithful
witness, Rev. 1.5. and a faithful witness will not lie, Prove. 14.5. 2. His
diligence in doing faithfully, whatsoever was commanded him of God: it is said,
Heb. 3.2. Moses was faithful in all the house of God, making all things
according to the pattern shown in the mount. In like manner, our blessed Lord
was diligent and faithful in doing all things for the good of his Church,
according to the eternal counsel and decree of the Father, Joh. 17.26. And I
have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it. 3. His carefulness in
keeping all these who by says and well-doing commit their souls to him: Jacob
was faithful and careful in keeping the sheep of Laban: Our blessed Lord, the
great shepherd of our souls, keeps all his sheep who hear his voice, and
follow him by obedience, Joh. 6.40. Joh. 10 27, 28. 4. It comprehends also the
righteousness and faithfulness, in keeping and performing lawful promises;
Rahab was righteous and faithful in performing her promise made unto the spies:
our blessed Lord is righteous and faithful in performing all his promises in
his own due time, Heb. 10.23. 1 John 1 9.

By the girdle of his loins and reins, we understand, 1. The delight which
Christ has in his faithfulness: he looks upon his own faithfulness as a
special point of his honor and glory; as the golden and embroidered girdle,
was an ornament of Kings, Job 12.18. 2. His readiness and forwardness to
perform all his promises, as one girded and prepared for his journey: therefore
he is said to wait, that he may be gracious, Isa. 30 18. and to stand at the
door ready to enter in, when it is opened, Rev. 3.20. 3. It signifies the
firmness and immutability of his promises; his faithfulness cleaves fast to
him, as a girdle to the loins or reins; not like Ezekiel his girdle, that by
time was marred and spoiled; but all the promises in Christ, are yea, and Amen,
2 Cor. 1.20.

Conclus. 1. Seeing our blessed Lord is righteous and faithful in all his
assertions, though some of them may seem strange and incredible to sense and
humane reason, not yet purified and elevated by the light of says; it is our
duty to captivat sense and humane reason unto all his assertions, 2 Cor. 10.4,
5, as to believe the unity of his essence with the Father, because he, who is
the faithful witness, has asserted it, Joh. 10.31. I and my Father are one: To
believe his eternal existence before all time, even his personal pre-existence
with the Father, before his coming forth in his Incarnation and assuming of the
Humane Nature, because he himself, who is the truth has asserted it, Pro.
8.30. I was by him, as one brought up with him. He was coeternal with the
Father, and yet in the fullness of time came forth from the Father, into this
inferior world, to take on him the vail of flesh, and thereby consecrat an
entry for us into the most holy place, Joh. 16.28. I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the world, Heb. 10.19, 20. It is our duty to believe
his individual operation with the Father in the works of Creation and
Providence, not as a cause social with the Father, but as one prime cause with
him, because he himself who is righteous and faithful, has asserted it, Joh.
5.17, 19, 20. My Father works hitherto and I work, etc. To believe the
resurrection of the dead upon his own testimony full of veracity, Joh. 5.28.
The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth. But we are not too curiously to enquire about the
manner how he will quicken and raise the body out of the dust; we leave that to
the unsearchable wisdom and infinite power of our Lord, who will do it according
to the working, whereby he is able, even to subdue all things unto himself,
Philip. 3.21. Though we cannot conceive the special manner, how Original sin is
propagat, yet we assent to the truth of the thing it self, upon his testimony,
Joh. 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh. And, Romans 5.17, 18. By the
offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, etc. Augustine
says well, We should not so much enquire about the manner how Original
concupiscence has entered into us, which we feel in our selves, by daily
experience, as about the manner how it may be extinguished. And, Lib. 2. de
Nup. and Concupis. Cap. 21. Why ask ye (did he answer to Julian the Pelagian
who stiffly denied any Original sin, because he could not by human reason
comprehend the manner of transmitting it to the posterity) by what secret gap
or crevice it has entered into man, seeing ye have an open gate, By one man
(says the Apostle) sin entered. And Lib. 5. de Morib. Eccles. Cap. 21. Nothing
is more notour, than that sin is propagat from the parents to the children: but
nothing is more obscure, than the manner how it is propagat: Therefore says he
elsewhere, In humane truths, intelligam ut credam, let me understand the matter
that I may believe: but in divine truths, credam ut intelligam, let me believe
that God has spoken it, and then I shall understand it to be a most certain
and irrefragable truth. That ye may be the more confirmed in this Doctrine,
which gives glory to the truth and faithfulness of Jesus Christ against
unreasonable men (though they call themselves most rational) pleading from
humane reason to the weakening of the testimony of God, which is the supreme
reason. Consider, 1. It is against all sound reason to measure the infinite
Being, and his operations with the same rule of humane reason and Philosophy,
by which we measure finit beings and their operations: Were it not an absurd
solly to measure a tall man with the same measure we measure an infant; this
were as the binding of Samson with cords of flax. 2. Yea it is most agreeable
to sound reason, that most credit and faith should be given unto the supreme
reason, to wit, the testimony of God, who is the prime verity: for the more
famous the person testifying be, we esteem the more of his testimony. 3. We
believe some natural truths, from our own sense and experience, though we
cannot give a natural and evident reason of our knowledge of such things; as of
the ebbing and flowing of the Sea; of the influence of the Planets upon the
inferior and sublunary Bodies; of the attractive virtue of the Adamant or
Lodestone, etc. And is not the testimony of God a more sure ground for faith
to rest on, than our own experience and sense, which many times may be, and
oftentimes is subject to mistakes? That one passage ( Eccles. 11.5.) is
sufficient to stop our curiosity, and to make us acquiesce without gainsaying,
to the testimony of God, As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor
how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child; even so thou
know not the works of God, who makes all.

Conclus 2. From our blessed Lord his faithfulness and diligence in doing the
duties of his Mediatory-office, whereunto he was called by the Father, we have
a fair pattern and copy for our instruction and imitation to be faithful and
diligent in our lawful Callings: His mind and his time was all taken up in his
faithful and diligent discharge of the Office of Mediator, committed to him by
the Father, Luke 2.49. Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business?
And for the better up stirring of you to follow his example in your lawful
Callings and Employments, Consider, 1. God blesses the diligent and faithful,
Prove. 28.20. but he that is diligent, or rather fool-hasty in using unlawful
means, and so having no calling to that effect from God, cannot expect a
blessing, Prove. 22.29. But he that makes haste to to be rich, shall not be
innocent. 2. Zeal in Religion and spiritual duties, does well consist with
diligence in our lawful employments, Romans 12.11. Not slothful in business,
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Yea this fidelity and diligence in our
particular Callings, does adorn our Christian profession, but unfaithfulness
and negligence is the reproach of it, Tit. 2.9, 10. 3. Idleness is a breach of
the eighth Command, Thou shall not steal, as is evident, Ephesians. 4.28. Because the
sluggard steals away much precious time from the right use of it. As theft is
an usurpation of that which belongs to another; so the slothful man eats his
bread without any allowance or blessing from God, 2 These. 3.10. 4. The slothful
man is a waster of much precious time, and a great impediment to himself in
what he might have had, if he had been diligent, Prove. 18.9. He also that is
slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster. 5. Idleness and
slothfulness is a great inlet to that evil one, and to many temptations with
him: The unclean spirit entered into the empty house with a train of other evil
spirits, Mat. 12.42. Cato said truly, Men by doing nothing, learn to do evil:
And the Heathen Poet could say, Otia si tollas, etc. Take away idleness, so
shall you take away the fuel of many noisome lusts.

Conclus. 3. From his faithfulness and care in keeping what is committed to his
trust, is inferred our duty: 1. Every one to be faithful in their trust, in
imitation of him, who was faithful in keeping all who were committed to his
trust by the Father: especially men in public places, as Magistrates, to whose
trust God has committed his people, as Pupils to their Tutors; and there is a
day coming, wherein the supreme Lord, and everlasting Father, will call them to
make their Tutors-accounts: therefore they should be faithful, careful, and
tender Nursing-fathers, to protect them by their power: but no ways by
oppression or subtilty to prey upon the simplicity and weakness of their
Pupils: Likewise the Spiritual Guides in the Church, should learn from him, who
was faithful in all the house of God, to dispense the bread of life faithfully
to the children of God, as these who are Stewards of the mysteries of God* 1
Cor. 4.1. and must give an account to God for the souls committed to their
trust, Heb. 13.17. And as men in public places would be faithful, they should
labor for a deep impression of the fear of God upon their spirits, 2 Chr.
19.9. Neh. 5.15. 2. Let us take comfort from his faithfulness and care to keep
what is committed to him; let us cast all our care on him, who cares for us, 1
Pet. 5.7. Joh. 10.28.

Our spiritual enemies can never get advantage from any negligence in him; for
he is the watchman of Israel that neither sleeps nor slumbers; nor from any
weakness in him, for he is the stronger one, and the Almighty one, Rev. 1.8. he
is both able to keep that which is committed to him, Jude Epist. 24. and also
willing, John 6.37. It is the will of God and our duty to use all means and
endeavors for keeping our selves in the love and fear of God, 1 John 5.18.
Jude Epist. 20. but let us not trust to our own keeping, but pray to the Lord
that he would keep us in the hour of temptation, Ps. 16.1. Mat. 26.41.
remembering always, that we are kept by his power through faith, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Conclus. 4. From the faithfulness of our blessed Lord, in keeping and
performing all his precious and gracious promises, let us learn, 1. for our
imitation, to be faithful in that solemn promise made to God in our baptism;
because in baptism we were consecrate to God, and by profession put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.27. Therefore, when we call to mind that solemn
engagement, we should be faithful to keep that promise; and should not make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. As it is
sacrilege to impropriat that which has been dedicat unto pious uses; So it is
most detestable sacrilege to withdraw our selves from serving God in holiness
and righteousness, unto the fulfilling of our own sinful lusts. How many
promises of amendment of life have we made unto God in the day of our
affliction? Let us be faithful, and pay the vows which our lips have uttered,
when we were in trouble, Ps. 66.13, 14. Let us be faithful in performing our
lawful promises made by one to another; and truly a man fearing God will make
conscience of sincerity in making a lawful promise, and of honest endeavors in
performing, unless God in his providence render it impossible, Genesis 42.18. This
do and live, for I fear God. But the deceitful and unfaithful man, that in
promising has no purpose to perform, is like unto Antigonus King of Macedon,
who made many large promises to give this and that to some men, but gave it
not; therefore in reproach he was called (...), one that was ever to give, but
never gave what he had promised.

From our blessed Lord his faithfulness for performing all his gracious
promises, we have a solid ground for concluding assurance of comfort unto all
Expectants of glory, and eternal rest in heaven, who are now in a state of
grace and sanctification. As our blessed Lord is faithful in revealing the will
of the Father, so is he likewayes in performing all the promises of God, which
in him are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. He will give in his own good time that
rest and satisfaction promised to all who are pressed and wearied with the
burden of their sins, Mat. 11.28 He will cleanse the true penitents, who
confess their sins with a serious purpose and endeavor to forsake them, 1 John
1.9. he will give strength to all who are humbled under the sense of their own
weakness, and trust to him for help, according to his faithful promise, Job
23.6. Is. 42.2. and he will give the promised outgate unto all who are patient
and long-suffering under great and continued trials, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Object. 1. It is true, he is faithful in all his promises, but I doubt the
promises are made to me; for there is no mention made of me in all the gracious
promises. Ans. 1. In speaking thus, thou speak against the generation of the
just, as if there were not a gracious promise made to any living in thy
generation, for there is no mention of them in particular, more than of thy
self. 2. If thou be weary of sin, the promise of rest is made unto thee; for it
is made to all who are weary of sin, and by faith come to Christ, the precious
cornerstone laid in Zion, for rest and support to wearied sinners, Is. 28.16.
If thou mourn for sin, and by faith in Christ come unto God for comfort, thou
may be assured, the promise of comfort is made unto thee. If thou thirst
after Christ and his righteousness, the promise of satisfaction and refreshment
is made to thee: Therefore, although thou acknowledge thine own unworthiness,
as justly thou may, yet acknowledge also his faithful promise, Ps. 69.32.
Your heart shall live that seek God. Isa. 45.19. I said not unto the seed of
Jacob, seek ye me in vain; I the Lord speak righteousness. In this case do thou
as wise Abigail, who acknowledged her self unworthy of David's gracious offer
and message sent unto her; yet she went after the messengers of David, and
became his wife, 1 Samuel 25.41, 42. In like manner, obey thou his gracious
message and offer of rest and satisfaction, proponed to thee by his Ministers
in the preaching of the Gospel, and let thy heart co-habit with him.

Object. 2. But the Lord delayeth to give that promised rest and peace to my
wearied soul. Ans. His delays are not denyals; in his great wisdom he
delayeth, that thereby thou may be humbled for thy delaying and shifting in
former times to do commanded duties; and also that by his delay of comfort, thy
heart may be enlarged the more with strong and vehement desires, and then thy
comfort shall be the more full and sensible, Ps. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide,
and I will fill it. Consider, that as soon as thou repents, and by faith
cleavest to the promise made in Christ the Mediator, thou gets the peace of
reconciliation, Act. 13.39. wait on in faith and patience, and thy blessed Lord
will give, in his own good time, the peace of assurance: as the Judge does
first pronounce the sentence of absolution, and thereafter gives an extract of
the sentence by his Secretary unto the party absolved, which he lays up in
his Charter-chest, and is in much peace and quietness of mind: In like-manner,
our blessed Lord, by his holy Spirit according to his promise in the Word,
shall seal the mourning believers, Ephesians. 1.13. and assure them of pardon, and
of eternal life; from which assurance, shall arise peace in their conscience,
and joy unspeakable and glorious, Romans 8.34. 1 Pet. 1.8.

Object. 3. Our blessed Lord has promised deliverance out of troubles, yet my
troubles continue; yea, are increased. Ans. All temporal promises are to be
understood, with a secret clause of provision; if the performance of them shall
be for the glory of God, and the spiritual benefit of his own children, Psalm.
34.10. They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 84.11. No
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Therefore be thou
patient, and in the time of continued and increasing afflictions, look to his
faithful promise, Joh. 16.20. In this world ye shall be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy. Our faithful Lord, in his own good time, can
easily recompense all our temporal losses even in this world, if it seem good
in his eyes, Is. 61.7. For your shame you shall have double, and for confusion
they shall rejoice in their portion; therefore in their land they shall possess
the double. But certainly in that day of restoring all things, all losses shall
be recompensed though not in specie, yet in value exceeding them very far:
therefore reckon with thy self, that all the sufferings of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us,
Romans 8.18.

Object. 4. The faithful Lord has promised to deliver out of temptation, 1
Cor. 10.13. yet I am daily infested with sinful thoughts, and sometime brought
into bondage with my own consent. Ans. Yet it is the better that such thoughts
are a grief to thy spirit, as Hagar was to Sarah; be of good courage, the Lord
in his own good time will cast out the bondwoman and her child, even thy
in-dwelling corruption, and all the offspring of it; reverence the wisdom of
God in suffering thy soul to be molested with these incursions and bickerings
of that impure spirit; he permits it, that the grace of humility and prayer may
be the more exercised by thee: all the Canaanites were not driven out of the
land of Canaan, by the wise providence of God, permitting and ordering it for
good* that the wild beasts should not multiply in the land: So the Lord, in
his wisdom, permits the in-dwelling and stirrings of corruption within thy
soul, to preveen the increase of pride, and to keep thee humble and watchful,
and to stir thee up unto daily prayer for increase of strength in the inner
man. Therefore give it not over, but resist daily, trusting to that promise,
Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. Thou
art engaged into a good cause, to fight against thy lusts; although through the
wiles of Satan at a time, thou may be brought into bondage, yet despair not
of victory in end; mourn as Peter did after his denial in the high Priests
Hall; and if thou mournest bitterly for thy bondage, it is not altogether
voluntary; when thou mourns for it, there is some resistance to it from grace
in thy will; and he that gives grace to resist, shall give victory in end, Romans
7.24, 25. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The father of the possessed
child brought his son, who had been infested and molested from his childhood;
and when the child was acoming to Christ, the unclean spirit did vex him and
rent him; but he went forward to our blessed Lord, who charged that soul spirit
to come out of him and enter no more into him, Mark 9.17, etc. So it may be
thou art never more infested, than when thou have a resolution to go to Christ
and walk after his Commandments, yet rise up by repentance and resolution of
new obedience; who knows but thy mighty Lord will rebuke that unclean motion,
and say as he did to that unclean spirit, I charge thee to come out of him, and
enter no more into him?

Object. 5. But in the mean time my soul faints within me, under great
afflictions and desertions; because there is neither appearance of comfort nor
out-gate. Answ. As faithfulness cleaves to his loins as a girdle; so let faith
in thine heart cleave to him and his promises: for as the lungs, like bellows,
do cool and refresh the heart that it faint not through much heat and labor;
so faith, breathing the faithful and gracious promises of God into the fainting
soul, does revive the same, Psalm. 27.14. Psalm. 42.5. Psalm. 119.81. When the
Mariners in the Ship with Paul, (Acts 27.) saw no light outward, for directing
their course, they did cast out their Anchors, and waited for the day: so when
thou who fears the Lord walk in darkness, and has no light, trust in the
Name of thy faithful Lord, and stay thy self upon thy God, Isai. 50.10.
Remember for thy encouragement, thy blessed Lord is faithful and compassionat,
Mat. 15.32. he had pity on the multitude who had continued with him three days
without any bodily refreshment, and would not send them away fasting, lest they
should faint in the way: much more thy Lord, full of compassion, will not
suffer a poor humble soul, that has been waiting on him by sincere obedience,
and for him by a lively hope purifying the heart, and thirsting more and more
for righteousness, to depart out of this life, without some refreshment in the
inner man, but as he did to that old expectant Simeon, Luke 2. he will give him
Christ his Savior into the arms of his faith, that he may depart in peace in
the hope of salvation.

VERSE VI. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie
down with the kid: and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together,
and a little child shall lead them.
FRom this verse. to the 10. is set down the great and admirable effects of
Christ's powerful government by his Spirit and Word, to wit, a strange change
and metamorphosis of persons, who, before the light of the glorious Gospel did
shine in their hearts, were of a sensual and brutish disposition, and of a wild
and savage conversation; who were rebellious against God, and had an antipathy
one against another: who were like Wolves in oppression; like Leopards and
young Lions in fierceness; like the Asp and Cockatrice in bitterness of spirit,
and venomousness in conversation: but these after their conversion, by the
light of the Gospel, shall live in obedience and peace with God, and in concord
with others, who before them were in a state of grace* The wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calf, and
the young lion, etc. that is, they shall be so daunted by the power of grace
with the Gospel, that they shall live in a sweet communion and fellowship with
these who were in Christ before them: and also with these, who sometimes were
also bitter and malicious enemies to the godly; even such as had been like Asps
and Cockatrices, shall be converted and made partakers of the meek and lowly
Spirit of Christ. The cause of all this change, will be the light of the
glorious Gospel, as it is said in the end of verse. 9. For the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. As at the
Sunrising, the wild beasts do return to their dens and caves; so the light of
the Gospel, in such as are effectually called, according to the eternal purpose
of God, will make their wild and beastly affections to hide themselves for
shame; and they shall have no pleasure in the unfruitful works of darkness, and
they shall cast away all their idol-lusts, Isai. 31.6, 7. Hos. 14.8.

Observe. 1. Man, before his conversion to God, is compared to creatures void of
reason, and carried away by their sensual appetites, unto objects pleasing to
sense; so that they are liker to brute beasts then to men of sound reason:
therefore, in holy Scriptures, they are compa^ed sometimes to the beasts in the
field; sometimes to the fowls in the air; sometimes to the fishes in the sea;
and sometimes to creeping things. To beasts of the field, are compared such
obstinat sinners, who oppose the Gospel, and will not forsake their sins, that
Christ may reign in them; such are as headstrong beasts, 1 Cor. 15.32. Acts
19.29. in which respect men are called brutish, Psalm 92.6, 7. Psalm 94.8. Isai.
19.11. Open and fierce persecuters, are compared to the fierce lion, 2 Timothy
4.17. Heretics, who subtly seduce people from Christ and from his truth, as
also, being cruel hypocrites, are compared to wolves, Acts 20.29. Mat. 7.15.
The furious and outrageous man, to a boar robbed of her whelps, that does run
against any he meets with, though possibly innocent, Prove. 17.12. such were the
furious Donatists and Circumcellions, who massacred these of the orthodox
Church, that withstood their schism. The oppressor, who by violence bears
down all who stand in his way, is compared to the ranging bear, Prove. 28.15.
The vindictive man, who dissembles his malice, and watches for an opportunity
of revenge, is compared to lions and leopards, who lurk privily, and sets
upon the Passenger unawares, Psalm. 10.9. Secret and subtle detractors of the
children of God, are compared to foxes, which peel the bark from the Vines; so
they by blasting their reputation, endeavor to make their labors fruitless
and unprofitable to others, through calumny and prejudice, Cant. 2.15. The
insolent and riotous man, who roaving in his wild courses, does puff at all
that reprove him, is compared to the wild ass snuffing up the wind and will
not be turned back, Jer. 2.24. The man that inconsideratly, and yet willingly
casts himself into temptations, is compared to a horse rushing into the battle,
Jer. 8.6. The man who is not overawed by the fear of God, nor led by the
counsel of God in his Word; but must be restrained by outward force or
judgments, is compared to the horse and mule, Psalm. 32.9. The man that is
inconstant in the way of his Religion, is compared to a dromedary, Jer. 2.23.
The profane men, who have no esteem of the precious Ordinances of God, are
compared to swine and dogs, Mat. 7.6. Seducers, who infect others with the
poison of their pernicious errors, are likened to mad dogs, Phil. 3.2. Men,
who after profession of repentance, return to their old sins, are compared unto
swine and dogs, 2 Pet. 2.20. Men, who revile Rulers, unto barking dogs, 2 Samuel
16.9. Covetous men, unto greedy dogs, Isa. 56.11. The beautiful woman, who
wants discretion, and does expose her self unto temptations, is compared to the
swine. The silly person, drawn away to uncleanness by her allurements, is
likened unto the ox led to the slaughter, Prove. 7.22. The base-spirited man,
who submits to adversaries upon any terms, though never so unhonest, is
compared unto an ass, Genesis 49.14. So is also the base servile spirit, that does
not duty out of love, but only out of servil fear, Prove. 26.3. And the drunkard
is worse than the beast in the field, because the beast thirsts for drink
only to satisfy necessity and his natural appetite; but the drunkard thirsts
for drunkenness to satisfy his sensual and sinful appetite. They are compared
to the fowls in the Air; the man that walks disorderly and waits not upon the
employments of his lawful calling, is compared to a bird wandering from its
nest, Prove. 27.8. The unnatural parent, careless of breeding or providing for
his children, is compared unto the Ostriche, Job 39.14. Lament. 4.3. The
deceitful man, who by fraud and unrighteousness makes his purchase, and
thereafter in the just providence of God is spoiled thereof, is compared unto a
Partridge, gathering and hatching eggs, but beaten or chased away from them by
the hunter, or some ravenous fowl, Jer. 17.11. The ambitious proud man, that
sets his nest on high, and thinks no hand is able to remove him, is compared
to an eagle, Jer. 49.16. The man who preyes upon the simplicity and weakness of
others, is compared unto ravenous birds, Is. 46.11. The pusillanimous man,
afraid of every thing, is compared unto the silly dove, Hos. 7.11.

They are compared unto fishes in the Sea: the great men on earth, who to
satisfy their lusts of covetousness and ambition, do trouble the peace of the
Sea of this world, are compared unto whales, Ezekiel. 32.2. The dissembling cruel
man, unto the crocodile, that seems to weep, and yet devours tne passenger that
comes under his reach, Is. 27.1. Such a man was Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,
Jer. 41.6.

They are compared to creeping things; the false turbulent Prophet, by his loud
and frequent cryings, stirring up the powers of the earth to war one against
another, is compared unto frogs; and as the loud cryings of frogs is ordinarily
the sign of an ensuing tempest, So is the seditious upstirrings of seditious
false Prophets, a sign of ensuing troubles, unless God in mercy preveen it,
Rev. 16.14, 15. Seditious whisperers, detractors and calumniators, are compared
unto vipers, Mat. 3.7. and here they are compared unto asps, which are
serpents, full of wyndings, like unto the plyes of a buckler, (as the Greek
word imports) and they do hurt men at unawares, Genesis 49.17. Ps. 140.3. And
great men of bitter and fierce spirits, are compared here to the cockatrice,
the chief of serpents, called in Greek, (...), and in Latin, Regulus; and
because the wicked counsels of leading-men do much harm, therefore they are
compared to the eggs of the cockatrice, Is. 59.5.

Use 1. For admonition to all men, living yet in the state of nature, and
walking after their own sensual lusts; Look into the glass of Gods Word, take a
view of your deformity through corrup^ nature, and be humble in the sigh: and
sense of it; because your sinful lusts prevailing in you, makes you rather like
unto beasts, than unto rational men. At this the very Heathens of old did
glanse in their Mythologies, and poetical Metamorphosis, as in Actaeon, turned
into a pufillanimous heart by his fond lusts, and Lycaon, into a wolf, by his
cruel and tearing oppression: this is the spiritual use we should make of the
History of some of the beasts, recorded in holy Scripture to this end, that
beholding in that mirror of these creatures, our deformity in our conformity
unto them, we may be humbled, ashamed, and study in time coming to conform our
selves unto the will of God revealed in the holy Word. Let us not be like unto
these, of whom the Apostle speaks, Jam. 1.24. who behold their natural face
in a glass, but straightway forget what manner of men they were: far less
should we be like unto the Apes, who beholding their deformed and misshapen
bodies in a mirror set before them, do run upon it and tear it: they despise
and contemn both Word and Preacher, when their own deformities are discovered
unto them, as the Jews did against holy Stephen, when he discovered their gross
errors both in judgment and practice, Act. 7. against Paul, Act. 21.30. and
ran upon him when he spoke that which crossed their opinion, Act. 22.22.

Use 2. The other use we should make of the natural History of the irrational
creatures, is for our instruction, as to stir us up to diligence, we should go
to the Pismire or Ant, and learn in the summer of our youth, to provide for the
winter of old age, Prove. 6.6. The quarrel-some men should learn meekness from
the Doves; and the rash uncircumspect man, prudence and caution from the
Serpents, Mat. 10.16. the careless unbeliever, who is negligent to use the
outward means of salvation, as the hearing of the holy Gospel, the receiving
the blessed Sacrament of the holy Communion, should learn diligence and make
conscience of resorting to these gracious Ordinances, wherein Christ is
offered; this he may learn some way from the Eagles resorting to the place
where the dead carcass is, Mat. 24.28. The unthankful man should learn
thankfulness to God and to men his benefactors, from the Ox and the Ass, Is.
1.3. And the secure and careless sinner should learn forefight and
circumspection in flying from the wrath to come, even from the Stork and Crane,
Jer. 8.7.

Observe. 2. By the preaching of the Gospel accompanied with the power of the
Spirit of God, a great change is made upon the spirits of natural and
unregenerat men: Many that had been like Lions, Wolves, Bears and Serpents,
shall be changed (says the Prophet here) from their wild and malicious
inclination, and shall be made partakers of the meek and humble Spirit of the
Lord Jesus Christ, in the days of the full manifestation of the Gospel, as it
came to pass in the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. and in the Ephesians, Ephesians.
5.8. It was clearly manifested in Paul, who sometimes like a Wolf, did
persecute and scatter the flock of Jesus Christ, yet afterward became not only
a sheep of the flock, but also a Preacher and Pastor: Zacheus, who sometime was
like a ranging Bear in his oppression, is converted by the Gospel* restores
what was not his own, and of his own gives to the poor, Luke 19.8. And many of
the Priests, who had been like Asps and Cockatrices, of bitter spirits,
venomous tongues and cruel hands, against the primitive Christians, became
themselves obedient to the Faith, through the power of the Spirit of God
accompanying the Gospel preached unto them, Act. 6.7.

For the better understanding of this change, wrought in the hearts and
conversation of the Elect by the Gospel, we would Consider, there be three
principal changes in the spiritual estate of man; 1. A change from the estate
of primitive innocence and happiness, unto an estate of sin and misery, brought
upon man by his own fall, Eccl. 7.29. L^^ this only have I found, that God has
made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions. This was a voluntar
and a sinful change, from the better to the worse. 2. There is a gracious
change wrought by God himself in our conversion, from an estate of rebellion
and of prevailing corruption, unto an estate of grace and favor with God, and
unto an estate of sanctification; this is from the worse to the better, 2 Cor.
3.18. We all with open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord. 3. A change from the better to best of all, from an estate of grace
here, unto an estate of immortal glory at our death, Job 14.14. All the days
of my appointed time, will I wait till my change come. 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed.

Consid. 2. What man lost by his first change, and what he lost not: he lost
not through his fall any thing, which was essential to him; for then after his
fall he should have been no more a man, although after his fall he is sometimes
called in holy Scripture a beast; yet not that he became such in nature, but
because he was carried for the most part like a brute beast by sense, toward
that which was pleasant to flesh and blood: he retained still after the fall
his natural faculties of understanding and will: he had an inbred capacity to
understand some speculative truths, as that there is a God; and that the whole
is more than any several part of the same: and also to understand practical
truths, Romans 2.15. as, that he is to be worshipped, and that we should do to
others as we would have them do to us. He lost not his liberty of will, in
willing freely from previous deliberation, without coaction, or force in the
proper and elicit acts of the will, in willing or refusing; though in the
outward man he may be forced, yet can he not be forced in his will: when a man
is forced to go into prison, yet his will is not forced, for still he freely
wills it not. He lost not the affections of grief at what was noisome, nor of
fear at what might harm him; he had them in the state of innocence in the first
act, and proneness (as they speak) but not in the act of exercise, till after
his fall into misery; these affections were lost in respect of their
straightness and rectitude, but not in respect of their substance and being.
Man by his fall lost not the faculty of conscience; for after his fall,
conscience made him ashamed of his nakedness: and the natural conscience in
Heathen men, is said to accuse or excuse, Romans 2.15. He lost not the shape or
posture of his body, whereby he is in some sort distinguished from all other
creatures: I grant, accidental deformities in the body, are the consequents of
sin; but yet the frame of it, in respect of the situation of the members, was
not lost. He lost not dominion altogether over the creatures: although wicked
and unregenerat men have not a right to the creatures, as they are pledges of a
better portion in Heaven; yet they have still a right to the bare creature, but
without that relation to that better portion in the other life. For, as wicked
men have their natural life from God, so they have a right and allowance from
God to preserve that life, by the use and help of his good creatures; otherwise
it were not lawful for them to use means for preserving their life, but they
should rather abstain from them.

By his fall, he lost clearness and quickness of understanding, to take up and
discern heavenly and spiritual truths, in order to the salvation of his own
soul, Mat. 16.17. 1 Cor. 2.14. Although he lost not the faculty of willing, nor
liberty from coaction, and from a natural determination to this or that; yet he
lost the liberty of rectitude and uprightness, by being now after his fall
perversely inclined to that which is displeasing in the eyes of God, Romans 5.10.
We are called enemies to God by nature, and enmity is properly in the will. He
lost purity in his affections; our affections, at first, were like clean and
pure water running in a clean channel, but now they are muddy and earthly,
there being much perturbation in them, like water running through a muddy
channel, Joh. 3.31. He that is of the earth, is earthly. Our affections at
first were straight, set upon God and things above; but now they are bowed
down, and through the strength of corrupt nature, set on things below, Romans
8.5: For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh.
Although fallen man has not lost the faculty of conscience, yet he has lost
that clearness, quietness and calmness that was in it at the first: for so long
as man lived in a communion and harmony with God, there was also inward peace,
and a pleasant harmony in his conscience, like an instrument well tuned: but
when by sin he brake harmony and communion with God, then his conscience became
like a troubled sea, roaring out into his ears a dreadful sound from fear of
wrath to come, as a mighty tempest to drive them into hell; then as Outlaws,
they were afraid at every thing: So Adam and Eva, after the fall, had a mighty
tempest in their consciences, which did drive them away to hide themselves from
the presence of the Lord.

Consider. 3. In conversion to an estate of grace, there is a happy change, 1.
In the mind, by illumination and light: as at first God created light in the
first creation, so in the second creation and regeneration, he first creats the
light of faith, whereby we see God reconciled to man in Christ the Mediator, 2
Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ. When a man is converted, he gets a new light, in respect of
his mind, which is the subject of it: but it is not a new light in respect of
the object; he has not new spiritual and saving truths revealed to him,
beside, or far less contrary to the Word: as a blind man, when his eyes are
opened, does not see another Sun, then what was before in the firmament, though
not seen by him, until his eyes were opened. 2. God makes a change in the will,
by taking away the stony heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Acts 16.14. He removes impenitence
and unbelief, which are as two strong bars to resist his call by the outward
means, until he remove them by the power of his invincible grace, whereby he
works mightily in those that believe, Ephesians. 1.19. For not only does he preach
deliverance by his Word, but also he sets at liberty such as are bruised with
sorrow in their hearts for their sins, Luke 4.18. 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty. August. (Lib. 1. against the 2 Epist. of
Pelag. Cap. 19. citing that place, Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the
Father draw him,) observes, it is not said, no man can come to me except the
Father lead him, that so we might think the will of man did preceed, and
thereafter the Father did lead and promove his will: but it is said, except the
Father draw him: and who can be said to be drawn, if he himself first be
willing? therefore (says he) they are made in a wonderful manner, even to be
willing by him, who knows how to work inwardly upon the hearts of men: not
that any man (for that is impossible) should believe against his will, but
because of not-willing, he is made willing. 3. There is a change in their
affections, which in some measure are purified and rectified: the sense of Gods
love in Christ works godly sorrow in their hearts, Zech. 12.10. It works a
filial fear in them, to do any thing that may offend God, Jer. 32.40. I will
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. 4. There is a
change in the conscience, after conversion, it is quiet and calm: the
righteousness of Christ apprehended by a lively says, does quiet the
conscience, both with the peace of Justification, Romans 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And with the
peace of Sanctification, Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink,
but righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. The conscience after
conversion, becomes more tender of duty, and sensible, even of smaller
offenses, like the flesh of Naaman, cleansed from his leprosy: such tenderness
we see in David, Psalm. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. 5.
There is a change in the body and conversation: the body, it becomes a temple
to the Holy Ghost, and all its members, like several Vessels in the Temple, are
consecrat to the service of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. Romans 6.19.

Consider. 4. This change is not perfect in degrees, 1. Our knowledge in the
state of grace here is but in part, 2 Cor. 13.9. For we know in part. In many
mysteries of Religion, we know, that such a thing is an undoubted truth from
divine revelation; but the cause and manner how such and such things are, we
know not; as the eternal generation of the Son; the manner of the eternal
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, the individual unity
of the three blessed Persons in the Divine Essence; these mysteries we know in
a confused and general manner, like the sight of the blind man of Bethsaida,
Mark 8.24. But in Heaven our knowledge of these great mysteries, will be more
clear, like the sight of that same blind man by a second touch, and by the
light of glory; when we shall see light in his light, Psalm. 36.9. and when we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 2.2. 2. Although there be a change of our will
at our conversion, yet there remains in it corruption, which is the seed of
disobedience to the will of God, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit. This tumult and insurrection of corruption against grace in the will,
does pain and vex the godly, like the twains which strove in the womb of
Rebekah: but after our change at death to immortal glory, our petition put up
to God in this life, shall be fully answered, Thy will be done on earth, as it
is done in heaven: then shall we be like unto Angels, and our will shall cleave
unto God and his will indeclinably for ever. 3. Our affections, after our
change and conversion in this life, are not wholly pure; who can say he has
made his heart clean? Prove. 20.9. As shoes open above (as was the manner of the
Jewish Nation in our blessed Lord his time) did contract dust and fuilie, and
their feet had need of daily washing, so our affections are not so closly
united to God; but many times they are open and enlarged toward the world,
which defiles the heart, and puts even men converted unto a daily necessity of
repentance, and cleansing from all uncleanness of the flesh and the spirit, 2
Cor. 7.1. But in Heaven there will be perfect purity of heart, like Angels; not
a wandering motion there; we will be far above the world which defiles the
heart, and far above the vain shadows of this present world, which now and then
interveening, draws our eye and heart off God: but at our change into glory,
nothing can or will interveen between God and us; our minds and our hearts then
will be wholly and unchangeably set upon him. 4. Though now after conversion,
there may be some calmness in the conscience, yet it continues not always
alike; some of the godly do say, as Job 7.4. I am full of tossing to and fro;
as David, Ps. 42.7. All thy waves and thy billows have gone over me: and as
Hezekiah, Is. 38.13. As a lion, so will he break all my bones, etc. But at our
last change to glory in heaven, there will be a perfect and an everlasting
calm; like that of men tossed at Sea, when they come within a safe Harbor; for
the salvation of God will be a perpetual bullwark unto them. 5. The body of the
godly in this life, is subject many times, as a drudge, unto a corrupt and
imperious will; but at our last change, as the will of the godly will be wholly
and sweetly subordinat unto the will of God; so in the day of resurrection, the
body with all its members, shall be a Temple filled with the Holy Ghost: then
there shall not be a wrong look in the eye, nor an impertinent word in the
tongue, nor a wrong step in all the course of our bodily motion and
conversation; the body now is weak and sickly, but then it will be ever
healthful and strong; now it is weary and subject to fainting, but then it will
be agile (as Augustine speaks) it will be in an instant of time, wheresoever
the spirit shall desire to be; then shall our bodies and tabernacles of clay be
conform to the pattern shown in the mount, when our blessed Lord was
transfigured, Philip. 3.20.

Use 1. For conviction of many, who think they are in a state of grace, when in
the mean time, they are carried away with sense and masterful passions, like
brute-beasts, toward the fulfilling of their sinful lusts: some are like Lions
in fierceness, some like Bears in their inconsiderat wrath, some like evening
Wolves in their cruel covetousness, some like the Asps in the venom of their
tongues, and others like the Crocodiles in dissembling their cruelty with false
shows of pity, that the more easily they may destroy the simple ones; but such
men would consider in time, how far they are from being of the meek Spirit of
Jesus Christ; now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
Romans 8.9.

Use 2. For exhortation to all such who are yet the old men, like Moab, not
changed from their Lees; consider, 1. in Gods account ye are compared to
Beasts, before this happy change spoken of here be wrought in you; and (as it
is truly said) it is better to be a beast, than truly compared to a beast. 2.
Ye can have no evidence that ye are in Christ, but from this change; If any man
be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. and if any man be not a new
creature, he is not yet actually in Christ; and it is not possible to be with
him in glory after this life, except ye be in him first as new creatures in
this life; for as there is no condemnation to them that are in him, so there is
no salvation to them that are not in him, who is the Savior only of his
mystical body, Ephesians. 5.23. 3. If there be no change from thy state of corrupt
nature; death in its approach will be terrible, like a Sergeant at Arms to
apprehend a rebel in his act of rebellion, and straightwayes to hale him before
the Kings Bench, Psalm. 7.12, 13. 4. There is no coming to heaven, without this
change; as lepers under the Law, were not admitted into the assemblies of the
people of God, before they were cleansed from their leprosy, So there will not
be admission into the assembly of the firstborn in heaven, until you be
cleansed from your sins; and all your presumptuous thoughts of salvation,
without cleansing the heart and conversation, are but vain imaginations and
groundless fantasies, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee?

Use 3. For confort to all such, in whom God by his Word and Spirit has wrought
a real change from their former vain and sinful conversation: be of good
comfort, he who has begun the good work of grace in thy soul, will finish it
until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. he is the wise builder, and will
perfect his work of free grace begun in thee in this life: though thy knowledge
of God, and of thy happiness in him be but in part, yet in the other life it
will be full, like the light of the Sun at noonday, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now thy
knowledge is mediat, as through a lattesse; then shall it be immediate and
intuitive, 1 John 3.2. we shall see him as he is. In this state of grace, our
will is not only mutable by nature, but also of a mutable condition, even after
we are in a state of grace, and has a proneness and liberty unto evil; but in
heaven our will shall be of an immutable condition, fixed always upon God, and
subordinat unto his will necessarily, yet most freely, without all force and
co-action; for then it will be our meat and drink to do the will of our
heavenly Father: then there will be perfect purity in the affections, we shall
be presented to the Father altogether faultless, Jude Epist. 24. then shall
there be full joy and everlasting delight in God himself the supreme good.
There will be an everlasting calm in the conscience, not so much as an air of
temptation, or whisper of any inordinat motion; and all the members of the body
will be weapons of righteousness, like vessels in the temple above, wholly
consecrat to God. Therefore, let the children of God in all the outward changes
they see in this unconstant world, and in some inward changes they feel now and
then in themselves, in respect of their spiritual condition, yet hold fast
their confidence in God, and rejoice in the hope of that unchangeable condition
that abides them in heaven.

Quest. Some will say, I have a purpose to change, and have some wishes for it,
as a thing necessar in this life, before I can be changed into that state of
glory in that other life: but seeing this change is not ordinarily upon a
sudden, (as was that of Paul) what shall I do, as previous in order to such a
change? Ans. 1. Thou would be first, from the threatenings of the Law, convinced
of thy extreme danger, if thou be not changed from thy former evil ways, Psalm.
7.11, 12, 13. and thou must believe the faithful promises of such benefits, as
will attend thy change, to wit, peace of conscience in this life, Psalm.
119.165. Gal. 6.16. and eternal happiness in the life to come, Ezekiel. 18.21.
Romans 8.13. 2. Thou would observe, according to the threatenings of God, his
sad judgments accordingly falling upon some sinners, that were obstinat and
would not change from their former evil ways: some drunkards have been taken
away suddenly, others clothed with rags, and made visible documents of the
revenging justice of God against excess and riot: Likewayes some unclean
persons have been seen pyning away in vile diseases; and others of them brought
to a morsel of bread through the whoorish woman: Thou who art a drunkard or
harlot, observe this, and change thy way, lest a worse thing befall thee, who
has the advantage of such a severe warning from others; it was said to
Belshazzar, Dan. 5.22. And thou his son, O Belshazzar, have not humbled thine
heart, though thou knew all this. 3. Observe also some changes in thine own
outward condition: It may be thou has met with some sad dispensations from
providence, when thou was running in the excess of riot; which were like the
Angels opposition unto Balaam in his way to Balaak: make good use of such sad
occurences; before wrath be poured forth upon thee in the great day, even to
the uttermost; and harden not thine heart against such warnings, Job 9.4. God
is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against
him, and prospered? If God at any time has changed thine adversity into
prosperity, observe it, and let the riches of his bounty lead thee to
Repentance, and to a change from thy former evil ways, and say, as Ezra 9.13,
14. Seeing that thou our God has punished us, less then our iniquities deserve,
and has given us such deliverance as this; should we again break thy
commandments? 4. Be thou resolute against all the impediments of a future
change; especially against the bitter mockings of such, as sometimes were thy
prosane companions in iniquity; who will speak all manner of evil against thee,
after thy change, because thou will not run with them to the same excess of
riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. they will possibly call thee a vile hypocrite: but labor
thou to be of a sound and honest heart in all manner of conversation,
exercising thy self (as Paul did, Act. 24.16.) to keep a good Conscience void
of offense both toward God and man, in all things willing to live honestly.
Heb, 13.18. then shall thou not need to be ashamed of thy fair profession, Ps.
119.80. let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed. 5. Be
thou also resolute against the counsels of the evil men, who would pervert the
right ways of the Lord, and draw away thine heart from entering into them; as
Elimas the sorcerer would have drawn away Sergius Paulus the Deputy, from the
way of the Christian Faith, Act. 13.10. but resist thou such evil suggestions
at the very first, as our blessed Lord did the counsel of Peter, Mat. 16.23. 6.
Be thou resolute against discouragements suggested by worldly men, to hinder
thee from the way of Godliness, and going forward into that heavenly Canaan; as
the unfaithful spies did discourage the Israelits, from going to that earthly
Canaan, Number. 13.32. They allege the way of Godliness is a melancholious and
comfortless course of life; whereas, on the contrary, true joy and mirth comes
to the soul after our change and conversion, Luke 15.32. It was meet that we
should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive
again; and was lost, and is found. The Eunuch, after his conversion to the
Christian Faith, went on his way rejoicing, Act. 8.39. 7. In order to thy
future change, thou must believe that infallible proposition, If we change from
our former evil ways, God will turn from his wrath and pardon the iniquity of
our former evil ways, Isa. 55.6, 7. Jer. 18.7. for a man will not change his
way, unless he think to be the better, and happier by the change. 8. Lastly,
thou must be frequent in prayer to God, that he would produce this happy change
in thee; for though a man by a general concourse of divine help, may do some
Acts previous to the special change and conversion, from the state of Nature
into Grace, yet can he not without the concourse and strong influence of the
special help of supernatural Grace, change himself from the state of nature
into the state of grace, Jer. 13 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
Although some previous dispositions be ordinarily antecedent in order of time;
yet are they not the causes of our change and conversion; which is wrought and
brought forth by the invincible grace of God, changing and inclining our will
to the obedience of his holy will; Jer. 17.14. Heal me O Lord, and I shall be
healed; save me, and I shall be saved. August. citing this place, says well,
In vain do vain men say, I will heal my self; no, says he, let us say, heal
me, O Lord, and I shall behealed. Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me and I shall be
turned. He preveens us by his grace, and makes us willing, and thereafter
follows us also with his grace, lest we should will in vain.

Observe. 3. A true and real change from the state of corrupt Nature, unto a
state of Grace, is visible and evident in these four effects, held forth in the
text, 1. A communion and fellowship with the godly already converted, They
shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. 2. A cheerful submission to the Word of God,
though preached by weak men, A little child shall lead them. 3. Honesty and
righteousness in their purchase, and contentment with their own portion, The
Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. 4. Peaceable-mindedness and a meek
conversation, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain.

1. Evidence. Sincere and real Converts will delight themselves most in the
society of the godly; because they are forbidden to have any intimat fellowship
with the ungodly, 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a brother, be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. 2 These. 3.14. If any man obey not
our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he
may be ashamed. It was the care of the Saints on earth, to shun the company of
the ungodly, Psalm. 26.4. Psalm. 101.7. The holy Evangelist John, would not go
into the same Bathe, where were the blasphemous Heretics Ebion and Cerinthus:
but contrariwise it was their custom to frequent and delight in the company of
such as feared God, Psalm. 16.2. Psalm. 119.63. Act. 9.19. Then was Saul, (to
wit, after his conversion) certain days with the Disciples, which were at
Damascus.

Quest. 1. Is it unlawful in any case to keep communion and company with wicked
men? Ans. 1. It is not simply and altogether unlawful; for then must we needs
go out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10. A natural communion with them, in things
necessary for this present life, is very lawful: Abraham and Isaac went to
Gerar and Egypt in time of famine: and our blessed Lord sent to Sihar, a
village of the Samaritans, for bread. 2. A civil communion in things necessary
for our well-being, is also lawful; as commerce and trading with wicked men:
thus Solomon, 1 King. 9.26. did keep a communion and commerce of trade with the
Heathens of the Eastern India: Likewise a communion and association in war for
defense and self preservation; or for the recovery of things unlawfully taken
by usurpers and oppressors, is very lawful for the Magistrate and Ruler of the
people: Abraham joined in confederacy with Aner, Eshcol and Mamre, though
Canaanites, for the rescuing of Lot, Genesis 14. It is lawful also for the
preserving of the public peace, and their own private peace: Isaac made a
Covenant of peace with that Heathen King Abimelech, Genesis 26.31. And Nehemiah
sought a Pass for safe conduct and protection from Artaxerxes, Neh. 2.7.
Providing always such confederacies be without any condition prejudicial to
Religion, or to common honesty: It must not be on such like conditions, as were
these whereupon peace was offered to Israel by Nahash the Ammonite, 1 Samuel
11.2. 3. There is a lawful outward Church Communion with wicked men, in the
outward ordinances, as in hearing the Word, praying, praising, and receiving
the Sacrament: Ishmael was circumcised as well as Isaac; and Simon Magus was
baptized, as others also were in Samaria. We may not separat from the Church,
because possibly through the negligence of the Spiritual Rulers, profane and
scandalous persons are admitted to the holy Sacrament: The Angel of Pergamos
and Thyatira, is reproved for tolerating vile and scandalous persons;
notwithstanding the people of these Churches are not required to separat from
the Church, Rev. 2. Cyprian, Lib. 3. Epist. 3. Although (says he) there seem
to be tares in the Church, yet thou must not separat from it; but labor by all
means, that thou thy self may be good grain. August. Epist. 48. to Vincent.
Good men (says he) are not to be forsaken for evil men's sake; but evil men are
to be tolerat for good men's sake: And this he proves, 1. From the example of
the Prophets, who spoke much against the people of Israel, and yet did
communicate with them in the holy Ordinances. 2. From the example of Christ,
who^ did tolerat Judas. 3. From the example of holy Cyprian, who did tolerat
the covetousness of his Colleagues; and yet not forsake communion with them in
the sacred Ordinances. Such toleration is not an approbation of these whom they
tolerat: it is simply unvoluntar, as the toleration of the tares, Mat. 13. but
voluntar, only in respect of a care to preserve the wheat: Thus David, for
preserving the public peace, did tolerat the sons of Zerviah, but did not
approve them in their headstrong courses: It is true, we must have no
communion with wicked men and workers of iniquity, as such, in their evil
works, Ephesians. 5.11. Though we should not have communion even with the godly in
their sinful infirmities; yet we must not for these break off fellowship with
them, Gal. 6.1. And we should follow them and their example in all things,
wherein they are followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.

Quest. 2. Wherein stands our spiritual Church Communion with the godly? Ans.
It stands, 1. in our partaking the same outward holy Ordinances, Heb. 10.24,
25. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works; not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together. 2. In having the same common
privileges, as one heavenly Father, one Head, one Spirit renewing them, one
common inheritance purchased and reserved in Heaven for them; for which cause
all believers are said to be (...), kinsmen; (...), of one mystical body;
(...), fellow-heirs, Ephesians. 2. 3. In mutual Christian-duties; as in loving one
another, Gal. 5.13. Ephesians. 4.2. Forbearing one another in love: not breaking
fellowship for infirmities: Paul reproved Peter to his face boldly, but did not
break off Christian communion with him, Gal. 2.14. Cornelius and Cyprian, lived
in Christian fellowship and communion all the days of their life,
notwithstanding some difference in judgment. The spiritual duties of Christian
love for mutual edification, we have set down, 1 These. 5.11, 14. 4. In a
sympathy and fellow-feeling, 1 Cor. 12.26. As in the natural body there is a
sympathy between the brain and the sinews, between the stomach and the reins;
so there is a mutual sympathy between the members of the mystical body of Jesus
Christ; they will be pained at the heart with godly sorrow for the failings of
one another, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and
I burn not? They will rejoice in the spiritual good of one another, Joh. Epist.
3.4. There will be a sympathy of sorrow in their outward calamities, by
condoling one with another, 1 Pet. 3.8. A rejoicing and congratulation in
outward prosperity, Phil 2.27, 28. 5. In a mutual supply of spiritual wants and
defects, 1 Pet. 4 10. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. He that
has more of zeal, will stir up another that has more of knowledge, but less
of zeal: and he that has more of knowledge and prudence, will advise another
that has more of zeal, but less of knowledge and prudence: Likewise there will
be according to their abilities, a supply in bodily wants, 2 Cor. 8.14. as was
seen in godly Cornelius, Acts 9.10. otherwise there is not any sincere love of
God notwithstanding any great show in profession, 1 John 3.17. But whosoever has
this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his bowels
of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

Use 1. For admonition, as ye would show your selves true converts, bewar of
intimat and frequent fellowship with profane and ungodly men, 1. Because evil
company corrupts good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. Joseph learned in the Court of
Egypt to swear by the life of Pharaoh: It is said, ( Prove. 22.24, 25.) With a
furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy
soul. As contagion comes by looking upon sore eyes, so infection takes hold
upon many from their beholding the evil example of others; for thou art more
ready to comply with their corruption, then they are to follow any grace or
virtue that is in thee: thou has corruption dwelling in thy mortal body, which
is ready to correspond with them, and to concur in their works of darkness;
but they have not grace in them to correspond with thee in gracious
dispositions or actions. 2. Through their evil company, thou may be in danger
of a temporal judgment, as was good Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. Yea not only
in danger, but also involved in the same common calamity with them, as was
righteous Lot, Genesis 14.12. 3. By thy intimat fellowship with profane men, thou
does great prejudice to thine own good name and reputation: for, others seeing
or hearing of thy fellowship with them, cannot but think thou art like unto
them, as birds of one feather flocking together: but thou should consider,
that next to a good Conscience, a good Name is to be sought and preserved,
Prove. 22.1. a good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving
favor rather than silver and gold. Silver and gold may be lost and recovered
again; but a good name once lost, is not easily recovered; it will cost a man
more pains and labor to recover it, then it would cost him to have preserved
it: It is compared to precious ointment, Eccles. 7.1. A good name is better
than precious ointment. It is more precious and fragrant than ointment; yet
evil company is as a flee in the ointment, spoils it and makes it unsavory. 4.
It is the will of God thou should abstain not only from the substance of
evil; but also from the circumstances, and appearances of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 John 5.21. keep your selves from idols.
Not only from the act, but also from the object of idolatry: therefore the Lord
would not have the people of Israel plant a grove of any trees near unto the
Altar of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.21. lest it being too nigh, the people might creep
into the groves, and there sin against the Lord: for, it becomes Christians to
walk circumspectly, even before the world; a chaste and honest conversation
becomes well the Spouse of Christ; Caesar said, it became Cesars Wife not only
to be honest in deed, but also to be free from all occasion of suspicion: how
much more does it well become all espoused to Christ, to walk humbly with God,
and without offense before men? 5. The man, who without a call does frequent
evil company, provokes God to leave him, and to give him over unto the evil
counsels and temptations of such evil company: therefore, godly men, though
never so resolute, yet should they not, without a call from God, (as Joseph and
Daniel had for their being in Egypt and Babylon) cast themselves into the snare
of evil company; no man nearest to danger by his own free option, is long safe;
no wise Mariner in time of calm, should cast anchor hard by a rock, for he
knows not how soon the storm may arise, and dash the V^ssel against the rock.
It was the wisdom of chaste Joseph, not to abide privately in one and the same
room with that shameless woman, Genesis 39.10.

Use 2. For exhortation, to frequent most the company of such as fear the Lord;
because, 1. their good example and instruction may be unto thee a restraint
from evil doing, as good Jehoiadah was to Jehoash for a long time, 2 King.
12.2. 2. It may hold off a judgment temporal even from wicked men; if there
had been but ten righteous persons in Sodom, it had been spared for their
sakes; yea, ( Genesis 19.22.) the Angel said, he could bring no judgment upon it
until Lot was first gone out of it. 3. The company of the godly, through Gods
blessing, may do much good unto thee by their good example and counsel, Prove.
13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise. This may be clearly seen in
the godly servants of Abraham and Cornelius the Centurion, Genesis 24. Act 10.7.
by their religious speech and dialect, ye may easily discern they have been
bred in the company of these who feared God; yet sometimes it may be
otherwise, contrary to the good example and instructions of the Masters of the
families; for in David's company, there was an Achithophel; in Elisha's, a
Gehazi; and even in Christ's own company, the Traitor Judas.

The second evidence of a real change and of true conversion, is a willing
submission to the Word of God in the ministry of his weak Servants, subjected
to the like passions as we our selves are, a little child shall lead them:
these that are led by another, have first life within them; So men are first
quickened by the life of faith through the Word by the Spirit, and thereafter
they are easily led by the Ministers of Jesus Christ, unto duties revealed by
God in the holy Word, Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me. By the Spirit of God working effectually with the Word, they
are first made sheep, and thereafter they follow him in the way of obedience to
his counsel and direction, Romans 6.17. God be thanked that ye were the servants
of sin; but ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine which was
delivered to you: because the Word of God, by the Spirit, puts a stamp and
impression upon their spirits, as the printing-iron does upon the paper, that a
man may see therein the very letter of the Type it self; this is signified in
the Original, (...): this submission in believers is by the assent of faith in
their minds to the Word, as the infallible truth of the God of truth, and by
love in our hearts to it, as the good and righteous Word of God, which is able
to save the soul of the believers, 1 These. 2.13. Ye received the Word of God,
not as the word of men, but as the Word of God. And withal, there is an honest
purpose of heart to obey the direction of the Word in practical duties, Luke
8.15. That seed on the good ground, are they, which in an honest and good
heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.
Romans 16.19. Your obedience is come abroad unto all men.

Use 1. For conviction and reproof of many visible Professors, who by their
willful disobedience, and rejecting the counsel of the divine truth, declare
themselves in effect, not yet truly changed and converted from what they were
formerly; some flatly reject the Word, as these Jews, Jer. 44.16. others speak
fair, but prove indeed like the young fair-spoken son, Mat. 21.31. He said, I
go Sir, and went not. How many in time of sad affliction, confess their sins,
and profess a purpose of amendment as Pharaoh did? Exodus 9.27, 28. but all
these professions and appearing resolutions, are like the morning cloud, and as
the early dew, soon dried up with the heat of a new temptation, Hos. 6.4.

Quest. It may be asked, what is the cause that men do not submit to the
counsel of the Word of God? Ans. 1. Their deadness and absolute want of the
life of grace; they are dead in their sins, and dead men cannot be led: it is
true, some time as dead men, they may be carried on by the example of others,
to some outward performances, as Simon Magus was baptized with others; but they
are not truly led as men living by a principle of faith within themselves. 2.
Pride is a cause of that disobedience; for as humility is the mother of
obedience to the Word of God, Mat. 11.5. The poor in spirit receive the Gospel;
So pride is the mother of disobedience to the Word, as was seen in those proud
civil Rulers, Jer. 43.2. and in these Ecclesiastic Rulers, Joh. 7.48. 3.
Ambition and vainglory makes men to reject the counsel of God, Joh. Epist. 3.
Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence among them, receives us not.
4. Covetousness and worldly-mindedness, Matthew 13.22. The care of this world,
and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the Word. As thorns draw away the sap of
the earth from the good seed, that it grows not; so the thorny cares of the
world, do draw away, or at least weaken men's affection toward the Word, and
makes them to mock at the word and counsel, which crosses their worldly
interests, Luke 16.14. And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all
these things; and they derided him. 5. An obstinat love to one idollust or
other, draws the heart away from God and from his Word, Joh. 3.19. This is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

Use 2. For exhortation to submit unto the Word of God in the mouth of his
Ministers, 1. Thy hearty submission, is a comfortable evidence of thy
regeneration; for, men who follow their leader, have life; walking by the
Spirit according to the direction of the Word, is a sure evidence of a
Spiritual life in us, Gal. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit. It is an evidence of our Adoption, Romans 8.14. For as many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. 2. Consider, God is thy
supreme Lord and lawgiver, therefore thou should submit to him who is
infallible and most just, even by an implicit faith and obedience, as Abraham
obeyed and he went out, not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. Thou should
also, without all murmuring and fretting, submit to judgments threatened in the
Word, or inflicted in the course of divine providence, as Eli did, 1 Samuel 3.18.
and David 2 Samuel 15.26. He is the absolute Lord, and gives not an account of
his matters to the children of men, Job 33.13. 3. Without this submission by
faith and obedience, the Word will not profit us unto the Salvation of our
souls, Heb. 4.2. The Word preached, did not profit them, not being mixed with
faith in them that heard it. As meat not received, or not retained in the
stomach, does not nourish. 4. Consider in time, if thou will not submit
willingly to the word of his righteous command, thou shall one day, mauger thy
will, be subjected unto that punishment threatened in the Word against the
disobedient and obstinat, Take the unprofitable servant, etc. Matthew. 41.46.

Object. But I have a prejudice against the Leader and Minister, I am not
satisfied with the manner of his entry; therefore I cannot submit to him as my
Leader. Answ. Although there were some defect (as thou apprehends) in the
manner of his entry; yet consider well every defect about the administration,
even of divine Ordinances, does not make them void and null: there was a defect
in the high priest, his entry, in our Lord's time, wherein it was annual, and
the investitour was by the Roman Deputies, and yet our Lord did not reject them
upon that account: there was in Augustin's time, a defect in the ordination of
some Ministers, who formerly had been ordained by the Novatians: yet when these
Ministers afterward were received into the Communion of the Orthodox Church,
they were not of new ordained again; August. Lib. 2. against Parmen. chap. 13.
If Ministers (says he) return to the Communion of the true Church, they are
not to be reordained; but as their baptism, so their ordination remains
entire. He speaks of such, as had been baptized or ordained by the Novatians,
with whom remained the substance of these ordinances, though in some
circumstances, there was a defect: It is true, the baptism administered by the
Paulinianists, being Anti-trinitaries, was by the Orthodox Church, thought null
and void; as also the ordination by them; as was declared in the first Council
of Nice. Yea, it is well known, that some of our learned and worthy Reformers,
received ordination from the Church of Rome; and yet the reformed Church did
heartily reverence and submit to the Word of God preached by them.

Use 3. For direction what to do in order to submission, 1. Purge thine heart
by repentance from noisome lusts; as the body is purged from obstructions, that
it may grow by wholesome food; so the soul must be purged from noisome
affections, that many a time obscure the judgment, and disturb the will: the
soul must be purged from malice, from guile, from hypocrysie, from envy, from
evil speaking, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Purge it from malice, which is as canker, and
abundance of choler, eating up some children, and bindring them to grow; Purge
from guile, because the deceitful man is an enemy to the word of truth, as was
Elymas, a man full of deceit, Act. 13. Purge from hypocrysie, because the
hypocrite is an enemy to the word of light, that takes the vizorn off his
face; and this discovery galleth him to the heart, as was seen in the
Pharisees, Mark. 12.12. Purge from envy, because envy is as soreness of the
eyes, and hates the light, Joh. 11.48. Purge thy soul from evil speakings,
because thy evil speaking of the Minister unto others, does great prejudice
both to thy self and to others: it puts thy heart out of that frame of meekness
required, for receiving the ingrafted Word, Jam. 1.21. and he that speaks
lies of the Minister, begins to hate him, who is wronged by him, Prove. 26.28. A
lying tongue, hates those that are afflicted, by it. 2. Set God before thee,
and hear the Word as in his fight, who one day will judge us according to that
Word; thus did the godly Centurion, Act. 10.33. Now therefore are we all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. 3.
Labor for a humble spirit, bringing all thine imaginations and thoughts
captives, ^o follow the Lord Jesus Christ, triumphing in the chariot of sacred
truth, 2 Cor. 10.5. The weapons of our warfare, are not carnal; but mighty,
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations,
and every high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ. We must not
consult with sense and humane reason, nor with flesh and blood in difficult
duties commanded by God; but follow the example of Abraham, Romans 4.19, 20. and
of Paul, Gal. 1 16. Neither must we consult with humane reason and Philosophy,
as our dictator in the great mysteries of the Christian Faith; such as are the
individual unity of the divine essence in the three blessed Persons; the
eternal generation of the Son; the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father
and from the Son; the personal union of the divine and humane nature of Christ,
and the resurrection of the body in the great day: It is ground enough for us
to believe the truth and reality of these great and deep Mysteries, that God,
who cannot lie, has revealed them in the holy Word: but we must be sober in
our enquiry of the manner; and although we cannot, by humane reasoning, attain
to the natural knowledge and science of these divine truths; and although,
through our infirmity and ignorance, we imagine them to be contrary to Natural
and Philosophical verity; yet, after better consideration, we conclude, that
Supernatural verities, are not contrary to Natural truths; because God, the
prime verity, is the Author of all real verity, and he cannot contradict
himself: only by the light of divine revelation, and the inward light of Faith,
we perceive and take up these sublime divine mysteries, which we cannot discern
by the light of Natural reason, though never so refined: as the light of the
stars, and the light of the Sun, are from God the Creator; and the light of the
Sun, is not contrary to the light of the Stars; for both of them, are lightsome
bodies: yet we see many things by the light of the Sun, to which our eye cannot
reach by the light of the stars. Therefore let us submit our faith to divine
revelation in the Word, and not oppose the barkings of humane reasonings
against revealed truths: It may be well said to these men, who Idolize humane
reason and Philosophy, which Tertullian said of the Heretics in his time, in
his book of the resurrection of the flesh, Chap. 3. Take from them these things
of humane Wisdom, wherein they agree with the Heathens; that so they may
determine their questions from the Scriptures alone; and they cannot stand in
the debate. It may be justly said to them, which Augustine said to the
Manichees, Lib. 17. against Faust. Chap. 3. Your tergiversation and
prevarication, is every way confounded: say plainly, that ye believe not the
Gospel: for when ye believe in the Gospel what ye have a will to; and ye
believe not what ye will; ye believe rather your selves then the Gospel. But
although humane reason cannot conceive the truth of these great mysteries, yet
it is our duty, without all contradiction, to believe the holy Scriptures, and
by a pious and modest silencing of all humane reasoning, to submit, by faith,
to the Word of God. The more silent humane reason is in these great mysteries,
the obedience of faith is the more conspicuous; and it well becomes humane
reason, that is an handmaid to Divinity, to be silent when her Mistress
speaks. Augustine frequently in his disputes with the Pelagians, who did too
much extol the strength of humane reason, does repeat this saying, credam ut
intelligam: Let me once believe it is spoken by God, then shall I understand it
to be a truth, evident in respect of divine testimony, though I see no evidence
in the things themselves. Bernard Epist. 190. What is more against reason, than
to endeavor, by thy low and silly humane reason, to transcend and surmount
supreme reason, to wit, the testimony of God himself, who is the prime verity?
4. As thou would be led by the Ministry of the Word, come to the reading and
hearing of it with an honest heart, that is, with a serious and sincere purpose
to obey the counsel and direction of it, though it should cross thy opinion,
design, humor, or interest, Luke 8.15. Thou must not come, as these proud men
( Jer. 42,) who pretended a purpose to obey; but when the answer given by the
Prophet, was not according to their desire and design, they in their pride
disobeyed it; but come with that disposition and earnest wish, that David had,
Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! then may
thou be confident it shall be well with thee, both in this and in the other
life, Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive
me to glory. Likewise whosoever submits sincerely to the Word of the Lord, will
have a due respect unto his Ministers and Messengers, 1 These. 5.13. For when
the message is commended unto the conscience of the hearers, it makes room also
in the heart for receiving the Messenger, for his Master's and the works sake:
Rebekah was very civil and courteous toward Abraham's servant, who came to suit
her in marriage to his Master's Son, Genesis 24. and shall not believers be kindly
affectioned toward the Ministers of the Gospel, who are friends to the
Bridegroom Jesus Christ, and do suit them in marriage unto him? 2 Cor. 11.2. I
have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you, as a chaste virgin to
Christ.

Evid. 3. The third evidence of a true change and conversion to God in the days
of the Gospel, is set down in these words, verse. 7. And the lion shall eat
straw like the ox: that is, the man who before his conversion, lived like a
fierce lion upon violence and rapine, who made no conscience, what way he
purchased his livelihood, after his conversion, shall forsake his unlawful way
of purchase, and thereafter shall live on the fruits of his own lawful labors;
as also he shall be well satisfied and content therewith, as his allowance from
God; even as the Ox eats straw and provender, the fruit of his labors, and
is well satisfied, and in his own manner, content therewith. From this evidence
of true conversion, we infer clearly these two conclusions, 1. Men truly
converted, will forsake their former evil ways of purchase by fraud or
oppression, and will make conscience of the way of their purchase in time
coming. 2. They will study contentment in their lawful purchase, whether it be
great or small.

Conclus. 1. As a true Convert will forsake in his purpose and endeavor, every
former evil way, because he knows mercy from God is promised only to such,
Prove 28.13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy. Isai.
55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. So the man, that has been an oppressor or
fraudulent in his dealings and bargains with others, will forsake these former
evil ways, and make conscience of lawful purchase in time coming: this was
manifestly seen in Zacheus, who before his conversion was an extortioner, and
exactor of more than was due; but after his conversion, he restored four fold,
and made conscience of his purchase in all time coming, Luke 19.8. The reasons
why true Converts do so, are, 1. Because such men know, that as they should
walk humbly with God, so they should walk honestly and justly with men, Mic.
6.8. 1 These. 4.3, 6. This is the will of God, that no man go beyond, and
defraud his brother in any matter. 2. They know that God threatens severe
judgments against extortioners and defrauders, 1 Cor. 6.10. 1 These. 4.6. 3.
They know that faithfulness and uprightness, in our particular Callings and
Employments, does adorn their holy profession, and stops the mouths of such as
are adversaries to it, 1 Pet. 2.15. For so is the will of God, that with
well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. And they know
also, that unrighteousness in our particular stations and employments, does
open the mouths of adversaries, to speak evil of our profession; thereby
profane men within the visible Church, are hardened in their sinful practices,
and they say, Why may not they do as such and such great professors do? Thereby
men without the Church visible, are hardened in their error and alienation of
heart, from a communion with the Christian Church: therefore Augustine unto
this question well answers, if it be lawful to a Christian to spoil and rob a
Jew, who is an obstinat adversary to the Christian Religion? he answers, It is
no way lawful; because thou who art a Christian, by so doing, hardens the Jew
in his error and infidelity, and hinders him to become a Christian. Therefore
it is our duty to walk in wisdom and uprightness toward them that are without
the Christian Church, Col. 4.5. remembering always, the second Table of the
Divine Law, is the sure Test, according to which is tried the sincerity of men
in the duties of the first Table, Luk: 18.19, 20. Acts 10.35. He that fears
God, and works righteousness, is accepted of God. Such was the practice of
sincere Converts recorded in holy Scripture: Simeon was just and devout, Luke
2.25. And Paul did exercise himself to keep a conscience void of offense both
toward God and men, Acts 24.16.

Use 1. For conviction of many who have an outward form of godliness, and would
be esteemed sincere Converts, and yet make no conscience of righteousness in
their dealings with men, Mic. 6.11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked
balances? The Apostle Paul, (1 Cor. 6.7, 8.) will have all those who profess
their conversion to the Christian faith, rather to remit of the rigor of their
own right in particular debates with others, than to disgrace their holy
profession by litigious pleaes: much less should Professors disgrace it by
injustice in their dealings with their neighbors: The God of truth, cares not
for words and phrases of piety, or for commending the Minister and his Sermon;
when in the mean time their works and doings are the fruits of unrighteousness:
Our blessed Lord, said to that woman, who lift up her voice, and said unto him,
( Luke 11.27, 28.) Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the papes which thou
have sucked: but he said, yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of
God and keep it. Holy and humble Angustine, on a time, hearing the people
highly commending a Sermon preached by himself, said, We tremble at your
praises, these are but leaves, we seek fruits from you. And certainly righteous
dealing with men, is a fruit of true piety toward God.

Use 2. For exhortation, to make conscience of your purchase, 1. Consider the
evil and danger; if ye do otherwise, Prove. 28.20. He that makes haste to be
rich, shall not be innocent: Jer. 17.11. As the partridge sits on eggs, and
batcheth them not; so he that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them
in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. Wicked Ahab made
haste to get Naboth's Vineyard, but he possessed it not long. 2. Unlawful
purchase, like a noisome morsel in the stomach, does pain and torment the
conscience, when God awakes it with terror, Job 20.20. Surely he shall not
feel quietness in his belly. 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich, fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. 3. Unlawful purchase makes a man unwilling,
and afraid to die; as a thief, taken with the sang, is unwilling and afraid to
come before the just Judge: the unrighteous purchaser cannot leave his
evil-gotten goods with any confidence of a blessing upon them from God to his
children and heirs: for he may know from the very light of nature, that the
righteous Judge of all the earth, does not approve the malefactors evil deeds:
yea, though the children should prove good and upright men, not walking in the
ways of their father; yet they being possessors of his evil-gotten goods, are
in mala fide unjust usurpers; and the righteous Lord and Judge of all the
earth, does oftentimes punish them, or rather the memory of the unrighteous
purchaser their Progenitor, by taking the cursed thing out of their possession.
Therefore the Heathen Greek Poet Hesiod, from the very light of Nature, said
well, (...), i. e. be not given to unlawful gain, for such gain is alike to
great losses. Because the unrighteous purchaser, in so doing, loses far more,
to wit, a good conscience, and peace therein, which is better than gold or
silver. On the contrair, consider the good and benefit of a lawful and
righteous purchase, 1. There is much peace in the enjoyment of it; though it be
but a little thing, Prove. 16.8. Better is a little with righteousness, than
great revenues without right. Prove. 15.17. Better is a dinner of herbs, where
love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. 2. Though men in this world
should neglect, or take little notice of a deserving man in public employment,
who keeps a good conscience in all his ways; yet his honesty in his particular
actings toward men, comforts and upholds him, as it did Samuel, when the people
neglected him, 1 Samuel 12.3. and as the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 7.2. 3. The
righteous purchaser, does at his death leave and bequeath his lawful purchase
with confidence of a blessing with it from God; as Jacob at his death said to
Joseph, Genesis 48.21, 22. Behold I die, but God shall be with you, and bring you
again unto the land of your fathers: moreover, I have given to thee one portion
above thy brethren, etc.

Use 3. For direction of our deportment in our particular Callings and
Employments, in order to the purchase of our livelihood, 1. I recommend
diligence in your lawful Employments, Romans 12.11. Not slothful in business. 2
These. 3.11, 12. We hear, that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, but are busy bodies: Now them that are such, we command
and exhort, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat
their own bread. And the ox to whom the sincere convert is compared here, is
diligent and laborious, Prove. 14.4. Much increase is by the strength of the ox.
2. God blesses the diligent, Prove. 10.4. Prove. 22.29. but the idle man is
reckoned amongst thieves, Ephesians. 4.28. Idleness exposes a m^n to temptations, as
of being a bu^ie body, 2 These. 3.11. of being tattlers, 1 Timothy 5.13. Cato said
truly, by doing nothing, men learn to do evil. Idleness tempts a man many times
to use base and unlawful shifts, which has brought many men unto a shameful
end, and in stead of entertaining and preserving their life, they themselves,
through the justice of God, have been the shortners and destroyers of it. 3. Be
thou sober and moderat in thy desires of the good things in a present world,
Prove. 23.4. Labor not to be rich, cease from thine own wisdom. Because the
worldly-minded wise man, thinks gain sweet upon any terms: in a special manner,
moderat thy desires in a time of common calamity, as the Lord required Baruch
to do, Jer. 45.4, 5. Behold, that which I have built, will I break down; and
that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole land; and seek
thou great things for thy self? seek them not, etc. 4. Be thou sober in thy
diet, and in the use of things, though never so lawfully purchased; and be
charitable to the indigent; this is the ordinary way wherein the Lord continues
and oftentimes increases the purchase, Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy
substance and with the first fruits of all thine increase: so shall thy barns
be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. Prove.
11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be
watered also himself. But if a man abuse the good things purchased, to pride,
riot and excess; or if he withhold his charity from these in distress, he
provokes God to withdraw these good things he has purchased from him, Prove.
23.21. The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, etc. Prove. 11.24
There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that withholdeth
more than it meet, but it tends to poverty. 5. Be thou faithful and upright
in all thy dealings with men. Prove. 28.20. A faithful man shall abound with
blessings. God will give to such a man a safe protection, and a constant
provision, Isai. 33.15.16. He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly,
he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding
of bribes, etc. he shall dwell on high; his place of defense, shall be the
munitions of rocks; bread shall be given him; his water shall be sure. 5. In
your dealings with others, whether ye be Merchant or Tradesman, make justice
commutative thy rule, Mat. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them, etc. Therefore when thy heart would entice
thee to secret gain by unlawful means, and whisper, stolen waters are sweet,
answer thou, and rebuke that temptation from an honest conscience and
principle, prompting thee to say, I will not do so, for I would not have men to
do so to my self.

Conclus. 2. A sincere Convert is content with any little portion purchased
with a good conscience: he is like the Ox well satisfied in eating the straw,
that grows from his own labors, Job 6.5. Does the wild Ass bray when he has
grass? or loweth the Ox over his fodder? For the better understanding this
point, we would know, 1. What true contentment is. 2. The grounds of it. 3. And
the way how to attain it.

True contentment is a voluntar and quiet satisfaction to the soul in our
present condition, from a cheerful submission to the will of God, who in his
wise providence measures out our present condition and allowance unto us. This
Christian contentment has three properties, 1. It is inward within a man
himself, as the cistern; but it is from God as the efficient and fountain of
all satisfaction and tranquillity of spirit in his own children, Prove. 14.14. A
good man shall be satisfied from himself. 2. It is voluntary, 2 Samuel 15.26.
Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. That spurious and
adulterat contentment of some among the Heathens, did proceed rather from a
forced subjection to a fatal necessity, or to fortune, (as they were wont to
speak) than from any voluntar submission to divine providence. 3. True
contentment is equal and uniform, to wit, in every estate and condition of
life, Phil. 4.11, 12. In prosperity it is without an immoderat desire to have
more; and in adversity it is without murmuring or envying others their
prosperity. Heathens had not contentment in every estate; some of them could
endure poverty, but no ways disgrace; as was seen in Cato and Lucretia, who
being overcome with grief and passionat impatience, did make themselves away;
which unnatural fact, Heathens did call an heroic act of a great and strong
spirit; but it was rather a fit of weakness and impotency; because strength of
spirit appears most in bearing patiently the burden of adversity, as
Augustine reasons well to that same purpose, Lib. 1. Cap. 20. of the city of
God.

Quest. 1. May not a man lawfully desire to be in a better condition, than
possibly he is in for the present? may not a poor indigent man desire to be in
a more plentiful condition; and such a desire seems not to consist with
contentment in the state of his present adversity? Answ. 1. A man may not
desire immoderatly another condition than the present, Heb. 13.5. Let your
conversation be without covetousness; and be content with such things as ye
have, etc. 2. He may not be excessive in his desires, in respect of the matter
and object, Prove. 30.8: Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither
poverty, nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me. 3. A man may not use
any unlaw^ul means of fraud or oppression for attaining the thing desired,
though never so good, Prove. 23.6. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an
evil eye, nather desire thou his dainty meats. For he that makes have that way
to be rich, shall not be innocent; such fool-haste is no speed: but when God in
his good providence offers lawful means for attaining a better condition, we
may, yea we should, make use of these means; otherwise it were a blameworthy
negligence and unthankfulness to God; for such gracious opportunities, 1 Cor.
7.2.21. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called: art
thou called being a servant? care not for it; but if thou may be made free, use
it rather. These worthy godly men, Joseph and Daniel, did not reject the great
favors offered and conferred on them by heathen Princes.

Quest. 2. May a true convert be displeased with ^ad afflictions lying on him
for the present? and if he may, How can he be said to be content with his
present condition, with which he is displeased? Answ. He may be displeased with
affliction as a thing bitter and hurtful to his natural condition, and yet be
content with it, as it is an act of his heavenly Father's will: the sick
patient is displeased, and has no contentment in the potion of Medicine being
considered simply; yet is he well pleased and content with it, as being
prescribed by the skilful Physician in order to his better health. Although
impatient desires to be delivered out of adversity, are inconsistent with
Christian contentment under it: yet humble desires of a delivery with
submission to the good will of God, do well consist with it; as we see in our
blessed Lord. Luke 22.42. He said, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup
from me; nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done: but we may not use any
unlawful means for our own delivery out of affliction, as wicked Ahaziah did, 2
King. 1. yea far rather we should say with Job, shall we receive good at the
hand of God; and shall we not receive evil?

Quest. 3. Is it a sin not to rest content with the measure of knowledge and
grace bestowed by God upon us already? and may we not desire to have more of
knowledge and grace than we have for the present? Answ. 1. It is a sin, if our
coffeehouse with our small measure of knowledge and grace, or our desire to
have more, proceed from the bitter root of vain glory or envy, to the end we
may have praise with men, as we see others of more eminent gifts have: thus
Simon Magus desired the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost. 2. As the
children of God do not desire increase of gifts and graces from any fretting
coffeehouse at what they want; but rather from an humble desire to have more
of spiritual gifts, that thereby they may glorify God the more, and edify
others: So they humbly submit the measure of these gifts and graces unto the
wisdom and will of God; they are thankful for the little they have already
received, and praise his free grace with Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. by the grace of
God I am what I am, and withal they reach forth unto these things which are
before, Phil. 3.13.

2. The chief ground of true contentment is the favor of God, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
Psalm. 30:5. Psalm. 63.3. Hab. 3.17, 18. And that the favor of God is a
soul-satisfying portion, is evident from these reasons, 1. That which satisfies
the soul of man, must be a good universal, to give contentment unto all the
faculties of the soul: pleasant sounds delight the ear, but not the eye; and
pleasant colors delight the eye, but not the ear: but a soul receiving God and
his favor, has an universal satsifaction, to wit, of light to the mind, of
love to the will, and of delight and joy to the affections; they have as much
of the enjoyment of God as they are capable of in this life; and would have
more, if they were more capable. 2. The soul-satisfying good must be such, as
is intimat to the soul: worldly and sensual objects, stick for the most part in
the sense and imagination: but do not affect the reason with any solid
contentment; they are as Readiness armor unto David, loose and shuffling: but the
sense of Gods loving kindness, is united to the understanding, and ravishes the
heart with joy, so that ou^ of the abundance of the heart, they say, as Psalm.
103.1. My soul and all that is within me, or that is in the midst of me, bless
his holy Name. 3. The soul-satisfying good must be that which is the supreme
good; because any inferior good, cannot fully satisfy the desire, so long as
the soul knows of one superior and better: as Moses was not satisfied with
what he saw on this side of Jordan, until he was at the top of Pisgah; so there
is not a full and complete satisfaction unto the soul, till we come to mount
Sion, that is above: our greatest satisfaction in this life, is to enjoy God by
faith, by love, by peace in the Conscience, and joy in the heart, which are the
first fruits of eternal life. 4. The soul-satisfying good, must be permanent;
because the very apprehension of a change, does interrupt our present
contentment, as may be seen in the intervals of chronical diseases; the fear of
returning fits, disquiets the heart, even in time of health: all worldly
objects are like a summer flood passing away, Prove. 27.24. Riches are not for
ever, and does the Crown endure to every generation? But the gracious presence
of God is like unto the Sun, shining more and more unto the perfect day of our
full happiness in heaven, Psalm. 89.33. My loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Jer. 32.40. I will not turn
away from them, to do them good. Joh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water
that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him,
shall be in him a well of water, springing up unto eternal life. John 13.1. he
loved them unto the end.

3. The means to attain unto true contentment are, 1. Withdraw thy heart from
seeking o^ placing thy contentment in the things of this present world; because
worldly pleasures are deceitful; riches are uncertain; and worldly honor does
evanish like smoke; for worldly glory shall not descend after a man into the
grave, Psalm. 49.17. 2. Make God and his favor your portion; then whatsoever be
your present condition or portion in this world, ye shall have inward
contentment; because God himself is a full, unchangeable and everlasting
portion, Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I
hope in him; that is, depend on him alone for satisfaction, Psalm. 73.26. My
flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart and portion for
ever. In all thy wants or losses worldly, thou may and should rest
content in him, who is thy alsufficient portion, Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. As a man, who has
lost a small portion put to adventure at Sea, does yet rest content, and
rejoices in the stock he has abiding sure at land. 3. Be moderat in your
worldly desires of things worldly, Prove. 30.8. feed me with food convenient.
Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, etc. Nature is
content with little, Job 6.5. Does the ox low over his fodder. And grace is
content with less; even in tribulations and worldly wants, it can rejoice in
God alone, Romans 5.3. We glory in tribulations also. But conceit is insatiable;
it must have this and the other thing also: Immoderate desire of things
worldly, does procure much grief and coffeehouse, if either we be
disappointed or deprived after some enjoyment: how grieved was Ahab, when
Naboth refused to give him his vineyard which he did covet with too much
eagerness? how did Micah howl ( Judge. 17.) when he was robed of his Idol, which
he coveted with so much blind zeal? when Aristotle was asked, By what means one
might become rich? his answer was, if he were poor in his desires. 4. Consider
how many better (possibly) every way than thy self, are in a worse worldly
condition; many of the dear children of God are shut up in prison, when thou
with thy poverty enjoyest outward liberty; many of them are under languishing
diseases, when thou art in health: Vriah was well content to lodge in the open
fields, when he saw the chief commander Joab thus lodged. 5. As thou would
have some contentment in thy worldly enjoyments, look well to the way of thy
purchase and coming by them, Prove. 16.8. Better is a little with righteousness,
than great revenues without right. Peace in the Conscience, is like health in
the body: as a man in health can be content with course fair; so peace in the
Conscience makes an easy digestion of worldly wants and crosses: God blesses
the diligent and gives him contentment in the enjoyment of that little he has
purchased with a good Conscience, Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord, it
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. But a man made rich with an evil
Conscience, can have no true inward contentment in all his abundance; as at a
funeral feast, there may be plenty of meat; but there is no mirth nor music
with it; neither God nor their own Conscience makes them welcome to their
evil-win goods. 6. Consider what good things thou enjoys yet from God, as well
as what thou wants: what thou have, is far more than thou deservest;
therefore be thankful to God; and thy wants are much fewer than thou deservest,
therefore be content and submit to his wise dispensation. 7. Consider thy
interest in that great gift, the Lord Jesus Christ himself, to which all thy
worldly wants are infinitely inferior; and from thence thou may be assured, that
thy want of any desirable good thing in this world, does not proceed from want
of love in God unto thee, but from the riches of his wisdom and love, who
knows what is best for his own children, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. The consideration of that everlasting Covenant of Grace in
Jesus Christ the Son of God, made holy David content, though he knew it would
not be well with his house and posterity in their worldly condition, 2 Samuel
23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is all my
salvation and all mdy esire, although he make it not to grow. 8. Consider what
thou looks for in heaven, and be content with the little thou enjoyest here in
the time of thy minority: all our afflictions and wants here, are not to be
compared with our abundance there, and with the glory that shall be revealed in
us, Romans 8.18. This consideration and great to look by faith, did quiet and
content the hearts of the children of God, when they saw the prosperity of the
wicked and the adversity of the godly in this present world, Psalm. 17.14, 15.
Thou fillest the belly of the men of this world with thy hid treasure; they are
full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes: as for
me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake,
with thy likeness. 2 Cor. 4.16, 18 For which cause we faint not, etc. while we
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. 9.
Labor thou to be truly godly, keeping a good conscience toward God and man;
for godliness that has contentment, an inseparable companion, always with it,
is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. 10. Lastly, and above all, pray earnestly to God to
instruct thy soul in that mystery and secret of contentment in whatsoever
estate; for in it the Apostle Paul was instructed and initiated by the Holy
Spirit and the good Word of God, Phil. 4.11, 12. Therefore let it be thy daily
prayer, Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me.

Use 1. For admonition, to bewar of that fretting coffeehouse with our
present condition, though never so low, 1 Timothy 6.8. Having food and raiment,
let us therewith be content. Because, 1. this fretting coffeehouse with our
present condition, provokes God in his justice to put us oftentimes to more of
disquietness: The people of Israel were discontent and loathed the Manna, which
they had for the present, therefore they were disquieted with the fiery flying
Serpents, Number. 21. 2. Coffeehouse and secret grudging for disappointment of
our worldly desires and hopes, especially when we think we are in the way of
duty, does provoke God many times to continue, yea, and to increase our
afflictions. The people of Israel, were in their duty, having left Egypt at
Gods command, yet when they repined against the holy command, in their
apprehending of great toil and labor in going up the hill, they were kept in
the wilderness for the space of forty years; whereas if they had not fretted
and repined, they might have come to their expected end and rest within the
space of forty days, Numb. 13.34. 3. Although God should grant unto a man his
desire in the time of his impatient coffeehouse, yet it is oftentimes given
with a curse, Numb. 11.33. While the flesh, which they so impatiently desired,
was between their teeth, the Lord smote them with a great plague. Therefore it
should be our prayer to God, to give us repentance of our frettings in times of
affliction, and to recover us from these paroxisms; and then if it be his good
pleasure, to ease or deliver us. 4. This coffeehouse, like a fretting
cancer, brings men oftentimes into dangerous and heinous sins, as to fraud,
deceit, and oppression: Ahab not content with his own possessions, oppressed
and murdered innocent Naboth: Proud ambitious men, discontent with the
condition of being private subjects, and not so respected according to their
fancy, are easily tempted to sedition and rebellion, as was Absalom: Men
discontent and fretting under a great and long sickness, have been sometimes
tempted to consult with wizzards and witches, as was Ahaziah, 2 King. 1.2. yea,
sometimes they have been tempted to self-murder, as was arrogant Ahithophel,
because his counsel, which he thought an oracle, was rejected.

Use 2. For correcting and allaying the fits of coffeehouse, arising now and
then, even in the hearts of the children of God, from some present sad
dispensations, or pressing wants: Abraham, the father of the faithful, Genesis
15.2. said, What avails all that I have, seeing I am childless? Godly Rachel
was discontent with her own barrenness, and envyed her sister Leah: Asaph had a
sharp fit of coffeehouse with the great prosperity of the wicked, and the
great adversity of the godly, Psalm. 73.13. And Jonah was absurd and most
unreasonable in his fretting and orping at the removing of the Gourd, which he
himself never planted: so we see even the godly sometimes have their own
repinings of heart, when God, in his unblameable providence, sometime removes
what himself freely gave, whereas they should be thankful to his rich and free
bounty for the former loan; and submissive to his wisdom and sovereignty in
removing what he himself gave. Therefore consider, 1. Such fretting
coffeehouse, does not become thy profession; thou do profess thy self a
child of God, and should a wise and kindly child take the pett at the allowance
of his wise and loving Father? Does it not become thee rather to say, as thy
elder Brother said before thee, Joh. 18.11. The cup which my Father has given
me, shall I not drink it? 2. Thy fretting coffeehouse, is a questioning of
the wisdom of God, who knows well what is best for his own children; of the
justice of God, who is righteous in all his ways; of the sovereignty of God,
who may dispose of his creatures at his own pleasure and wisdom, Eccles. 7.14
God also has set the one over against the other, to the end that man should
find nothing after him. The wise God, in his various providence, sets
prosperity at one time against adversity, and contrariwise, as upon the earth
there is oftentimes a valley and an hill joined together: And consider, thy
coffeehouse is a questioning the love of God, who not only chasteneth, but
even sometime scourges his own children, Heb. 12.6. 3. Look unto Christ, and
this will cure thy fretting canker of coffeehouse: Art thou in poverty? fret
not, but look to him, who being rich, became poor for us; his ordinary fare was
barley loaves and a few fishes, and he had not whereon to lay his head. Art
thou reproached and disgraced unjustly by men? do not thou fret and repine
against providence, nor faint as one that could not live, but in the popular
air: Look unto Christ, who endured such contradiction of sinners, Heb. 12.3. He
was called a Samaritan, a deceiver, a phanatick or phrantick, Mark 3.21. and a
complyer with Beelzebub, Mat. 12.

Use 3. For exhortation, to be content with thy present condition, till God in
his good providence, by means of his own appointment, call thee to a better and
more prosperous condition, 1 Cor. 7.20, 21. Because, 1. God increases his
gifts and graces to contented and thankful man, as unto Abraham, content with
Ishmael, he gave an Isaac; and to Solomon, content with the gift of wisdom for
ruling the people, he gave abundance of riches also. 2. Contentment with the
things a man has for the present, makes him to possess himself in patience,
and to prevail over his masterful passions, Luke 21.19. In your patience
possess ye your souls. But coffeehouse and repining, does so distract and
distemper the spirit, that some malcontents turn hypochondriack and stupid,
like Nabal; and others turn mad and furious, like Nebuchadnezzar, raging
against every thing they meet with in the course of their life. 3. Contentment
with little, preserves a man from many snares and temptations; a man content
with glad and honest poverty, is not easily entangled with the bait of unlawful
gain; and a man content with a low degree or place, is not easily tempted with
the wages of unrighteousness unto the way of Balaam.

VERSE VIII IX. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt
nor destroy in all my holy mountain, etc.
THe fourth evidence of true and sincere conversion to the Christian faith, is
peaceable-mindedness, and an harmless conversation: In the days of this great
change, foretold by the Prophet, men who before their conversion by the Gospel
to faith in Jesus Christ, were bitter and cruel to all with whom they
conversed, and were to them like asps and cockatrices, shall be new creatures,
and so harmless, that other Christians, like sucking or weaned children, though
weak and without power to defend themselves, shall not be hurt by them; and
these Christians, that were converted before them, they shall live without any
annoyance from them: for, after their conversion, as it is said in the Text,
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; that is, in the
Christian Church, so called, in allusion to mount Sion, where was the Temple of
Jerusalem, which was the place of the solemn Assemblies for the worship of God:
for, the Psalmist, speaking of the Messiah and his kingdom, resembles the
Christian Church by mount Sion, Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy
hill of Sion. If any man from the prophesies of an Altar and Sacrifices to be
in the days of the Gospel ( Isa. 19.19. Mal. 1.11.) would infer, there shall
be Altars and external Sacrifices under the Gospel, he may as well allege,
that the worship under the Gospel, shall be upon a mountain, from this place,
and from Isai. 2.2. All that can be concluded from these allusions, unto the
worship under the Law, is this; that the object of Worship will be one and the
same, both under the Law and under the Gospel, in respect of substance, but not
in respect of some circumstances and Ceremonies, which were to endure under the
Law until the time of Reformation by Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.10.

The Christian Church is compared to mount Sion, 1. This mount was a Fort of
the Jebusites at first, but afterward taken by David, and inhabited by him: So
by nature, our understandings, wills and affections, are strong holds for
error, disobedience and sinful lusts, until Christ the Son of David, subdue
them by the power of his Word and Spirit, 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our
warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. 2. Mount Sion was a place pleasant and delectable for
situation; so the Lord delights in his Church and people, Psalm. 149.4. The
Lord takes pleasure in his people. Therefore they are called his Spouse, Hos.
2.19. his Treasure, Psalm. 135.4. and his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. 3. Although mount
Sion was high and visible, yet sometimes it was over-clouded with a mist: so
the true Church, is not alike visible at all times; as may be known from Elias
his sad complaint, 1 Kings 19.14. And in the time of Athanasius, the world
groaned under Arianism; and many sound believers were forced to hide themselves
in caves, and there to worship God. 4. Mount Sion was firm and unmovable; so
the Christian Church, through the presence and protection of the Lord Jesus
Christ, will continue and endure, even to the end of the world, Mat. 16.18.
Mat. 28.20.

Quest. It may be asked at what time this prophecy of so great peace and
outward prosperity in the Christian Church was fulfilled? Ans. 1. That
universal peace in the Roman Empire, at the birth of our blessed Lord, in the
days of Augustus Caesar, cannot be the peace spoken of here; for that was
before the preaching of the Gospel unto the Gentiles; but the peace, spoken of
here, is an effect of the Gospel preached and believed amongst them. 2. This
Prophecy was fulfilled in part, even in the times of the holy Apostles; when
persecutors, who sometime, like wolves, had scattered the flock of Jesus
Christ, were converted to the Christian faith, and became like lambs, of a meek
and harmless disposition; as was seen in Paul, and also in the sometime
malicious Priests, Acts 6.7. and many of the multitude, being sometime like
boars, enraged against Christ and his Disciples, were by the power of the
Gospel tamed, and became of a peaceable spirit and conversation, giving up
themselves to be directed and guided by the Apostles in time coming, Acts 2.37,
38. 3. Many learned Divines, think this Prophecy began to be fulfilled, Anno
Dom. 311. in the time of the Emperor Constantine the Great; under whose happy
reign, there was an open and peaceable profession of the Christian Religion,
and freedom in a great part from the Heathen persecution: at which time (as
many of them think) was the beginning of the thousand years, spoken of, Rev.
20.3. during which time Satan, or the Dragon, was bound and restrained in a
great measure from the former manner of persecution; and they think these
thousand years did expire, Anno Dom. 1310. at the rising of the Ottoman Family
among the Turks; at which time Asia was overspread with Mahometism; and soon
after, in the year 1415. Constantinople was taken by the Turkish Emperor
Mahomet; and the famous Temple of Sophia there, was turned to Mohammedan
worship. 4. This prophecy is fulfilled in part daily, when some ungodly men,
who in former time hated the Church and the communion of Saints, are, by the
preaching of the Gospel, converted unto the believing of the truth, unto the
love of God and his holy Commandments, and unto the sincere love of all Saints.
5. Lastly, It is probable (as many learned men think, who yet are not for the
opinion of the Millenaries) this prophecy shall be more visibly fulfilled at
the incoming of the fullness of the Gentiles, and at the national conversion of
the Jews: Because these great and frequent wars amongst Christians, of one
Nation against another: and sometimes civil wars in one Nation among
themselves, are a great stumbling block unto their conversion: but when this
stumbling block shall be removed out of the way by a more universal peace
amongst Christians themselves, then shall the Jews, dispersed now through the
world amongst Christians, join themselves to the Christian Church, as it is
prophesied, Isa. 2.4. Mic. 4.3. Nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more. This universal peace, in all
probability, will not be, until the Gospel be preached unto many nations that
are yet in heathenism, according to the prophecy. Isa. 19.23, 24. at which
time the incalling of the fullness of the Gentiles, and peace amongst
themselves, at least more than in former times, will be a motive, blessed of
God, for the inbringing of the nation of the Jews unto the Christian Church:
for, it is said, In that day shall there be an high way out of Egypt to
Assyria, and the Assyrians shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptians into
Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians; in that day shall
Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst
of the land. Although the Christian Religion, was planted in Assyria, in the
times of the Apostles; for there was a Church then in Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13. and
also a Church was planted in Egypt, in Alexandria by the Evangelist Mark; yet
afterward, and at this day. Assyria and Egypt, are overspred with Mahometism:
But this text of Isaiah, speaks of restoring the Christian Religion to them
before the incoming of the Jew^; and that after their conversion to the
Christian faith, Israel shall be for a third companion in a Christian communion
with them in the same Spiritual blessings. It is true, there will be still
until the consummation of the World, some wicked and malicious men, within the
visible Church, as tares mixed with the wheat, until the day of final
separation: but it is probable, the chief Rulers themselves, being converted to
the Christian Faith, shall be so overruled by the power of divine grace, that
they will not hurt nor destroy in all the holy mountain of the Lord; and
Inferiors, who are malicious, shall be so overawed by the wise and powerful
providence of God; and also restrained by Rulers fearing God; that they shall
not be able to destroy in all the holy mountain. That the incalling of the
fullness of the Gentiles, will go before the incoming of the Jews, appears from
Isa. 60.16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the
breast of kings, and thou shall know, that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy
Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. In these words, the Prophet foretells,
that the Jewish Nation shall receive the doctrine of the Gospel from the Church
of the Gentiles, converted to the Christian Faith before them; and the Apostle
says, Romans 11.25. Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in. Therefore it is more than probable, that the incalling
of the fullness of the Gentiles, shall preceed the incoming of the Jewish Nation
unto the Christian Faith: for although some particular persons, in the times of
the Apostles, and also afterward, received the Christian Faith; yet the
incoming of the body of the Jewish Nation, was and is a mystery, which God is
his own good time, will explain, by bringing them into the communion of the
Christian Church.

Oserv. Men truly converted to the Christian Faith, will forsake their former
malice and bitter dispotion to hurt and harm others; and will labor to be of a
peaceable disposition and conversation: this is evident from verse. 8, and 9. It
is evident also from the happy change, which we may observe in true converts,
recorded in the Word of God; as in the Ephesians, amongst whom sometime there
were men, like wild beasts, with whom Paul had an unpeaceable and fighting
life, 1 Cor. 15.32. but after their conversion to the Christian Faith, there
was a great change in them, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are
ye light in the Lord. Paul was sometimes a fierce and uncessant persecuter of
all persons of the Christian persuasion; but after his conversion, he became
very tame and peaceable in his moderat and Christian condescension in matters
indifferent, 1 Cor. 9.22. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some. These convert Jews, who a little before, in their bitterness
of spirit, called the Apostles drunken fellows, do change their toon, and say
in their compellation, men and brethren, Act. 2.37. The rude and severe Jailer,
who was officious in his severity, doing more than he was required, afterward
becomes more tame and peaceable, as may be heard in his civil compellation,
Act. 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

Quest. If it be asked, what are the means by which we may, through Gods grace,
attain a peaceable disposition and conversation in a particular Christian
Church? Answ. I humbly conceive, there be three special means; whereby such a
disposition and conversation may be attained, 1. Humility of spirit. 2. Sound
moderation in judgment. 3. Mutual forbearance in love. The humble spirit, is
ordinarily a peaceable spirit and conversable in all Christian duties: pride is
the mother of contention and division in the Christian Church, Prove. 13.10.
Only by pride comes contention. The pride of Diotrephes, who loved the
pre-eminence, troubled the peace of the Christian Church, and bred opposi^ion
unto the blessed and peaceable Apostle John; the pride and vain glorious
ambition of private professors in Corinth, glorying to be called followers,
some of Paul, some of Caephas, did trouble the peace of that Church; the pride
of Demetrius, Bishop of Alexandria, troubled the peace of the Church there, and
the quiet of Origin, from his pride and envy of Origin his reputation amongst
the people: therefore says Augustine justly, In diverse Churches, are diverse
Heresies; but pride is the mother of them all: On the contrair, humility is the
mother of peaceableness, both in disposition and conversation; Paul after his
conversion, is very humble, esteeming himself the chief of sinners, and least
of Saints; and of a most peaceable disposition and conversation, both by his
example in becoming weak to the weak, that he might gain them; and also by his
exhortation to others, 2 Cor. 6.3. We beseech you, that ye receive not the
grace of God in vain, giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not
blamed: The proud man cannot converse peaceably with any that will not follow
his opinion, but the humble Christian desires no following, but in a
subordination to the Lord Jesus Christ, the great shepherd of our souls: such
was the humility of the great Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me,
even as I also am of Christ. Therefore it is our duty to follow the exhortation,
Phil. 2.3 Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory; but, in lowliness
of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. The second useful mean
toward a peaceable disposition and conversation in a Christian Church, is
Christian moderation, Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto all men:
that these within the Church may follow it in their Christian communion one
with another, and these without, may fall in love with your profession, and
join themselves to the communion of the Christian Church: such is the
moderation the Apostle requires in the Corinthians, that thereby they may shun
scandal and offense to these that are without, and may conciliat respect and
credit to the Christian Religion, by departing from the rigor of their own
private right and civil interest; and therefore not follow their litigious pleas
before heathen Judges, who by their contentions, were deterred from imbraceing
the Christian Religion, as being an enemy my, in their opinion, to peace and
humane society, 1 Cor. 6.7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you,
because ye go to Law one with another; why do ye not rather take wrong? why do
ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? This Christian moderation
appears in the use and exercise of our Christian liberty in matters indifferent
in their own nature, when we use them with such moderation and restriction,
that we give not offense to the weaker; such was the great moderation in the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 8.13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will
eat no flesh while the world stands; lest I make my brother to offend. But
this moderation and restriction, is to be understood only in things within our
own power; for in duties, wherein we are bound to God, or to our lawful
Superiors, we may not forbear the doing of such duties, because some
unnecessarily may be grieved thereby, or others, through ignorance, may be
stumbled; in such a case, the offense is taken, but not given: but moderation
in things of our own particular benefit, or privilege, is very commendable, as
a character of a prudent and sober Christian. This Christian moderation appears
also, in shunning with all circumspectness, the two extreme errors distant
from truths mediocrity: for although neutrality in matters of faith, necessary
to be known and believed, be very detestable; as was the neutrality of Gallio,
who cared for none of these things: and also that indifferent lukewarmness of
the Laodiceans, is much to be blamed; they were neither zealous for the truth,
nor zealous against it: but as Christians should be valiant, and in an holy
zeal, contend for the faith once delivered unto the Saints, Jud. Epist. 3. so
should they decline from extreme errors, opposite to the golden mediocrity of
truth. We should bewar of that extreme excess of Atheistical flattery of Thomas
Hobbs and his followers, who blasphemously affirms, that the Subjects are bound
to obey the Supreme Magistrate his commandments, though contrary to the
Commandment of God: which pernicious error, is directly contrary to the
Apostles, Acts 4.19. Acts 5.29. It blames the blessed Martyrs of great
imprudence, who were tortured, not accepting deliverance, Heb. 11.35. It
destroys the very vitals of Christian Religion, and is abhorred by Christian
Rulers; for it spreads a net before them. We should also wisely shun that
other extreme, to refuse peevishly and frowardly obedience in matters merely
and clearly indifferent and lawful, even because the Christian Magistrate
imposes them; as if it were a taking away of our Christian liberty, wherein we
should stand fast: But the Apostle in that place, Gal. 6.1. speaks of our
Christian liberty from the bondage of the Ceremonial Law; the observance
whereof, after the death of Christ, was not indifferent, but pernicious, Gal.
5.2. If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. The authority of
the Christian Magistrate, in commanding such things, takes not away the
liberty of our judgment, as if we were bound to think them not indifferent,
but necessary in their own nature; but it restricts only the liberty of our
outward practice; which restraint, is thought expedient for the good of the
Church by the Christian Magistrate, with the advice and consent of the
Church Assemblies. Therefore all moderat and sound Christians should rest on
that golden midst, far distant from these two extreme errors, Mat. 22.21
Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Cesar's; and unto God, the
things that are God's. And it is our duty to pray unto God, that the Christian
Magistrate may use his power in things indifferent and external, according to
the Apostolical Rule, to the edification of the Church in piety and charity, 1
Cor. 14.26. We would be moderat in matters circumstantial, in matters not
defined and determined by the holy Scriptures; In such things (says holy
Augustine) the custom of the people of God, and the ordinances of Ancestors,
are to be counted for a Law; and seeing such things do not import any necessary
documents of truth, we must take heed, that we overcloud not the fair face of
Charity, by the tempest of Contention, August. Epist. 86. to Casul. Such was
the moderation and peaceableness of holy Ambrose, as he is cited by August.
Epist. ad Januar. I^ ye would not commit an error, do ye, says he, what I use
to do; for to whatsoever Church I come, I conform my self to the Ceremonies
thereof. Calvin, Epist. ad Farel. Concerning Ceremonies, labor with your
brethren (says he) that they contend not pertinaciously with their neighbors:
so it shall come to pass, that all things may be ours, we our selves free from
all, and also be the servants of peace and concord. Calvin, Lib. 4. Institut.
Cap. 10. Sect. 32. We must endeavor, by our outmost diligence, that no error
creep into the Church; that no particular Church despise another for variety of
external Discipline: that in such things we prescribe not to our selves any
perpetual Law; that we refer the who^e use and end of such observancies and
practices unto the edification of the Church; in which, if it be needful and
expedient, not only something may be changed, but also whatsoever in matter of
Discipline has been formerly in use and observance with us, may be suffered to
be abrogated and abolished without taking any offense thereat. Bullinger,
Epist. ad Calvin. (which is to be found amongst Calvin's Epistles) says, Albeit
our Discipline does not answer in all things to yours; yet it is tempered
according to the times, places, and persons; neither do our Churches therefore
upon that difference incline, that your Discipline should be overturned. P.
Martyr Epist. to Hooper Bishop of Glochester, I am not ignorant that the
authority of Churches, whether present or former, should not so much prevail
with us, that by them the truth of the Word of God should be suppressed: for,
albeit the world should be dissolved, yet the divine truth abides always
unmovable and unshaken: but for matters indifferent, I think, says he, and
contend for it as a duty, that we should neither condemn them, nor speak
irreverently of them: but now, says he, when a change is brought into the
Church in points necessary about Religion, and that with so great difficulty;
if these things also, which are in themselves indifferent, shall be held forth
by us, as in themselves impious; thereby the minds of almost all men, are so
alienated from us, that they will not any more show themselves attentive and
patient hearers of sound Doctrine, even about things necessary.

The third mean required for a peaceable disposition and conversation in a
particular Christian Church, wherein we live for the time, is mutual
forbearance one of another in love, Ephesians. 4.3. not but we may and should
admonish one another in smaller errors, whether of opinion or practice, 1
These. 5.14. Lev. 19.17. But we should not separat from Church Communion with
them; especially if the errors in judgment be of smaller moment, and no ways
do concern the foundation of Faith; and if the Abettors of them, be otherwise
lovers of piety, peace, and of an honest conversation, in this case, private
persons, much more the spiritual Rulers, should with all meekness and long
suffering tolerat them, and according to the measure of their gift admonish
them, and labor to reduce them unto the way of truth, Gal 6.1. If a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit
of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Which Apostolic
precept, is diligently to be observed, not only toward men defective in some
errors of conversation, but also toward others, erring simply through weakness
of judgment. Such simple Errants, are tolerated, but not approven; even as we
tolerat some distempers in the body, but delight not in them; yea we seek some
remedies to cure them: we tolerat them as Ulcers to be cured; but we do not cut
off such persons by debarring them from Church Communion, as a member affected
with a Gangren: far less should such who err out of simplicity in smaller
matters, be provoked or rankled by reproaches and scoffings, lest the want of
charity, meekness and prudence, prejudge them much against the true Doctrine,
alienat them from the truth, and also render them more pertinacious in their
way of error; and least of all should the Rulers of the Church, provoke them
by bitterness in words, writings, or deeds; the meek Spirit of Christ and of
the Gospel, becomes them well, Luke 9.55, 56. 1 Timothy 3.3. A Bishop must be
patient, not a brawler. Judicious Calvin, is much for this forbearance,
Institut. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect. 12. "Yea, says he, some error may creep into
the Church, either in the administration of Doctrine, or of Sacraments; which
nevertheless should not alienat us from Church Communion; for, all points of
true Doctrine are not of one form. And in the same place, citing the words of
the Apostle, Phil. 3.15. he says, Does not the Apostle sufficiently declare,
that difference of judgment about matters not so necessary, should not be the
matter of division amongst Christians? Beza, Epist. 24. to the English,
residing abroad in the time of Queen Mary's persecution, says, Therefore to
avoid that ugly and pernicious renting and tearing asunder of the members in
the sacred Body of Christ, we think it, says he, lawful for no man in any case
to separat from the Church of Christ, wherein at least the Doctrine remains
sound and uncorrupted; wherein is continued the power of Godliness, and the
administration of the Sacraments according to the institution of Christ.

For peace and concords sake, there would be a forbearance and not breaking of
Church Communion for every fault in the life and conversation of others: for,
none of the children of God, want their own failings and trippings, Jam. 3.2.
For such failings of infirmity and inadvertency, which Tertullian calls,
quotidianae incursiones, the daily out-falls and bickerings of in-dwelling
corruption with the inner-man of grace: therefore Augustine says well, Now do
men live well, if they live without a crime; but if any man think he lives
without sin, in so thinking, he does not effect, that thereby he may not have
sin; but by his presumptuous thoughts he hinders himself to obtain the pardon
of sin. Such a condition of the Church, as may be free from all spot or
wrinkle, is to be expected in Heaven, when we shall be presented faultless
before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, Jude Epist. 24. Yea, we
may not separat from Church Communion, though gross and scandalous sinners live
in it, so long as they are acknowledged by the Church-rulers to be members
thereof, 1. Because the holy and zealous Prophets in the Old Testament did not
command the people to make separation in such a case, when Hophni and Phinehas,
the sons of Eli, were a scandal to the people, 1 Samuel 2.17. When many of the
children of Israel, both high and low, were guilty of gross and scandalous
sins, the Prophet Isaiah did, according to his duty, sharply reprove them,
Isai. 1.21, 22, 23. yet did he not require the godly to abstain from all
Church Communion with these gross offenders. 2. Albeit in our blessed Lord his
time, the Pharisees, who had the pre-eminence, for the most part, in their
Synagogues, were men void of honesty, judgment and mercy, covetous, proud and
cruel; yet the Lord himself kept communion with that Church, Luke 4.16. As his
custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to
read: He commanded others also to keep Church Communion with them, Mat. 23.2.
He did sharply reprove the Angels or Ministers of the Churches of Pergamos and
Thyatira, because they did tolerat in their Church-meetings, persons abominable
in errors, both of judgment and of practice; yet did he not command private
Professors in these Churches to separat from them, and to erect Congregations
apart by themselves. 3. The Apostles Peter and John, who were pillars of the
Christian Church, did keep Church Communion with the Jewish Church, wherein
were the Pharisees, Acts 3.1. There were in the Church of Corinth, some who did
scandalously transgress by riot and drunkenness, 1 Cor. 11.21. yet the
Apostles, did not require the pious and sober Christians among them to separat
themselves from that Church. Cyprian, Lib. 3. Epist. 3. Albeit there seem to be
tares in the Church, yet neither our faith nor charity should be hindered
thereby; that because we see tares to be in the Church, we our selves therefore
should depart from the Church: it is our duty in such a case (he means of
private Professors) only to endeavor that we our selves may be good grain. In a
great house (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.20.) there are not only vessels of
gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; but the vessels of earth
shall be broken by the Lord alone, to whom the rod of iron is given. And,
Epist. 12. Neither think ye, ( says he to the Novatians) that by so doing, ye
assert and maintain the Gospel of Christ, whileas ye have separated your selves
from the flock of Christ, and from peace and concord with it; when it is more
agreeable to the duty of generous and good Soldiers, to keep their ground
within their own Trenches; and being placed there, to do such things which are
for the benefit of the public. Augustine contra Donat. and Parmen. advises
these who live in a Church, pestered with profaneness and gross corruptions in
manners, for to do these four things, 1. Let us amend, says he, what we can.
2. What things we cannot amend, let us tolerat, and mourn with love to the
persons of these gross offenders. 3. Let us endeavor to preserve unity. 4. If
thou can not take away the wicked from thee, yet take evil and wickedness out
of thy self. Calvin Institut. Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect. 13. "There were ever some,
who out of a false persuasion of their own perfect sanctity, as if they had
already become aerial Demons or Spirits; they despised the society of all men,
in whom they perceived any humane weakness or frailty; such men, says he, were
the Donatists, and at this day some of the Anabaptists. But as for flagitious
and scandalous persons, he thinks they should be processed and debarred from
Church Communion in the holy Sacrament, until they satisfy the Church, and
thereafter be received again into communion: If Church-rulers neglect to
censure such scandalous persons, private Christians do not sin in receiving the
holy Sacrament with them: but the Church-rulers sin in not censuring them, and
thereby making the hearts of the godly sad. Beza, Epist. 2. says, We should
labor to come our selves especially to that holy Table with a pure conscience;
and if coming so, we do communicate in the Church with some murderers and
adulterers, yea with Turks and Jews; the fault will not be imputed to us, but
to the Church-rulers, who admitted such. August. Tom. 9. Lib. de Medicin. Cap.
3. says, We cannot debar any man from the communion, except he has of his own
accord confessed, or has been processed and convict in some Judicature
Ecclesiastical, or Secular. Yet if that heinous sin be known to one private
person only, it appears he is bound, both for good to the Church of Christ, and
for good to the soul of that guilty person sinning hainously, in secret to
follow our blessed Lord his direction, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. If thy brother
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone; if he shall hear thee, thou has gained thy brother: but if he will not
hear thee, etc. and in end, tell it to the Church.

Use. For exhortation, seeing the true members of the mystical body of Jesus
Christ, and sincere Converts to the Christian Faith, will be (as is prophesied
here) of a peaceable and harmless disposition and conversation, let us live in
a communion of love, in peace and concord; not like wolves and savage beasts,
biting and devouring one another: How pleasant and how good a thing is it for
brethren to dwell together in unity? Psalm. 133.1, 2. It is both pleasant and
profitable, like the ointment poured forth upon the head of Aaron; it makes a
Church fragrant, and to be well reported amongst those who behold them, or hear
of them; it is profitable, like the dew of Hermon, it makes the Church to grow
and enlarge her borders: how pleasant is it to see the houses of one and the
same city, conform every way one to another, as they say, it is in the city of
Gonoa? but how unpleasant is it to see the houses of one and the same city,
divided far one from another; as if every man in his own pride, would make his
own house a Citidale? let us remember, the spiritual Jerusalem should be as a
City compact together, Psalm. 122.3. How unpleasant also is it to see the stones
of one and the same building, even budging and dividing asunder one from
another? Is not the Christian Church said to be a building in Christ, fittly
framed together for an habitation of God through the Spirit? Epes. 2.22. and
being so framed together, it grows up in sanctification, and becomes an holy
Temple to the Lord, wherein he delights to dwell: but division and discord in
the Church, is both unpleasant and unprofitable: Contention and division
amongst the rowers in the ship, and vain presumption in the passengers, to take
the oars into their own hands, greatly hinders the progress of the Ship in her
way. What is the cause, the Gospel was spread so far in the Apostl's time in one
age only; their sound went through all the world, Romans 10.18. and the Christian
Church was wonderfully enlarged? The reason is, they were then of one mind and
heart; and the spiritual Guides, had nothing so much before their eyes, as the
glory of God, that he might be known in his rich mercy and grace, and in the
conversion of sinners, that they may be saved: they sought not themselves, nor
their own glory and pomp in the world, but the glory of Christ their Lord and
Master; they were of one heart, and rowed one to another hand; they did not
strive one against another in a bitter emulation, but did strive together, one
with another in a godly emulation, for furthering the Gospel. It is true, even
in the Apostles times, there was division in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
1.12. but Paul and Cephas, were no ways the the Authors, or Abettors of these
divisions: they did not foment them by their own contentions, or by bitter
emulation and popular ambition: Paul sharply reproved it, 1 Cor. 1.13. and
condemned it as a course not of spiritual, but rather of mere natural and
carnal men, 1 Cor. 3.4, 5. And Peter requires them (1 Pet. 2.1, 2.) to lay
aside all prejudice, and to drink-in the sincere milk of the Word, like new
born babes, who look more to the breast, than to the face of the Nurse.
Division and discord in a Church, has many times proven (as St. Jerome observed
in the Donatists) the occasion of error and pernicious heresy, which eats
like a canker: when the stones are divided one from another in the building,
then the rain gets place; and though not perceived at first, yet in end
undermyneth the wall, consumes the timber, and in end brings ruin: a small
lake in the ship, at first, through the joyntours of the boords, if not
timously and carefully stopped, does drown the ship and also the passengers,
Division in Churches one from another, does entertain heresy and the Authors
thereof: What was the cause that great Heretic Marcion (whom Tertullian
calls murem ponticum, the rat that did rent and consume the Church of Pontus)
was received and kindly entertained in the Church of Rome, after he had been
excommunicate by his own father? The cause thereof, was, that division between
the Roman and African Church; for Rome would have appeals to be made unto them
from beyond the Sea: this was the cause the Heretics, fleeing from the Eastern
Church, got shelter in the Western; that by so doing they might maintain their
pretended privilege to revise, and recognosce all causes Ecelesiastical. What
was the cause, those who fled from the Western Church, were countenanced and
welcomed in the Eastern? Was it not their division from the Western Church, and
their bitter emulation, that thereby they might maintain their emulation of
supremacy? which ambition, both in the Western and Eastern Churches, proceeded
from the pride of some chief Church Rulers, both in the one and other Church.
In the Eastern Church, It is true, some godly and learned men have given, and
sometimes do give connivance to error and heresy, not out of any evil
intention, but out of their excess of moderation, and charitable inclination,
being deceived by the insinuations of subtle Heretics and Shismaticks; but
such connivance proved oft-times very unprofitable, yea, exceeding harmful unto
the Christian Church; because those dissembling Heretics, who seemed at first
to be officious followers and flatterers of those good men, afterward when
these godly men that did tolerate them, were gathered to their Fathers, these
deceivers began openly to vent, and violently to press upon others, their
opinions, as doctrins and matters of Faith, which formerly they had desired to
be in charity tolerated, as private opinions: therefore we would beware of the
beginnings of division, Schism and all bitter emulation; for, if ye bite, and
devour one another, take heed, that ye be not consumed one of another, Gal.
5.15. Let us remember and consider, for our up-stirring to live in peace and
concord one with another, 1. Our God, is called the God of peace; our Redeemer,
the Prince of peace; the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of peace and of spiritual
Communion: and the more peaceable we are, we become the liker to our heavenly
Father, to our elder Brother, and to the Holy Ghost the Comforter. 2. We are
all members of one mystical body: How unnatural a thing is it, for one member
of the same body to bear another? Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim; it is called an eating of their own arm, Is. 9.20. Such
contention and division is like two sandy-stones grateing one upon the other,
till they be crumbled into nothing; this fury and madness, is a great grief of
heart to the godly and sober-minded, and a matter of rejoicing to the common
adversaries of the truth; thereby they think to spoil us of the truth, and they
cry out, as Moab did against Israel, 2 King. 3.23. They have smitten one
another, now therefore Moab to the spoil. 3. Consider often and seriously,
peaceable mindedness is an individual companion of true Religion, Jam. 3.17.
The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy
to be entreated. Let us labor for christian moderation in our Opinions and
Disputes, and decline extremities: Basil the great, said truly, that diverse men
(...), through an immoderat desire of opposing and counterpoising the opinoins
and assertions of others, are oft-times drawn away from the golden midst, and
afterward cannot retire (although possibly they would) for fear to offend their
party, whose opinion they have once espoused. Let us beware of that too simple
credulity to tatlers and whisperers, who make it their business to separate
chief friends; but as Solomon says, Prove. 25.23. The north wind drives away
rain, so does an angry countenance a backbiting tongue. And above all, let us
pray to God for much of the Spirit of Christ; for he was of a meek and lowly
Spirit, that he would build the walls of Jerusalem, and that peace may be
within her walls, and prosperity within her palaces, Ps. 51.18. Ps. 122.6, 7.

VERSE IX. -- For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea.
IN these words is set down, the instrumental cause and ordinar mean of this
great conversion and change in their disposition and conversation, to wit, the
abounding and large knowledge they shall have by the preaching of the Gospel of
the Lord Jesus Christ, whereby life and immortality shall be brought to light,
and they shall know there is no name under heaven whereby they can be saved,
but the Name of Jesus, Act. 4.12.

Quest. It may be asked, at what time was this prophecy fulfilled? For answer,
Consider the Gospel or Doctrine of the glad tidings of salvation in Christ, was
a mystery hid from the Gentiles; and other heavenly Truths and Ordinances, were
communicate only to the Jews, Ps. 147.19, 20. Romans 3.2. There was not a Church
among the Gentiles before the time our blessed Lord gave commission to preach
unto them, Mat. 28.19. It is true, there were some proselytes at diverse times
before the birth of our Lord: in time of the Patriarchs was Melchizedeck
(though some think he was Shem) and Job; in Moses his time, was Jethro; in
Joshua his time, Rachab; in the time of the Judges, Ruth; in the time of David,
Ittai the Gittit; in Solomon's time, Hiram; and in Jeremiahs time, Ebedmelech:
these were but the first fruits of the Gentiles, and drops, in comparison of
that great flood of Converts foretold, Is. 2.2. It shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations
shall flow unto it. After the birth of our blessed Lord, and his sending forth
the Apostles, to teach all Nations, the knowledge of the Gospel did abound in
many parts of the world, as the sea abounds with waters: it was foretold by our
blessed Lord, that this prophecy should be fulfilled in a great part, even
before the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, Mat. 24.14. and it was
fulfilled, Romans 10.18. Their sound went unto all the earth, and their words
unto the ends of the world. Col. 1.23. which was preached to every creature,
which is under heaven: for the Gospel was preached by the Apostles, even to the
greater part of the habitable world, so far as it was known at that time,
according to that ample Commission given by our Lord to his Disciples, Mat. 28
19, 20. Therefore faith Augustine de Civit. Dei, lib. 22.8. Whosoever he be
that requires miracles at this time, he himself is a great wonder and prodigy,
who believes not, when all the world believes the Gospel. But before the end
of the world, these Nations, which sometimes were Christian, and are now
overspread with Turcism and Mahometism, as at this day Assyria and Egypt, and
many Nations, living at this day in Paganism, shall be converted to the
Christian Faith; and the Gospel shall be preached unto many Nations, which were
not known in the days of the Apostles, as it is at this day, both in the
Eastern and Western India.

Observe. The preaching, hearing and knowledge of the Gospel, is the ordinary
mean of conversion, and of a Gospel-like conversation, 2 Cor. 4.6. God has
shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in
the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. God has called you by our Gospel to
the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is evident from
instances of diverse persons converted to the Faith of Jesus Christ, and to the
way of Sanctification by the preaching of the Gospel, Act. 2.37.47. Act.
16.14.33.31. It is also evident from the denominations the Gospel gets, as,
1. The word of grace, Act. 20.33. Not only because it is sent to a Nation or
People out of Gods free grace, Matthew. 13.11. It is given unto you, to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven; but to them it is not given. But also by
it, as the ordinar instrument, the holy Spirit works the sanctifying and
saving grace of believing and turning to the Lord in all come to years of
discerning, and appointed for Salvation, Act. 11.21. The hand of the Lord was
with them; and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. 2 Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, etc. Gal. 2.8. He that wrought effectually in
Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward
the Gentiles. Therefore now, in these days, after that this sacred instrument
and testimony, is sealed and reposited by God in his Church; the pillar and
ground of the truth, 1 Timothy 3 15 as the only authentical Record and invariable
Rule of the Christian Faith: if any man shall pretend to the inward revelation
of the Spirit, without or contrair to the written Word, it is Enthusiasm and a
delusion of his own private spirit: neither let any man think it is enough to
have the outward revelation of the written Word, without the inward operation
of the holy Spirit, enlightening the understanding by Faith to perceive, and
assent unto the truth revealed in the Word; and enclining the will by love to
receive and retain it in the heart; for the Lord opens both the understanding
and the heart, Luke 24.45. Act. 16.14. The Gospel is called the word of life,
Act. 5.20. Because the Gospel is the seed of the new life, 1 Pet. 1.23. Faith
and belief to the threatenings of the Law, is as the Plough, to rent the
fallow-ground of our heart; but Faith conceiving and embracing Christ in the
promises of the Gospel, is the seed of our regeration, Jam. 1.18. Of his own
will beg at he us, by the word of truth. It is called the word of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Because in the Gospel, remission and
reconciliation in the blood of Christ, is offered unto all, who repent and
believe in him, Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. And it
is called, The word of Salvation, Act. 13.26. Because it is the ordinar mean of
Salvation, Rom 1.16. 2 Thessalonians. 2 13. God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. That
the Gospel is the ordinar mean of Conversion to the Faith of Christ, is evident
from Reason, and clear consequences from Scriptural truths, 1. Hope of life and
immortality, is a strong motive to turn men from the broad way, that leads
unto death and to everlasting destruction: Now the Gospel shows unto us life
and immortality in Christ Jesus, Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. 2 Timothy 1.10. The grace of God is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has
brought life and immortality to light, through the Gospel. 2. By the knowledge
we have of Christ, and by believing in him, as he is offered in the Gospel, we
are turned from an estate of condemned rebels, unto an estate of persons
justified and reconciled in the blood of Jesus Christ. Isa. 53.11. By his
knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities, Isa. 53.11. 3. By the manifestation of Jesus Christ, and by
believing in him, as he is offered in the Gospel, in all his Mediatory-offices,
such a deep impression of his rich and free love, is put upon our spirits, that
we are turned to a conformity unto him in our wills and affections unto the
will of God, 2 Pet. 1.4. By the precious promises, ye are made partakers of the
divine nature. This impression, is like the Spirit moving the wheels of our
inner man, and making them to follow the Spirit in their motions, conform to
his Word, Ezech. 1.20. our hearts become like the paper stamped with the
printing iron and receiving an impression thereby, conform to the impression of
the Spirit by his word: and the doctrine of the Gospel, is therefore called
(...), Romans 16.17. the impression of doctrine.

Quest. If the great mystery of Redemption and Salvation in Christ, may be
known by the light of Nature, and of humane Reason? Answ. 1. There are means
given of God, whereby all people on earth may know God in his existence, and
something of his power, wisdom and justice; as the book of Creation, Psalm.
19.11. Romans 1.20: The Book of ordinary Povidence, bearing witness there is a
God, Acts 14.17. Acts 17.27. The Works of his extraordinary Providence, carried
by report or otherwise unto the Heathens, Josh. 2.10. The report of the
silence of the Oracle at Delphos, made unto Octavius Augustus, did so affect
him with admiration, that he caused erect an Altar with this Inscription, (...)
To the God firstborn; by the Minut-book of man's own conscience, which is a
vade-mecum, something of the justice of God, both preceptive and vindicative,
is known, and was known to the Heathens from the light of Nature, Romans 2.14,
15. When the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these not having the Law, are a Law unto themselves;
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing
one another. The Heathens knew something of the revenging justice of God, from
the great terrors upon the spirits of those that do evil, as upon these wicked
men, Caligula and Nero: but shall these Books, there was not one sylable of the
way of salvation by Jesus Christ: that knowledge of the Law of Nature from the
light of Nature, makes them inexcusable before God; because they glorified not
God, and did not all the good and moral duties they might have done, if they
had improven that light of Nature, so that they are without excuse, Romans 1.20.
2. The Heathens before and under the Law, and even many at this very day, from
the light of Nature, and by tradition, (as the learned Grotius thinks in his
Book of the satisfaction of Christ) from Noah and from Japhet and Ham, the
Progenitors of the Gentiles, as also from their posterity downwards to the
Heathens and Pagans at this very day, they had, and now have the custom of
sacrificeing, although the Heathens, by these sacrifices, did and do
acknowledge from the light of Nature, the Majesty, Sanctity and Justice of God,
which is to be satisfied and appeased by the children of men, guilty of many
iniquities; yet they did not know Jesus Christ, who offered up himself a
sacrifice by his death to satisfy Divine Justice, and to preserve us from
eternal wrath; this is only known by Divine Revelation in the holy Scriptures,
wherein we are required by faith to behold him who takes away the sin of the
world, Joh. 1.29. 3. The Heathens, by the light of Nature, knew that in great
calamities, it was their duty to pray unto God for help and relief; the
Mariners in the Ship with Jonah, being afraid in the great storm, did cry every
man unto his God, Jonah 1.5. but they knew not Jesus Christ, the alone Mediator
between God and man, and therefore did not pray in his Name, in whom alone both
our persons and our supplications are accepted: the knowledge of this we have
in the holy Scriptures from our blessed Lord, John 16.23. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.
4. The knowledge of the work of Redemption and Salvation in Jesus Christ, is
only known from Divine Revelation in the holy Scriptures, Acts 4.12. Neither is
there salvation in any other: for there is none other Name under Heaven given
among men, whereby we must be saved. This great mystery, is only known by
revelation in the holy Scriptures, Mat. 11.25. our Lord said, I thank thee O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Mat. 16.17. Blessed art
thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven. The Incarnation of the Son of God, and the Salvation
of lost man by him, is called a mystery, hid from the Gentiles for many ages,
Ephesians. 3.9. This sublime mystery, the natural man cannot know by the strength of
humane reason, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. Some who magnify the strength of
humane reason, think, that by the natural man in this place, is to be
understood the carnal man, addicted to his sinful desires, which hinder him, by
the strength of his own reason, to take up these divine mysteries: but it is
clear from the series of the sacred Text, that natural man, signifies one
endued only with the light of reason; and it is some way opposed by way of
distinction to the spiritual man, enlightened and renewed by the illumination
of the Holy Spirit; as also, spiritual man, is taken, Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a
man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the
spirit of meekness. Chrysostom. on this place, by natural man, understands a
man endued only with the light of reason, "That man, says he, who lives for
the flesh, neither is yet illuminat in his mind by the Spirit; but only has
that inbred humane wisdom which the Creator of all things has put into the
souls of men. Grotius, upon that place speaks thus, The natural man, and the
carnal man, is not the same thing: the natural man is he, who is guided only by
the light of humane reason: but the carnal man, is he who is ruled by the
affections of his body. It is true, some of the ancient Fathers in the
Christian Church, who before their conversion had been eminent Philosophers
themselves, and had a great kindness for some of the best of them, as Socrates
and Plato, they do speak very charitably concerning their salvation, although
they lived in Gentilism: yet they thought not that they were saved without some
knowledge of Jesus Christ: which they in a great latitude of charity, thought
they might have in an extraordinary way without Divine Revelation in the holy
Scriptures; but we say, as Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord
our God; but those things which are revealed, belong unto us.

Object. But it appears, the Christian Religion is grounded upon humane reason,
because it is called our reasonable service; and therefore every part of
Christian service, whether it be in believing all heavenly truths, or in
practical duties and worship, seems to be known from the light of humane
Reason; and that Reason and Philosophy should be the Interpreter of Sacred
Scripture. Ans. No part of Christian Religion is against humane Reason; but
there be some divine and sublime mysteries thereof above humane Reason, and the
reach of the most subtle Philosophy. There be some divine Truths (which they
call of mixed Revelation) these may be known by the light of humane reason, and
the assent given to them upon that ground, is called Intelligence, or Science:
and they may be known also by the light of divine revelation; and the assent
given to them, upon that ground, is called Faith: Such is the knowledge of the
existence of God, and of the creation of the world: such are also diverse moral
duties, which were known by the light of nature to the heathen Philosophers.
But divine and heavenly Truths (which they call of pure Revelation) are known
only by the testimony divine R^velation in holy Scriptures: such are, the
mystery of the Trinity, of the Incarnation of the Son of God, of the
Resurrection of the body, etc. As for these truths of a mixed revelation, they
are also agreeable to the principles of humane reason and Philosophy; as has
been made evident by learned men in their Treatises of the reasonableness of
Christian Religion, by Morney, Amyrald, Baxter and others: but the other divine
truths, both speculative and practical, are known only by the light of Divine
Revelation in holy Scriptures; as that practical duty of incalling of God, in
the Name of Jesus Christ the Mediator, Job. 16.23. Heb. 7.25. That great
Heathen Philosopher Socrates, advised men well, from the light of nature, to
pray for good things from the gods, and that only in the general, without
limiting them to the giving of this or that good thing in particular; which
they should refer unto the will and wisdom of the gods themselves; but he could
never advise them to pray unto God in the Name of Jesus Christ the Mediator,
because this had not been revealed to him by the light of the holy Scripture.
Chrysostom. on the place, by reasonable service, understands spiritual worship,
in opposition to the worship of God under the Law, by sacrificing irrational
creatures: in the same sense does Grotius and D. Hammond interpret it. In
thinking, or speaking of the great sublime mysteries, which are called the
wonderful things of God, (Acts 2.11.) we would be sober, and not measure them
according to the short rule of humane reason; as speaks well Just. Mart. in
con^uting the Greek questions, We must not, (says he,) measure the works of
God by our own thoughts and imaginations; for the works of God are above our
mind, sense and reason. Augustine Enchyrid. Cap. 4. Such things (says he) are
to be defended by reason, which either took their beginning from the corporeal
senses, or were invented by the understanding of the mind: but those things
which we have neither proven by the corporeal sense, nor can reach by our
understanding, they are without all doubting to be referred to the testimony of
those holy men, moved by the Holy Ghost in writing the sacred Scriptures.

Object. But these Heathen Prophetesses, called Sybills, who lived above 400
years before the birth of Christ, did foretell of his Incarnation, of his
Birth, of his Sufferings, of his Resurrection, and of his second coming to
judge the world, and that he is Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Savior; as
Augustine records, Lib. 18. Cap. 23. of the City of God. This Prophetical
knowledge they had not from the light of Scripture, because they were Heathens;
and the Oracles of God were committed unto the Jews, Romans 3.2. and therefore it
would appear, they had the knowledge of these great mysteries from the light of
humane reason. Ans. Some of the learned think, those Books, called the Oracles
of the Sybills, whereof we have but some fragments by tradition from others,
were devised and written by some zealous Christian, suppressing his name, out
of his affection to convert the Heathen unto the Christian faith, by convincing
them from their own Writings, as he gave it out: but this is not probable; for
if such Writings had been forged by Christians, then Celsus and Appion, who
lived in the time of Origin, and others, zealous for the Christian Religion,
would have objected such a forgery against the Christians, to whom these two
subtle Philosophers (well versed in such antiquity) and malicious enemies to
the Christian Religion, would have objected such a forgery, as unbecoming men
of any Religion: Besides, the great Heathen Poet, Virgil, (Ecclog. 4.) speaks
of the Prophesies of Sybilla Cumana, wherein she prophesied of a new offspring
in his time, coming down from the high Heavens, which he misapplyed to Octavius
Augustus, reigning at that time; but is was intended by the Oracle, to declare
the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, who came from Heaven, and was incarnat and
born in the 52 year of Augustus: Now it is well known, Virgil died 18. years
before the birth of our Lord, whereof the Oracle spoke; though Virgil was not
living when it was fulfilled: Therefore, following the more current opinion, we
think these Oracles were spoken by these Heathen Prophetesses, among which,
these two, Sybilla Erythraea and Cumana, were the chief and more famous: We
think they had their Prophetical light and knowledge of those mysteries by
extraordinary revelation from God himself, as was also the Prophecy of Balaam,
an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, concerning the coming and the birth
of the Messiah, called by him. The Star of Jacob, Number. 24.17.

Quest. If all the people of God, before, and under the Law, knew Jesus Christ,
and salvation to be purchased by him; for the Gospel seems not to have been
preached or known unto all the faithful? Ans. 1. This Gospel, or the glad
tidings of Salvation by Jesus Christ, was preached by God himself in Paradise
unto our first Parents after the fall, Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the serpent: It was preached to Abraham before the Law, Genesis
22.18. Gal. 3.16. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. It
was illustrat by Ceremonies, as by Sacrifices; in which respect our blessed
Lord, who is the principal Subject of the Gospel, and the body of all these
foregoing shadows, is called, The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
Rev. 13.8. It was illustrat also by types, as Melchizedeck, the King of
righteousness and peace, was a type of righteousness and peace through Jesus
Christ the King of his Church. 2. Under the Law, the Doctrine of the Gospel was
delivered by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye
shall hearken. And by the other Prophets, Acts 10.43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall
receive remission of sins. The sacrifices under the Law, were shadows of the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1.29. Their washings
and purifications, were shadows of the blood of Christ, that purges from all
unrighteousness, 1 John 1.7. Their lamps and lights within the Tabernacle and
the Temple, were shadows of Christ the true light, who enlighteneth every one
that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. for, all natural light and knowledge is
from him, and all who have spiritual light and knowledge they have it from him,
who is the Sun of Righteousness, and the brightness of the Fathers glory; they
have it from him, and from no other. 3. This Doctrine of the Gospel, was most
clearly preached in the fullness of time by our Lord himself, by his Apostles,
and by all his faithful Ministers unto the end of the world: therefore the
knowledge of the Gospel, in the days of our Lord and his Apostles, is called a
seeing face to face, in comparison of that dim light, before, or under, the
Law, 2 Cor. 3.18. as a face veiled and unvailed is the same in substance; but
the manifestation of it, is not alike clear under the vail, and without the
vail.

Quest. If believers under the Old Testament, had the same Covenant of Grace
and Salvation, which believers have under the New Testament? Ans. They have one
and the same. 1. They have the same promise, Genesis 22.18. Gal. 3.16. Acts 15.11.
We believe (says Peter) that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
shall be saved even as they. 2. They have the same main and principal object
and substance of the promise, to wit, Jesus Christ, called the seed of the
woman, Genesis 3. The seed of Abraham, Gal. 3.16. Shiloh, Genesis 49.10. The son of
David, Psalm. 89.36, 37. Immanuel, Isai. 7.14. The branch of righteousness, Jer.
23.5. David, Ezekiel. 34.23. Hos. 3.5. Messiah, Dan. 9.25. A fountain opened to
the house of David, Zach. 13.1. 3. It is the same Covenant, in respect of the
same fundamental privileges, Genesis 22.18. Jer. 31.32, 33. I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them;
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 4. There is the same
Mediator, Genesis 17.7. Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made; he says not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed,
which is Christ. 1 Timothy 2 5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and
Man, the Man Christ Jesus. Although the Covenant under the old and new
Testament, did not differ in substance; yet they differed in circumstances, as
1. In their seals and Sacraments; the seals and Sacraments of the old Testament
or Covenant, were Circumcision, and the Paschal Lamb; but of the new Testament
the seals and Sacraments, are Baptism and the holy Supper. 2. They differ in
the degree of clearness and manifestation; for now under the full dispensation
of the Gospel, the Covenant of grace is more clearly manifested, than it was
before the Apostles time, when it was veiled with types and legal ceremonies; 2
Cor. 3.18. 3. They differ in the extent; now the Covenant of grace and the
Gospel, is manifested unto all Nations, Mat. 28.19. but it was not so in the
days of the old Testament before the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the
sending forth of his Apostles with a commission to preach the Gospel unto all
Nations, Psalm. 147.19.20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with any nation.

Use 1. For Admonition; take head that ye neglect not, nor despise this
glorious Gospel, which is the word of Salvation, by the Ministry whereof
Salvation is offered to all who repent and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
who alone is the Savior of his people, Mat. 1.21. He alone saves by way of
impetration and effectual application of that great Salvation, purchased by his
satisfaction and righteousness: but his faithful and painful Ministers, may be
said, in some sense, to be ministerial Saviors of the people of God, 1 Timothy
4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy doctrine: continue in them; for in
doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. 1 The
neglect and contempt of the Gospel, is a despising the offer of pardon and
peace from our gracious God; and it is an heigh contempt for Rebels to despise
the offer of pardon and peace from a gracious King. 2. This contempt, is
reckoned by the Lord, a more heinous sin, than any transgression of the Law;
and that it deserves a greater condemnation, Joh. 3.19. And this is the
Condemnation, etc. Joh. 19.41. Jesus said unto them, if ye were blind, ye
should have no sin: but now ye say, we see; therefore your sin remains. Heb.
2.2. For if the word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how shall we escape, if
we neglect so great Salvation? etc. 3. It is a rejecting of Christ himself,
when his word is not received by men, Joh. 12.48. He that rejects me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him. 4. Barrenness and
unfruitfulness in the days of the Gospel, exposes a Nation to the curse and
wrath of God, Heb. 6.8. That earth which has the rain and plenty of the Gospel
often preached, and yet bears thorns and brears, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. For if the barren tree, which brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, what shall become
of these trees that bring forth evil fruits? 5. The contempt of this glorious
Gospel, brings many times temporal judgments upon a Nation, Luke
19.42.43.44. as it did upon Jerusalem by the Romans, and upon the seven
Churches of the lesser Asia by the Turks and Mahometanes; and if at such a time
the outward ordinance of preaching the Gospel, be continued in Gods rich mercy
for saving some of his Elect; yet in his revenging justice, he withdrawes a
blessing from the outward ordinance toward the generality of such a people,
Isa. 6.9.10. Go and tell this people: hear ye indeed, but understand not; and
see ye indeed, but perceive not, etc. and if men continue and persevere in
their contempt of the blessed Gospel, they bring upon themselves eternal
judgment, Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies, which would not, that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8. It is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you,
etc. In flamming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Use 2. For exhortation, both to esteem highly of the Gospel, and to live a
life suitable thereunto: esteem highly of it, as men do of gold; and it is
compared to the finest gold, tried in the fire, Psalm. 19.10. because the truth
and solid comfort of Gospel-promises, is tried, especially in the fire of
affliction, Psalm. 119.81.92. Unless thy law had been my delights, I had
perished in mine affliction. Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts
within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Therefore David esteemed more of it,
than of thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.72. 2. It is compared unto a
pearl of price, Matthew. 19.45, 46. and men esteem much of precious pearls. 3. It
is called the doctrine of glad tidings, Luke 2.10. It brings to us the glad
tidings of reconciliation, of pardon, and of true liberty through Jesus Christ;
such tidings of peace should be very acceptable to rebels; and the tidings of
true liberty, should be much esteemed by us, who by nature are bondslaves to
sin, and in bondage to the fear of death and damnation: therefore we should
acquaint our selves more and more with the knowledge of this Gospel; and if we
esteem highly of it, we will delight much in it; as men delight much in these
studies that are in great estimation with them: 4. It is the golden charter of
our heavenly inheritance; therefore is it called the Gospel of the kingdom; and
men are very careful to preserve and understand their charters. 5. It is called
the New Testament, 1 Cor. 11.25. and heirs portioners are very careful to
understand what is contained in the Testament of their Legator. 6. It is called
Christ's letter to the Church his Spouse; and how earnest, yea impatient is the
dutiful loving wife to read and understand the letter sent from her absent
husband? 7. The Gospel is the main Subject and Theme of Ministers their
preaching; for which cause they are called, in a special respect, Ministers of
the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. They have most of inward peace and comfort in a
time of fiery trial, who have been building the gold of sound doctrine upon such
a foundation: but there will be no solid comfort from building the chaff of
humane inventions, or the mud of their own earthly passions and perturbations:
by the preaching of the Gospel, men are called and brought unto Christ; and to
this end did our Lord appoint a Ministry to endure in his Church unto the end
of the World, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. This was the great business and
work of the holy Apostles, and of Apostolic men, 2 Cor. 11.2. Col. 1.28. Act.
20.20, 21. I grant they may, and should preach the Law; but principally in
order to this end, that men being convinced by the Law of their own
unrighteousness, may seek in to Christ for righteousness and life, which is
brought to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. Ye are also to be exhorted to
walk as becomes the Gospel; for this is the special practic^l duty of sincere
Christians, Phil. 1.27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel
of Christ. 1. It is the Gospel of peace; and by it we are called to live in
peace one with another, 1 Cor. 7.15. God has called us unto peace. 2 Cor.
13.11. Be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace, shall be
with you. 2. It is the Gospel of grace, and thereby we are called to holiness
inward, in our hearts and affections, and to holiness outward, in our
conversations. Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication, and all uncleaness, or covetousness;
let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. For God
has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness: For the Gospel takes
not away the mandatory power of the Law, which is the fixed rule of our
thankfulness and obedience also under the Gospel, Romans 3.31. Do we then make
void the Law through faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the Law. Tit, 2.11,
12. The grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly-lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Although believers under
the Gospel, be freed from the condemnatory power of the Law; yet are they not
freed from the directive and mandatory power of the Law; yea the Gospel ties us
more strictly to sincere endeavors of new obedience, upon a new obligation
from our redemption, to serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. and 2 Cor. 6.20. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit,
which are Gods. 3. The Gospel is called light, and therefore our conversation
should be in some measure suitable to the opportunity of this heavenly light,
by walking, (for men walk in time of light) in the ways of Gods holy
Commandments, and by working out our own salvation in fear and trembling: How
unsuitable is it in the daytime for men to come abroad with their
night-cloaths? How unsuitable are the works of darkness and dishonesty, whether
secret or open, unto the glorious profession of the light of the Gospel? Romans
13.12, 13. Ephesians. 5.8. 1 These. 5.5, 6, 7, 8.

Use 3. For trial; if your knowledge of the Gospel be not only literal, but
also spiritual, accompanied with a true and lively faith, whose end is the
salvation of your souls, (1 Pet. 1.9.) ye will discern it by these signs, 1.
Much of literal knowledge, fluctuating only in the brain, does oftentimes puff
up the mind with a Tympany and windy self-conceit; but the spiritual and saving
knowledge, does make the heart humble, and the spirit sober: Paul, after he had
embraced the Gospel, esteemed himself the least of saints and chief of sinners.
2. This saving knowledge, will conform you to Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18. The sincere
Convert looks on Christ in the Gospel, as his pattern for assimilation and
conformity to him, as he is set forth in the Gospel-promises: and therefrom, as
your great copy, ye would draw and delineat your conversation in holiness and
righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.21. 3. This saving knowledge of Christ in the Gospel,
will obscure all things worldly, and all secular knowledge, in comparison of
the precious Gospel and the truths revealed therein, 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined
(says Paul) not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. Philip. 3.7, 8. I count all things but loss, for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc. 4. This saving knowledge in true
Converts, is a growing light and knowledge, Phil. 3.13, 14. I count not my self
to have apprehended, etc. I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. And although the child of God, possibly does
not grow much in that knowledge of simple apprehension of things, that may and
should be known, yet he grows in the knowledge of appretiation and estimation
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of these unsearchable and durable riches,
treasured up in Him; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be immortal
praise, honor and glory, for now and ever. Amen.

THE TRUE LIVING WAY TO SALVATION. SERMON I.
JOHN 14.6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth and the life.
IN these words, is contained our Lords answer to his Disciple Thomas his
question, How can we know the way to the Father? In which answer we have an
excellent and comfortable description of our blessed Lord. I am the way, says
he, wherein men walk to the Father for reconciliation and peace in this life,
and for glory in the other life: I am so the way, that I am the truth, and also
the guide of all them who walk in me: and I am life to them in all their
faintings in their way to heaven, to sustain and uphold them till they come to
the end of their faith, even the salvation of their souls.

Three things are here attributed to our Lord, 1. That he is the Way, 2. That
he is the Truth, 3. And that he is the Life.

1. Our blessed Lord is called the Way, 1. Because as a way leads men unto a
place of rest; so the Lord Jesus Christ, by the merit of his death, has
prepared, and leads believers on him to a place of eternal rest in Heaven,
and gives us access to the Father by faith in him, while we are in the world,
and after death, everlasting rest in, and with him, in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Col. 1.20. Joh. 14.2. I go to prepare ae place for you. 2. As men must walk in
the way, and set their feet therein, that so they may in end come to the place
of their rest; so we must fasten our hearts on Jesus Christ, that walking in
him by faith, and after him as our great pattern by imitation, we may in end
come to the possession of eternal life. 3. He is called the Way, because he is
our forerunner in the way to Heaven, Heb. 6.20. Not only he has made the way
clear and passable for us to Heaven, in removing the wrath of God, which was
like the flaming sword that kept man out of Paradise; this he has done by the
satisfaction made by his death to Divine Justice for our sins: but also by his
example, he has showed us the way of sanctification, wherein we should walk;
and now by his intercession in Heaven, he applies to us that promise made in
the Covenant of free Grace, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. I will cause them to walk in my
statutes.

Christ is called the new and living way, Heb. 10.20. He is called the new way,
not that believers before the Law, or under the Law, went by any other way,
than by faith in the Messiah to come, unto the Kingdom of Heaven; because all
of them were saved by virtue of the Covenant of Grace made in him, in whom
believers of all Nations at all times are saved, Acts 15.11. We believe, that
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they.
Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Rev.
13.8. he is called, The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: But he is
called the new way, in opposition to the way of the Covenant of Works, made
with the first Adam; which Covenant, man through his fall made himself unable
to keep, and so to be justified thereby and get eternal life, Romans 8.3. For
what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh. It is called the living way, because believers in Christ are quickened
by his Spirit to walk in him, and by him to attain eternal life. The Lord Jesus
Christ is called the Way, because by him only we come to eternal life, Acts
4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name
under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. And there is no coming
to the Father for reconciliation, but by him, as the one and alone Mediator,
Joh. 14.6. No man comes unto the Father, but by me.

Object. Is not Sanctification and good works called also the way to Heaven,
Ephesians. 2.10. God has before ordained, that we should walk in good works? And
afflictions are also called the strait and thorny way, through which we must
enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. Ans. The Lord Jesus Christ is
properly the living way, that quickens us, and leads us to eternal life:
Sanctification and good works are comfortable mithes and evidences, that we are
in Christ the way, 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature. Joh. 15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. Sanctified afflictions, are
as hedges to keep us close with Christ the way, that we do not debord nor
depart from him and the way of his Commandments, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for
me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Object. But I have wandered long and far in the broad way, will I be welcome to
him, who is the only way to get me access to the Father, and being
reconcilled, to bring me to glory? Ans. If thou forsake thy former evil ways,
he will receive thee, and by his Spirit lead thee in the way to eternal Life, 2
Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you. Thou has his own
gracious promise, if thou will turn from thy former evil ways, and by faith
come to him, he will accept thee, Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in
no ways cast out. He accepted of many who had walked in the way of curious and
unlawful arts, Act. 19.19. He accepted of some vile and abominable unclean
Persons among the Corinthians, when they by repentance turned from their former
unclean ways, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God. Does not our blessed Lord invite all sinners, pressed
and wearied under the burden of their sins, Mat. 11.28? And albeit at thy first
coming to him, thou has not so much ease and rest in thy conscience as thou
would, yet thou may have some case and beginning of satisfaction from his
promise of rest to the weary soul: bless him for the promise, rest upon it by
faith, and in his own good time he will give the some sense of inward peace,
from the sense of his love shed abroad in thine heart by the Holy Ghost; for
this seal of the Spirit is given after believing, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise.

The second thing affirmed by our Lord of himself, is, I am the truth. This is
the glorious title of the Supreme God, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of truth, and without
iniquity, just and right is he. And the Son of God, who thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, is called here the Truth. 1. He is essentially truth; as
the justice and mercy of God, is no other thing but the just and merciful God,
So the truth of Christ is no other thing but the true and faithful Lord: as it
is said, 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; So Christ
is truth, and in him is no possibility of error: In him is infinite wisdom,
and he cannot be deceived; he is infinitely holy and true, and cannot deceive
any who trusts into his word. 2. He is the prime and suprem Truth; the cause
of the truth of being and essence in all things, Col. 1.18. For by him all
things consist. And he is the cause and author of all moral truth in the
thoughts, speeches and actions of men. 3. He is the truth, because by the word
of truth revealed, out of the Fathers bosom, by him who is called ( Joh. 1.1.)
(...) because he is the essential Word, and the express Image of the Father;
and also he is the great Interpreter and Revealer of the will of the Father,
Joh. 1.18. and by this revealed will, he guides his own Children in the way to
everlasting glory, Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory. 4. He is (to speak so) morally true, even as he
was man, 1 Pet. 2.22. Guile was not found in his lips. 5. He is the truth,
answerable to all the Prophesies and Promises made concerning him, 2 Cor. 1.20.
In him all the promises are yea, and amen. He is the truth answerable to all
the legal types, as the body to the shadow, Joh. 1.17. The Law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. In the Temple, during the
Levitical service, the lights and lamps were shadows of Christ, who was called
by John the Baptist, the true light, Joh. 1.9. And is called by himself, the
light of the world, Joh. 8.12. Thou that art ignorant, and mourns under the
sense of thine ignorance, come to him, who is the true light, and he will give
unto thee that eye salve, even the illumination and unction of the Holy Spirit,
Rev. 3.17, 18. He is the beam and resplendor of the Fathers glory: although a
man, through the weakness of his eyes, cannot behold the Sun in his brightness
without dazzling and confounding his sight; yet with much contentment and
delight, he looks upon the beams of the Sun: So it confounds and astonisheth
the Spirit of a Believer, to look on God, and to think upon his greatness and
justice, provoked to wrath by his many sins: this fight affrights him and
makes him say with Manoah, Judge. 13.22. I shall surely die, because I have
have seen God. Therefore look thou on God manifested in his Son Jesus Christ,
who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. Look upon his mercy and
love, manifested in giving his Son to satisfy divine justice for our sins:
this fight of God in Christ, is a comfortable and reviving fight; then may a
Believer say, as the wife of Manoah said, Judge. 13.23. If the Lord were pleased
to kill us, he would not have accepted of Christ's offering and satisfaction for
us. The Lord Jesus Christ, is the truth of all the sacrifices under the Law;
they were a shadow of good things to come, to wit, of the sacrifice of Christ,
who offered up himself by death a sacrifice of sweet smell to the Father; he is
the true Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1 29 Heb.
10.12. We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once
for all. August. lib. 20. against Faust. cap. 21. The flesh and blood of Christ
before his coming, was promised by the similitude of Sacrifices; in the passion
and suffering of Christ, it was exhibi^t by the Truth its self; after the
ascension of Christ, it is solemnly celebrat by the Sacrament of Commemoration*
upon the Cross he offered up himself to the Father, to take away our sins; and
now in the Word and Sacraments, we call to mind his sacrifice and death till he
come again, 1 Cor. 11.26. As in the Word, Christ is not offered to God by the
Minister, but to us; so in the Sacrament, he is not offered to God but to us,
and with him a communion and share in the fruits of his death, ^ Cor. 10.16. As
the blood of the Paschal-lamb was sprinkled upon the posts of the doors, and
the destroying Angel came not near the house; so the application of the
Sacrifice of Christ for Propitiation and Salvation, is made by Faith, Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: He is the Truth of all the legal washings and purifications; he
is that true Fountain opened to the house of David for sin and for uncleanness,
Zach. 13.1. Therefore confess thine uncleanness with the Lepers; believe in
him, who is the truth of all these purifications, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.

He is the true Manna, that true bread of life, Joh. 6.32. My Father gives you
the true bread from Heaven. Our Lord is the true Manna. 1. The Manna was given
to the people of Israel in the wilderness, where bread could not be had from
any creature: so when no creature was able to save man, God gave his Son to the
death, that by faith, poor hungry souls might feed on him and be refreshed.
Isai. 59.16. And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his
Righteousness, it sustained him. As the people of Israel cried out in
admiration, when they saw the Manna, Man-h^^, what is this? So let us admire
and cry out, what a love is this in God, to give his only Son to be the bread
of life to feed and preserve those, who by nature were enenemies and children
of wrath? The Manna was white and pleasant to the eye, and also sweet and
pleasant to the taste, like waffers made of honey; so Christ in himself, the
true Manna, is most pleasant, without spot, and without blame, as also he is a
most pleasant fight to them that repent and believe the Promise: as the sight
of a Cornerstone, is very comfortable to a weary person sinking under an heavy
burden, as the sight of the brazen serpent in the wilderness, was most
comfortable to those who were stung with the fire serpents. In like manner, the
Lord Jesus Christ, the true Manna, is sweet and precious to Believers, 1 Pet.
2.7. He is sweet in the Promises, sweet in the first fruits of eternal life,
when by the holy Spirit he sheds abroad his love, like precious ointment in our
hearts, when he gives peace to our Consciences, and joy to our hearts in the
hope of Salvation: but the heart cannot conceive how sweet and comfortable this
true Manna will be in Heaven, when we shall be filled with the full and
everlasting Fruits of his glory: then shall we say as the Queen of Sheba said
of Solomon's glory, It was true that was told me on Earth by the Ministers of
the Gospel; but the half was not told me of that I do now see and enjoy in
Heaven. 3. They gathered the Manna in the morning; so by Faith, bring in Christ
the true Manna, early to feed and refresh thy soul: acquaint your selves in
time with him, for he will not make new acquaintance at his second coming with
any, who neglected to come to him in this their day. He will say to the foolish
and sloathful Virgins, Depart from me, I know you not, Mat. 25. Bring Spiritual
hunger with you, it is a sauce to provoke appetite after Christ the true and
hid Manna, Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that
meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto
you: for him has God the Father sealed. Bring Faith with you, for by it we
seed on Christ, and draw virtue from him for our spiritual nourishment, and
preservation unto eternal life, Joh. 6.35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the
bread of life: He that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes
on me, shall never thrist. 4. God ordained a Pot full of Manna to be kept in
remembrance of his special providence toward them in the wilderness, that from
the remembrance of it, they should praise him, and by Faith depend on him and
his care, in time-coming: so lay thou up in thy memory any experience of
refreshment at any time by the Word or Sacrament, and depend on him for
time-coming in all thy wants spiritual or bodily: when thou find any
faintness or failing of Spirit, and no liveliness in thy soul for the time,
then remember thou bygone experience of former refreshment: Our Lord says to
you, as to his Disciples, Mat. 16.8, 9. O ye of little faith, why reason ye
among your selves? do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five Loaves
of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up, etc. Remember ye not the
former experience ye have had of spiritual refreshment by the holy ordinances
of God? Then say thou to thy disquieted Soul, as Psalm. 42.6. O my God, my soul
is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan,
and of the Hermonites from the hill Mizar. And resolve thou and conclude, as
the Prophet does, verse. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God.

Seeing our blessed Lord is the Truth; in his lips was never found guile; truth
and faithfulness cleaves to his reins as a girdle, Isa. 11.5. In all thy
doubts of acceptance into his favor, or perseverance in his favor (I speak to
thee who art humbled under thy sins, and in thy fear and unbelief stand
aloof from him) consider he is the Truth, and has promised acceptance to all,
who wearied of their sins, come unto him, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives
me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no ways cast out.
And as he has promised acceptance, so he has promised the grace of
perseverance, Joh. 10.27.28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me: and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish;
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

Object. I cannot deny my own sense, for I am weary of sin, and yet I find no
sensible rest and quietness to my soul, notwithstanding the promise of rest.
Ans. 1. Consider well the ground of thy weariness; that thou be not wearied
only of sin, as it carries along with it a burden of wrath and punishment;
thus Cain was wearied, when he said, my punishment is heavier then I can bear:
but also that thou be wearied of it as an unclean and vile thing; as it is an
offense against thy gracious God; then if thou be thus wearied, come to Christ
the precious cornerstone laid in Sion, and although thou get not rest to thy
sense as thou would, yet make not haste to depart from waiting on him; he
that believes, shall not make haste, Isa. 28.16. wait on, and adhere to the
promise, made to all who cast their burden upon Christ the precious
cornerstone laid in Sion; because those who rest on his promise, and on him,
in whom all the promises are, yea and amen, shall not be ashamed of their hope,
1 Pet. 2.6. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, behold, I lay in Sion,
a chief cornerstone Elect, Precious; and he that believes on him, shall not
be confounded. 2. Consider there is a fourfold rest. 1. The rest or
acquiescence of faith to the faithful promise of God; as a debtor has some
rest in his mind, when the Creditor promises to forgive him the debt, although
he has not yet gotten his acquittance and discharge. 2. There is a rest in
hope of the thing promised, though there be some commotion in the Spirit
through weakness of Faith, until the promise be performed to their sense: this
rest is like unto some rest the ship that was formerly tossed with the waves,
has now at Anchor, although not without some agitation and commotion. 3. There
is a rest and peace in the soul, from the full assurance of Faith, when the
heart is persuaded by the holy Spirit, and a lively faith resting on Jesus
Christ, that their sins are forgiven them, and that they are reconciled in the
blood of Jesus Christ: such an assurance had Paul, Romans 8.38, 39. For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, etc. shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. This rest, is like the
quietness a great debtor has in his spirit, after he has received his
discharge out of the hand of his creditor. 4. There is the rest of vision and
fruition in Heaven, when we shall ee and enjoy God, and be satisfied to the
ull, with that fullness of joy, and with those pleasures for evermore at his
right hand, Psa. 16.11. But thou who has not yet attained to that rest and
quietness from full assurance of faith, rest thou by the faith of adherence and
hope; be not so unwise, as to refuse to rest o^ the promise, because thou
cannot reach to that full assurance; consider thy adhering to the promise, is a
step appointed of God for thy ascending unto the assurance. Were it not a
childish folly for one to say, I will not go up to an high room, because at
first I cannot step up to the upmost degree and step that leads into it?
Bless thou God for his gracious and faithful promises made to the weary
sinner: Consider well that the life of faith is before spiritual sense and full
assurance; I say to thee, as Philip said unto his brother Nathanael, Joh. 6.
Come and see. Come by says to the promise, and thou shall see; thou shall get
some assurance less or more of thy remission and reconciliation with God in
Jesus Christ, before thou depart out of this life.

3. The third thing affirmed by our blessed Lord of himsef, is, I am the life.
1. He is life in himself, Joh. 5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have life in himself. The Son has it communicate
from the Father as the fountain of the Deity; but he has it not from the
Father as the cause; for the cause in order of nature is before the effect; but
the blessed Son is coeternal with the Father in nature and essence: He has
life in himself from all eternity, Psalm. 102.24. Thy years, O my God, are from
generation to generation. Which words are applied to our blessed Lord, Heb.
1.10, 11, 12. and Rev. 1.8. He is called Alpha and Omega, the beginning of all
things, and the end to which all things are referred and ordained equally as to
the Father: the primitive Christians for testifying their Faith concerning the
Deity of the Son of God, as also for testifying their detestation of the Arian
Heresy, denying his Deity, did at their dying, direct their friends to cause
these two letters A. O. to be engraven upon their Tombs. 2* He is the Life, in
relation to all creatures living a natural life; he is called, (1 John 1.1, 2.)
The word of life, because he gives life to all, and not only gives it, but
also conserveth their being and kind of being, Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all
things by the word of his power, that is, by his active power in the course of
providence, manifesting his will and purpose for the preservation of their
being; as a Kings word of command signifies what is his will. This giving of
life, and conserving of life in the Creatures; (for all things consist by him,
Col. 1.17.) proves clearly our blessed Lord, to be truly God, for he that
gives life, is truly God; and therefore God is called frequently the living
God, because he lives in himself, and of himself; and also gives life to all
things living; which even the very Heathens from the light of nature
acknowledged, as the Apostle ( Act. 17.18.) proves out of their own Poet
Aratus, to convince them of their Idolatry in worshipping Idols that had no
life: It is God alone who preserves and continues the Creature in its being
and operations, Psalm. 36.6. Thou preserves man and beast. Job 7.20. O thou
preserver of men! and from the conservation of all things in the course of
providence, our blessed Lord proves the truth of his Deity, and equality in
essence and power with the Father, Joh. 5.17. Hitherto the Father works, and
I work. Therefore we should acknowledge, by the homage of honor and obedience
our blessed Lord, who is the author and preserver of our natural life: as the
Sun gives light to the Air, and by his shining continues the same, so our
blessed Lord gives life, and by a continued influence of his active power,
does continue our life; when the Sun withdraws his influence of light, there is
nothing but darkness in the Air: so when the Lord of life withdraws his hand of
power, the Creature lives no longer, Psalm. 104.28, 29. Thou openest thine
hand, they are filled with good: thou hidest thy face, they are troubled, they
decay and perish. Man's life is but a vapor, it is in his nostrils; thou cannot
tell when thou breathest out the air, if thou shall take it in again: how soon
is our life gone, if the God of our life should stop and obstruct the common
conduits of life in the body; or if for any long time he should obstruct the
common Cyres, that serve for purging the body, think not thou that meat or
drink only holds in thy life, it is the Lord of life that does it by blessing
and impowering these means: when he takes away his powerful blessing, thou may
eat, and yet not be satisfied, Mic. 6.14. Hag. 1.6. Ye eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink: ye cloth, but there is
none warm. 3. He is the Life, because he is the Author and Preserver of our
spiritual life: our life of justification and absolution from eternal death and
damnation, is from him, Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Our life of Sanctification,
whereby we are recovered in part from that deadly sickness of sin, that we pine
not away in our iniquities, is by Christ, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare
our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live
unto righteousness. And he is the Perfecter of the life of grace, by the life
of glory, Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live with me. We live in him by
faith, we live to him by new obedience, and we shall live with him in glory,
Col. 3.3, 4. Our life is hid with Christ in God: when Christ, who is our life
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

Seeing spiritual and eternal life, is only to be gotten in Christ, it is our
duty and happiness to seek our life in him, 1. Because except we be in him by
faith, we are dead and damned creatures. 2. If thou come to him for life, thou
may be confident to obtain it; for, it is his great regrate, that the Jews
would not come to him by faith, that they might have life, Joh. 5.40. 3. His
willingness to give life unto penitent and believing sinners, is evident from
his solemn protestation, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel? It is evident from the Sons errand in coming into the world, Joh. 12
47. I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. It is evident from
his faithful promise, Isa. 55.3. Incline your ear and come unto me: hear and
your soul shall live. Joh. 6 51 I am the living bread, which came down from
Heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.

When thou has be^n made partaker of the life of grace from Christ, labor to
preserve that life; for he that is born of God keeps himself, 1 John 5.18.
Preserve the life of grace, 1. By frequenting the Ordinances of Word and
Sacraments; for as by these means the Lord begets this new life in us, so by
the same means he preserves it in us, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. As new born babes desire
the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. As children, who
forsake their meat, do decay daily; so Christians who loath or neglect the
Sacred Ordinances, do decay in respect of the vigor of grace. 2. Frequent good
company: as a good and wholesome air, is very profitable for preserving life and
health natural; so good and gracious company, is very profitable by their
wholesome conference and admonitions, to preserve the spiritual life of grace,
Prove. 27.17. Iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend. But evil and ungodly company, is like evil weeds, that hinder the
growth of good herbs: they by their evil example, and their mocking the work of
Gods grace in others, do discourage them, and sometimes abate the vigor of the
life of grace in them. 3. Daily exercise is a mean to preserve natural life and
health in some vigor, because, through want of exercise, the body becomes
lazy, and the life less active: so daily exercising of our selves to keep a
good conscience void of offense toward God and men, is a notable mean to
preserve the life of grace in some vigor; as Paul did, Acts 24.16. 4. When at
any time thou perceivest a beginning of fainting in the life of grace, then at
the first, go by prayer to Christ, who is the life, and wrought life in thee by
his Spirit; pray to him, that according to the promise, ( Isai. 40.29.) he
would give power to thee who faintest, and that he would increase strength. It
was the wisdom of the Shunamite, to come unto Elisha, that he might restore
life to her child, who had gotten life at first by the help of his prayers: so
it is the wisdom of believers, when in their sense, they seem to be dead and
deprived of the life of grace, that sometime they had; at such a time to go to
Christ, and by prayer and faith to wrestle with him, that he may come by his
Spirit, and revive their fainting soul: It is their wisdom to do as Peter did,
Mat. 14.30, 31. who beginning to sink, immediately he cried, saying, Lord save
me, and immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand and saved him: so although
the Lord may suffer thee to sink and fail in spirit, that thou may see and be
humbled with the sight of thine own weakness: yet if thou run to him by prayer,
he will not suffer thee to drown; but will stretch forth his hand of power, and
revive thee and renew the vigor of thy faith, that thou may praise him who is
the Author, the Preserver, and the Perfecter of the life of grace in his
Saints. To him, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be immortal praise, honor
and glory, for now and ever. Amen.

The Attractive Power of the Death and Cross of Christ. SERMOM II.
JOHN 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
me.
OUr blessed Lord, in the verse. preceding; has spoken of his victory over
Satan, of casting him out of his spiritual possession of the elect, and of
their delivery from his power and bondage: In this verse. he speaks of the
procuring cause of their delivery, to wit, his own death on the Cross; and also
of the powerful and efficacious application of the virtue of his death, by
giving faith to the elect, to believe in him and draw their hearts toward him.

Divis. In the words we have these two things, 1. The manner of our Lord his
death, And I, if I be lifted up from the earth. 2. The virtue and efficacy of
his death, I will draw all men unto me.

Whereas it is said, If I be lifted up; the meaning is, when I shall be lifted
up; for the particle (...) here, is taken for (...) when, as it is taken also,
1 John 3.2. But we know, that when he shall appear, (...) for (...). As for the
manner of his death, If I be lifted up from the earth; There was a twofold
lifting up of Christ: one from the earth unto the Cross, whereto his body was
nailed at his death, whereof here, and Joh. 3.14. There was another lifting up
after his death, unto the Throne of glory in Heaven, Acts 5.31. Him has God
exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel, and forgivenness of sins. By his lifting up upon the
Cross, and the merit of his death, he procured the remission of our sins; and
by his lifting up, after his death, to the Fathers right hand, he does apply
the remission of sins by his intercession. Our blessed Lord gave himself
willingly for his sheep, Tit. 2.14. Joh. 10.17, 18. for if he had been pleased
to make use of his own Almighty power, all the power of the world could not
have taken his life from him; he that with one word did cast his enemies to the
ground; who by his power, even upon the Cross, did rent the rocks, he could
easily have rent in pieces the tree whereto his body was nailed: yet in his
wisdom, he was pleased to suffer death at the hands of his enemies: though his
death was simply voluntar, yet in some respects it was necessar. 1. There was a
necessity of it, in respect of the punishment threatened against man upon his
disobedience, The day thou eatest, thou shall die: therefore there was a
necessity of satisfaction to divine truth and justice by the death of Christ,
the Mediator and surety of the Covenant of Grace, which was made in him, Gal.
3.16. and ratified by him, Heb. 7.22. 2. There was a necessity in respect of
Gods decree to send his Son, that he might make satisfaction to Divine Justice
in our nature; therefore it is said by our Lord, Joh. 17.6. Thine they were,
and thou gave them to me. They were the Fathers by election; and given to the
Son, that he might satisfy for them, reconcile them, and in end bring them to
the salvation appointed for them: As a King resolving to release and give
liberty to so many Rebels, Prisoners, gives them over to his Son, that he may
pay their ransom, and so obtain their liberty, according to the Fathers
decree. For this cause, our blessed Lord, in respect of the decree of the
Father to send him into the world, that he might die and save his elect, is
called the Lamb foreordained or predestined, 1 Pet. 1.20.

This manner of death of our blessed Lord upon the Cross, was necessary, 1.
That he might be answerable to that type of the brazen Serpent lifted up in the
wilderness, Job. 3.14. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the Son of man be lifted up. 2. That by this manner of death, he
might deliver us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, cursed
is every one that hangs on a tree. He underwent a temporary curse, to deliver
us from the eternal curse and wrath due to the transgressors of the Moral Law:
Although there be no proportion between the suffering of a temporary curse, and
the suffering of an eternal curse, due to us; yet, the dignity of the person
suffering, did give infinite value to the merit of his suffering, Heb. 9.14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve
the living God? And the person suffering, being the Son of God, made the virtue
and efficacy of his death, to be of infinite power to purge away our sins, and
reconcile God to us, 1 John 1.7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin. 3. Our blessed Lord died upon the Cross, that by
this shameful death he might merit our exaltation unto favor with God in this
life; for, he made our peace with God through the blood of his Cross, Col.
1.20. and that he might merit our exaltation unto everlasting glory in the life
to come, Heb. 12.2. For the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross:
this joy and glory set before him, as Mediator, was that glory and triumph he
should obtain over all his and his Churches enemies.

It should be our great desire and endeavor, with the Apostle, to know Christ
and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. To this knowledge all humane learning should be
subservient. It is of special use, 1. It will inflame thine heart with love to
the Father, who^ gave him to the death of the Cross for thee, that thou
should not perish, but, believing in him, thou might be reconciled with God,
and get eternal life; It will inflame thy heart with love to the Prince of
glory, when thou considerest for whom he suffered this ignominious death of the
Cross: It was even for thee, who by nature was an enemy to God at first by a
wicked inclination, and after thou came to the years of discretion, thou wast
a rebel by thy wicked actings and works: Men sometimes have died for their
friends, as Codrus and Curious for the good of their country; but God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us, Romans 5.8. when thou considerest the painfulness of his death; hands and
feet were pierced and nailed to the tree of the Cross: In the hands and feet,
which are the extremities of the body, the sinews meet together and convey the
pain to all the parts of the body: And the purer and finer the complexion be,
the sense of feeling is the more quick, as a sound and cleanly body is more
sensible of the cold piercing Air, than a gross humorous body. Look in narrowly
to the inside of his sufferings, even the greatness of his soul-sufferings;
they cannot be conceived, how extreme they were: therefore the Greek Church, in
their public prayers, said, For the sake of Christ's unknown sufferings, have
mercy upon us, O Lord. We may know something of them from his expressions, my
soul is exceeding sorrowful; Thou may see something of them in his bloody
sweat; our raging fever in our sinning, brought on him this bloody sweat, that
thereby he might cure us of the burning fever of sin: we hear something of his
soul-sufferings from his most sad complaint to the Father, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? we had forsaken God days without number, and he was
deserted of comfort for a time, to satisfy for our sinful desertions; and
bring us into a communion of favor and glory with God. Consider the
shamefulness of his death; He was exposed to the public shame and reproach of
his enemies, and of all the beholders; and shame to an ingenious spirit, is
worse than death; it racks and breaks their heart, Psalm. 69.20. Reproach has
broken my heart. Consider his willingness to die, Isa. 50.6. I gave my back to
the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face
from shame and spitting. Phil. 2.8. He humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross. Consider for what end our blessed Lord
suffered all this pain and shame: his back was furrowed with stripes and
scourges, that by his stripes we might be healed; his head was crowned with
thorns, to get us a crown of immortal glory, he suffered all this pain and
shame, to save thee from extreme and endless pain and shame: How should a sick
patient love his Physician, that preveens a dangerous fever? And how should a
malefactor love the man, who kept him from the shame of the pillory? How much
more should we love our blessed Lord, who by the death of the Cross, has saved
us from that unquenchable fire, and has preserved us from eternal shame and
confusion?

2. The frequent and serious meditation on the Cross of Christ, will keep thine
heart humble with godly sorrow for thy bygone sins, that crucified the Lord of
glory. Zach. 12.10. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and
they shall mourn for him, as one that mourns for his only son, etc. It will
mortify the love of sin in thee for time coming: sorrow and shame are two
mortifying passions; as a debtor is sorry and ashamed of the distress his
surety was put to for his debt; and he is very sparing to take on new debt, 2
Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us; (...) hemmeth us in, and makes
us strait-laced, not to dispense with our selves, to debord toward any thing
may offend him, who died such a death, to satisfy divine justice for our debts
and sins. It will mortify thee to the World; to the deceitful pleasures
thereof, and to such things as take up the thoughts and affections of too many,
Gal. 6.14. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Joy
in the Cross of Christ, suppresseth, and in end quenches, all sinful joy; as
sweet odours bear down the stench of noisome and corrupt vapors; so the sweet
smell of Christ crucified, does bear down our vile lusts. This joy in the Cross
of Christ, surpasses even all lawful worldly joy; as the wine of Christ's own
making in Cana, (Joh. 2.) did far surpass the wine at the feast, that grew by
the industry of men.

3. The meditation of the Cross of Christ, will encourage and strengthen thee
against all pain and shame of this present world in thy suffering for the name
of Jesus; when thou remembrest how thy Lord endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, to satisfy for thy sins, and to purchase unto thee eternal rest from
all pain; to preserve thee from everlasting confusion, to bring thee unto
everlasting glory, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ,
happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. Therefore
whenever God calls thee to suffering, go not to shift it, as a duty wherein
others are more concerned than thy self; When Octavius Augustus, was desired by
an old Soldier to speak unto the Roman Senate in his favors; Octavius
answered, he should cause one speak to them in his behalf; then did the
Soldier open his breast, and showed the skars of the wounds, he had received
at the battle of Actium for his cause; and that he had not interposed any other
between his body and the enemy: So Christ in his own body did suffer for thee,
1 Pet. 2.24. and when he calls thee to suffer for his name, put not off that
duty to others, seeing he himself suffered for thee, as well as for others.

4. The meditation on the Cross of Christ, yields great comfort to us in all
our fears, from our spiritual enemies, Col. 2.15. Having spoiled principalities
and powers, he made a show of them, openly triumphing over them in his cross.
In which words, the Apostle alludeth to the custom of triumph after great
victories over enemies; when the Captives were openly dragged in chains after
the Chariot of the Conqueror: so our blessed Lord, by his death on the Cross,
as his triumphing chariot, has led captivity captive. And, 1. spoiled Satan
our Arch-enemy, of all the Elect, who through the corruption of nature, are for
a time, led captive at his will: Although now and then after their effectual
calling and conversion, he infest and molest the children of God by his
temptations and infalls; yet the Captain of their Salvation, by the merit and
power of his cross, in end will give them the victory; as he prayed for Peter,
Luke 22 30. And as he has promised, Romans 16.20. Augustine Tractat. 52. in Joan.
says well, Aliud est regnare intrinsecus, aliud forinsecus oppugnare: It is a
diverse thing to reign within in the heart, and to beseige from without. Satan
reigns not in the children of God, though he beset and beseige them with
temptations from the World. 2. The Captain of our Salvation triumphed over the
World in his own person, when for all the glory of the World he would not once
stoop to the Tempter, Matthew. 4. When ever he pleased, he restrained the
malicious designs of men, Joh. 7.46. Act. 16.10. Therefore be of good comfort
in all thy fears from malicious and wicked men, Joh. 16.33. In the world ye
shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. 3. He
triumphed over death, 1 Cor. 15.56. O Death! I will be thy death. He has taken
the sting from death: to the godly it is as the brazen Serpent in this
wilderness, it has not a sting; but will cure us fully of all the stings we got
here; of the sting of temptation; of the sting of a guilty conscience; and of
the sting of venomous tongues. Thy death through Christ his victory on the
Cross, shall be unto the as the valley of Achor, an entrance to thy promised
rest. 4. He by the merit of his Cross, overcame the the power of the grave, and
manifested his victory by his rising on the third day, Hos. 13.14. O grave! I
will be thy destruction. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22 For since by man came death, by man
came also the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive. Though thy body be turned into dust, yet shall
it not be annihilat, nor turned into nothing; but shall be kept in a chamber of
repose, Isa. 57.2. They shall rest in their beds, and shall be raised as a
Bride adorned with Ornaments of glory, conform to our blessed Lord his glorious
body, Phil 3.20.

The virtue and efficacy of our blessed Lord, his sufferings on the Cross, is
contained in these words, I will draw all men unto me: for understanding of
this, we would know, 1. How Christ is said to draw; seeing the will cannot be
forced; and none are welcome to Christ, but such as are willing. 2. How is he
said to draw all men, for all men do not believe? 3. What manner of drawing
this is, seeing it is not only a drawing in some measure toward him, but even
unto him, for an union with him, for it is said (...), unto me? Ans. to the
first: by drawing here, is meant Christ, his effectual calling of the Elect,
unto grace by the Gospel, holding forth Christ crucified, and by his Spirit
working faith in the heart to go to Christ, and embrace him willingly for the
salvation of their souls: In ^espect of this drawing, the believing Romans are
said to be the called of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.6. 1. As in drawing, the power
attractive is from without us, and is in him that draws us; so the power of
believing, by which we come to Christ, is from God, Joh. 6.44. No man can come
to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. Ephesians. 2.8. for by grace
are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: It is the gift of God.
2. Drawing presupponeth life in him that is drawn; for dead men are carried,
and not drawn on their own feet, so actual faith and drawing near to Christ,
presupponeth the principle of grace and faith put first into the soul;
therefore Christ is called the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. 3.
There is a drawing, not only in the first beginning of our motion and
conversion unto Christ; but also after we are entered into the course of grace,
we are drawn and promoved therein by subsequent and assisting grace; of which
drawing, the Spouse of Christ speaks, after her saving knowledge of Christ,
from the sweet smell of his graces, Can. 1.3, 4. draw me, and we shall run
after thee. This drawing is as the continuance of a prosperous gale of wind,
for promoving the ship in her course.

To the second, I answer, by all men, is meant sometimes all individuals, 1 Timothy 4.10. He is the Savior of all men, that is, all men who get any temporal
salvation or delivery, they have it from the living God. In this sense, all
things are said to have been made by him, Joh. 1.3. In this sense it cannot be
taken here, for all men are not outwardly called by the Gospel, which is yet
hid from many Nations; and many outwardly called, are not drawn and called
effectually, Matthew. 22.14. Matthew. 23.37. 2. It is taken by way of restriction,
to the subject matter spoken of in the same place, as 1 Cor. 9.22. I am made
all things to all men, to wit, in the use of my Christian liberty, in matters
indifferent: 3. It is taken for very many, though not simply for all
individuals of men, Joh. 11.48. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe
on him, that is, very many will believe on him. 4. It is taken for all kinds,
as Act. 10.12. Peter saw in a vision a great sheet, wherein were all manner of
four-footed beasts on the earth, (...). Rev. 5.9. Thou have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. So it
is taken here for all kinds of men; rich and poor, male and famale, Jews and
Gentiles; as it is taken, Joh. 11.51, 52. He prophesied, that Jesus should die
for that Nation: and not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather
together in one, the children of God that were scattered abroad. Joh. 10.16.
And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also I must bring and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold: and one shepherd. Gal.
3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Col. 3.11. Where
there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is all, and in all. Augustine understands
this place of these who are predestinat to salvation, or of all kinds of men.

To the third I answer, there is an outward drawing and calling by the
preaching of the Word, Matthew. 23.37. Our Lord says, O Jerusalem! how often
would I have gathered thy children together, etc. and ye would not? There is an
inward drawing by the cord of Faith and Love, wrought and fastened in the heart
by the Holy Ghost, Act. 11.21. The hand of the Lord was with these Preachers,
and a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. The outward drawing by
the word, without this inward drawing by the Spirit, is not effectual for man's
conversion, Act. 13.45. The unbelieving and envious Jews were not drawn by the
Word preached by Paul, but they contradicted and blasphemed his Doctrine, Heb.
4.2. But the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in
them that heard it. Although the word preached be a mean sufficient in its own
kind, that is, a sufficient outward mean; yet is it not simply sufficient for
conversion: As Plowing and Sowing, are sufficient outward means for
fruitfulness; but are not effectual without the first and latter rain.

This effectual drawing, is a drawing upward of the soul by faith unto an union
and communion with Jesus Christ in his merits, Joh. 6.65. No man, said our
Lord, can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. The grace
of faith is given to us from above; it is like a cord cast down from the Rock
of our Salvation, to save man from drowning and destruction in his sins; it is
a drawing of the heart upward unto Christ by faith in this life, and a bringing
of the soul to the enjoyment of glory in the life to come, Joh. 17.24. Father,
I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me. The sense of Christ's love in
dying for us, is like the heat descending from the Sun, and drawing up the
purified vapors: It is like the Lodestone drawing up the hard and heavy Iron:
The sense of Christ's love in dying for us, softens our hard hearts, and turns
them toward himself. 2. As it is a drawing of the heart up to himself by faith
and love, so it is an obediential drawing by love and obedience to the ways of
his holy Commandments: It is not a drawing only toward an outward profession of
the truth from the custom of others, or hope of worldly applause or benefit; as
Simon Magus was baptized, that he might retain the respect and following of
many Samaritans his old followers, who had now been baptized: neither is it a
drawing to the profession of the truth, only for fear of worldly loss; as many
of the Persians became Jews in their outward dissembled profession, for fear of
the Jews: But this inward drawing and believing, is from love to God in the
will, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, that
is, when thou, together with thy Word, exerts the power of thy invincible
grace, thou will make thy people willing and obedient to follow thee in the
ways of thy Commandments. 3. It is an equal and uniform drawing both of the
inner and outer man; all the powers of the soul, like so many wheels, anointed
and moved by the Spirit of God, are drawn after the Spirit, according to the
outward drawing of the Word, as it is said of that extraordinary drawing by the
Spirit, Ezekiel. 1.20. Whithersoever the Spirit was to go, they went. The
understanding is enlightened by heavenly knowledge, and light within, by the
Spirit of God, according to the outward light of the Word, 2 Cor. 4.6. For God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. The will is strongly inclined to embrace Christ, and is sick of love to
enjoy him, Cant. 3.8. The affections, like the inferior wheels, are moved and
carried toward Christ by an enlightened understanding, and by a vehement
inclination of the will, Cant. 5.4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole of
the door, and my bowels were moved for him. Although the drawing and motion
toward Christ begins from within, yet it stays not there, but draws also
the outward man unto Christ; the members of the body become weapons of
righteousness, Rom 6.13. As the motion of the Clock, is first within, and
thereafter perceived in the regular motion of the Hand of the Horologe, and in
the sound of the Bell; so the inward drawing and motion of the soul, is
perceived in our outward regular actions, and gracious communications. 4. It is
a most sweet and delightful drawing; the God of all grace by his preveening
grace makes us first willing, and then by his subsequent and assisting grace
draws us most sweetly, with delectation in our hearts after him: It is, as
when one is drawn forward to a place from the sent of precious odours, Cant.
1.3, 4. It is as the speedy mounting of an Eagle upon wing from the smell and
fight of the dead carcass; so the sight and sent, through faith, of Christ
crucified, does most sweetly and willingly draw an hungry soul unto Christ to
be fed and refreshed out of the fullness of the merit of his death, Mat. 24.28.
For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together.
Augustine in his Tractat. on this place, ^aith, It is a drawing, as the
shepherd going before, draws the sheep after him, by holding forth a green
branch in his hand: so our blessed Lord works in the hearts of the elect that
gracious disposition of his own sheep, to hear and follow his voice; and
thereafter by the sweetness of the object propounded to them, to wit, Christ
the Branch of Righteousness, and by the inward operation and strong impulse of
the Spirit, he makes them follow the outward call of the Word. Joh. 10.4. When
he puts forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him,
for they know his voice. 5. It is an invincible, and irresistible drawing; it
is not only by moral swasion of motives taken from benefit, or prejudice to
their souls; but it is by a powerful persuading, and efficacious inclining of
the heart, Genesis 9.27. God shall persuade Japheth, and he shall dwell in the
tents of Shem. Hos. 2.14. Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her
into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her, or, to her heart. Although
there is in all men a corrupt principle of resistance to the will of God, yet
when God is pleased to exert that exceeding greatness of his power toward them
that believe, Ephesians. 1.19. Actual resistance is overcome by the insuperable grace
of God, Jer. 17.14. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I
shall be saved. Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art
the Lord my God. Augustine calls the operation of grace in our conversion to
the ways of God, victrix delectatio, an overcoming delight, like a sweet and
strong smell overcoming and bearing down corrupt vapors and exhalations: this
grace of God in conversion, is rejected by no hard heart, because willingness
to resist, is taken away, as Augustine speaks well to this purpose.

Therefore humble penitents should look up by faith to Christ on the Cross, as
he is held forth to them in the Gospel: The persons stung in the wilderness,
looked to the brazen serpent, and were healed; so whatever thy sins has been,
and whatsoever be the sting of thy guilty conscience, confess thy sins, with
purpose and active endeavors for amending thy ways; draw near by faith to
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be healed, Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. Although
thy faith be weak, yet if convinced of thy sins, and mourning for them, thou
look to Christ alone for salvation, thou shall be saved, Isai. 45.22. Look unto
me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none
else: which place speaks expressly of Christ, if we compare verse. 23. with
Phil. 2.11. All that looked to the brazen serpent in the wilderness, were not
alike quick-sighted; yet all who looked, were healed: So all stung with sorrow
in their hearts for their sins, if they fix their eye and heart upon Christ
crucified, they shall be saved, though faith be weak in the measure: for our
salvation does not depend upon the strength of our faith, but upon the strength
and power of Christ, in whom we believe. And if thou be truly drawn by faith to
Christ, then Christ and his Cross will be great in thine eyes and estimation,
far above all things here below: As a man lifted up to an high mountain,
esteems things below in the valley to be but small; so a soul elevated by says
to Christ, and to things that are above, esteems little of all things on earth,
in comparison of Christ and his unsearchable and durable riches, Phil. 3.8. I
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung that I may win Christ. And the true believer glories most in the Cross of
Christ, who endured the Cross, and despised the shame, to save us poor souls
from extreme and everlasting pain and shame, Gal. 6.14. As we believe the merit
of the Cross of Christ, so let us labor to feel more and more of the power of
his Cross crucifying sin in us, and drawing our hearts from the vanities of
this present world, and quickening us to serve and honor him, who spared not
his life, but gave it to the death of the Cross for us. To him; with the Father
and the Holy Spirit, be all praise, etc. Amen.

Soul-healing virtue in Christ to the broken in heart. SERMON III.
PSALM. 147.3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.
THe holy Prophet stirs up his own heart, and the hearts of others from the
consideration of the glorious attributes and works of the Lord, to praise his
great Name: and amongst these works for the manifestation of his compassion and
mercy toward poor mourning sinners; because he heals the broken in heart, and
binds up their wounds: This our blessed Lord applies to himself as a work of
mercy, common to him with the Father, Luke 4.18. He has sent me to heal the
brokenhearted.

As in healing the diseases and wounds of the body, there be these three
considerable, 1. The Physician. 2. The Patient. 3. The Cure it self: So it is
in healing the diseases of the soul, and wounds of the spirit of man. We have
all these three, in these words, 1. The Physician is the Lord himself, Jehovah,
He. 2. The Patient, The broken in heart, and wounded in spirit. 3. The Cure, He
heals.

The Lord God, is the sovereign Physician, who according to his good pleasure
heals all distempers: He heals a distempered civil State, by restoring
civil Peace, Psalm. 46.9. Psalm. 147.14. A distempered Church, by restoring
Unity, Peace and Love, Isa. 30.26. Jer. 30.17. Jer. 32.39. He heals breaches
in families, by restoring domestic Peace and Amity; He heals distempers
through bodily diseases, Ezod. 15.25. 2 Kings 20.5. He heals Souls
distempered, through the guilt and sting of an evil conscience, Psalm. 103.3.
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. Jer. 3.22.
Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your backslidings. In all our
distempers, it is our wisdom and duty to go to God, and to his Son Jesus
Christ, the Sovereign Physician for healing sick Souls. Psalm. 61.2. From the
end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed; lead me to
the rock that is higher then I. Psa. 60.2. Thou have made the earth to tremble;
thou have broken it: heal all the breaches thereof, for it shakes: especially
when the soul is in an high fever and distemper of grief and fear, through
bypast sins, Psalm. 41.4. I said, Lord be merciful unto me; heal my soul, for I
have sinned against thee. We should use the outward means ordained by God, for
healing our souls; such as are the hearing of the Gospel, receiving the holy
Sacrament of the holy Supper, and daily Prayer: these are, through Gods
blessing, strengthening and healing Ordinances: but we must not rest on the
outward performances, or on the abilities of the Minister thereof; as if there
were any Intrinsecal virtue in them, for healing a sick and fainting Soul: The
Word was preached by Christ himself, and yet no healing followed, Matthew. 23.37.
Luke 19.42. The Sacrament of Baptism was ministered by Philip the Evangelist to
Simon Magus, and yet there was no healing of that gall of iniquity in his
heart: when a people look too much to the instruments, who preach the Word, or
minister the Sacraments, it provokes our jealousy, God many times to withhold
assistance from the Ministers, and a blessing from the outward means to the
people: for all these outward Ordinances are but empty cisterns, till they be
filled by an influence of power and life from himself, Joh. 6.63. It is the
spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The outward Ordinance,
without the Lords special presence and blessing, is like the staff of Elisha,
in the hand of Gehazi, they do not quicken a dead soul, nor awake the sleepy
and secure soul, 2, Kings 4.31. Therefore inusing the outward means for healing
our souls, we should go by Prayer to the great Physician himself, that by his
Spirit he would go along with the outward Ordinances.

If thou go to him, thou need not despare of healing, for in his own due
time he will heal all that come to him, Jer. 17.14. Heal me, O Lord, and I
shall be healed. There is no soul-disease incureable to him, though in it there
were a complication of infirmities and distempers, Isai. 1.16, 18. Wash ye,
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease
to do evil: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow,
etc. Though thy sins were inveterat through custom from thy childhood, like
the Lunatic child, Mark 9.21. Though incurable through all the counsel of
friends, like the disease of that sick woman, Luke 8.43. Therefore come your
selves to him, and let parents bring their stubborn children in their prayers
to Him the great Physician, who can heal perverse spirits, and make crooked
things straight, even when parents and friends has despared of their recovery
from their soul-distempers and evil ways: In all distempers and wounds of
spirit from outward grievous afflictions, come to this Sovereign Physician;
though creatures neither can, nor will heal thee; yet he will come near to the
afflicted, who under affliction bodily, are most afflicted in their spirit for
their sins, Psalm. 27.10. Jer. 30.17. Hos. 2.14. I will allure her, and bring
her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. When the godly are in
a desolat, and wildernesse-like condition, and few or none to comfort: then the
Lord, in an acceptable time, comes in to the soul with comfort: all the moral
Instruments of our comfort and healing, are but as an Apprentice who can do
nothing without their masters secret information and direction: therefore the
brokenhearted would come to Jesus Christ, who had a calling from the Father, (
Luke 4.18.) to bind up and heal the broken in heart: he healed Inveterat bodily
diseases, as one of twelve years, one of eighteen, and one of thirty eight
years, for the comfort of all poor humbled sinners, who formerly have
accustomed themselves to do evil. He is a skilful Physician to apply several
Medicines for healing several diseases: He has Corrosives to awake these who
are in a spiritual Lethargy; even the spirit of burning and judgment, Isai.
4.4 He has sharp afflictions as a scourge to tame and daunt proud and vain men,
who are in a spiritual Phrency, and distempered with an heady conceit of their
own righteousness, Job 36.8, 9. If they be bound in fetters, and be holden in
cords of affliction; then he shows them their work, and their transgressions;
that they have exceeded. He has Lenatives and Restauratives to poor fainting
Souls; even the sweet promises of the Gospel, Isa. 57.11. Matthew. 5.3, 4. Matthew.
11.28. Though this great Physician, the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Humane
Nature, be locally in Heaven, yet he can heal broken hearts on earth, by the
virtue and presence of his Spirit, through the power of hi^ Intercession at the
Fathers right hand, 1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Aduocat with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righ^eous; and he is the Propitiation for our sins. He
healed the Centurions sick servant at a distance, Matthew. 8. And the Son of that
Noble man, ( Joh. 4.51.) at a distance also: As the Sun in the Firmament,
though at a distance from the Earth, does quicken and revive the Creatures by
the influence of light and heat; so the Sun of Righteousness, the Lord Jesus
Christ, does by the influences of his Spirit and Virtue, quicken and revive a
soul fainting under the burden of sin.

2. The Patient under Gods Cure, is the broken in heart, or, wounded in spirit,
The broken heart, is called also in Scripture a contrite spirit, Ps. 51.13. Is
57.15. When the heart that was sometime whole and hard like a stone, is broken
into pieces, like a grain bruised between the upper and nether millstone: so the
heart of a truly humbled sinner, is crushed between the sense of divine
justice, displeased with its sins; and the sense of divine love manifested in
the Gospel: it is called a bruised spirit, Isa. 42.3. When the heart is bruised
and bowed down so with the burden of many and manifold sins; that from the deep
sense of grief and shame for them, they have not the confidence to look up to
God, Psalm. 40.12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up, etc. It is called a wounded spirit, Prove. 18.14. because the
Lord of hosts, provoked by our sins, does justly wound the guilty conscience
with pain, that the wounded spirit can get no rest. Psalm. 38.3. There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin. It is called a soft and tender heart, sensible of the
danger and vileness of sin; Josiah his heart, was tender and humbled at the
hearing of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. A rent heart, Joel 2.12. When the love of
sin is emptied out of the heart by repentance; as water out of a rent vessel:
and it is called an heart of flesh, pliable and yielding to walk in the
commandments of God, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

The necessity of a broken heart, is evident from the text, because it is the
broken heart only that God heals. 1. God takes speci-notice of the broken in
heart, Psalm. 56.8. Ezekiel. 9.4. 2. He preserves the broken in heart in the midst
of common calamities, Psalm. 34.18. Ezekiel. 9.4. For if they be taken away with
the common calamity, yet they get their souls for a prey. Good Josiah, is said
to have been gathered to his grave in peace, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. Although he was
slain by the bloody sword of an enemy. 3. It is evident from the contrary evil
of an hard heart; because man's wilful hardening of himself in his evil ways
against warnings from the Word of God, from the rod of God upon himself or
others, and from the sharp checks of a guilty conscience, does provoke God
judicially to harden him, by giving him up to a Conscience past feeling, to
commit sin with greediness, and so to obstruct their own healing, because not
the hardened, but the broken in heart, are healed, Mat. 13.15. For this peoples
heart is waxed gross, etc. Lest at any time they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. For when wicked men do wilfully harden
themselves in their evil ways, it is just with God to withdraw his former
common restraints, such as were the checks of a ^emording Conscience, and a
panick fear of wrath to come; thereafter he casts the bridle on their neck:
then do they run wild in their own imaginations, when they are given up in the
just judgment of God to walk in the counsels of their own hearts; Psalm. 81.11,
12.

The means and helps for breaking of the heart, that in all men is naturally
hard, are, 1. A laying to heart the severe threatenings of God against sin, Jer.
23.29. Is not my word like an hammer? Many men hear the word of threatening, but
are still hardened, their heart is not broken; because the threatening is not
said to heart by Faith. The old world, ( Mat. 24.39.) though they knew the
threatening of the deludge by the preaching of Noah, yet they knew not, that is,
they laid it not to heart, till the flood came: The hammer breaks not the hard
stone, until it be laid to it with some pith; but when it is laid to heart, it
does in some measure begin the work of heartbreaking, Jonah 3.5. They believed
God in his threatening, and proclaimed a fast, which was a proclamation of their
sorrow for their sins: Faith to the threatening, works fear in the heart, and
fear breaks the heart with present sorrow, from a present apprehension of the
wrath to come; this was the cause of Ahab his sorrow and legal humiliation, 1
Kings. 21.27. but in the children of God, this fear and brokenness of heart, is
so ordered in the wisdom and mercy of God, that it prepares them for the
comforts of the Gospel in Jesus Christ; as Noah moved with fear and
apprehension of the threatened deludge, prepared an ark to the saving of himself
and his house, Heb. 11.7. In like manner the children of God, warned and
wakened by the threatening of the Law, flee in to Christ, the only Ark and
propitiation, that covers believers from the curse of the Law and eternal
wrath, 1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocat with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins. 2. Sad
afflictions, laid home with conviction to the Conscience, is a mean oft-times
ordered by God to break an hard heart, as is seen in Manasseh, who was humbled
by his fetters, and in the Prodigal, who was humbled by great famine and want:
the unjust reproaches of enemies, contrary to their intention (like that man,
who opened the Apostem in the body of his enemy, by a dart thrown at him) are
ordered by God to break the heart of his children with sorrow for bypast sins:
the reproaches of vile Shimei, calling David a bloody man in the matter of
Saul, wherein he was most innocent; yet it did break his heart with sorrow in
remembrance of the matter of Vriah. 3. A particular confession of our sins, is
a mean blessed of God to the breaking of the heart: when we consider the
circumstances of their number and greatness against infinite Majesty, infinitely
just, who will not clear the guilty, when we consider the Omniscience and
Omni-presence of God, that we have done this and the other evil in his sight,
and so have been shamless in our sinning; as the vile adulteress, is shameless
by intertaining the adulterer in the presence of her husband: when we consider
our wilfulness and obstinacy in sinning against the light of our own
conscience, as these men did, Act. 7.51. When we consider our relapses, like
the Sow to the puddle, and the Dog to the vomit, after many promises and
resolutions in the day of affliction to the contrair: when we consider our base
ungratitude, not only neglecting to render to the Lord according to his
benefits bestowed upon us; but also our rendering to him evil for good, and so
deserving, that evil of punishment should never depart from us, Prove. 17.15. 4.
A particular register and remembrance of Gods former mercies in doing us good
all our days, by providing for us, and preserving us from many visible and
invisible dangers; when we call to remembrance his patience and long-suffering
in bearing with us in our sins: this brake the hard heart of the Prodigal, when
he remembered the former bounty of his gracious father. Luke 15.17, 18. 5. A
serious and frequent meditation of death and judgment, will be a mean to break
an hard heart, a^ a man drowned in debt, not aquainted with any that will be
surety for him; and knows assuredly, the rude Messenger will take him
personally at the Term, arrest him, and present him to the Judge; then the
irrevockable sentence will come forth, Take him, bind him hand and foot, etc.
It broke the heart of Paul's companions, that he said, they should see his face
no more, Act. 20.38. So the fear of the day of death and of judgment, should
break the hard heart, when they consider if they go on and die in their sins,
they shall be separate from God for ever, and never shall see his face.
Therefore break thine heart with sorrow for bygone sins, break off thy course
of iniquity by righteousness; make thine aquaintance in time with Jesus Christ
the Surety and Mediator of the New Covenant, and pray with Hezekiah, Lord, I am
oppressed, undertake thou for me. If now he be thine Advocat, thou need not
be afraid of that day of judgment, because thy Advocat will be thy Judge:
repent of thy sins, and by faith make application to him as thy Advocat and
intercessour at the Fathers right hand: be of good courage, he that speaks
for thee now, will not speak against thee in that day. 6. Look often by Faith and
frequent meditation upon Christ crucified: this is a special Medicine and
Lenitive to soften the hard heart, Zach. 12.10. This look to him by faith, is
like the blood of the goat, which breaks the hard Adamant; look on him
wounded for thy transgressions, both in his body and spirit: shall the innocent
Cautioner be wounded, and sore distressed? and shall not the Principal debtor
be wounded with sorrow for the debt he himself contracted? shall our spotless
Cautioner suffer shame and reproach? and shall not our hearts be broken with
grief and shame for our sins, which put the innocent Lamb of God to open
reproach? Psalm. 22.6, 7. Psalm. 69.20. 7. Pray to God for a soft and broken
heart, it is promised in the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Pray for the
influence and insuperable operation of the grace of God upon thy hard heart,
that thou may know in thy self what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
them who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, etc. Ephesians.
1.19. The influence of his overpowering and overcoming grace, will be as
Aquafortis, to cut and divide an heart of iron: we are like little children
within the house, that can shut the door of the heart upon our selves, but
cannot open it: Therefore we must cry to him, who both opens the dark
understanding ( Luke 24.45.) and also the heart and affections, Act. 16.14.
that he would open our hard hearts by his preveening grace, and by his
subsequent grace, he would keep them open, and enlarge them by love toward
himself, and his holy Commandments.

3. The cure of the broken in heart, he heals them, and binds up their
wounds. God heals these that are of a broken heart with sorrow under great
afflictions, upon their persons or outward estate, Hos. 6.1. Come and let us
return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten,
and he will bind us up. The Lord heals these that are thus wounded, by giving
them patience and strength in the inner-man to bear the visitation of the Lord
in the day of their trouble, Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthendst me with strength in my soul. Sometimes he
comforts them with inward peace and joy; that exceeds the pain they have from
outward tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. Who comfort us in all our tribulation,
etc: For, as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ: and sometimes by delivering them in their greatest
extremity, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that
we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead: who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he
will yet deliver us.

The Lord heals also, in a more special manner, those whose hearts are broken
with sorrow for their sins: This is the healing we should desire most, as David
did in the time of his great sickness, Psalm. 41.4. I said, Lord be merciful
unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Our greatest care should
be of soul-health, 1. Because our care should be greater to have the soul
healed, than the body or outward estate: This was David's first and greatest
desire in the time of sore sickness, Ps. 39.8, 13. he first prays for
deliverance from his sins, and then, with submission, for deliverance from his
bodily disease, Deliver me from all my transgressions: O spare me, that I may
recover strength before I go hence, and be no more. The soul is more precious
than the body; as men are more careful to have an Apostem in the inward and
noble parts healed, than a scratch in the skin of the body; so our first and
greatest care should be, to have the diseases of our souls healed. 2. If the
spirit be healed, and if a man have peace with God and his own conscience, he
will be able patiently to bear the infirmities of the body; But, a wounded
spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. As a man having an Ulcer in his back, is much
disquieted, even with a little burden: but if the back be sound and whole, he
can walk quietly under a great burden: So when there is no health nor peace in
the conscience, a very small affliction does disquiet and perplex our hearts:
but when we have inward health and peace in the conscience, we are able through
the Lord, who strengthens us, to walk patiently and quietly under a great
affliction, Psalm. 23.4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me. Psalm. 138.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will
revive me. 3. Unlese ye have a care of your souls-healing in this life, there
is no coming to perfect soul-health and salvation in Heaven: as the Lepers,
under the Law, were not admitted into public meetings, till first they were
cleansed and healed; so no unclean thing shall enter into the New Jerusalem,
Rev. 21.27.

That we may the better understand what this soul-healing is, and how the cure
is performed, we would consider, that sin in Scripture is compared oftentimes
to sickness, Isai. 1.5. and in many places to leprosy. 1. In bodily sickness,
there is a privation and want of health, so in sin, there is want of Original
Righteousness, which was the sound constitution of man in the state of
innocence. 2. In bodily sickness, there is a collision of humors, like
contrary waves, making a commotion in the body; so in our corrupt hearts, there
is a contrariety of unruly lusts, one desiring this visible and sensual good,
and another lust, carried after another sinful object. 3. In sickness there is
consumption, and a tendency unto death, unless it be preveened; so in sin,
there is a tendency unto eternal death, unless it be preveened by the pardon of
our sins in the blood of Christ. 4. In sickness bodily, men oftentimes become
weaker and weaker; so unless they be restored by sanctification, sinners grow
worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13 Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived.

Therefore, by healing, is meant specially these two, 1. The forgiving of sin
to these who are broken in heart with sorrow for it, Isa. 33.24. And the
inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, to wit, unto the second death: the people
that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their iniquity. 2. The sanctifying of a
brokenhearted man, and healing him by degrees, from in-dwelling corruption,
which many times over-mastered him: these two acts of soul-healing, are set
down, Psalm. 103.3. Bless the Lord, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who
heals all thy diseases. By the remission of sin, the soul is healed, and
recovered from a state of guiltiness and obligation to punishment eternal; and
by sanctification, it is recovered from pineing away in iniquity.

The impediments of soul-healing, are, 1. Waywardness and frowardness of men,
who cannot endure to have their wounds touched and ripped up by the word of
reproof, Prove. 1.30, 31. They would none of my counsel; they despised all my
reproof: therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices. They cannot endure amputation and mortification of
their sinful lusts, which are as a gangrened hand or foot, therefore they are
not healed; but choose rather to pine away in their beloved lusts, than to have
them cut off, and so to have their souls saved. 2. Hardness of heart, and
stupid security, without apprehension of the danger, and vileness of their
sins, makes them carlesse to seek to the Lord for healing their souls, Mat.
13.15. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their hearts,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. 3. Wilful rejecting of the
counsel and direction of the great Physician of our souls, given to us by his
faithful Ministers, Jer. 51.9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed. Mat. 23.37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? Behold your house is left unto you desolat, etc. 4. A
false conceit and imagination of our own righteousness and soul-health, is a
great impediment to the healing of the soul, as the Phrenetick man, who thinks
himself whole, seeks not the Physician for healing, Matthew. 9.12. They that be
whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick; that is, they that are
sensible of their souls distemper through the malady of sin, are sensible also
of a necessity to be healed.

The outward means of Soul-healing, are the Word, specially the
Gospel-promises, Psalm. 107 20 He sent his Word and healed them. Isai. 57.15
Thus says the high and lofty One, etc. I dwell in the high and holy place;
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humhle, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Isai. 61.1 The Lord
God has sent me to bind up the broken hearted. Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifices of
God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart O God, thou will not
despise. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is an outward mean for healing a
broken heart; because it is a visible sign and seal of our Communion of Christ's
Body broken for us, and of his blood shed for us; and his offering of his Body,
and our receiving of it by Faith, is the special mean to heal the broken heart
by the virtue of his Body broken for us: Prayer is a mean blessed of God for
healing a broken heart: Moses (Number. 12.13.) cried unto the Lord in behalf of
his leprouse sister Miriam, saying, heal her now, O God, I beseech thee. And
(2. Chron. 30.18, 19, 20.) Hezekiah prayed to the Lord for healing and
forgiveness to the People, who had prepared their hearts to eat the Passover,
but had not been punctually cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary conform to the Law cerimonial: And it is said, the Lord hearkened to
Hezekiah, and healed the people.

The inward means of healing the Soul, are specially two. 1. Repentance, Jer.
3.20. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your backslidings. Jer.
4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved.
Repentance cleanses the wound, and leteth out the malignant humor. 2. Faith is
a special mean for Soul-healing; it is as the hand that applies the
healing-plaister; it applies the blood of Christ, wherewith the Soul is
cleansed, Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved. As the Haemoroise Woman, when she touched Christ, was healed by the
healing virtue that came out of him; so when a humble brokenhearted sinner
does lay hold on Christ, and the promise made in him, healing virtue comes from
him, whereby guilt and obligation to eternal punishment, is taken away in our
Justification, and the fever of corruption is much abaited, by the work and
power of Sanctification.

The manner of Gods healing the broken-heart, is, 1. Freely without any merit
in man procuring the same; for, Who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? Romans 11.35. To this purpose says the prophet, Isai.
43.25. I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake,
etc. 2. He heals powerfully; so that when he puts to the hand of his
invincible grace for healing, no distemper of the will can resist him; for he
takes away willingness to resist, and so he begins his healing in cureing the
malignancy of the will, Jer. 17.14. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed.
Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. This efficacy of Gods grace in
healing Souls, is called the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power. It is a power, exceeding
and overcomming the power of our corruption, at the time when God is pleased
(...) exert it. 3. God heals the Soul gradually in ^espect of indwelling
corruption: although (as is most probable) God justifies a sinner at once from
the guilt of all his sins, actually forgiving him all his bypast sins, and
giving him a right and claim through Christ unto the remission of sins to come:
Yet the healing of the soul, from the vilness of indweling corruption in the
course of Sanctification, is by degrees; for so long as the children of God are
on Earth, there is in them grace and corruption, and each of them lusts one
against another, Gal. 5.17. 4. He heals perfectly and fully all his Patients,
at the end of their life, from all stain of Sin, and di^temper of Conscience,
through the stirring of inward corruption: as the Jewish Women were fully
purified after Childbirth, before they were presented in the Temple; so our
blessed Lord and Physician, after our new Birth and Regeneration, does purify
us in the course of Sanctification; and at death, having closed the course of
our purification, does after death, present us faultless before the presence of
his glory with exceeding joy, Jud. Epist. 24.

Obj. One possibly may say, my heart is broken with sorrow for my sins, and yet
their is no healing of my soul, nor peace and quietness in my Conscience; I may
say, as Jer. 4.14, 19. I looked for the time of healing, and behold trouble.
Ans. God is debtor to none for healing; he heals the broken in heart, but not
because their heart is broken: The distemper is merely from our selves, but our
healing is from his free Grace; with some sinners he deals more roughly than
with others, according to his Wisdom and good Pleasure, Isai. 28.27. Paul is
cast down to the ground, but the heart of Lydia is gently opened; some are
sooner cured and comforted, to preveen despair; others are keept long under
cure and exercise of Conscience, to preveen pride and presumption

Therefore wait upon the Lord thy Physician, with all patience and submission.
1. Because he has promised to heal the broken in heart, and in zeal to the
glory of his Truth, he will perform his promise, Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promise. Our patience is the thing he wills, and after the proof of our
patience, we shall receive the good promised, he does not heal us to our sense,
at the first; David had not health and peace in his Conscience at the first,
upon the breaking of his heart for these two heinous sins, Psalm. 51.8, 12. The
Lord in his wisdom, suspendeth healing and comfort, after the heart is broken,
to the end in time coming we may be more careful to keep a good Conscience,
which is the box wherein the precious Jewel of Peace and inward Joy, is
preserved from rubbs and defilments. 2. Consider, the more patient thou art,
thy inward pain will be the less: a sick man from his Impatience, that he is
not healed so soon as he expected, does both increase his pain and offend his
Physician; and afterward when God gives to his impatient Children, any case
from trouble, they are ashamed of their former Impatience; whereas patience and
submission to God about the time, manner, and measure of our healing and
delivering, will preveen the shame that arises from our impatience in times of
trouble, and delayed relief, Romans 5.4, 5. Patience works experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. 3. Consider that our wise God, to
manifest his Sovereign Dominion and free Grace, does sometimes heal at the
first, even gross offenders, as the Publican Luke 18. And the notorious Thief,
Luke 22. Sometimes he does keep lesser offenders, for a long time under pain
and terror of Conscience: In rich mercy he pitieth some of his Elect, that are
in an high rageing Fever of sin, and like to perish in it: As also in his
Wisdom he keeps lesser offenders, for a long time under exercise and disease
of Conscience, lest they should think little of lesser sins, which oft-times
prove an inlet to greater sins. 4. Consider his Wisdom, who knows well, when
and how, to deliver his own Children out of trials and troubles, 2 Pet. 2.9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptations. 5. Consider his
Faithfulness, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that ye are able: but will with the temptation also make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Limit not the holy One of Israel to
means or times: The Physicians of our bodies will not take it well, to be
limited by their patients to this or that time of healing: but wait thou on him
at all times in the use of the lawful means, and wait for him in hope; who can
tell, but he will heal and comfort thee, in thy greatest extremity, with
unexpected and abounding consolations? Isai. 41.17, 18. When the poor and needy
seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thrist, I the Lord
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them; I will open rivers
in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys; I will make the
wilderness a pooll of water, and the dry land springs of water.

Quest. How shall I know, if I be in the way of recovery, from the fever of my
corruption, and in the way to perfect Soul-health, and Salvation? Ans. 1. As
the recovery of some health in the body, is known by the beating of the pulls,
when it is more equal and regular than it was formerly; so if thou be in the
way of Soul-health; whereas thy former motions and ways, were unequal, thou
was once much for the lesser duties of the first Table, as the Pharisees were
in their precise payment of Tithes, but they neglected the substantial duties
of the second Table, as Mercy, Faith and Judgment: At other times, thou seemed
very zealous of the duties of the second Table, as the deputy Gallio was of the
Emperors honor and service; but as for the matters of God and true Religion,
he accounted them but trifles, and cared not for them: but if thou be in the
right way to per^ect Soul-healing, the respect of thine heart, will be equal
and uniform toward all the Commandments of God, Psalm. 119 6. Then shall I not
be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Act. 24.16. And herein
do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience, void of offense toward God
and toward men. Though thou may fail sometimes out of Infirmity, and
Inadvertence; yet the disposition and inclination of thy will, is found in all
thy ways to honor God, Heb. 13.18. Pray for us; for we trust we have a good
conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. 2. As in a begun recovery
of b^dily health, the former fever and thirst is in some measure abaited; so it
will be with thee, if thou be in the way to Soul-health: whereas sometime thou
did drink-in Iniquity with greediness, as the Ox does water, thou was
insatiable in thy sinful desires; even when thy body was wearied in thine
Iniquity, thy will was not wea^ied of it: but now if thou be in the way of
recovery and ammendement, thy former desire after sin, will be much abaited,
and thou will hate even wandering and straggling motions, Psalm. 119.113. I hate
vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. 3. As natural appetit grows in these
that are in the way of recovery to bodily health, and their right taste begins
to be restored: so whereas formerly the good Ordinances of God, were loathsome
to thee in the time of thy rageing Fever in sin, as Manna was to the people of
Israel, in their feverish sits of Impatience and Coffeehouse: Now, if thou
be in the way to Soul-health, the Word of God will be sweet to thy Soul, Psalm.
119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to my
mouth. Thy former sins will be bitter to thee as wormwood; as a man scunners
much afterward at the Dish, which did overset and distemper his stomach, so
thou will abhore thy former evil ways, which did distemper thee, and bring
pain to thy Conscience, Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall ye remember your own evil
ways, and your doings, that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your
own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Romans 6.20, 21. For
when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness: what fruit
had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? 4. The man in the way
of recovery from bodily sickness, begins to have a stomach to digest grosser
meats; whereas in the time of sickness, he tarrowed at every thing: So if thou
be in the right way to Soul-health, begun peace in thy Conscience, will make
thee digest even great afflictions and wants, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be
not so with God; yet he has made an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire; although he
make it not to grow. Heb. 3.17, 18 Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the Vins, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation. 5 The sick man in the way to recovery, gets
^^me ability to walk; our blessed Lord said, J^h 5.8. to the man that was
healed, Take up thy bed and walk. So, whereas formerly thou was wallowing in
the m^re of vile sins, or lying in the bed of sluggishness, and carnal
security: Now if thou be in the right way to perfect Soul-health, thou will
endeavor to walk in the ways of God, as Manasseh did. 2 Chronicles. 33.16. and as
Zacheus did, Luke 19.8.

Quest. Ye will ask, what direction give ye us, after we are in the way of
soul-recovery, that we may not relapse into our former fits and
soul-distempers? Answ. 1. Be thankful to the great Physician, who has begun in
thee the course of Sanctification to heal thy soul: Hezekiah was thankful to
God, after his recovery from his bodily disease, and went up into the house of
the Lord, to worship and praise him: If thou be unthankful to thy Physician,
thou cannot with any confidence in new troubles and distempers, go to him for
help and relief. 2. Keep a good diet; be thou of a sober and humble spirit,
both under the sense of former mercy recovering thee, and also under the sense
of the dregs and relics of corruption dwelling in thee; which will not be
perfectly cured till the hour of our death; a man in the way of recovery,
abstains from such meat, as would provoke his old disease, and distemper him
again; so abstain thou from evil company and all occasions, that would cast
thee into a new fever of trouble in thy Conscience; as the holy Patriarch Judah
did abstain from going to Thamar any more, Genesis 38.26. And as the holy Apostle
Peter went out of the high Priests hall, where he had been tempted to deny his
Lord, Luke 22.62. 3. Be thou watchful and circumspect after thy begun recovery,
as Hezekiah was, Isa. 38.15. What shall I say? he has both spoken unto me, and
himself has done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my
soul. As a man who is recovering of a broken leg, walks at leisure and
circumspectly, especially in rough ways, wherein are many stumbling blocks:
Remember often what our Lord said to the sick man that was healed, Joh. 5.14
Behold thou art made whole; sin no more, least a worse thing befall thee. Be not
secure, but follow the advice given by the Prophet to the King of Israel, after
his victory against his enemies, 1 Kings 20.22. Go strengthen thy self, and
mark and see what thou do; for at the return of the year, the King of Syria
will come up against thee. Much more should thou watch against thy spiritual
enemy, for thou know not how soon he may return with a violent temptation
and assault upon thee. 4. Be careful to keep acquaintance and daily
correspondence with God in thy devotion and spiritual duties; as a man healed
of bodily sickness, is careful to keep good correspondence with the Physician
that healed him, and when at any time he is afraid of a new fit of his old
disease, he does acquaint him; so do thou by prayer, make daily application to
God who has begun to heal thy soul, Mat. 26.42. and at thy first apprehension
of the rising of any lust or noisome humor in thy soul, cry to him, as Paul
did, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. and thou shall get a gracious answer as he did, My grace
is sufficient for thee. To God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be immortal
praise, etc. Amen.

Soul-healing Virtue from Christ, by believing in him. SERMON IV.
JOHN 3.14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: even so
must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have eternal life.
IT is said, Joh. 1.17. The Law was given by Mose^; but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ. The Moral and Ceremonial Law was by Gods appointment proclaimed
by Moses; but the grace of Justification and absolution from the curse of the
Moral Law, as also Truth in fulfilling the Ceremonial Law, and answering to all
the types under the Old Testament, came by Jesus Christ, who is the Truth, the
body, and substance of all the legal Sacrifices and Offerings, Joh. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the World. He is the truth
of all the legal washings and purifications, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. He is the truth of all the lights and
lamps in the Levitical service, Joh. 8.12. I am the light of the world: he that
follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. He
is the truth of all the Levitical Altars, as he was of their sacrifices, Heb.
13.10. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
tabernacle. He is the alone Altar that sanctifies all our spiritual offerings,
1 Pet. 2.5. His death was the true antitype of the lifting up of the brazen
Serpent in the wilderness; as is clear from the words in the text: in which we
have a vive resemblance between Christ crucified, and the brazen Serpent; as is
clearly insinuat in the particle of similitude as, and in the particle of
reddition and application, even so.

The resemblance is, 1. In that which was lifted up, to wit, the brazen
Serpent, and the Son of man. 2. In the place, to wit, in the wilderness. 3. In
the lifting up of the Serpent upon a pole; and the lifting up of Christ upon
the tree of the Cross. 4. In the necessity of the lifting up of both; there was
a necessity of lifting up the brazen Serpent to heal those who were stung; so
there was a necessity of the death of Christ, for healing and saving sinners,
even so must the Son of man, etc. 5. There is a resemblance in the consequent
and benefit following, their looking: all those, who being stung, did look on
the brazen Serpent, were healed: So all sinners wounded with sorrow for their
sins, and looking by faith, receiving him in all his offices, and resting on
Christ crucified, as he is offered in the Gospel, shall not perish but have
eternal li^e.

2. There was some resemblance between that brazen Serpent and Jesus Christ,
who by way of excellency, is called, The Son of man, 1. That Serpent was in
outward form, like unto Serpents that have stings; but really it had no sting:
So our blessed Lord, though he was in form like unto sinful men, yet was he
without all sin, Romans 8.3. He was in the similitude of sinful flesh, it is not
said, In the similitude of flesh, for he was truly and really partaker of flesh
and blood; but without sin: for he behoved to be clean himself, who was to
cleanse us; and to be whole and perfect, who was to heal us. 2. That Serpent
was not made of Gold, but of Brass: Jeroboams Calves were made of Gold: Our
Lords outward Garb and fashion before the world, was without all show and pomp,
Isai. 53.2. When we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him, Luke 17.20. The kingdom of God comes not with observation. The ordinances
of men are oftentimes very specious in their outside, as were the Calves of
Jeroboam; but the Ordinances of God are simple, without outward splendour: as
the holy Word preached in simplicity, and the holy Sacraments administered in
simple elements, yet with them is great virtue, and a blessing to believers.
The Word, accompanied by the Spirit of God, is the power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16. and works eff^ctually in those that believe, 1 These. 2.13 The
Sacrament of Baptism, through the Spirit, is the Laver of Regeneration, Acts
22.16. Tit 3 5. and the Sacrament of the holy Supper, is through the blessing
of God, the real and spiritual communion of the body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 10.16. Jeroboam his Calves, though of Gold, did not heal any who
worshipped them: but there is much comfort and benefit to be had in the ^^^ple
Ordinances of God, much more than in all the specious and glistering inventions
of men. One old zealous Father, at the Council of Nice, prevailed more with
that young Heathen Philosoph, for his conversion to the Christian Faith, even
by speaking to him in the simplicity of the Gospel, than all the learned
Fathers could do by dispute and arguing. 3. The occasion of making and lifting
up the brazen Serpent, was their great pain and danger in being deadly wounded
by the fiery fleeing Serpents, Numb 21. So the occasion, both of the
Incarnation of Christ, and of his death upon the Cross, was our sins, wherewith
we were wounded by the old Serpent, and had been in pain for ever, if Christ
had not been Incarnat and died also for us; he was wounded for our
transgressions, Isa. 53.5.

The consideration of this, that our sins were the cause of the lifting up of
Christ upon the Tree of the Cross, should work in us these three penal
affections, 1. Grief and great sorrow for our bypast sins, Zech. 12.10. David
when he saw the innocent people destroyed by the Pestilence, he was grieved at
the heart, and said, 2 Samuel 24.17. Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly;
but these sheep, what have they done? So we may and should say in the grief of
our hearts, What has the innocent Lamb of God done, who was without spot, and
blameless? But we have sinned, and we have eaten the so^^ Grape; and his teeth
was set on edge: we stretched out our hearts and hands to iniquity; and his
back was scourged for our offenses. 2. It should work in our consciences, shame
and self-indignation; and we should afflict our spirits for our sins, as
Ephraim did, Jer. 31.19. I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear
the reproach of my youth. 3. An active detestation of all sin^ul ways for time
coming, as it is said, Job 34.32. That which I see not, teach thou me: if I
have done iniquity, I will do no more, Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have
I to do any more with idols?

2. The place wherein the Serpent was lifted up, was the wilderness: even there
did God provide a remedy, where no means of humane help was to be had: there
was no antidotes to be found in the wilderness against the venom, for
preserving from that infl^mmation, and extreme burning with pain: So fallen
man, was in a wilderness-estate after he had sinned against God: for in holy
Scripture, wilderness i^ taken for, a desolat condition, Isai. 35 6. In the
wilderness shall waters break out; that is, plentiful refreshment by the
Messiah. Isai. 41.18. I will make the wilderness a pool of water. When no
remeed for healing man could be had from creatures, the righteous Angels could
not satisfy infinite Justice, they being finit creatures: no more than the
payment of ten pounds can exhaust the debt of an hundred thousand pounds: holy
and righteous men cannot satisfy for themselves, Psalm. 143.2. And enter not
into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified. Yet in such an extremity, like a wilderness, wherein no out-gate is
seen, the Lords own arm brought salvation to his people, Isai. 63.5. I looked,
and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold:
therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury, it upheld me. In
this wilderness, our blessed Lord was lifted up; let us look by faith to him,
when at any time we are stung with the tongues of a viperous generation, and
back-biters, who are like Dan, an adder by the way; in such a case look thou to
Jesus Christ lifted up on the Cross, mocked and reviled, Heb. 12.3. Consider
him, that endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, lest ye be
wearied and faint in your minds. In this world, that is a wilderness of many
Labyrinths and difficulties, wherein many times we see no probable outgate: Let
us lean by faith and dependence on Christ crucified, the Captain of our
Salvation; and he will at death lead us out of this wilderness, into that
Paradise that is above. as it is said of the spouse in Cant. 8.5. Who is this
that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? Romans 8.39. Nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separat us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

3. As the Serpent was lifted up upon the Pole; even so was Christ upon the
Cross, 1 Pet. 2 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree;
the word there ((...)) signifies both to bear a burden, as Matthew. 4.6. The
Angels will bear thee in their hands, (...) and also to take away, Joh. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, (...). So our
blessed Lord took away our sins, by bearing the burden of the punishment due to
us; and thereby making satisfaction to Divine Justice, Isai. 53.6. We have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of
us all; and verse. 12 He was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the
sins of many. He was lifted up upon the Cross, and died that kind of death, to
take away the curse of the moral Law, threatened against us for our sins, Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Although
there be no proportion between a temporal curse or punishment, and that eternal
curse and punishment due to us for our sins; yet the infinite worth of the
Person, being the Son of God, gave infinite worth and value to his sufferings
for a short time, for taking away the eternal punishment, and for procuring to
us an eternal and exceeding weight of glory, according to that of Heb. 9 14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, Purge our Conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God?

As our blessed Lord was lifted upon the Cross; so let us lift up our minds and
hearts to him, and as Paul had the Philippians always in his heart, Philip.
1.7. So let us carry Christ crucified always in our hearts. 1. This should be
our great care and study, with the Apostle Paul, who studied nothing so much as
the knowledge of Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. And Philip. 3.10. That I
may know the fellowship of his sufferings. For this end, the holy Sacrament of
the Supper was institute, to bring often to our remembrance the death of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 11.26. 2. Serious and frequent thoughts of his Cross, will
mortify sin in us, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ. Thoughts of the
great grief and shame, brought upon the Innocent Lamb of God by our sins,
should pierce our hearts: should we rejoice in that, which made him cry out, My
Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death? God forbid we should glory in that
which procured the shame of the Cross to him. The thoughts of his Cross will
mortify our impatience in all our afflictions; when we look to him, who with
so great patience endured the Cross, and with insuperable courage despised the
shame of the World. This will mortify our love to the perishing vanities of
this present world, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world. As a dead man is not affected with the pleasures of the world;
and the world is crucified to him, as a man has no pleasure to look upon the
limbs of a malefactor hanged up in the high way. 3. Thoughts of the cross of
Christ, have an active and attractive Virtue: they will quicken our Faith, and
draw us nearer to Christ; where the carcass is, there will the eagles be
gathered, Matthew. 24.28. The sweet smell of the cross of Christ, draws
Believers to him: It will quicken our love to Christ, and our obedience, Can.
1.3, 4. Thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love
thee: draw me, and we shall run after thee. A thankful man cannot but love his
servant, that has suffered much for him; how much more should we love our
blessed Lord, who suffered so much for us, who by an evil Nature, are born
enemies to God? The consideration of his death, will quicken our hope and
dependence upon God, for all things needful in time coming, Romans 8.32. He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with
him also, freely give us all things? It will quicken our love to all who belong
to Christ, especially in the time of their distress; as the love of David to
Jonathan, in the remembrance of his great kindness, did make him enquire after
these that belonged to Jonathan, that he might show kindness to them, 2 Samuel
9.1. The consideration of this great love of Christ, in dying such a death for
us, by the power of his Love, will subdue our sinful lusts, and make us by
patience to overcome difficulties and afflictions in suffering for his Name,
Romans 8.37. Nay, in all tbese things we are more than Conquerours, through him
that loved us. This Heavenly fire of his Love in our hearts, like lightnings,
will quench that earthly fire and exhalations of unclean lusts. 4. Serious and
deep thoughts of the cross of Christ, will comfort and encourage us against all
our enemies, whether devils or wicked men, because Christ, upon the c^oss, has
spoiled principalities and powers. Col. 2 15. Satan our arch-enemy, is both
bound and spoiled by the Captain of our Salvation. He may and will molest us,
like an enemy besieging a City, and making frequent assaults; but he shall not
prevail to get possession, John 10.28. They shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. The true Believers, may and will be
molested, by wicked men tempting them to sin; and persecuting them with tongue
or hands, because they will not run with them in the excess of riot, 1 Pet.
4.4. But be of good comfort; for even all the wicked in the world, are
subjected to him by the merit and power of his Cross, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. Joh.
16.33. These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace; in
the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world. The thoughts of the death of Christ, will comfort us against the severe
charge, and sharp challenges of a guilty and accusing Conscience, Romans 8.34.
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again; who is even at the right hand of G^d, who also makes Intercession for
us. It will comfort and encourage against the fear of death; seeing our blessed
Lord by his death on the Cross, has taken away the sting and curse from our
death, 1 Cor. 15.57. But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. The necessity of the death of Christ upon the Cross, even so must the Son
of man be lifted up; It was necessary our Lord should die. 1. There was a
necessity of immutability in respect of Gods decree to save lost man by the
sufferings and death of Jesus Christ, Heb 2.10. For it became him, for whom are
all things; and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to
make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. 1 Pet. 1.20.
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times for you. 2. There was a necessity in respect of
infallibility to fulfill the Prophesies concerning his death for our sins. Isa.
53.12. He has poured out his soul unto death. Dan. 9.26. The Messiah shall be
cut off, but not for himself. 3. To fulfill and to be answerable by his death
and bloody sacrifice to the typical sacrifices, Heb. 10.4, 5, 6, 7. For it is
not possible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins, etc.
And, Rev. 13 8. he is called, The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world;
to wit, in these mystical and typical sacrifices, before, and under, the Law.
4. There was a necessity for him to die this kind of death on the Cross;
whereof see more in Sermon. Joh. 12.32.

Though there was a necessity for our blessed Lord to die, yet he submitted to
it most willingly; he poured out his soul unto death, and frequently it is said
in the New Testament, he emptied himself, and gave himself to the death, Gal.
1.4. Ephesians. 5.2. Tit. 2.14. This kind of necessity agrees well with a
spontaneous willingness, though not with a liberty of indifferency toward the
opposite act. And seeing our blessed Lord submitted himself willingly to this
necessity, in order to our salvation; let us also, whenever in a necessity of
divine providence we are called to undergo this or that cross, willingly and
cheerfully submit our selves to the necessity of his wise providence: Let us
say as our Lord did, Not my will, but thine be done. Let us say as David did, 2 Samuel 15.26. Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. And
with these loving Professors, Acts 21.14. When Paul would not be persuaded, we
ceased, saying, the will of the Lord be done.

5. There is a resemblance in the consequent and effect of their looking to the
brazen Serpent, and of believers their looking to Christ on the Cross. 1. These
Serpents in the wilderness were deadly: the Septuagint Interpreters calls them
(...): so in sin there is the bite of the old Serpent, when a temptation to sin
is fastened on our hearts, and we give consent to it, Jam. 1.15. When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is finished, brings forth
death. The bite of the Serpents, was painful before they looked up to the
brazen Serpent; there was a burning inflammation and pain from the sting: so it
is in sinne^s, after they have sinned, the sting of an evil conscience remains
burning and tormenting them from the sense of guiltiness, and the fear of wrath
to come, and fear has torment, 1 John 4.18. 2. They were pained at the heart,
before they looked to the brazen Serpent: so before a sinner can look by faith
to Jesus Christ, and so be healed, there must be pain and grief at his heart in
some measure of sincerity, for offending the just and gracious God, Mat. 9.11,
12. Jesus said unto them, they that be whole need not a Physician, but they
that are sick. Two sorts of persons are not healed at the first, to wit, those
that are lethargick, or phrenetick; senseless of sin, or conceitful of their own
righteousness: The Church of Laodicea is convinced first of her security and
vain imaginations, before she be invited to be healed, Rev. 3.19. And the
Pharisee, conceited of his own righteousness, returned to his house not
justified, Luke 18. As the lethargick is ordinarily cured by casting him into a
fever, and then he being sensible of his distemper, is healed by the Physician;
so our great Physician puts secure and senseless sinners oftentimes to a sharp
fever and exercise of conscience, by discovering covering sin and wrath to
them, and thereafter heals them, as he did the Jailer, Act. 16.30, 31. The
Phrenetick and conceity soul, the Lord heals, by beating them with the sharp
rods of affliction, Job 36.8, 9, 10. If they be bound in fetters, and be holden
in cords of affliction; then he shows them their work and their
transgressions that they have exceeded: he opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity.

They were healed by looking up to the brazen Serpent; so by faith in Christ
Jesus, we are healed from our sins, Act. 16.30. Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. He is the only Physician, that is both able
and willing to heal the broken in heart: As the People stung, were healed by
their looking up, as a condition appointed and required by God: But they were
not healed for their looking up, as a cause meritorious of healing; so Faith is
appointed, and required as an instrument or condition, without which there is
no Justification and Salvation; but it is not the cause meritorious, but looks
to Christ alone, as the procurer of our Justification and Salvation in his
blood: The sick Woman was healed of her bloody flux, through her touching of
Christ, but not by any virtue in her touching; for the healing virtue came from
Christ himself alone, Mark 5.30. Luke 6.19. He heals us of all the stings,
that disquiet and torment our spirits; of which there be four. 1. The sting of
a guilty and tormenting Conscience, spoken of, Job 20.12. 2. The sting of
outward great afflictions, not only in the Wicked, but also in the Godly; to
wit, a fear and apprehension of wrath in the affliction, Job 6.4. The arrows
of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit; the
terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. 3. The sting of
temptation, 2 Cor. 12.7. There was given to me a thorn in the flesh. 4. The
sting of death, 1. Cor. 15.56. At that time, our sins that were quiet from
tormenting us, as the viper was for a time, Act. 28. at death they leap on our
Consciences, to torment them with fear of the second Death. Therefore let us
look to Christ crucified, that we may be healed of all these stings, Isai.
45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth: Look to him,
who shed his blood for the remission of sins; who has reconciled us in the
blood of his Cross; and this look, will calm the Conscience, from the sting of
guiltiness, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. When thou art disquieted with the sting of
afflictions, look to Christ, who by the merit of his sufferings, has taken
away the curse and wrath from thy sufferings, and makes them medicinal and
profitable for thy soul, Heb. 12 10. He chastises us for our profit, that we
may be partakers of his holiness. 3. Against the sting of temptations and sharp
trials, look to his rich and free Love, Romans 8.37. He will give strength to
resist, 2 Cor. 12.9. He will give outgate, 1 Cor. 10.13. 4. Against the sting
of death, look by Faith to Jesus Christ, who is the Savior of his body, Romans 8
1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Look by Faith to
him, interceeding at the right hand of God, for preserving us Believers unto
eternal Life, Rom 8.34. Joh. 10.28. As by his death he purchased our peace with
God, so by his Intercession he perpetuats that peace, Heb. 7.25 Wherefore he is
able also to save them to the outermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make Intercession for them.

4. All that looked to the brazen Serpent, were healed; although in such a
great number of men, all were not alike quick-sighted; so all Believers, though
not alike strong in Faith, by looking to Christ crucified, are saved from their
sins. There is no exception of infants in the life of Faith, although in the
estate of Grace, and for the time they be not able, by a reflex act, to discern
their own estate: as infants are refreshed with bodily food, although their
hand be not so large, as the hand of men grown up to ripe age: the promise of
salvation is universal to all true Believers, whether stronger or weaker, Joh.
3.16. Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: The
Church of Christ, is compared to a flock of sheep, Act. 20.28. And all the
sheep are not alike strong; yet the great Shepherd of our souls, does gather
the Lambs with his arm, and carries them in his bosom, and does gently lead
those that are with young, Isai. 40.11. It is compared to a family, Heb. 5.14.
And all in the family are not alike strong; so it is in the Church: and yet our
heavenly Father feeds all by Jesus Christ, the bread of life. Therefore look
unto him, with the eye of Faith, though weak, and be ye saved, Isai. 45.22. It
is not so with the eye of a believing soul, as it is with the eye of the body,
in beholding this created Sun; the more it looks upon it, the eye is the more
dazzled and weakened; but the more a Believer looks on Christ the Sun of
righteousness, he grows the stronger in the grace of Faith: because he sees
more and more of the power of Christ, to save all who come to God by him; who
is the Son of God, in whom the Father is always well pleased; he sees the
more of his willingness to accept of sinners; he sees him on the cross,
giveing pardon, and promising Paradise to a notorious malefactor; he hears
him praying for forgiveness to his enemies: Therefore he concludes, that he
will not reject his soul that comes unto him sincerely, though weakly.

It is not said, that the Son of man must be lifted up, that all men may
believe; or that all men may have eternal li^e: For if the Lord had intended,
that all men should believe, or that all men should be saved, then all men
should believe and should be saved; for who has resisted his will, and
purpose? Romans 9.19. It is also repugnant to his wisdom, to intend what he knows
cannot come to pass, to wit, that all men should have Faith; for Faith comes by
hearing the Gospel, and God intends not to send the Gospel to all men.

The bite of the Serpent in the wilderness, was in it self deadly; yet all who
looked to the brazen Serpent were healed: So all sin in it self is deadly; for
the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. But if we confess our sins with sorrow
for them, and a purpose to forsake them; and if by faith, we look to Christ
crucified, and rest on him, we shall be saved, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. We would consider well the covenant of Grace, made in
Christ to Believers: It is a covenant well ordered, sure and everlasting, 2 Samuel 23.4. It is well ordered, and adorned with rich and free promises of all
things requisite for our eternal happiness; as promises of mercy, (I will
forgive them their sins) of grace and sanctification, I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and writ it in their hearts, etc. Jer. 31.33, 34. It is a
sure Covenant, because grounded on two things immutable, to wit, Gods eternal
Counsel and Decree manifested in the Gospel, for blessing and saving all
Believers in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.16. All the promises, are Yea and Amen in
him; because, made in a respect to his satisfaction, and performed by him in
the fullness of time: The other ground of the sureness of the Covenant, is the
Oath of God, Heb. 6.17, 18. Genesis 22.16. It is made sure by the blood of our
Surety and Mediator Jesus Christ, who shed his blood both to purchase, and to
assure us of the remission of our sins: It is ensured to us by the Seals of the
holy Sacraments, and although the Seals under the Old and New Testament, be
diverse: yet the Covenant sealed, is one and the same; as the face is one and
the same, when veiled and unvailed. It is an everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32.40.
I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, etc. It is put in the hand of
our Surety, to be kept for us, and he by the power of his invincible Grace,
keeps us for the possession of the heavenly Inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. For farther clearing the
Doctrine of believing in Jesus Christ for Justification, or Remission of sins,
and for eternal Life, we would answer some Questions.

Quest. What is the Object of justifying and saving Faith? Answ. The Object of
divine Faith, is all the divine truths revealed in the holy Scripture; but the
Object of justifying and saving Faith, is the Lord Jesus Christ; he is the only
Object, whereunto we must look for justification and salvation, Isa. 45.22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth. Act. 10.43. To him
gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in
him, shall receive remission of sins. Act. 13.39. By him, all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. As these who were wounded by the fiery serpents in the wilderness, looked
also to the pole whereupon it was set; but they were healed only by looking to
the brazen Serpent its self; so though the whole Scripture, is as a ring of
gold, precious and much to be esteemed, yet the Lord Jesus Christ, is as the
precious stone in the midst of it; and for obtaining justification and
salvation, is to be looked unto allanerly: The Lord Jesus Christ, and Gods rich
and free love in sending him into the world, is mostly, among all divine
Truths, to be looked unto, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. Joh. 20.31.
But these are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son
of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his Name. So as he is
the alone Object, to which we should look, as the meritorious cause of our
justification and salvation; so, of all revealed divine Truths, he is the
principal Object of our Faith; he is the end of the Law Cerimonial, Gal. 3.24.
He is the entire supplement of the Moral Law, by his perfect righteousness and
satisfaction to divine justice, Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likness of
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. And he is the Mediator
and substance of all Gospel-promises, 2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God in
him, are Yea, and in him Amen. Therefore it is our duty to be conversant in all
divine Truths revealed in holy Scripture; but we should meditate most
frequently upon this divine Truth of our justification and salvation by Jesus
Christ, wherein most eminently is manifested the Father's love in sending him,
the love of the Son in coming into the world, that by the merit of his death,
we may be justified and saved; and the love of the Holy Ghost, in anointing and
qualifying him for these great effects: as the Be passes through many flowrs
in the Garden, but stays longest on these, where it gets most honey; so we
should often meditate upon the mystery of Gods free love in Jesus Christ: All
the Scriptures are faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptance; yet this
saying is eminent above all, 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners. We should turn away our eyes from looking to any thing as
meritorius of justification and salvation: but we should look unto Christ alone
and his righteousness for the salvation of our souls; because life eternal, is
the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. And we are saved by
grace, through Faith in him, Ephesians. 2.8. This doctrine, from the force of truth
upon the Conscience, and for quieting the heart in the remembrance of our own
unrighteousness, the learned and worthy reformed Divines, have maintained
according to the holy Scriptures; and the learned Bishop Andrews, (in his Sermon.
on Jer. 23.6.) says piously and soundly, That if men would set God before them
in his justice, and their own souls in their guiltiness, they would interpose
nothing between the revenging justice of God, and their guilty souls, but the
alone righteousness of Jesus Christ: yea, some of the Roman Church, have
acknowledged, that justification and salvation, is to be sought only in the
Lord Jesus Christ; as was evident from that directory for visitation of the
sick, reprinted at Venice, one thousand five hundred seventy six; the priest is
directed to propone this question to the sick person, Believe thou that none
can be saved by their own merits, or any other way, than by the merit of our
Lord Jesus Christ? And the Priest is directed to instruct the sick person, that
there is no other way of salvation, but by Faith on Jesus Christ alone.
Bellarmin. (lib. 3. of Justif.) after a long debate, he concludes, It is safer
for the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and for shunning the danger of
vain glory, to put our confidence only in the righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Ferus, a learned and moderat Divine, commenting upon the parable of the
Laborers in the Vineyard, Mat. 20. speaks to this purpose, God promised
freely, and he rewards freely; therefore if thou would keep Gods favor
toward thee, make no mention of thy own merits; for he will give all things out
of his own mercy; nevertheless thou must not be the slower to do good works;
yea rather thou should be the more zealous of them, seeing we have so
bountiful a Lord.

Quest. Is there no more required for justification, but only Faith in Jesus
Christ? Is there no more required for inheriting eternal life, but to receive
him, and to rely on him? Answ. Some of late, even Divines of the reformed
Church, have spoken very rashly (to say no worse) of some eminent and Orthodox
learned men of the Reformed Churches, as if they did not require in the
believer new obedience and sanctification: It is true, they require according
to the Scriptures, that by Faith alone in Christ and his righteousness, they
should look for justification; but they require new obedience and
sanctification in the believer, as a necessary antecedent unto eternal life.
The Harmony of learned Divines of the reformed Church, in the Doctrine of
justification, See in learned Hornbeck his Institut. Theolog. Cap. 11. and they
affi^m that as our sins were imputed to Christ the Surety and Mediator of the
New Covenant, so his Righteousness is imputed to believers for justification:
therefore it is not, as some in their expressions, complying with the Papists,
have spoken, a fancy, or Justitia Putativa, a supposed righteousness, but it is
real of God the Father, accompting his Sons Righteousness unto the sinner, and
by that accompting, making it his to all effects, as if the sinner himself had
performed it: as speaks the learned and famous Arch. B. Usher, in his Sum of
Christian Religion upon this Subject: Because (says he) this Righteousness is
in Christ, not as in a person severed from us; but as in the head of the
Church, the second Adam, from whom therefore it is communicated unto all, who
being united as members unto him, do lay claim thereunto, and apply it unto
themselves, Romans 5.19. Romans 10.4. And though (says he) it be not fit to
measure heavenly things by the yard of reason, yet it is not unreasonable, that
a man owing a thousand pound, and not being able to pay it, his Creditor may be
satisfied by one of his ^riends: And answering to that question, how then does
the soul reach after Christ in the act of justifying? Even as a man (says he)
fallen into a river and like to be drowned, as he is carried down with the
flood, espyeth the bough of a tree, hanging over the river, which he catches
at, and clingeth unto, with all his might to save him; and seeing no other way
of succor but that, ventureth his life upon it: This man so soon as he had
fastened upon this bough, is in a safe condition; though all troubles, fears and
terrors are not presently out of his mind; until he come to himself, and
sees himself quit out of danger; then he is sure he is safe; but he was safe,
before he was sure: Even so it is with a believer, Faith is the espying of
Christ, as the only means to save, and the reaching out of the heart to lay
hold upon him: God has spoke the word and made the promise in his Son; I
believe him to be the only Savior, and remit my soul to him to be saved by his
Mediation: So soon as the soul can do this, God imputes the righteousness of
his Son unto it, and it is actually justified in the Court of heaven; though it
is not presently quieted and pacified in the court of conscience; that is done
afterward, in some sooner, in some later, by the fruits and effects of
justification.

Quest. Is there an infallible and inviolable connection between true faith on
Jesus Christ, and salvation by him? Ans. Yea, for it is said here, That
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. And it
was said ^y the Apostle Paul unto the Jailer, Acts 16. Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall he saved. Christ is said to dwell in the heart by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. As there is a local union between a man and the house wherein
he dwells and resides, so there is a spiritual and real union between Christ
and a believer; and there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: and to
assure believers on Christ, of the certainty of their salvation, it is said in
the present tense, Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life. Believers are as sure of it by their claim of faith on Christ, as if they
were already in present possession of it: yea, it is said in the preterit
tense, Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Quest. May not one have true justifying and saving faith in his heart, and yet
not know that he is justified? Ans. Yea, he may have the direct act of faith,
whereby he is justified; and yet not have the reflex act of faith, whereby he
knows, and is assured of the gift of Faith, freely given to him of God, by
which act he is Assured of his justification; as an Infant has the truth of
life natural in him, though for want of ripeness in judgment, he does, not by
a reflex act of understanding, know the same: Yea, a true and justified person,
may be so overwhelmed in spirit with the fears of his former great and many
sins, though he embrace Christ, and rely on him wholly and only for salvation,
that yet he may so faint in his fears, that at the time he does not discern the
truth of the life of grace and faith in his Soul; as a person in the time of
his bodily swouning and fainting, does not discern the truth of a natural life
in his body: Notwithstanding the true Believer, in such times and cases, cannot
discern the truth of the life of faith in himself; yet other godly discerning
Christians, perceiving his sincere desire after the means of Salvation, and his
appetite toward the Gospel, which is the immortal seed of the new life, do very
rationally conclude, that he has the truth, though not the vigor of the life of
grace and faith in his soul; as these who look on, and see an Infant greedily
sucking the breast, though the Infant it self has no knowledge to discern its
own life, yet they truly conclude from its natural appetit to the means of
life, that it has life; because as new born babes, they desire the sincere milk
of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.

Quest. What are the effects and signs whereby I may discern the truth of
faith, when we have not the vigor of it? Ans. We discern it by the effects. 1.
The true Believer has an high estimation of Christ, and a low estimation of
himself: He is precious to Believers, 1 Pet. 2.7. Paul had an high estimation
of Christ, that he came into the world to save sinners; and a low estimation of
himself, as being the least of Saints, and chief of sinners: The true believer
esteems highly of the Gospel, whereby life and immortality is brought to light
through Christ. He accounts all things but loss; yea, but dung and unsavory,
in camparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord,
Phil. 3.8. 2. The true believer, as he rejoices most in the cross of Christ; so
he mourns for his sins, whereby he crucified the Lord of glory; he looks upon
him whom he pierced with his grievous sins, and he mourns as one mourns for
his only Son, Zach. 12.10. 3. True faith, is a Magisterial grace, and labors
to quiet our unruly affections and passions, as an awful Master, by his
presence, quiets the unruly Scholars; for, faith receiving Christ in the heart
to dwell there, commands all the affections to be still, and to do nothing
that may disturb and grieve the Spirit of Christ; the Spouse, after she has
found her Beloved, says to her heart and affections, I charge you, O ye
daughters of Jerusalem, etc. that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he
please: That ye neither interrupt his delight in me, nor my delights in him,
Cant. 3.5. 4. True faith purifieth the heart, and labors daily to keep it
clean by the bessom of repentance, Act. 15.9. God put no difference between us
and them, purifying their hearts by faith. The Lord is said to dwell in the
heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. And after the believer has received him, he
endeavors daily to keep the house clean where he dwells: by faith, the heart
is espoused unto Christ as a chaste virgin, 2 Cor. 11.2. And when the believer
is tempted to any vile lust, he says with Joseph, how can I do this and sin
against my Lord, to whom I am espoused for ever in holiness and righteousness?
5: True faith on Jesus Christ, works by love, Gal. 5.6. It commands us, and
in an holy violence constrains us to love the Father, who has forgiven us
much; to love the Son, who shed his blood for the remission of sins; an^ to
love the Holy Ghost, who is the sealer and confirmer of our justification and
remission: Faith on Christ, commands us, and by a commanded act, requires us to
love one another, 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we should believe
on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another. As lines drawn from
the circumference, the nearer they come to the Center, they are the nearer one
unto another; so believers the nearer they come by faith to Jesus Christ, the
Center of our souls rest and happiness, they are the more united one to another
in love; yea, when by faith we look upon Christ, as our great example, faith
does command us to love even our enemies, with the love of benevolence and
beneficence; when we perceive our blessed Lord, both prayed for his enemies,
and also healed Malchus ear; and in a special manner to love all saints with a
love of complacency and delight, as fellow members of the mystical body of the
Lord Jesus Christ; and to walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has
given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor.

It is therefore the wisdom, duty, and comfort of believers, to examine
themselves, that they be not only sound in the doctrine of faith, but also
sincere in the grace and work of faith, that they may have rejoicing in
themselves from the testimony of a good conscience, Gal. 6.4. True and sincere
justifying and saving faith, receives Christ entirely to dwell in their
hearts: the sincere believer receives him in all his Offices; as a Priest, to
bless the soul where he dwells, with all spiritual blessings; as a Prophet, to
teach him by the Word; and as a King, to rule him by his Law and holy
Commandments. As he receives him by faith, so he intertains him by love; as he
receives Christ by faith, so he gives up himself by love unto him; as Christ
dwells in him by faith, so he dwells in Christ by love and delight; he
intertains him by obedience in the course of Sanctification; as an honest
Subject, who sometime was a rebel to his Prince, the more he rests upon the
word of the Prince for his remission, he is the more ready and active to obey
him in all time coming: for though faith rest on Christ alone, and on no other
for Justification and Salvation, yet it rests not from the duties of obedience
in the course of Sanctification; the true believer in the preparation of his
heart, is ready to every good work and commanded duty, with the Apostle Paul,
Acts 9.6. saying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? For the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, obliges believers the more strictly to the duties of
Sanctification: for, knowing they are justified in the blood of Christ, which
is the price of our redemption, therefore should they glorify God in their body
and in their spirit, which are God's, not only by the right of creation, and
temporal preservation; but also by the right of redemption and everlasting
salvation, 1 Cor. 6.20. Seeing they have the promises of free grace, ratified in
the blood of Christ, they should cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. See more,
2 Cor. 5.15. Tit. 2.11, 12, 14. So that the Doctrine of Justification by faith
in Jesus Christ, does not make void the Law, but establishes the Law, Romans
3.31. Though it make the Law void as to Justification by it, Rom, 8.3. yet it
does not make it void, or cancel it from being a fixed rule for our direction.
Now to the Lord Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher of our faith, with the
Father and Holy Ghost, be all praise, etc. Amen.

Spiritual Life, and Spiritual Walking. SERMON V.
GAL. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
THe Apostle, having spoken in verse. 22, 23, 24. of the seve^al fruits of the
Spirit in the soul, wherein he has planted the life of grace; he infers
this conclusion, If we live in the Spirit, etc. that is, if we be quickened by
the Spirit of God, and raised to a new life of grace, let it be seen in the
course and actions of our life, Let us walk by the Spirit: that is, by the
guidance and direction of the Spirit, according to the Word of God, which was
inspired into the Prophets and Apostles by the Holy Spirit.

In the words, we have, 1. A benefit supposed, If we live in the Spirit. 2. A
duty proposed, Let us walk in the Spirit.

For clearing the benefit supposed, we would know, 1. The nature and condition
of this life, which we are said here to have by the Spirit; what it is. 2. We
would know the necessity of this life. 3. The excellent quality of it, in
excelling all other kinds of life.

1. As for the nature of this life, it has three effects or operations, 1. Our
Justification, whereby our sins are forgiven, and we are absolved from the
sentence of damnation, through the perfect obedience and satisfaction of our
Mediator, the Lord Jesus Christ: as a man sentenced to death for some heinous
crime, is called a dead man, even before the execution of the sentence; and
when he is absolved, he is said to be a living man; so by nature, through sin
and guiltiness, we are children of wrath, and dead in sins and trespasses,
obnoxious to eternal death and damnation; but being justified by faith in Jesus
Christ, we are said to live in Christ, and have the hope to live with him for
ever. This life is purchased to us by the merit of the death of Christ, and is
applied by the Holy Spirit, working faith in us, whereby we are united to
Christ, and receive, in and through him, remission of sins, offered to us in
the preaching of the Gospel, and s^aled in the holy Sacraments, 1 Cor. 6.11.
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 2. The act also and operation of
the life of grace, is our Sanctification, wrought in us by the Holy Spirit,
mortifying in us the deeds of the body, Romans 8.13 If ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, to wit, the life of glory in
Heaven; and it is a quickening of us to live here unto righteousness, as a man
pincing away in sickness, is said to be a dead man in respect of his fast
approaching unto death; and when he is in the way of recovery, he is said to be
a living man; because there are pregnant hopes of his better health and life.
This life of Sanctification, purchased also by Christ, is applied and wrought
in us by the Holy Spirit, through the washing of regeneration, and renewing of
the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. 3. There is the life of comfort and spiritual
cheerfulness; it is said of old Jacob, Genesis 44.30. His life is bound up in the
lad's life: because he was much comforted in his son Joseph. When sin and
judgment is set before us, our heart is dead and comfortless, like the heart
of Nabal, whose heart, at the report of David's wrath against him, died within
him through fear, 1 Samuel 25.37. But when the Spirit of the Lord in our fears
and faintings, does revive us by the sweet and piercing smell of the cross of
Christ, received by faith into the soul, then we live a comfortable life, and
our soul rejoices in God our Savior, 2 Cor. 4.11. For we which live, are
always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might
be made manifest in our mortal flesh, that is, that the life of comfort and
inward strength from Christ might be manifested in our sufferings, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. This life of
inward comfort and strength, purchased also by the merit of the death of
Christ, is applied and wrought in us by the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16. I
bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. that he would grant
you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, by his
Spirit, in the inner-man. This life, is called our life in Christ, Col. 3.3, 4.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. It is purchased by
him, hid and preserved in him and with him, as the life of the branches is
preserved in the root, Joh. 14.19* Because I live, ye shall live also. It is
called the life of the Spirit, or by the Spirit, in this place, because by the
Holy Spirit, we are united and joined unto the Lord our Head and Savior, 1 Cor
6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit: and because we are
renewed to a new life by the Holy Spirit, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. It is called
the life of faith, Gal. 2.20. because, by faith we receive the life of
Justification, Sanctification, and of inward comfort from Jesus Christ.

2. This life of grace, is absolutely necessar as a midst and necessar
antecedent unto eternal life. 1. As the natural life is a necessar foundation
of natural actings and operations; dead Trees grow not, dead Animals walk not,
dead men discourse not; so the life of the Spirit in us, is the foundation of
all our spiritual and supernatural actings: without this life, men are dead in
sin, and cannot grow in grace; without it, men are dead, and cannot walk in the
ways of Gods commandments; without it, men are dead, and cannot understand nor
perceive the things of God in a saving way for the salvation of their souls, 1
Cor. 2.14. 2. The necessity of the life of grace wrought in us by the Spirit,
appears in this, because without it, there is no coming to the life of glory,
Joh* 3.5. This life of grace, is the infancy of the life of glory; and as one
cannot grow up to the perfect stature of a man, unless he has been first an
infant, so a man cannot be a perfect man in glory, except first he be an infant
in the state of grace: as one cannot be put into actual possession of an
inheritance, till he first be born into the world; so no man can be put into
the possession of the heavenly inheritance, until first he be born over-again
by the holy Spirit, the author of the life of grace, and the preparer and
preserver of us for the life of glory. This life, in, or through, the Spirit,
is absolute necessar, even for all men who would come to the life of glory: for
it is said indefinitly, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: Though he were never so nobly
descended of earthly progenitors, yet if he live not in the Spirit, it may be
said of him, as of Judas, It had been good for him he had never been born. 3.
It is necessar for our comfort, to assure us we are united to Christ, and that
neither life nor death shall separat us from him: as life in the branch, is an
evidence of its ingrafture and union with the Tree, So our partaking of the
life of the Spirit, is a comfortable evidence, that Christ is in us by the
indwelling of his Spirit, and we are in him by faith and love, 1 John 4.13.
Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his Spirit.

3. This life in the Spirit, is an excellent life, if simply considered in it
self, 1. In respect of that true and pure pleasure that attends it; the
deceitful pleasures of a sinful life, are like the sting of an asp, casting a
man into a deep sleep, but when the conscience is awaked, the heart, through
fear, is as Pashur, Magor-missabib, fear round about; the conscience of a
sinful liver, is like a chiding wife in the bosom, casting up to the man all
the former evil ways he has walked in, in the days of his former life. But
the godly and spiritual liver, has much inward pleasure and soul-satisfaction,
Pro. 14.14. The back-slider in heart, shall be filled with his own ways: and a
good man shall be satisfied from himself. His good conscience, from the sense
of the life of the Spirit within him, is like Abishag to David in his old age;
it does cherish the inner-man, and warm it with a sense of Gods love, shed
abroad in the heart by the holy Spirit; it sweetens common mercies to the man
who lives in the Spirit. The primitive believers, from the sense and comfort of
the life in the Spirit, did eat their meat with gladeness and singlness of
heart, Acts 2.46. Oh, that profane and worldly-minded men, who speak of a holy
and spiritual life, as a condition sad and comfortless, would become spiritual
livers in the Spirit, and take a proof of that estate of life: I say to these
men, as Philip said to Nathanael, Come and see; and after sight and proof, ye
will say as the Queen of Sheba did, it was true that was told me; but not the
half of that contentment and joy I find by experience, to be in a godly and
spiritual life, was told me. The life in the Spirit has great and certain gain
accompanying it, together with much unspeakabl contentment, 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness with contentment (that is, which has contentment always attending
it) is great gain. 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having
the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. It has the
promise of temporal blessings, Psalm. 34.6, 7. Romans 8.28. and of eternal
blessings, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. These who live in the Spirit, do live in great honor
and reputation with God; and the greater and wiser the person is, who does
bestow the honor, it is the greater: but so it is, that the great and wise God
does esteem much of men of an holy and spiritual life; he calls them his
Treasure, Psalm. 135.4. his inheritance and portion, Psalm. 35.12. his jewels,
Mal. 3.17. The friends of God, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. The sons of God, 1 John 3.1.

This life in the Spirit, is excellent, if compared with the natural life: the
life of the sense is common to us with the brute beasts, whereof some do excel
men in some outward senses: the life of reason, is common to us with Pagans and
Infidels; and many of them in their philosophy has excelled us: yea, our
living under the outward means of Word and Sacraments, is common to us with
many hypocrites and castawayes; but this life in the Spirit, is far more
excellent than that of sense and reason: as a man by reason, does far excel the
most sagacious beast; so does a man, living in the spirit, excel the greatest
Moralists, who were, or are, void of the life of grace by the Spirit: natural
men partake of the divine gifts, but spiritual and godly men are made partakers
of the divine nature, by way of assimilation, 2^ Pet. 1* 4. And as for men,
living, or rather dieing, and stinking above the earth in their vile lusts; a
godly and spiritual life does excel that vile and miserable life, as far as
light does darkness, and Heaven does Hell.

Seeing we live the life of grace by the Spirit, we should be very watchful,
that we grieve not the Spirit. 1. It is the worst sort of unthankfulness, to
render evil for good; and it is also unnatural for children to grieve their
parents, that under God are the author of their natural life, How great a sin
then is it, to grieve the holy Spirit the author of thy spiritual life? 2. Thou
art sealed by the Spirit, who seals thy eternal redemption to thy faith* by
the promises of the Gospel, and more clearly by the administration of the holy
Sacraments, as the outward common seal, and effectually by the graces of the
holy Spirit of sanctification, as the inward and privy seal of thine heavenly
inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed
with that holy spirit of promise. And, how loath are men, and in reason should
be so, to grieve the Kings Secretary, that has past their gift gratis through
the Seals? 3. The Spirit of God is the comforter; And should thou grieve
him, who many a time has comforted and supported thee in the day of thy trouble
and grief? If thou grieve the Comforter, to whom will thou go in the day of new
troubles on thy spirit, for comfort and strength?

Use 1. Therefore grieve not the holy Spirit in whom ye live, 1. By your unruly
passions; he is the Spirit of love and peace, grieve him not by your envy, and
malice one against another; it was a grief to Moses his spirit, who was a man,
living in the Spirit, to see the Hebrews at strife one with another: the holy
Spirit, is a Spirit of purity; and vile thoughts and motions in the heart,
entertained with delight, grieveth him, as the daughters of Heth did grieve
Rebekah; he is a liberal Spirit, as he is called, Psalm. 51.12. and our base
nigardness and unmercifulness toward the poor, does much grieve him. 2. Grieve
not the Spirit by speaking or doing against the light of your conscience, which
being inspired by the Word of God, is the counsel of the Spirit; thus did
Ananias grieve the Spirit, Act. 5.3, 4. and the Rulers, Act 7.51. 3. We grieve
him by our unbelief in new exigents of trouble, notwithstanding our former
experiences of his power and bounty, as the Disciples grieved our Lord, Mat.
16.8, 9. It is no small grief to thy friend if thou distrust him in a small
matter, when thou have had experience of his kindness in great matters. 4. We
would by all means beware of mocking the work of the Spirit in others; it was a
great grief to Sarah, that Ishmael mocked her son Isaac: so this mocking of the
work of mortification and holiness, does greatly grieve the Spirit of God: any
Artificer is grieved, to hear the work of his hands to be undervalued and
despised by others; so the Spirit of God, is greatly grieved and displeased to
see holiness, which is his own proper work in all who live in the Spirit, to be
undervalued and despised by the men of this present world, who mind not the
things of the Spirit but of the flesh. Labor to be spiritual, and like to the
Spirit by whom we live: we are said to be sealed by the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13.
and there is an impression of the seal upon the wax; so if we live by the
Spirit, and be sealed by him, there will be an impression of holine^s and
purity in some measure answering to the Spirit, by which we are sealed: Let us
be spiritual in our intentions toward the honor of God, with any gift of the
Spirit bestowed upon us; for our Lord says of the Spirit, Joh. 16.14. He shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. Let us labor
to be spiritual and heavenly-minded, often conversing in our hearts with God,
Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in Heaven: like Pilgrims, who being abroad do
often mind their own native country; let us be spiritual in our delights, for
they that are after the Spirit, mind the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.5. Let
our delight be most in God and things heavenly, as in spiritual benefits,
spiritual ordinances and spiritual duties: let us labor to be spiritual and
sincere in the worship of God; for the Father seeks such to worship him, Joh.
4.23.

Use 2. The duty propo^ed, walk in the Spirit, that is, walk by the power and
grace of the Spirit, according to the light of the Word inspired and dictated
by the Spirit: this Word, in the original, signifies to walk foot for foot
after the leading and teaching of the Spirit, by the word (...), as young
children walk after the footsteps of their father in the same path, though not
with steps equal to the father; or as School-boyes learn the A, B, C, and first
elements (which are called (...)) one letter after another: In like manner we
learn precept upon precept, and thereafter do construct and set the actions of
our life and conversation together aright, according to the rule of the Word of
God, so that by walking in the Spirit, is meant the course of sanctification,
and of new obedience, required by God of us in the covenant of grace, as it was
said by God to Abraham, the father of the faithful, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me
and be thou upright. God promises in the new covenant of rich and free grace,
that he will both give unto his people power to walk in his commandments, and
also actual assistance in walking, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new heart also will I
give you; and a new spirit will I put within you, etc. And I will put my spirit
within you and cause you to walk in my statutes: To this duty we engage our
selves in the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, to walk in newness of
life, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father; even so
we also should walk in newness of life. And in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, we renew our engagement made in Baptism.

The duty of new obedience, is called a walking, 1. Because in wa^king, there
is a place, from which we walk and turn from; so in the course of new obedience
we must forsake our former evil ways, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts. 2. There is the way, wherein men do
walk; so the man, renewed by the Spirit, does walk in the way of Gods
commandments, Ezekiel. 20.19. I am the Lord your God; walk in my statutes. 3. A
light, according to the which men walk; so in ou^ Christian walking, the light
is the Word of God, Psalm. 119.105* Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light
unto my path. 4. In walking through a wilderness and dangerous places, men have
need of a skilful guide, as Hobab was to the people of Israel in the
wilderness: So men renewed, has need of the holy Spirit to guide and lead them
by his strength from one duty to another: Therefore David prays so often for
quickening in the ways of Gods commandments; for it is not enough, that once we
be quickened to a new life, but we have need also to be quickened thereafter and
stirred up to the duties of a new life. Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way. 5. As in bodily walking,
there is an end and place toward which we walk; so in our spiritual walking, we
walk from strength to strength, aiming at perfection and the seeing and
enjoying of God in mount Sion that is above; 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Phil. 3.13.14. I count not my
self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I
press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

This duty of walking in the ways of Gods commandments, is required of all,
who have the spiritual life of grace, If we live in the spirit, let us walk in
the spirit. Although the estate of grace, does free us from the Law, as it was
a covenant of works to man in the estate of innocence, Romans 6.14. Ye are not
under the law, but under grace; yet we are not fred from it as the fixed and
perpetual rule of the duty of thankfulness to God, both upon the account of our
creation and redemption, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the law through faith?
yea, we establish it. The Gospel adds a new obligation from the glade tidings
of our redemption through the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought
with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which
are Gods. To this we are called by the Gospel of grace, Tit. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet.
2.24. Christ bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to
sin, should live unto righteousness. To this walking in newness of life, we are
engaged by solemn profession in Baptism, wherein we are said to put on Christ,
Gal. 3.27. and these who put on Christ, should walk in newness of life, Romans
13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh,
to fulfill the lusts thereof. And Christ gives salvation only to them who
labor to obey him, by walking in newness of life, Heb. 5.9. And being made
perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation, unto all them that obey him.

There be three evident symptoms of natural life, to wit, 1. Appetite toward
the means of life, 2. Growth and increase of stature, And 3. Motion and
walking. In like-manner, there are three signs of spiritual life, 1. Appetite
and desire after the word and means of Salvation, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born
babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word. Although the renewed children of
God, do not know sometimes by the reflex act of knowledge and faith, that they
live by the Spirit; yet others experienced Christians, do know they live by
perceiving their spiritual appetite after the means of the life of grace. 2.
Growth in Grace and Sanctification, is a sign of the life spiritual, infused
into them by the Spirit; for the Ministry of the Word, is given for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all
come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the me^sure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. 3. Moving and walking in newness of life, with all respect to all
the holy Commandments, is a sign undoubted, that we live in the Spirit; because
these two are joined together, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes. As Lazarus, raised from death to life,
did come forth from the sepulcher, wherein he was laid, and walked in the sight
of others; so a soul quickened by the Spirit, does rise from his sins, wherein
he was dead and buried, and walks before God and men in newness of life.

There is a walking after the flesh, directly opposite to walking in the Spirit,
Romans 8.1. There is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. We must beware of such walking,
because the end of it, is eternal destruction; for, he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit, or
walks after the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.8.
Such walkers after the flesh, are profane men, walking presumptuously in the
imaginations of their own evil hearts, and yet thinking to get Heaven in end,
as if a man walking toward the west, should think in end to come to the east:
Of this profane and presumptuous walking, and the severe punishment of it, we
read, Deuteronomy. 29.19. This is not to walk in the power of the Spirit of God, but
in the strong delusion of their own deceived spirit: such walkers are these
spoken of, 2 Pet. 3.3. There shall come in the last days, scoffers, walking
after their own lusts. And all such also, who walk in a course of life,
fulfilling the sinful desires and lusts of their own hearts. It is true, the
godly, though renewed by the Spirit of God, have flesh and corruption in them,
but they walk not aftr the flesh, as their ordinary guide and counselor.

The holy Scripture holds forth the manner of our walking in the Spirit, in
these following qualifications, 1. In walking humbly with God, Micah 6.8. What
does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? By keeping upon thy spirit the impressions of his
greatness and holiness, this will make thee to walk humbly: this made Isaiah
humble, after he had seen a visible representation of the Majesty and Holiness
of God, Isai. 6.5. Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips, etc. This impression, will make the soul obedient to the will
of the Lord, as Isaiah also was, Isa. 6.8. Also I heard the voice of the Lord*
saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? then said I, Here am I, send
me. This imp^ession of the greatness and holiness of God, will make the renewed
man to shine in his conversation before the world, as Moses his face did shine
before the people, after he had conversed with God in the mount. 2. It is a
spiritual and heavenly-minded walking, having the way and haunt of the heart
far above the things of the world, Prove. 15.24. The way of life is above to the
wise, that he may depart from hell beneath. Such walking keeps the heart free
from the bondage of many temptations and snares, wherein the earthly-minded man
is taken and detained: as the Eagles, who soar in a high way, are not so easily
shot and felled by the Fowler, as the greedy Cormorants that flutter upon the
surface of the earth, or the vain Stanchel that hovers in the air and embraces
the wind: In like manner, heavenly-minded men, are not so easily taken with the
baits of the world, as greedy and ambitious men, who mind earthly things. 3. It
is a circumspect walking, Ephesians. 5.15. Whereof hereafter in Sermon. on that place.
4. It is a sincere and upright walking, Psalm. 84 11. No good thing will the
Lord God withhold from them that walk uprightly. It is a walking with a respect
unto all the Commandments of God, as David walked, Psalm. 119.6. with active
endeavors to keep a good conscience toward God and man, as Paul walked, Act.
24.16. To have a good conscience, and to be always willing in all things to
live honestly, as the Apostle did, Heb. 13.18. It is a constant walking, at
least in respect of a fixed purpose and resolution, Psalm. 84 7. They go from
strength to strength. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for
which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

The impediments of walking, are, 1. Want of light: for if a man walk in the
night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him, Joh. 11.10. Therefore
said our blessed Lord to the Pharisees, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures,
Mat. 22.29. Therefore, as we would walk in a right way toward the Kingdom of
Heaven, we would labor to understand the holy Scriptures, which show us the
way of truth and righteousness, and we should daily pray with the holy Prophet,
Psalm. 43.3. O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them
bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles. And we should pray with
holy David, Ps. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: thy
spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness. 2. Fetters are a great
impediment to walking; so our unruly and excessive passions, as the excessive
fear of creatures, excessive desires of worldly good things, excessive joy and
delight in worldly pleasures, are a great impediment to spiritual and heavenly
walking; as servants gazing and fixing their eyes upon some Pictures in their
way, are stayed in their walking and in going about their business: Against
this impediment we would pray to God for liberty and enlargement of spirit from
that bondage to our masterful affections; and we would turn David's resolution,
( Psalm. 119.32.) into a supplication, O Lord, enlarge thou my heart, and then
shall I run the way of thy Commandments. It should be our daily prayer to the
Lord with holy David, Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity,
and quicken thou me in thy way. 3. A heavy burden is a great impediment to
walking* so when men over-burden their spirits with the care of worldly things,
they walk not in the way of righteousness; but many times step aside after the
wages of unrighteousness: the love of the world hindered the rich young man to
walk after Christ, Luke 18.23. Therefore that we may walk readily and
cheerfully in the ways of Gods Commandments, we should cast all our care upon
him, for he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5.7. And we should pray daily, as Psalm.
119.36. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness. 4.
Fainting is a great impediment to walking. Jonathan fainted in his way, till he
tasted of the honey. Great difficulties and discouragments in the way of
Holiness and uprightness, are like the Sons of Anak, that discouraged greatly
the people of Israel from walking up the hill, that thereafter they might enter
into the promised Land. Against this impediment of fainting in the good and
perfect way, from the many troubles and discouragements thou meetest with
therein, recollect thy self, and be encouraged from the Lords faithful promise,
Isai. 40.29. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he
increases strength. In all the bitter mockings thou meetest with from profane
men, who not only mock thee, but speak evil of thee, because thou will not run
with them to the same excess of riot, yet be thou resolute and steadfast in thy
spiritual and Christian walking, as David did, Psalm. 119.51. The proud have had
me greatly in derision; yet have I not declined from thy Law. Yea, walk the
more sincerely and spiritually in conversing with God by prayer, Psalm. 69.12,
13. I was the song of the drunkards; but as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O
Lord, in an acceptable time. When the child of God has least acceptance or
communion with profane men, then is he most acceptable to God, and has most of
his countenance, which preserves his soul from fainting at their bitter
scoffings: look often unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith, who
endured such contradiction of sinners, lest we, looking too much to men who
wrong us, should faint in our minds, Heb. 12.2, 3. Be encouraged in all thy
faintings from the hope of that Crown of Righteousness laid up for all these
who walk with God, as Enoch did. Walk with God in heavenly meditations; and
walk thou before God as Abraham did in faith and obedience: the hope o^ that
Crown strengthened the heart of Paul against fainting, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. For
which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man
is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Therefore
seeing there is an infallible connection between spiritual life by the Spirit,
and spiritual walking in the strength, and by the direction of the Spirit,
according to the Word, as there is a conjunction of the stream with the
fountain, if we live in the Spirit, let it be manifested by our walking in the
Spirit; and if the Spirit dwell in us, the Spirit will quicken our mortal
bodies, and raise them up to follow the Lamb wherever he goes: To him, with
the Father and Holy Spirit, be all praise honor and glory, for now and ever.
Amen.

Circumspect walking. SERMON VI.
EPHESIANS. 5.15. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
VERSE. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
AS Salvation is the end of faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.9.
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls; So our
walking in the way of holiness and good works, is the way to salvation; the
Lord Jesus Christ, is properly the living way, that leads and guides
believers to salvation; and good works are the meeths and evidences that we are
in Christ the Captain of Salvation, Ephesians. 2.10. For we are the workmanship of
God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained,
that we should walk in them.

The Christian walking, is discribed here, 1. Positively, See that ye walk
circumspectly. 2. Negatively, not as fools. 3. By way of opposition to the
walking of fools, in two qualifications required in circumspect walking, But as
wise, redeeming the time. 4. The motive to a Christian and circumspect walking,
is taken from the evil of the times, Because the days are evil.

To walk circumspectly, signifies (as the original word (...) imports) an
accurat and exact walking, like a man walking upon the ridge of a mountain,
without declining to the one hand or to the other, Deuteronomy. 5.32. Ye shall observe
to do therefore as the Lord your God has commanded you: you shall not turn
aside to the right hand nor to the left. 1. In our zeal, we would walk
circumspectly, not overstretching our selves to do more, than we have a calling
from God to do, as Peter did in smiting with the sword, without a warrant from
Christ; and we must circumspectly shun the other extremity, in omitting the
duty of confessing the truth, when we are called thereto by God; it was the sin
of these fair professors ( Joh. 12.42.) they did not confess Christ, for fear
to be put out of the Synagogue. 2. We would shun circumspectly all negligence
and carelessness to do good works, Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity,
let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of
faith, Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works: because every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down and cast into the fire, Mat. 3.10. and we would walk circumspectly,
shunning the other extreme, in confiding into our own good works for
justification and salvation, because, if God enter into judgment with man,
none living shall be justified in his fight by their own works, which are very
far short of that exact righteousness required in the law, Psalm. 143.2. Yea,
Abraham, Father of the faithful, was not justified by his good works: for if
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God,
Romans 4.2. 3. We should walk circumspectly in using the things of this present
world; not refusing the good things offered to us by the good providence of
God, whether riches, liberty or preferment to a more free and plentiful
condition of life, 1 Cor. 7.21. But if thou may be made free, use it rather.
And we should walk circumspectly in shunning the other extreme, by abusing the
good things of this present world, to pride, riot, or vain confidence, 1 Timothy
6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded,
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. 4. We should walk circumspectly with holy men in this world,
not following them absolutely in all things; for even the best of mere men, has
their own failings: they are compared to the cloud in the wilderness, that had
a light side and a dark side: we must not put darkness for light, nor light for
darkness: but should follow holy men with this limitation, in so far as they
are followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. We should follow Peter in
his free confession before the Council, Acts 4. but not in his denial, in the
high Priests hall. 5. We should walk circumspectly with wicked men, that we be
not enticed to sin by their evil counsel or example, Prove. 1.10. When sinners
entise thee; consent thou not. We would walk circumspectly in forbearing to
speak any thing in their presence, that may strengthen them in their sinful
courses; or may be a snare to our selves, in giving occasion to them to procure
our hurt from these, who will make a man an offender for an inconsiderat word,
Psalm. 39.1. I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.
6. We should walk circumspectly, shunning all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians.
5.22. Neither doing evil, nor evil like: for, by the appearance of evil-doing,
we grieve the stronger Christians, and stumble the weaker, we do wrong and
prejudice to our own good name, which being preserved entire, is better then
precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. but being spoiled by the scandalous appearance
of evil doing, it becomes unsavory to others, as Ointment, corrupted by a dead
flee: Joseph walked circumspectly; not only he hearkened not to that shameless
woman, but also would not abide in the same secret room with her, Genesis 39.10.
Paul was very circumspect in shunning all appearance of mal-versation and
unfaithful dealing in the matter of public collections, 2 Cor. 8.20. Avoiding
this, that no man should blame us in this abundance, which is administered by
us. 7. There should be a circumspect walking, in shunning all occasions and
provocations to sin, especially familiarity with profane and riotous men, Prove.
4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil
men, Prove. 20.25. With a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his
ways, and get a snare to thy soul. For, evil company corrupts good manners:
can a man touch pitch and not be defiled therewith? can a man take fire in his
bosom, and not be burnt? Prove. 23.20. Several sins have their own several
occasions and provocations: but evil company is a magazine of evil occasions
and provocations for all sins. 8. We should walk circumspectly, in abstaining
from lesser sins; because such being neglected and not noticed, are oft-times
inlets to greater sins: what is said of one sin, is true of all, Prove. 17.14.
The beginning of strife, is as when one lets out water: therefore leave off
contention, before it be meddled with. Peter went rashly into the place of
temptation, without a call; and thereafter denied first, and in end cursed if
he knew the Lord Jesus Christ: it is not a superstitious and unnecessar, but
commendable preciseness, to abstain from lesser sins. 9. This circumspect
walking, is in an abstaining from every thing that would provoke our
predominant sin: old sores are soon and easily rankled; therefore we would
carefully keep aloof from it, as David did, Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright
before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. And we would shun also all
occasions, that are apt to induce us into sin, as the occasions of superstition
and idolatry in the matter of Gods worship. The Lord God forbad the people of
Israel to plant a grove nigh unto the Altar of God, Deuteronomy. 16.21. lest possibly,
in respect of the nearness, people should step aside from the Altar, and true
worship of God, into a place or manor of false worship.

The causes of uncircumspectness in our walking, are, 1. Want of knowledge, and
ignorance, as men for want of light, to discover dangers in the way, cannot
walk circumspectly, Joh. 12.35. He that walks in darkness, knows not
whether he goes. Through want of knowledge, the Jews walked in a way of
cruelty against our blessed Lord; and the Ephesians through the ignorance that
was in them, gave themselves over unto laciviousness, to work all uncleanness
with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. 2. The impetuous and vehement desires, even in
the godly and orthodox, has made them in their eagerness of opposition to one
error, through an immoderate desire of counterpoising, (which Basil calls
(...)) to walk uncircumspectly toward another extremity of error: some ancient
Fathers, in their great zeal to oppose Manicheism, in asserting a fatal
necessity of all humane actions, did incline too much to Pelagianism, and the
extolling of the liberty of man's free will, above the sphere of its activity,
as gardeners do bend a crooked branch too much sometimes to the other side. 3.
Pride and self-confidence, makes even the godly sometimes rash and
uncircumspect in their walking: Peter from self-confidence in his own strength,
was rash and uncircumspect in his going into the High Priests hall. 4.
Forgetfulness of death and judgment, and the account we must make to God of
our walking in the time of our sojourning here, does make men walk at random in
their evil ways, as Jerusalem sometime did, Lament. 1.9. Her filthiness is in
her skirts; she remembereth not her last end, Amos 6.3. Ye that put far away
the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near.

Means and Helps for a circumspect walking, are, 1. Sound knowledge of the good
and acceptable will of God from the word of light and salvation; because the
word of God, is the rule and measure, according to which we walk circumspectly
in obedience to the holy commandments, like children walking in one step after
another, according to their grounds and elements in learning, Gal. 6.16. And as
many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them. When we walk according
to this rule, we walk circumspectly; for we need not be ashamed, when we have
respect unto all his comm^ndments, Psalm 119.6. This rule keeps us from
wandering rashly into the paths of wicked and profane men, Psalm. 17.4.
Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the
paths of the destroyer. 2. As ye would walk circumspectly, look to God in all
your ways; he is now a witness, and one day will be thy judge, Genesis 17.1. Walk
before me, says the Lord, and be thou upright. He sees in secret, therefore
walk circumspectly in secret; although no man did see thee, yet the Lord
ponders and considers all thy ways, Prove. 5.21. The ways of man, are before
the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. The all-seeing wise God,
pondereth all the steps of humane actions in their desires, intentions and
courses: though thy profession be never so fair before the world, yet he
ponders the intention of thine heart; he saw the hypocrisy and crooked walking
of Jehu, notwithstanding his fair and large profession of zeal for the Lord: He
ponders the time of thy sinning and unrighteous walking, if it be after mercies
received, Deuteronomy. 32 13, 15. Jer. 5.7. When I had fed them to the full, they then
committed adultery. The Lord ponders if thy unrighteous walking be in a time of
affliction, when thou should walk humbly and circumspectly; he observed wicked
Achaz in his trespassing more and more in the day of his distress, 2 Chronicles.
28.22. he ponders the place where thou walks in thy ungodly way, Isai. 26.10.
In the land of uprightness, will he deall unjustly: that is, in a place of
uprightness, where he might have seen the good example of some men, walking
uprightly and circumspectly before God and the world, yet he will walk in the
way of injustice. 3. Walk circumspectly in respect of the holy Angels, 1 Cor.
11.10. The Apostle will have women in the Church Assemblies, to carry
themselves decently in respect of the Angels, who are frequently there to
behold and admire the wisdom and mercy of God, revealed to his Saints in the
holy Word: they ^re ministering Spirits to the heirs of salvation; and our
uncircumspect conversation and walking, is very displeasing unto them; as the
rash speeches and actions of an inconsiderat pupil, does much grieve his
Governor and Tutor. 4. Walk circumspectly in respect of the godly, because by
thy rashness and failings, thou will make the hearts of the righteous sad: Paul
was much grieved with Peter's dissimulation at Antioch: by thy rashness and
failings, through uncircumspect walking, thou stumbles the weak, who by thy
evil example are drawn from the way of righteousness: Many were drawn away by
the example of Peter's dissimulation, Gal. 2. and how fearful and dangerous a
sin it is, to give offense to the weak, we may clearly see, Matthew. 18.6. Paul
would rather never eat flesh, than he should stumble his weak brother by eating
thereof, 1 Cor. 8.13. Walk circumspectly in respect of wicked men, who watch
for thy halting, who will magnify themselves, when thy foot slippeth, and
speak evil not only of thee alone, but also of thine holy profession, and of
all the Saints, as if they were all hypocrites: David, by his uncircumspect
walking, opened the mouths of adversaries, 2 Samuel 12.14. Therefore pray thou
daily, as David did, Psalm. 27.11* Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me i^ a
plain path, because of mine enemies, or observers. 5. As ye would walk
circumspectly* remember frequently the Lords former mercies, toward you, that
so ye may not depar^ from his ways, and so sin against the God of your
mercies: This consideration Ezra holds forth to the people of God, that in time
coming they may walk more circumspectly, Ezra 9.13, 14. Seeing thou our God,
have given us such deliverance as this; should we again break thy commandments,
and join in affinity with the people of these abominations? The remembrance of
former mercies, made Hezekiah, after his recovery from a dangerous sickness, to
walk softly and circumspectly all his years, in the bitterness of his soul,
Isai. 38.15. And our blessed Lord, holds forth this consideration to the man
that was healed of a longsome disease, Joh. 5.14. Behold thou art made whole,
sin no more, etc. 6. Fear of thine own weakness, and fears from the many
temptations and snares in this present evil world, is a special mean to make
thee walk circumspectly: fear to slip and fall, makes men walk circumspectly
in slippery places, Romans 11.20. Be not high-minded, but fear: therefore walk
circumspectly and humbly with thy God in the remembrance of his former mercies,
in the remembrance of thy former sins; in the conscience and sense of thy
present weakness, and in the fear of many and manifold temptations in this evil
world; as a man walks circumspectly, looking well to every step in the midst
of snares. 7. As ye would walk circumspectly, be not rash to venture upon
temptations: Cyprian says truly, Nemo periculo proximus, est diu tutus, no man
near to the temptation and danger is long safe: his advice is good, that men
would be circumspect, like mariners at Sea, who in time of a calm, do not cast
anchor beside a rock, because they know not how soon a storm may arise, and
dash the Vessel against the rock: so a Christian would be circumspect, though
his affections be quiet and still for the present time, yet if he venture upon
the place of temptations and snares, he cannot tell how soon the wind of
temptation may arise, and bring the shipwreck of peace and a good conscience.
8. As ye would walk circumspectly at all times and in all places, remember
often the necessity of our compearance after death before the tribunal of Jesus
Christ; this consideration made Paul circumspect, both in his personal and
ministerial conversation, 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Wherefore we labor, that whether
present or absent we may be accepted of him: for we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

Not as fools: The Apostle speaks more particularly of our Christian walk,
and that negatively, that we walk not as fools. 1. Not as the atheistical and
profane fool, who walks without any serious thoughts of God in his heart, Ps.
14* 1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God: they are corrupt, they
have done abominable works, there is none that does good. Ezekiel. 8.12. They say,
the Lord sees us not. Psalm. 94 8, 9. Understand ye brutish among the people,
and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, etc. Therefore be
not profane and godless fools, but fear God and depart from evil, Prove. 3.7. 2.
Be not vain and arrogant fools, walking in the imaginations of your own evil
hearts, Prove. 12.15. The way of a fool, is right in his own eyes. 3. Walk not
in the way of the licentious fool, after the lusts of uncleanness or
drunkenness, Prove. 7.7. The young man that followed the strange woman, is said
to be simple and void of understanding: he is a mad fool, running in the way of
riot and uncleanness to his own destruction. Walk not in the way of drunkenness
and excess: for the Scripture says, that drunkards are benumbed and besotted
fools, Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine take away the heart. 4. Walk not in the
way of worldly-minded and covetous men, who set up their rest upon the things
of this world, and make no conscience of their purchase, for the Scripture
calls such men, fools, Jer. 17.11. As the partridge sits on eggs, and
hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them
in the midst of his days, and at his end, shall be a fool. Luke 12.20. But God
said unto him, Thou fool, etc. 5. Walk not in the way of strise and contention,
for such men are, in the Scripture Phrase, fools, Prove. 20.3. Every fool will
be meddling. Prove. 26.17. He that passes by and medleth with strife belonging
not to him, is like one that takes a dog by the ears: he does at first rashly
engage himself into the quarrel, and is afraid how he shall come off fairly
without prejudice to his credit or estate. 6. Walk not in the way of malice;
for the Scripture calls malicious and wrathful men, fools, Eccles. 7.9. Be
not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
7. Walk not wilfully and obstinatly in any evil custom or way, for such men the
Scripture calls fools, who will not be reclaimed by the rods of God upon
their backs, Prove. 27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among
wheat with a pestel, yet will not his foolishness depart from him. Jer. 5.3, 4.
But they have refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder
than a rock, they have refused to return; therefore I said, surely these are
poor, they are foolish. 8. Walk not in the way of malicious dissimulation;
though such dissemblers may be esteemed wits, and active men in this present
world; yet in Gods account they are fools, Prove. 10.18. He that hides hatred
with lying lips, and he that utters slander, is a fool. 9. Walk not in the
way of slothful men, who delay from time to time to go about the great business
and work of their own salvation; such persons in holy Scripture, are compared
to the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 10. Walk not in the way of bare formality,
resting upon the performance of some outward duties only; because such men are
compared to the foolish builder, who built upon the sand: such fools are these
who rest on the hearing of the Word, but prepare not themselves to do it, Mat.
7.26. 11. Walk not here and there, departing from a known and received truth in
the matter of Religion; for such wavering and unconstant men, are called fools,
Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey
the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you?

But as wise: The Apostle (1 Cor. 3.18.) speaks of a twofold wisdom; an
heavenly wisdom, when a man prefers his duty to God unto all things worldly;
such was the wisdom of Paul, Act. 20.23, 24. The Holy Ghost witnesses in every
city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me: but none of these things
move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self; so that I might finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God. This wisdom is thought foolishness to
the worldly man, whose mind and heart is fixed on things earthly. And there is
a worldly wisdom, when men in their practice and endeavors, do prefer the good
things of this life unto the best things of the life to come, as Demas did:
this wisdom is foolishness in Gods account; for, what avails it a man to gain
all the world, and lose his own soul?

This Christian Heavenly wisdom, stands, 1. In men's proposing to themselves a
good and happy end of their actions: when they propone to themselves, as the
great and supreme end of all their actions, the glory of God, of whom, through
whom, and for whom are all things, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, do
all to the glory of God: when in the next place, they propose to themselves
that subordinat end, to wit, the salvation of their own souls, Phil. 3.14. I
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus: and when they propose to themselves the good of others, by following
their own example in well-doing, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
2. True Christian-wisdom, stands in a serious deliberation and search out of
Gods Word, what are the fitest means for attaining these ends; as by
well-doing, and suffering for well-doing, to glorify God, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye
be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and
of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part
he is glorified. When we search and consider from the Word of God, that true
repentance, lively faith, and sincere obedience, are the means, whereby we
attain salvation, Acts 3.19. Acts 16.31. Romans 2.6, 7. 3. It stands in a careful
and timous applying of the means necessary for these great ends: So if ye be
truly wise Christians, ye will be diligent and active in using the means,
whereby God may be glorified, and your souls saved; Jam. 3.13. Who is a wise
man and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him show, out of a good
conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: for God will have men to
repent and turn, that they may live in his sight, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says
the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Ye must believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,
for there is no salvation in any other, neither is there any other name under
Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. And ye must walk
in obedience to his will, because he became the Author of eternal Salvation
unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. 4. True Christian wisdom stands in
foreseeing impediments, stumbling blocks, and snares in the way wherein ^e are
to walk toward eternal life, Prove. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth evil. 5. As
the truly wise Christian foreseeth the danger, so he wisely preveeneth or
removes every impediment out of the way, that would hinder him to walk or run
his race with patience, 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under my body, and bring it
into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my
self should be a castaway. Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every weight, etc. 6.
The wise Christian walks according to right reason in his worldly desires,
and not according to passion and sensual appetite, which would be at the
outmost point of his carnal desires; for passions, not guided and moderated by
prudence and right reason, do run into extremity of sinning, as is spoken of
Israel, Jer. 3.5. Behold, thou have spoken and done evil things, as thou
could. In so doing, men become foolish to the destruction of their own
souls; like the Nightingale, delighting so much sometimes in her own singing,
that she bursts. 7. The truly wise Christian walks wisely toward them that
are without the Church, and adversaries to the sacred truth, Col. 4.5. Walk
wisely toward them that are without. 1 Cor. 10.32. Giving none offense, neither
to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: because in so
doing, thou hinders (so far as lies in thee) the great end, to wit, Gods glory
in their conversion to the faith and truth professed by thy self: to this end,
the Apostle gives sound advice to all who live in an outward civil society
with others, of a different persuasion in the matter of Religion, 1 Timothy 6.1.
Let as many servants, as are under the yoke, to wit, of unbelieving masters,
count their own masters worthy of all honor; that the Name of God, and his
doctrine be not blasphemed. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Likewise ye wives, be in subjection
to your own husbands, that if any obey not the word, they also may without the
word be won by the conversation of the wives: while they behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear.

Worldly and contentious wisdom, is directly opposite to true Christian wisdom,
as is evident from Jam. 3.15. This wisdom that has with it bitter envying and
strife, descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish. It is
called earthly from the object of it, because it is employed chiefly about
things earthly: of such wisdom speaks Jer. 4.22. They are wise to do evil,
but to do good they have no knowledge: wise to oppress others, as Pharaoh,
Exodus 1.10. Let us deal wisely, etc. wise by wicked counsels to destroy the
innocent; such was the wisdom of Achithophel in his counsel against David. It
is a sensual wisdom, to fulfill their own sinful lusts, in taking the
opportunities to do evil; as the young man, taking the opportunity of the
twilight to go about the work of darkness and uncleanness, Job 24.15. and the
vile adulteress, taking the opportunity of her husbands absence for her
shameful and sensual ends, Pro. 7.19. It is the earthly wisdom of a covetous
man, by his speeches to deceive and defraud the simple, Pro. 20.14. It is
naught, it is naught, says the buyer, etc. It is called a devilish wisdom,
from the Author of it, the subtle old serpent; and it is rather craftiness and
subtle deceit, than true wisdom.

The true signs and vive characters of the true Christian wisdom, are, 1. These
given by the Apostle Jam. 3.17. It is pure without mixture of deceit;
peaceable, without envy and malice; gentle, without desire of revenge; full of
mercy and charity, without grudging to give unto them that are in distress; and
full of good fruits, to wit, of piety, sobriety and righteousness. 2. Where
true heavenly wisdom is, there will be teachableness, and willingness to hear a
word of reproof when we do amiss, Pro. 1.5. A wise man will hear, etc. Pro.
9.8. Rebuke a wise man and he will love thee. David loved Nathan and Good, the
faithful Prophets, who reproved him in the Name of the Lord. 3. A truly wise
Christian will endeavor by his good example, instruction and admonition, to
win others to God, Prove 11.30. He that wins souls, is wise; as a wise and
faithful servant, by his good example of diligence, makes other servants
diligent and faithful in his Masters service. 4. True Christian wisdom, has
honest and harmless simplicity joined with it, Mat. 10 16. Be ye therefore wise
as serpents, and harmless as doves. 5. The truly wise Christian, like the wise
Merchant, prefers Christ to all things; and like the wise builder, Mat.
7.24. he builds his comfort and confidence on Jesus Christ the rock of his
salvation, as Paul did, Romans 8.33, 34, 35. Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should
glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 6. The truly wise Christian,
is an heavenly-minded man, having his affections set upon things above, Prove.
15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell
beneath.

The means and helps for attaining this heavenly wisdom, are, 1. Thou must be
humble and denied to thine own wisdom, 1 Cor. 3.18. Let him become a fool, that
he may be wise. Thou must captivat all thy thoughts and imaginations to the
wisdom and will of God, revealed in the holy Word, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 2. To this
end, thou must be well acquainted with the holy Scripture, which only is able
to make thee wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. 3. Thou would carefully
observe the experiences thou has had of Gods mercies in time bypast; this will
make thee wise and resolute in times of new difficulties, to depend on God and
his help, Ps. 71.17, 18. O God, thou have taught me from my youth, etc. Now
also when I am old and gray headed, O God, forsake me not: for, experience is
the schoolmaster of fools, to make them wise: thou will also observe the Lords
chastisements upon thy self in the former time of thy deboarding, and thou will
be more wise in time coming, Ps. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. Thou will observe the uncertainty
and vicissitude of all things worldly, and therefrom learn to be humble and
wise, not trusting, or insolently glorying in things uncertain: but thou
should be wise, and learn to glory in the Lord alone, with whom there is not
a shadow of change: thou should observe the judgments of God on wicked men,
and learn to be wise in forsaking their evil ways, Act. 19.16, 17, 18, 19.
When many that believed, saw the judgment of God upon the conjurers, they
burnt their magical Books, and forsook their unlawful arts. So the unclean
person, observing the judgment of God upon the harlot, brought to a morsel of
bread, and upon the prodigal waster, clothed with rags, and upon the proud
man, as Haman, brought to open disgrace, this should make others wise to
salvation, in being chaste, sober and humble. Cato said truly in alleging, wise
men profited more by fools, than fools did by wise men; because wise men see
the faults of fools, and avoid them; but fools will neither see their own
faults, nor follow the example of wise men. 4. If thou would be truly wise,
frequent the company of these who are wise, Pro. 13.20. He that walks with
wise men, shall be wise: but a companion of fools, shall be destroyed. 5. As
thou would be wise, pray to God for wisdom, Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not; and it shall be given him. Pro. 2.3, 5. If thou liftest up thy voice for
understanding, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord.

Redeeming the time: To redeem the time, does sometimes signify to gain time
by delaying and shifting of hard and difficult questions, which might bring the
answerer into great danger; So, Dan. 2.8. the King said to the Chaldeans, who
could not tell him the interpretation of his dream, but desired that he would
show them first the dream, he said, I know of certainty, that ye will gain the
time. To gain the time, is rendered by the seventy Interpreters, in the same
word that is used here: But we take the expression here to be borrowed from
Travelers or Sojourners, who sleeping too long in the short winter day, do
hastily rise and walk the faster, redeeming the time that was lost by sleep,
and amend their pase all the rest of the day: or it may be borrowed from
Merchants, preferring the opportunity of a good Market, and of buying precious
wares, even to the time of their ordinary refreshment, by eating and drinking,
Prove. 23.23. Buy the truth, but sell it not; that is, with the hazard of any
loss worldly, lay thou hold upon the occasions and opportunities of learning
the sacred Truths of God, but upon no terms sell thou, or alienat the truth:
or, the expression is borrowed from frugal men, who retrench their Retinue,
Diet and all Superfluities, that by so doing they may redeem Houses or Lands,
morgaged formerly through misgovernment or prodigality.

It is a chief point of Christian wisdom, to improve the time well; for it is
said here, Be wise, redeeming the time, as were, the wise Merchant, the wise
Builder, and the wise Virgins, spoken of in holy Scripture, because time is
precious, Pro. 25.11. A word fitly or timously spoken, is like apples of gold
in pictures of silver. Esther spoke in time, in behalf of the Jews, and Jacob
sought the blessing in time; and the wise Virgins provided oil in time: time
past cannot be brought back again, like the running of water, that does not
return; and it is wisdom for travelers to take the opportunity of the tide
before it be spent: as our time is spent here, so will it be with us in
eternity: it will be evil with them for ever, who spent the time of their life
in following their lusts and sinful pleasures, and did not redeem lost time, by
repenting in time, Luke 16.25. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now
he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Gal. 6.7, 8. For whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap: for he that sows to his flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit
reap life everlasting.

There be three differences of time, as it is commonly taken; to wit, the time
past, present, and to come: we should walk wisely in reference to all these
differences of times.

1. When we look back to the time past, that has been misspent in the
vanities and follies of sin, we should be humbled as holy Job was, Job 13.26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities
of my youth: as holy David was, Psalm. 25.7. Remember not the sins of my youth,
nor my transgressions. Cato, though an Heathen, repented (as he said) that he
had misspent one day in idleness: but all of us may say as Psalm. 90.9. Our
years are spent as a tale that is told: we are like some careless hearers, who
scarce know the subject and purpose of a tale, before it be near an end; so we
know not the main end and purpose of our life, which is to know God, and to
glorify him, when we have known him; and the life of many is near to an end,
before they consider the great intendment of God in giving them life. We may
say (as Eccles. 11.10.) Childhood and youth are vanity: misspent idly in
doing little or no good, and oft-times in doing evil; and we may say (as 1 Pet.
4.3.) The time past may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles,
etc. When we remember this misspent time, we should mourn, and resolve by the
grace of God, by amendment, to redeem lost time, and say and do as Job 34.32.
That which I see not, teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. How many opportunities of well-doing have we sloathed and neglected? As
of thanksgiving to God for benefits received, like unthankful Israel, Hos. 2.8.
She did not know that I gave her corn, etc. Of prayer and calling upon the Name
of God, as Israel in the time of oppressing one another, Psalm. 53.4. Have the
workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread; they
have not called upon God. How have we neglected the opportunities of humbling
our selves by fasting and prayer in a time of imminent or incumbent judgments?
Yea, we have walked in revelling and riot, contrary to the Lords sad
dispensations, Isai. 22.12, 14. We have neglected the opportunities of hearing
the good Word of God, Prove. 1.24, 25. We have refused the gracious invitations
of the Gospel, like these men, who made light of the Kings invitation to the
Marriage Feast, Mat. 22.5. We have abused the time of Gods patience, that
should have led us to repentance, as it is said, Rev. 2.21. Not only have we
been negligent, to lay hold upon the opportunities of well-doing; but also we
have been forward and hasty to take the occasions of evil-doing: How many have
been so malicious, that like the cruel old Priest Annas, they could not sleep
till they had done evil? How many have taken opportunity, from the weakness of
others, of their cruel revenge, as Simeon and Levi did? How many have taken
occasion from the simplicity of some, or from the desolat condition of others,
as of Widows and Orphans, to oppress them, and by their ruins build up an
estate to themselves? Such men should redeem the time by repentance and
restitution in time, Prove. 23.10, 11. Remove not the old landmark, etc. for
their Redeemer is mighty. Job 20.19, 20. Because he has oppressed, and has
forsaken the poor; because he has violently taken away an house which he
builded not: surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save
of that which he desired.

As for the present time, we should improve it to well-doing without delay;
God, in holy Scriptures, urges the opportunity of the present time, Joel 2.12.
Therefore also now, says the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart.
Psalm. 95.7. To day if ye will hear his voice, etc. 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the
accepted time, etc. The husbandman takes opportunity of the season, for
plowing and sowing; so should we of plowing up and renting our hearts by
repentance, and of sowing in righteousness: the sea-faringman, takes the
opportunity of a fair wind; so should we take the opportunity, when the Spirit
of God breaths upon us by the Word, without delay to depart from our sins,
and to advance toward the Port of eternal Salvation: Because, 1. The neglect of
the opportunity given us for well-doing, does provoke God to withhold the like
opportunity in time coming, Joh. 7.34. Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me.
Esau came not in time to get the blessing; and he never got another opportunity
for it. Jerusalem would not in time know those things that belonged to her
peace, and therefore in time coming they were hid from her eyes, Luke 19.42.
Felix made not good use of the opportunity he had for hearing Paul preach; and
he never got another convenient season, Act. 24.25. 2. Though thou may have
afterward an opportunity of the outward Ordinances, yet through thy former
neglect of them, thou provokes God to reject thy offerings, and outward duties;
the Lord would not accept of the people of Israel their offer to come up the
hill afterward, because they had neglected the former opportunity of Obedience,
when he had commanded them to come up, Numb. 14.40, 41, 42. 3. The time is
uncertain, in respect of the opportunity of the means of grace; for thou cannot
tell how short a time the market and offer of free grace may endure: the Lord
may send a famine of hearing the Word of the Lord, Amos 8.11, 12. The time of
thy life is uncertain; how many have been well and in health the one Sabbath,
but removed by death before the other? 4. Consider seriously, though the Lord
may be found of thee on thy sick and deathbed, after the many slightings of
opportunities in the days of thy health and prosperity; yet shall it be to
thee with much pain and wrestling; as the people of Israel, were put to the
pains of forty years abiding in the wilderness, which might have been saved by
the timous pains of forty days, Number. 14. As a man that neglects the
opportunity of a fair and favorable wind for sailing, may possibly wait on a
long time, before he have the like opportunity: Yea, though a man may repent
truly and sincerely upon his deathbed; yet it is not without much fear and
jealousy, that he has not so much forsaken sin through any true spiritual
aversness from it, as from a mere want of power to act sin in the body, as he
was wont formerly to do.

A wise Christian, should redeem and improve the time in order to time coming:
he should make timous provision for the time to come, as Joseph in the time of
plenty, laid up provision for the time coming of famine. There be four things
especially we would make provision of, 1. Of the word of the holy commandment,
and threatening against the time and hour of future temptations, Psalm. 119.11.
Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. And when
we are tempted to this or that sin, we would make use of the commandment
forbidding it, and of the threatening against it: we would lay up provision of
the Word, of gracious promises, against a time of temptation to doubts and
fears of acceptance, as these promises, Is. 55.1. Mat. 11.28. Joh. 6.37. and
against the fears of final Apostasy; we would lay up provision from the word
of promise, Joh. 4.14. Joh. 10.28. We would lay up provision of gracious
promises against temptations in an hour of da^kness and desertion, as that,
Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Isa. 49.15. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? yea, they may forget, yet I will not forget thee. Psalm. 89 31, 32.33. If
they break my statutes, etc. Then will I visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes: nevertheless, my loving kindness will I
not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. And lay up the
word of admonition against a time of senseless security, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Lay up that word, Phil.
2.12. Work out your own salvation in fear and trembling, and that of, 1 John 5
18. He that is born of God, keeps himself. 2. Make provision of good works,
though not as a ground of confidence, yet as a matter of comfort for time
coming, Luke 12.35. Provide for your selves bags which wax not old, a treasure
in the heavens that fails not. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Charge them that are rich,
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute willing
to communicate: laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. For, although good works
do not make way, and usher us into glory, (for Christ the Forerunner, only does
that by the merit of his death, Heb. 6.20.) Yet they are attendants,
accompanying persons justified, even unto eternal life, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are
the dead, which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them. 3. Lay up
provision of thy observations of Gods sad dispensations upon men going on
obstinatly in their sins, Job 9 4. Who has hardened himself against him, and
prospered? as on Pharaoh, Senacherib, Antiochus Epiphanes, Herod the great, and
Julian the Apostat. Lay up this observation as provision against temptations to
walk on in any course of rebellion against the known will of God: Hezekiah
advised the people of Israel well, from the sad experience of great desolation,
brought upon their Ancestors by their great sins, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Now, be ye not
stiff-necked as your fathers were; but yield your selves unto the Lord, and
serve the Lord your God, etc. Lay up provision of thy own personal experience
of sad afflictions upon thy self in a time of thy former strayings from God;
and of the good such afflictions did to thee, in stopping thy course of
defection, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now have I
kept thy word. And in a time of renewed afflictions, be patient, and submit to
God, who chastises his own children, to this end especially, that he may make
them partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. In time of great affliction, lay up
provision from thy experience of his strength supporting thee, and of his
wisdom and power in delivering thee, that in time coming thy heart may be
established by confidence and dependence on him in new troubles, Psalm. 42.6. O
my God, my soul is cast down within me; therefore will I remember thee from the
land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizar. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. But
we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, but in God which raises the dead: who delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver: in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us. 4. Lay
up provision of self-denial and resolution for evil times of persecution to
come, Mat. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, etc. And
he must be resolute as Paul, Act. 21.13. I am ready not only to be bound, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

From this Doctrine of Redeeming the time, three sorts of persons are justly to
be reproved, 1. Slothful Idlers, who redeem not the time, but from day to day,
delay to put heart and hand to the work of their own salvation, like the
sluggard, Prove. 6.10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber. Such men are like
to spend-thrifts, who neglect the appointed time for redeeming their morgaged
lands; and afterward when they would, they have not the opportunity, Luke
13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will
seek to enter in, and shall not be able. 2. Such as trifle away their time as
the Athenians did, Act. 17.21. As these tatling widows did, 1 Timothy 5.17. and as
these busy bodies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. Such also who spend more time in their
excessive recreations and gamings, than in their necessary and lawful
employments: especially such, who spend much of their time in dycing and
carding. Such, of old, were severely fined by the laws, both of Heathen and
Christian Emperors; and by the Canons of the Council of Eliberis, were
suspended from the holy Sacrament, as witnesses the learned Ductor
dubitantium: such prodigal triflers of precious time, are like to some foolish
persons, who spend upon conceits and fancies the moneys that should have been
employed to redeem their morgages: so these men play away their time, which
should be employed to redeem their former time, that was engaged to their
former foolish courses. 3. The debauched wasters of time in the works of
darkness, as uncleanness, drunkenness, oppression, covetousness, pride, malice,
etc. Such men redeem not the time, but prodigally cast it away: they are like
unto profuse wasters, who do not redeem the wodsett, but take on more debt, and
in end bring themselves to sinful, shameful and desperate poverty: So these
prodigal wasters and debauchers of their time, bring themselves in end to an
everlasting want of all comfort, as the rich glutton did, Luke 16.23, 24.

Therefore, let all sorts and conditions of men, take with the warning to
improve their time to the glory of God, and to the advantage of their own
salvation. 1. Such as are in their adolescency and growing age, they would
improve their young years to the glorifying of their Creator, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Offer the first fruits of your
age unto God, that your afterage may be sanctified and blessed of the Lord: if
the first fruits be holy, the whole lump of your time and age will be holy,
Romans 11.16. Plato to this purpose speaks indeed like a divine Philosoph, in
his first book of his Repub. Young age, says he, p^st over in virtue, and in
honest employments, is a comfortable nurse to entertain and cherish their old
age: but he that wastes and debaucheth his young years, when he comes to old
age, the remembrance of his former miscarriages in the time of his youth, does
greatly afright him: as infants awaked out of their sleep, by loud noises, are
greatly terrified and afrighted. In like manner, those men that sleeped
sometimes securely in the sins of their youth, shall be awaked in their old age
with the terrors of an accusing conscience, and afrighted with the dreadful
found of death and judgment, and shall not have rest to their souls, until
they repent of the sins of their youth, and by ^aith rest on the Lord Jesus
Christ, whose blood cleanses from all unrighteousness. 2. Such as are in their
prime, and meridian of their time, who are now in their full strength of body
and mind, Improve your time well; honor God, with the strength of thy body:
give not thy strength and the flower of thy time to uncleanness and
drunkenness, like these cursed men, Isa. 5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty to
drink wine: by so doing they weaken the spirit, and consume the body: they turn
the good gifts of God unto rebellion against himself, as if a soldier should
employ his levy-mony to buy arms, wherewith he might fight against his King
who gave it. Reuben, the beginning of Jacobs strength, abused his own time and
strength; therefore his dignity and excellency was taken from him: but Joseph
improved well his youth and strength of body; therefore God blessed him, and
his bow abode in strength, in despite of all that shot at him. Now is the time
wherein your senses and judgment are ripe and quick; use your time and
judgment well, that ye may have comfort in old age, when senses and judgment
will fail, as they did in old Barzillay: but if your quickness be set on edge
upon vain inventions, ye will be forced in your old age to say, as Romans 6.21.
What pleasure have we, or fruits, in those things, whereof we are now ashamed.
3. And such who are in their decrept old age, stouping toward the earth and the
grave, let them not employ their short time and their affections wholly upon
the things of the earth, when by the course of nature, they are near to be
removed from it: Let them not be busy in the things of the world, and careless
of the work of their own salvation; I say to them, as the Lord of the Vineyard
said to those, Matthew. 20. Why stand ye all day idle? ye are come to your
eleventh hour, your time is near run, the night of death is near hand, wherein
no man can work: therefore, before that night surprise you, delay not to enter
unto the work of sanctification, which is begun salvation, and work it out in
fear and trembling, that at death ye may rejoice, and say with Paul, (2 Timothy
4.7, 8.) I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. Let
them with old Simeon, frequent the temple, and make conscience of the holy
ordinances both public and private, in them waiting for the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will come to old expectants, as he did to old Simeon; and will put himself
into the arms of their faith, that they may say at death, Mine eyes have seen
thy salvation; now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

The reason brought by the Apostle, to press the whole complex duty, is,
walking circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, is set
down in these words, because the days are evil: no day or time is
intrinsecally evil, but good, being created of God together with the creatures,
as the measure of the endurance of things created by God, which were all good
in the beginning: but as man, by the abuse of his own free will, made himself
evil, Eccles. 7.29. So he himself makes his time and days evil, which are the
measure of his evil actions.

The holy Scripture speaks of good days and happy times, such as was the day
of the birth of our blessed Lord, Luke 2.10, 11. such as is the time of the
preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 6.2. such as will be to the
godly, the day of our Lords second coming, which is called the day of
refreshment, of restoring all things, Act. 3.19.21. and the day of full
redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. The Scripture speaks also of evil days, wherein sin
and iniquity does abound; such were the days wherein Noah and Lot lived; such
were the days wherein Isaiah lived, when he complains of the decay of truth,
of common honesty, and of the abounding of violence, Is. 59.15. Yea, truth
fails, and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey. Such were the
times wherein Jeremiah lived, who complained heavily of them, Jer. 9.2. O that
I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might leave
my people, and go from them; for they be all adulterers, an assembly of
treacherous men, full of falsehood and dissimulation, etc. Such were the times
whereof Peter foretold, 2 Pet. 3. There shall come in the last days, scoffers
walking after their own lusts: Men blasphemous and profane, mocking at the
promises of God, and at the says of the godly for trusting to these promises.
Evil days also are the days of sad and grievous calamities, Genesis 47.9. Jacob
said unto Pharaoh, few and evil have the days of the years of my life been.
Such were the days of Jerusalem in their first destruction by the Babylonians,
and in their second destruction by the Romans.

In such evil days, we should walk circumspectly; for, the Apostle urges this
duty from this reason, because the days are evil. Consider, 1. God observes
the godly in their walking at such a time especially, wherein sin and iniquity
does abound; he observed the uprightness of Noah, in the midst of a crooked
generation; and the righteousness of Lot, whose soul was vexed with the unclean
conversation of that evil time; he observed these few in the Church of Sardis,
who had not defiled their garments with the pollutions of that evil time
wherein they lived, Rev. 3.4. 2 Evil days are critic days, wherein we may
discern and judge of the good or bad dispositions of men living in such times;
evil times are searching and trying times of the says of the godly,
notwithstanding the prosperity of the wicked; thus the Prophets says was
tried, Ps. 73.28. But it is good for me to draw near to God. Such times are
trying times of the patience of the godly, Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promise. In such evil times, the stedfastness of the godly is tried, when many
that were fair professors in a time of prosperity, do make defection from the
way of truth and righteousness, as Joh. 6.68. when many that were sometimes
disciples by profession, went back and walked no more with Christ, then the
stedfastness of Peter and of such as were disciples indeed, was tried and
manifested: Peter said, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal
life. 3. Evil times, wherein sin and iniquity abounds, are perilous times, 2 Timothy 3.1. This know also, that in the last days, perilous times shall come.
They are called (...), times full of difficulty for the godly, to preserve
themselves from the contagion, or from the violence of such times, if they will
not run to the same excess of riot with the wicked.

Preservatives against evil times are, 1. Sound information from the Word of
God, that by the light thereof, we may discover and shun the ways of an evil
time, Ps. 17.4. Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have
kept me from the paths of the destroyer. Ps. 119.104. By thy precepts I get
understanding: therefore I hate every false way. 2. Give not consent to the
beginnings of any evil course, Prove. 1.10. My son, if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not. Because consent at first, may justly provoke God in his
justice to leave thee to thy own counsel, and then thou may prove an active
promoter, and violent driver on of the course of iniquity: Paul at first gave
consent to the stoning of Stephen, and afterward made cruel havoc of the
Christian Church. The course of iniquity is called a backsliding, Hos. 4.16.
Israel slideth back as a backsliding hiefer. And if once thou begin to slide,
thou cannot tell how far thine own corruption, and the evil counsel and example
of wicked men may carry thee, as it did sometimes the people of Jerusalem, Jer.
8.5. Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back, by a perpetual
backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. At first men are
deceived by their own hearts, and thereafter to excuse and strengthen
themselves in their own sinful ways, they deceive and corrupt others by evil
counsel and example: for no man at first comes to the hight of iniquity,
according to the saying, nemo repent fit pessimus: but they grow worse and
worse, deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13 3. In a time wherein piety
and righteousness is mocked by profane and licentious men, speaking all manner
of evil against the godly and upright, who will not run with them to the same
excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. labor thou the more to preserve thy self from
pusilanimity, and base fear of their revilings against any complying with their
sinful ways, Ps. 119.51. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I
not declined from thy Law. 4. In evil times, when a man is made an offender for
a rash and inconsiderat word, Isa. 29.21. then preserve thy self by silence,
except thou have a call from God to speak, Psalm. 39 1. I said I will take heed
to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle,
while the wicked is before me. Amos 5.13. Therefore the prudent shall keep
silence in that time, for it is an evil time. And pray often to God to set a
watch before thy mouth, not to suffer thy heart to comply with the workers of
iniquity; and that the Lord would preserve thee from being taken with their
worldly baits and allurements, Psalm. 141.3, 4. Set a watch, O Lord, before my
mouth, keep the door of my lips; incline not my heart to any evil thing, to
practice wicked works with men that work iniquity; and let me not eat of their
dainties. 5. In evil times of wrath and imminent judgment, by reason of
impiety and iniquity abounding in the land, draw near to God by repentance and
faith in Jesus Christ, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather your selves together; yea, gather
together, O nation not desired: before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before
the day of the Lords anger come upon you. Be humble, and tremble in time at the
threatening of wrath, that ye may have rest in your souls in the day when the
cup is poured forth, Hab. 3.16. When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips
quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my
self, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he comes up unto the
people, he will invade them with his troops. They who tremble not in the time
of a threatened judgment, yet when the judgment is poured forth, even these
who were stout-hearted sinners, in the day of wrath poured forth, they become
like Pashur, Magor-missabib, fear round about: When thou have repented of thy
sins, which together with the sins of others, have provoked the Lord to great
wrath, then flee by faith in to the mercy of God manifested in Jesus Christ,
who is the only Ark of Propitiation, Heb. 11.7. Noah being warned of God, of
things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his
soul. When the evil day of wrath is come, and the judgment is incumbent, then
humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people
which are called by my Name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my
face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will
forgive their sin, and will heal their land. 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Now be ye not
stiff-necked as your fathers were, but yield your selves unto the Lord, and
enter into his sanctuary, which he has sanct^fied for ever; and serve the Lord
your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you. Thus
Rehoboam and the Princes, did humble themselves; and the Lord gave them some
deliverance, 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7. 6. That thou may not faint in evil times,
wherein sin, persecution and misery do abound, guard thy heart with the hope of
that eternal rest, when thou shall rest from all thy labors, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17,
18. For which cause, we faint not, etc. For our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen. Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves, that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance. Which is
purchased to us by the merits of the sufferings of Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be everlasting praise, honor and
glory, for now and ever. Amen.

The Believer his Prospect, through the dark Valley of Death.
SERMON VII.
2 COR. 5.1, 2. For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens:

For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven.


THe Particle For, points at the connection of these words with the last verse
of the preceding Chapter; wherein the Apostle gave the reason of his not
fainting under all the pressures and afflictions he suffered in the body;
because he looked not so much by present sense to the things he suffered here,
as by faith and hope he looked to things eternal in heaven, to wit, unto an
eternal rest, and an immortal Crown of Glory, which not seen by sense, yet he
believed was reserved for him in heaven: Now faith is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. And the light
afflictions in this present life, are not to be compared with these eternal
things not seen nor perceived by sense, Romans 8.18. What these eternal things
are, the Apostle describes in part, in the two first verses of this Chapter;
even an immortal and glorified body in the day of the resurrection: therefore
he faints not, but has Christian courage in all the pain and shame he
suffers at the hand of men, now in his frail and mortal body; for we know
(says he) although our earthly house of the tabernacle of the body shall be
dissolved; when all the pins and joints will be dissolved, yet we have a
building of God, and we look for an house, even a glorified body, not of man's
making and giving; though our frail body be framed in the womb by the Lord, yet
the glorified body is of the Lords making and giving, in a more special manner;
because in the day of our resurrection, he shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. It is an house
eternal, and well situat in the heavens, where it will not be subject to storms
and tempests, as it is in this life: my assured knowledge (says he) of that
future happy condition, stirs up in my soul an earnest desire and longing to
remove out of the body, that I may be clothed upon with glory in my soul after
death, and with immortal glory both in soul and body at the day of resurrection.

By earthly house here, is meant our body, called an house of clay, Job 4.19.
because the body of the first Adam, of whom by propagation we have our bodies,
was formed out of the red earth, from which man was called Adam: it is
underpropped for a time by meat, drink, sleep, and sometimes by medicine, to
fill up the breaches, and to repair the decays of this house of clay, which in
end will fall down to the dust of the earth.

It is called a tabernacle; because the soul dwells in the body for a time, as
the Ark did reside in the Tabernacle, built for divine worship for a time in
the wilderness; until it got a settled residence in the Temple of Jerusalem: in
like-manner, our souls in this time of our sojourning on the earth, are lodged
in frail bodies, subject to many changes, and to a continual flux.

By building, or an house not made with hands, is meant the immortal glorious
body in Heaven: here in this life, the parents do minister the materials of our
frail and natural bodies; but the immortality and glory of the heavenly body,
will be only from God himself, as is evident, Phil. 3.20, 21. It is said we
groan, ((...)) as men straightened and pressed with a burden, that hinders them to
go so fast in their journey as they would: therefore the holy Apostle groans
and longs to be eased of that burden of the body, which retards him in his
motions toward his country that is above; and he desires to be clothed upon
with that heavenly house of incorruption; and to be invested in that full
glory, when the soul will be reunited unto a glorious body for ever without
separation; as likewise the body will be ever with the soul, and wherever it
desires to be; for the desire of the soul will be satisfied in Heaven, as
August. de Civit. Dei, says truly, Protinus ubi volet spiritus, ihi erit
corpus, wherever the spirit will desire to be, there incontinent shall the
body be.

In the words we have, 1. The Apostle his assured knowledge of that far better
estate after this life, verse. 1. For we know that if our earthly house, etc. 2.
The effect this knowledge wrought in the holy Apostle, to wit, an earnest
desire after that eternal house, verse. 2. For in this we groan, earnestly
desiring, etc.

From the words we draw clearly these four Conclusions, 1. The dissolution of
the body is certain, Our earthly house will be dissolved. 2. The glory of the
bodies of believers in this life, is certain in the life to come, We have a
building of God, etc. 3. There is a great difference and opposition between our
present and future condition in the body: now the body of believers is in this
life, earthly, and has need of earthly supports and propps: but hereafter in
Heaven it will be heavenly, in respect of its qualities: it will not be gross
and heavy, but subtle and agile; it is now corruptible, but then it will be
eternal; now it is on the earth, as a poor cottage of clay in the wilderness;
then will it be in Heaven, as a Palace, beautiful, strong and unmovable upon
Mount Zion that is above. 4. The assured knowledge of our interest and title
through Christ unto that happy condition of glory both in soul and body, will
stir up in believers a vehement desire of that complete happiness in Heaven,
for in this we groan, etc.

Conclus. 1. There will be a dissolution of the body by death, For we know,
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, that is, although
it were dissolved, as the particle which is also here ((...)) is well rendered,
1 Cor. 4.15. Though you have ten thousand instructers in Christ: and the same
particle is sometimes taken for ((...)) when, 1 John 3.2. We know that when he
shall appear, etc. and so it may be well rendered here also; when our earthly
house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved. Certain it is, it shall be
dissolved, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all, to die. Romans 5.12, 17. Sin came
over all, and by sin also death. 1 Cor. 15.22. In Adam all die. Romans 6.23. The
wages of sin is death. If man had not sinned, he had never died: and of this
immortality of the body upon the condition of his continuance in the estate of
innocence, the tree of life was a visible Sacrament and seal of assurance: so
as man was created with a possibility (I do not say, a power or inclination) to
sin or not to sin, according as he should use the power of his own free will:
even so accordingly he was created with a body capable of mortality or
immortality. It is a gross error of some, who have it from the Pelagians,
denying Original sin; That man would have died, although he had continued in
the estate of innocence; by reason (say they) of the materials of the body,
made up of contrary qualities, that by wearing one upon another, would have
made an alteration in the body, and in end brought corruption. But although
man's body was composed of contrary qualities, apt to war and wear one against
another; yet if man had continued in harmony and correspondence with his
Creators will, he would have kept these qualities in a just harmony one with
another; as he restrained the Lion and Wolf from devouring the Lamb and Kid in
the Ark of Noah; the Lion from doing any harm to the Prophets Ass, 1 King.
13.24. and the fire from finzing the hair of the head of the three Children,
Dan. 3.27. Is it not very probable, the glorified Bodies in Heaven will have
these same primitive natural qualities, and yet they will be without any
alteration or corruption? is it not evident, that the sentence of death was
threatened only upon the condition of sinning against God, The day thou eatest,
thou shall die? That this is not to be understood only of the spiritual death
of the soul, in being deprived of the favor of God, is clear, Genesis 3.19. In
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground;
for out of it was thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou
return. So that the sentence formerly threatened, is execute upon man after his
failie, and for his failie.

Seeing this earthly house will be certainly dissolved, our care of it should be
moderat, and not immoderat: let us not torment our selves with vexatious care,
what we shall eat, or what we shall put on; if we have food and raiment in any
competent measure, let us be content therewith, as sojourners are content with
a small portion in the time of their sojourning: Let your greatest care be of
your immortal souls, which are as a precious jewel enclosed in the body for a
time: Is it not a shame for many persons to have so much care, and take such
pains for adorning a mortal body, and in the mean time to neglect their
immortal soul? Were it not a senseless folly in a man, to put forth all his care
upon the repairing of the outside of his house, and yet to have no care of the
precious stuff and plenishing within it? Frequent meditations of the certainty
of the dissolution of our bodies, would keep our spirits more humble and sober
in the days of prosperity and health: to this end, the very Heathens did often
think upon their mortality; a Lictor or Sergeant was put into the triumphal
chariot beside the Conqueror, to put him in mind of his mortality, by crying
to him, Memento te esse mortalem, remember thou art a mortal man. Philip of
Macedon commanded his Page to knock every morning at his chamber door before he
rose, and to cry, Memento mori, remember thou must die. The great Emperor of
the Schythians, Tamberlan, in his military march, caused carry before him his
winding sheet, as well as the royal standart; and many of the people of God
amongst the Jews had their tombs in their gardens (as we read Joseph of
Arimathea had) to keep their spirits sober in the midst of their worldly
pleasures and delights: but men's forgetfulness of their approaching
dissolution, makes many so impudent and obstinat in their sinful courses, Lam.
1.9. Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembers not her last end;
therefore she came down wonderfully; she had no comforter. We have daily
warnings of the approaching dissolution of this house of clay, 1. From the
propps we make use of daily to support it, as our meat and our drink, they are
for repairing this ruinous house for a time; and yet do what we can, it will
fall down to the dust: take warning from thy going to sleep, and ^emember, as
thou puts off thy clothes, so thou must put off this garment of mortality: If
at any time thou take medicine, remember it is but as a plaistering for a time
of a decaying mud-house. 2. Let sickness in the body at any time, put thee in
mind of thy dissolution by death; because alteration does tend in end to
corruption; as a drop from the roof does in end wear the side-walls. 3. Take
warning from the death and burial of others; when thou see their scull, or
bones, or dust: this is a pious Necromancy thereby to divine of thine own
dissolution by death. 4. Take warning from the winter season; when thou look
on the earth, thou see neither grass nor flower, then remember thou that, of
1 Pet. 1.24. All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower of
grass: the grass withers and the flower thereof falls away. But thou who
sowest in tears, rejoice in the hope of that harvest of complete glory at the
Resurrection, which is the springtime of the immortality of the body; when the
bodies of the Saints shall spring up in glory, like the lillies, that were hid
under the ground in time of winter, Isa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in
the dust; for thy dew, is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead:

There is great reason, wherefore we should be preparing daily for the
dissolution of the body by death, 1. This dissolution is inevitable, and there
is not exemption from it by any humane power. It is true, God himself did
exempt Enoch and Elias from dissolution of the body; because he is the supreme
Lawgiver, and may dispense with his own penal statutes: but no person can
exempt himself from the necessity of a dissolution of the body: riches cannot
bribe death; the rich glutton died: honor and majesty in the great ones of the
world, cannot dash death out of countenance, nor chase it away; Kings are laid
in their graves: might and power of Armies cannot affright death; it has taken
away Kings and great Commanders upon the head of their Armies, wisdom and
eloquence cannot dissuade it from approaching; the wise and eloquent die, as
well as fools and ignorant men. The Piety of the godly, will not turn it away;
Abraham the father of the faithful, and all the Patriarchs died. 2. This
dissolution is uncertain in respect of the time, manner, and place: We come
into the world one way, but go out of it a thousand diverse ways: that rich
worldling, ( Luke 12.18.) was taken away on a sudden; the Shunamit's son goes
forth well in the morning, but dies before the evening: though our days are
numbered of God, yet they are uncertain to us: our breath is in our nostrils; if
either the air we draw in, or the air we breath out, be stopped, we are gone in
an instant: if but the small passages from the reins be obstructed, our heart
is suffocat. Therefore let us not in our vain presumption number years unto our
selves; but let us pray daily to God, that he would teach us so to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Psalm. 90 12.

Quest. How shall I be prepared for my dissolution and death? Ans. That thou
may be prepared, 1. Repent of thy sins, and be reconciled unto God through
faith in Jesus Christ the Mediator, without delaying, even while thou art in
the way, and cannot tell how soon thou may be removed, that thou may appear
before thy Judge, Mat. 5.25. Delay not till the very term of thy dissolution be
come; for then it will be with thee as with a careless debt or, who takes no
course with his debts in time; at the term-day he is confounded with fear, lest
death as a rude Messenger, sent from the great Judge, shall hale him to the
bottomless prison, from which there is no redemption. 2. Embrace Christ the
Savior of sinners into the arms of thy faith, that so with old Simeon thou
may depart in peace, Luke 2.29, 30. Holy Ambrose at his death, beholding his
friends weeping sore, said, Why weep ye? I have not so lived, that I am ashamed
to live longer, if it shall so seem good in the eyes of God; neither am I
afraid to die, because I have a gracious Lord. 3. Be thou diligent in thy
Christian, and also in thy particular lawful Calling; the foresight of death,
and appearance after death before the Tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ, made
Paul careful to approve himself to God in his Apostolical Calling, 2 Cor. 5.9,
10. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of
him; for we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, etc. Upon this
account Peter was also careful to do his duty faithfully, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15.
Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by
putting you in remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this my
tabernacle, etc. 4. In all the ways of thy Christian conversation, study to
persevere in keeping a good conscience, that at death thou may die with some
comfortable evidence in thy self of thy future happiness, 2. Tim. 4.7, 8. I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, etc. 5. Labor
thou to be prepared, as were the wise Virgins, ( Mat. 25.) with the light of
sound knowledge in thy mind, that thou may say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed. And also having the oil of sincere love in your
heart toward God; for the heart cannot conceive what God has prepared for them
that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. As also having sincere love in your hearts toward
all the Saints, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death unto life,
because we love the brethren. 6. Be thou prepared as these faith^ul servants, (
Luke 12.36.) who trussed up their garments, that they might be the more expedit
and ready to open the door to their Lord at his return: In like manner do thou
retire thy heart in time from the excessive love of the things of this present
world, that it be not entangled thereby: but set thy heart upon God and things
above; for as Plenishing or Household Stuff fixed fast in the wall, is
ordinarily broken before it can be removed; so a worldly-minded man, his heart
is broken with grief and worldly sorrow, when he is removed from his present
enjoyments: his spirit is rather taken from him against his will, then by him
freely commended, and cheerfully put over into the hands of his Heavenly
Father, Luke 12.20.

Conclus. 2. The future glory of the bodies of the Saints in Heaven, is not
only sure and certain, in it self, in respect of the object promised by God;
but also in respect of the subject, to wit, believers on the Lord Jesus Christ,
who may and should be assured of it; for it is said here by the Apostle, not
only in his own name, but also in the name of all believers on Jesus Christ, We
know we have an house, etc. It is expressed in the present tense, ((...), we
have) to signify the certainty of it in a believer; so, Joh. 3 36. He that
believes in me, has everlasting life. This assurance Job had, Job 19 27. Whom
I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, etc. And
David, Psalm. 17.15 As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall
be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness.

The reasons are, 1. Because not only the soul, but also the body of a
believer, is a part of the mystical Body of Christ, who is the Savior of his
whole body, Ephesians. 5.23. 2. As the body of believers, is an instrument and vessel
of honor to God in this life; so these same bodies shall be vessels of glory
in the other life, that they may receive there according to their service done
unto God here in the body, 2 Cor. 5.10. 3. The bodies of the Patriarchs, do now
rest in their graves; and as we may be assured, they shall be raised unto
glory, Matthew. 22.32. Joh. 5 28, 29. So all true believers on Jesus Christ, may
be assured, that their own bodies also shall be raised in glory unto eternal
life.

As we would be assured of glory to our bodies in heaven, let us use our bodies
here as temples to the Holy Ghost, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. Now
the body is used as a temple to the Holy Ghost, 1. by separating it from the
service of sin and iniquity, as the temple of Jerusalem, which sometime was a
threshing-floor before it became a Temple to God, it was separate from that
common use; So our bodies must be separat from the service of iniquity, before
it can be consecrat to the service of God, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. And what agreement
has the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God,
etc. wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separat, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. 2. As the temple of
Jerusalem was not only separat from a profane or common use, but was also
dedicat and consecrat unto the service of God, and spiritual employments; in
like manner, our bodies should be presented and dedicat to the service of God,
according to the duty of our Christian calling, Romans 12.1. I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
As all the vessels in the Temple, whether great or small, were holy; so should
all the members of our body be employed unto righteousness, Romans 6.13. Neither
yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; but yield
your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members
as instruments of righteousness unto God. Our eyes should be turned away from
beholding vanity, and employed to behold the power and wisdom of God in the
works of Creation and Providence; our ears should be circumcised and tu^ned
away from hearing profane or obscene speeches, and turned to hear what may be
profitable for our edification; our tongues should be turned away from all
unsavory communication, and should minister grace to the hearer. 3. The Temple
was guarded and kept by the Porters, lest any thing should enter or creep into
the Temple, which might defile it, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. In like-manner should we
watch over the Ports of our eyes and ears, that nothing enter in by them, which
may defile the soul, which is the very sanctuary within the temple of our body.
No stranger was admitted unto the temple of Jerusalem, Act. 21.28. so we should
not admit willingly, any strange thought or straggling motion, which would turn
the heart away from God, Ps. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy law do I
love. If through our inadvertence such motions creep in, or through violence
rush into the soul and molest the body, then as our blessed Lord in his zeal,
did scourge out the buyers and the sellers out of the Temple, we should in a
holy indignation, and commendable self-revenge, cast out these thoughts that
would sell our bodies and the members thereof unto iniquity: If thus ye be
careful to use your bodies as a temple to the Holy Ghost, then may ye be
assured, the Holy G^ost who dwelled in the soul, and overruled the body in the
day of resurrection, will fill his temple with glory; even as the temple of
Jerusalem was first built by Gods command, and thereafter filled with the
cloud, and sensible presence of God himself. But these who dishonor God in the
body and members thereof, as by blaspheming the Name of God, by uncleanness, by
drunkenness or other sins acted by the subserviency of the body; can such
persons, or dare they say, We know we have an eternal house in heaven? Yea, do
they not know, and are convinced from the threatenings of God, and from their
own conscience bearing witness to the truth and justness of the same, that if
they live and dye in their sins without repentance and amendment of life, there
is a bottomless dark prison with torments everlasting, prepared both for their
soul and for their body? Gal. 6.8. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of
the flesh reap corruption.

Conclus. 3. There is a great difference and opposition between the bodies of
believers in this life; and the condition of their glorified bodies in the life
to come: here the body is an earthly house, mouldering down daily; but in
heaven, it will be fixed, eternal and incorruptible. This opposition is clearly
set forth, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42, 43. 1. Now the body of the Saints is subject to
alteration and corruption, It is sow^ says the Apostle, in corruption, but
raised in incorruption. The body now, is in a continual flux and decay; some
pickles of our dust are running daily: our life is like a lamp within this
pitcher of clay, having need daily to be recruited by fresh oil: but in heaven
our bodies will be of a fixed condition, without any need of reparation; then
the vital and animat spirits of the body, will be pure and free from all
superfluous humors, and from all conflict of one bodily quality against
another; which, like contrary tides, do make a great commotion within the body:
but in heaven there will be a perfect harmony amongst all the elementary
qualities in the body; and therefore no possiblity of alteration, or declining
to old age. 2. There is an opposition in respect of the feature and beauty of
the body; The body is sown in dishonor, but raised in honor. Our body in this
life, is called a vile body, Phil. 3.20. Saccus stercorum; and the greatest on
earth must carry about with them these monitories of humility: A little time
before death, the face becomes pale and earth-like; as wine near-run, does
smell of the dreg: after the soul is gone, like an heavenly spark of fire out
of a mud-house, then the body becomes nasty and loathsome through stench.
Abraham desired to bury his some-time beautiful Sarah out of his sight. But in
the day of resurrection the bodies of the godly will be raised in honor, like
unto the glorious body of Christ. As the tabernacle in the wilderness, was made
according to the pattern shown unto Moses in the Mount; so the tabernacle of
our body will be raised according to the pattern of Christ's b^^y, shown in
mount Tabor, when he was transfigured, Mat. 17. They will be raised in great
comeliness both for splendour and proportion: these bodies that had any defect
or deformity in this life, through want of any member, shall have all made up
in that day of restoring all things: he that brings forth the lilly from
under the ground in beautiful colors, exceeding the glory of king Solomon, and
he that restored Malchus his ear, will adorn the body with beauty, and with
integrity of members: all doubts, how such a thing can be, are resolved by the
Apostle, Phil. 3.21 He will do it according to the working, whereby he is able,
even to subdue all things unto himself. 3. There is an opposition in respect of
the healthful disposition and constitution of the body; It is sown in weakness,
but will be raised in power. The best constitution of the body now, in
comparison of that it had in the estate of innocence, is at the best but
weakness: although all bodies now be not alike weak; yet a sharp fit of an
ague, or of the stone will lay the strongest man on his back; even the
strongest bodies through much labor do become weak and feeble, as a strong
bow, through much shooting, becomes flug and remiss: Sampson, notwithstanding
his great strength, became weary and thirsty after his fight with the
Philistines; and on deathbed the strongest man is not able to carry a drink to
his own head, or to turn himself in his bed: but in the day of resurrection,
the body will be raised in power and strength, and so continue without all
weariness: for weakness in the body, and weariness after labor, is a
consequent of man's fall, and of original corruption; if man had not fallen, his
labor in the garden would have been only a pleasant recreation without toil
and sweat: but in heaven there will be no remains of corruption in the soul;
and therefore no weariness in the body. 4. There is a great opposition between
our body now, and the glorified body in the resurrection, in respect of
exercise and operations; It is sown a natural body, but will be raised a
spiritual body: not of a spiritual, Aerial, or Etherial substance, for the same
individual body will be raised, and it was not in this life Aerial or Etherial:
there will be a raising up of that same body which is fallen, (...), and that
was a terrestrial body; it is said demonstratively, 1 Cor. 15.54. This
corruptible, and this mortal. But the body will be raised up with spiritual
qualities; now it is a natural body, and has need of natural means for
preserving and continuing the spece and kind by Generation, as also of meat,
drink and sleep for preserving the Individual by nutrition: but after the
resurrection, the body will be abstract and retired from the use of these
natural means and operations; the glorified Saints will be like unto Angels,
neither giving in marriage, nor taking in marriage, Mat. 22.30. The number of
the Elect, and of the Church Triumphant, will be complete at the resurrection;
there will be no more enlargeing of the Church by posterity: the whole desire
and delight of the Sa^nts glorified, will be so ^ully taken up with the vision
and fruition of the all-sufficient and unchangeable God, that the beatifick
vision will drown and swallow up any remembrance of natural desire or delight
on the creature: if Peter (Matthew. 17.) was so deeply affected with a sight of
that created glory he saw on mount Tabor, that he forgot all his former
contentments and enjoyments worldly below the mount, when he said, It is good
for us to be here: How much more will the Saints in heaven be ravished with the
sight and knowledge of that increated glory of God himself in their souls, when
he shall be mavelous in his Saints, 2 These. 1.10. and when they shall also
behold the glory of Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness in his humane
glorified body? The glorified body will not have any use or need of meat, drink
or sleep, because the body then will be of a fixed and durable constitution and
consistence, without all possibility of alteration or decay, Rev. 7.16 In
heaven the body will be spiritual, in respect of lucidity and agility in
motion; like unto the celestial Spirits and Angels, who in a very short time
make their motions through a vast space and interval, as the Angel Gabriel did,
Dan. 9.23. In like manner, our bodies then will be carried quickly in an
imperceptible moment of time, wheresoever our souls shall desire to be, 1 These.
4.17. We shallbe caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in
the air. As for these members of the body, which in this life serve for
necessar and natural use, they will serve in heaven for ornament and integrity
of the body: as the breasts of the woman come to old age, who sometimes gave
suck; although in old age they will not serve for that use, yet they do still
serve for the ornament and integrity of the body.

Herefrom is matter of great comfort to the godly, who suffer hard things in
the body here: be of good courage ye are not to dwell for ever in that silly
frail house; at the term of removal by death, ye know of a durable house; now
it is mouldering down daily, like an house of clay after a great shower; but in
heaven ye will have a mansion and fixed station in your fathers house, Joh.
14.2. Although possibly there be sensible weakness, or visible deformity now in
thy body; yet be thou patient in the hope thy body will be raised in strength
and beauty, as the body of Lazarus, without any sores: It is true, after the
Resurrection of our blessed Lord, the print of the nails remained in his hands
and feet, as also the hole of the wound in his side; but that was for a short
time out of his merciful condescension to cure Thomas his doubting; as also his
eating ( Joh. 21.) was not to satisfy necessity, for then his body was
glorious and immortal; but it was to feed and confirm their faith of the
Resurrection of his body. 3. Though now thou be weary in the body after much
labor, so was our blessed Lord in this, like unto us, as in all things, except
sin, Joh. 4.6. But be of good comfort, thou who exercisest thy self in
well-doing, shall rise in the body, as one refreshed in the morning after a
sound and quiet sleep* then shall thou be like unto Angels, in doing the will
of thy Lord with all cheerfulness, without all possibility of weariness. 4. Now
in the body thou art sometimes troubled about a livelihood and things necessar;
but after the Resurrection thou shall be satisfied to the full both in soul and
body with the fruition of our all-sufficient and unchangable God; even with
that hid Manna of the sweet* full, and unspeakable variety of delight, both in
the sense of the love of God toward thee, and in the sense of thy love
reflected on God, Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the
hidden manna. 5. Now thou art molested and fashed with the stirrings of
inordinat concupiscence dwelling in the body, as Sarah was grieved with Hagar,
dwelling in the same house with her: but it is thy comfort, after the
Resurrection of the body, as there will be perfect calmness in the affections,
without the least unruly motion; so in all the members of the glorified body,
there will be perfect quietness; as when the sea is calm, there is no agitation
in the Ship. 6. Though now at the dissolution of the body, and at the departure
of its noble guest the immortal soul, there may be, and ofttimes is, much pain
and agony, like unto the grief Jacob had at parting with his dear Benjamin: yet
rejoice thou in the hope of that joyful meeting again of thy soul and body, as
the joy was great when Jacob and Joseph met again together: the glorified soul
will bring glad tidings from heaven to the body, like the faithful spies, Number.
14. for the encouragement of the body to go along with it to the third heaven:
this joy will be increased at their meeting with Christ, accompanied with
millions of Angels; and it will be perpetuated with him in the paradise of God,
for we shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4..71

Conclus. 4. The assured knowledge believers have of that happy estate of soul
and body in Heaven, stirs up in them an earnest desire after the fruition of
it; for it is said, verse. 1. We know, etc. and, verse. 2. In this we groan
earnestly, etc. for the knowledge and persuasion of the truth of the good set
before us, does stir up the heart to desire, quickens us to diligence in using
all lawful means for attaining the good desired; and encourages us against
difficulties in the way: The pleasantness and fertility of the land of Canaan,
seen and known to the faithful spies, ( Numb. 14.) stirred up in them an
earnest desire of possessing the promised land; it quickened them to diligence
in the way, and gave them courage against the sons of Anak. who were to oppose
them in their way to it, Numb. 14.9. The Apostle Paul, knowing it was best to
be with Christ, did desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23. This desire made him
diligent and faithful in all the parts, both of his Christian and Apostolic
Calling; it made him also courageous and resolute against all difficulties and
discouragements, Acts 21.13. 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. 1 Timothy 6.12. But gross ignorants,
who know or believe nothing concerning the complete happiness of soul and body
in Heaven, have no true or well-grounded desire to remove out of the body: and
wicked obstinat sinners, though they have some literal knowledge of it; yet
they have not that lively hope, which purifieth the heart; and therefore at
death they are driven out of the body, sore against their will, as a Malefactor
condemned, is forced from his house to the prison, Job 18.18. He shall be
driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world. As in his
lifetime, the wicked man rushed into sin, like an horse into the battle,
without all fear of God: so he shall be driven as a beast into that dark and
bottomless prison; he shall be chased and pursued with the fears and terrors
of an evil conscience, Psalm. 140.11. Evil shall hunt the violent man to
overthrow him.

Object. But sometimes even the godly are unwilling to die, as was Hezekiah,
Isai. 38.10. and David, Ps. 39.13. What is the cause of this unwillingness in
them who walked uprightly before the Lord? Ans. The causes are, 1. An immoderat
love sometimes in the godly toward some of their nearest and dearest relations:
it makes them to linger in their desires and resolutions to die; as Lot did
linger in his departing out of Sodom Genesis 19.16. his great affection to his
sons-in-law, made him ling^r longer than he should: but when death takes the
godly by the heart, as the Angel did Lot by the hand, then they are willing to
submit to the will of God; and they say, as our blessed Lord did at his death,
Father, into thy hands I recommend my spirit. 2. Their desire to do good in
their station in the world, is a cause of their unwillingness to remove for a
time from that station: and this I think made David and Hezekiah somewhat
unwilling, out of their great respect to the people of God over whom they were
set: this made Paul to hover, and to be in a strait, whether to depart or abide
in the flesh; even his great desire to benefit the Church of Christ, by
preaching the Gospel, Phil. 1.23. These are truly pious desires and commendable
purposes; yet when the children of God perceive it is Gods peremptory will to
remove them by death, they commend their spirits to God, and the care of all
their concernments unto their wise Lord, who can raise up a Joshua in the place
of Moses, and an Elisha in the place of Elijah, and also enable them with the
spirit of their Calling. It is also a natural and pious desire of godly
Parents, to live that they may bring up their young children in the knowledge
and the fear of the Lord, and under God provide for them: nevertheless when
they perceive it is Gods will to remove them by death from their children, they
willingly submit themselves to the will of God; and as they cast themselves and
the care of their soul upon the God of their salvation; so with confidence they
commit their children to God, who takes this title unto himself, to be the
father of the fatherless. And I know well, the God of truth does not assume
empty titles; but is fully answerable unto them in the work of his gracious and
fatherly providence. 3. A cause of their unwillingness to die, is sometimes
their want of full assurance of the remission of their sins, and of the
salvation of their souls: but if they had this, they profess they would be most
willing to die. For answer to this scruple, I confess it is no wonder the child
of God desire this full assurance; because the more they have of a
well-grounded assurance, they have the more of inward peace and comfort: yet
though thou have not that full assurance, which is called (...), the full
assurance of faith; yet if by thy true repentance thou have forsaken thy former
evil ways, and have brought forth fruits meet for repentance in the amendment
of thy life, and by faith cleavest to Christ, and to the merit of his perfect
righteousness, I say unto thee, as our bl^ssed Lord said unto the Ruler of the
Synagogue, Mark 5.36. Be not afraid, only believe: Remember that of John 3.18.
He that believes on him, is not condemned. And ( Joh. 3.36.) He that believes
on the Son, has everlasting life. That full assurance, called in a borrowed
phrase, (...), is like that of a Ship coming in to the Harbor with full Sails
before the wind: yet some Ships in time of a storm will come in safe also with
a piece of a Cross-sail: Bless thou God for thy faith of adherence to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the promises of salvation in him: if with Job thou can say
with an upright heart, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
Consider I beseech thee, for thy comfort, that God is more zealous of his own
honor in performing his faithful promise made unto believers, who depend upon
him by faith and obedience, than thou can be of thine own salvation: as he
takes no pleasure in the destruction of a sinner; so he takes much pleasure in
thy turning and trusting in him: if thou die leaning by faith on him and his
promise of salvation, then shall thou be saved and carried by him out of this
wilderness unto that Paradise which is above; as it is said, Cant. 8.5. Who is
this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? If the Son
of God, the beloved of the Father, be also thy beloved; and if thou die,
leaning on him, then shall thou come out of the wilderness of this world; and
shall be filled with his everlasting love, and fullness of the purest joy and
delight in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What are the means and helps to make the children of God willing to
remove out of the body? Ans. 1. A special mean is that, set down here in the
Text, to wit, the assured knowledge of a far better estate after this life:
Moses, a little time before his death, went up to the top of Pisgah, Deuteronomy. 34.
and there the Lord showed unto him the pleasant and plentiful land of Canaan,
that was on the other side of Jordan; after which sight, he willingly died
there: in like-manner the Lord our God, for their further encouragement,
elevats the minds of his children, by the eye of faith, toward their eternal
rest in Heaven; then their hearts are so affected with love and desire to be
there with Christ, that they say as Paul did, Phil. 1.23. I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Old Simeon, a long
expectant of glory, waited for Christ, the consolation of Israel; and when he
got him in his arms, he said, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke 2.29, 30. In like-manner,
faith embracing Christ the Savior, and the hope of salvation in him and with
him, does depart in peace. 2. The seal of the Holy Spirit, in the work and
course of our sanctification, does encourage and make us willing to die* as the
Seal of earthly Kings, make sure to men their earthly possessions; so the King
of kings, by the Seal of the Holy Spirit, as our Sanctification is called, (
Ephesians. 1.13) makes sure unto believers their heavenly inheritance, which is said
to be among them which are sanctified by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts
26.^8. Therefore as ye would die willingly in the hope of that heavenly
inheritance, be very careful, that your gift thereof pass not only through the
Common Seal of the outward Ordinances of hearing the Word, and receiving the
holy Sacraments; but also through the Privy Seal of purifying and sanctifying
the heart; for, Blessed are they that are pure in heart, they shall see God,
Mat. 5.8. and without holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12.14. There is no
coming unto the heavenly inheritance without regeneration as a child yet unborn
cannot actually have the possession of an inheritance. 3. The earnest of the
Spirit, which is also called, The first fruits of the Spirit, (Romans 8.23.)
makes a man willing to die: as a man receiving, though a small earnest-peny
out of the hand of one that is faithful and able to perform the whole bargain
at the term, does trust to his faithful promise; and withal having received
some earnest of the promised sum; the nearer the term of performance is* he is
the more joyful: In like-manner, the child of God, having sometime received an
earnest or first fruits of his salvation, in the sense of Gods love, shed
abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost; some peace in his conscience by faith in
Jesus Christ the Savior of sinners; and some joy of the promised salvation,
from a lively hope to be with Christ; the nearer he is to the term of his
removal, he is or may be the more joyful: so it was with the Apostle Paul, 2
Cor. 5 8. He also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit; therefore we
are confident and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord. These first fruits of the Spirit in the soul, are like unto
these few clusters Joshua and Caleb brought from the valley of Eshcol; they
give some refreshment to the soul, and withal encourage it to go forward to
Heaven, where they shall get no worse, but much more of such fruits. Although
thou have not such a measure of the sense of Gods love toward thee, as thou
desire: yet if there be in thine heart a true and sincere hatred of all sin;
and a true and deep sense of thine own love toward God, that thou may say in
humility and sincerity, as Peter did, Joh. 21. Lord, thou that know all
things, knows I love thee: then may thou die willingly, because (1 Cor.
2.9.) Eye has not seen, etc. what God has prepared for them that love him. 1
Cor. 8.3. If any man love God, the same is known and approven of him. Peace in
thy conscience, from faith resting on Jesus Christ and his perfect
righteousness, is the earnest of thy full and everlasting peace in Heaven, when
thou shall see God as he is. Although thy peace of Sanctification may be
interrupted now and then by thy sinning sometimes against thy light, as it was
in David, Psalm. 51. yet in Heaven there will be perfect righteousness inherent
for ever, and the fruit thereof will be perfect and everlasting peace in the
soul. Spiritual joy, which is called the joy of the Holy Ghost, because he is
the Author of it; and is also called the joy of salvation, because eternal
salvation in Heaven is the object of it* if at any time God has given joy to
thy heart after thy mourning in secret for thy sins; and after thy believing in
Jesus Christ, who came into the world to save even the chief of sinners; then
look thou upon that joy, as a love-token sent down to thee from Heaven; and as
an earnest of that full and everlasting joy in Heaven that shall never be taken
from thee. This consideration and joyful expectation makes the children of God
willing to be dissolved, and to be with Christ at whose right hand is fullness
of joy, and pleasures for ever: For if there be such joy from the earnest and
first fruits, that it is called, (1 Pet. 1.8.) Joy unspeakable and full of
glory, What will the joy be after this life, when we shall receive the full sum
of glory, and shall reap the full harvest of joy in the kingdom of Heaven? It
is true, some of the dear children of God, who sometimes in their lifetime have
had peace in their conscience, and joy in their heart from the hope of
salvation, have been a little before their death under a cloud and great
wrestlings against temptations to unbelief and despondency, which were fierce
as the sons of Anak at their coming out of this wilderness: but before their
dissolution, that cloud evanished, and they expressed their joy, like the joy of
the wise men, when they saw the Star that led them to Christ appearing again,
Mat. 2.10. and they cried out, Venit venit, He is come, he is come; And then
they say, (as Isa. 25.9.) This is the Lord* we have waited for him, we will be
glad, and rejoice in his salvation.

Use. For exhortation unto willingness at death to remove out of the body: to
this end we would seriously and frequently consider, 1. This is the place and
the time of our sojourning; our rest is not here: therefore let us pass the
time of our sojourning here, in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. Like unto loving and dutiful
children in the time of their travels abroad, who are afraid to do any thing in
a strange country, that may dishonor their loving father, who sent them to
their travels for a time, and bare all their charges in the time of their
absence: this fear to dishonor our heavenly Father, and our active care to
honor him in this present world, will make us willing and confident to return
unto him at death, who will make us welcome at our return, and give us rest in
these eternal mansions in our Fathers house: this fear to offend God, and care
to please him in all things, made the Apostle Paul willing and confident in the
thoughts of his departure from this world, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8 I have fought a good
fight, etc. henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only,
but unto all them also, that love his appearing. 2. Consider often the place
thou leavest at death, and the place thou go to after death; and the vast
difference between these two, as the Heaven is distant from the Earth: thou
leavest a world of iniquity and misery; but go to that other world, wherein
dwells righteousness and all happiness: there is a vast difference between
the earthly house thou flitts from at death, and that eternal house and mansion
to which thy soul flitts immediately after death, and shall rest from all thy
labors, Rev. 14.13. Thy soul dwells now in a dark house; there is much
ignorance even in the best of Saints here: and any light or knowledge we have
now in the body, is but like the light unto a prisoner in the dungeon, through
crevices and slitts, by the ministry of our outward senses, our hearing and
seeing: but in that heavenly mansion, whereto the believer goes at death,
there is full light, Ps. 36.9. In thy light shall we see light. 1 John 3.2. We
shall see him as he is. There will be an identity in the object, God himself,
seen by all the glorified Saints: yet there is an infinite variety of all things
desirable for our happiness, to be seen and known in God himself, infinite in
excellency an goodness: even as a man beholds diverse re^ractions from one
and the self same sparkling precious Diamond: his light and knowledge in the
souls of glorified Saints will endure for ever, Rev. 21.23. The city had no
need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. This ea^^thly house does
oft-times smoke, and makes our eyes to gush ou^ with tears, as smoke does from
a soaking fite not yet put out: so the many sinful motions and fumes, arising
from in-dwelling concupiscence in the body, makes the children of God here
many times to mourn in secret before the Lord, and in the bitterness of their
spirit to cry out with the Apostle. Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? But at death the fire of
concup^scence will be wholly quenched; as at flitting, the fire of the house,
wherein they formerly dwelt, is wholly put out: but after death we shall follow
the Lamb in white robes, not only without blame, but also without all stain.
Now we dwell in a strait and narrow house; here are (...) great p^essures and
oppressions of spirit, with one affliction after another; but after death, we
shall be enlarged from all trouble and pain; then God shall wipe away all tears
from our eyes, Rev. 21.4. Now we dwell in a dropping house; one defluction
after another, from our weak and distempered head, do trouble this earthly
body: but after death, in our eternal house, there will be a perpetual
influence of life, health, peace and joy, from our strong and everlasting Head,
the Lord Jesus Christ. Now we dwell among many evil and troublesome neighbors,
who make us oft-times cry out with David, Woe is me that I dwell in the tents of
Mesecb. But in heaven there will be perfect peace, a sweet harmony in minds and
affections amongst all the fellow-citizens: there we shall be in a perpetual
communion with the blessed Angels, and with the glorified Saints. Yea that
which crowns all, we shall be in an immediate, full, and perpetual communion
with God himself, infinite in glory, Rev. 21.3. God himself shall be with them.
And at the resurrection of the body, we shall live in a communion of the
visible glory of Christ the Lord, whom we shall see with our bodily eyes, 1
These. 4.17 3. Lastly, consider what joy thou have had at any time here from
faith in Jesus Christ, whom having not seen ye love, in whom, though now ye see
him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspe^kable and full of glory, 1
Pet. 1.8. O what shall our joy be after death, when we shall see him face to
face! If now thy joy be so great in seeing him only through the lattesse of his
Ordinances, and if some of the Saints have such joy in suffering for him here,
how great shall their joy be in reigning with him there? If we have some peace
and calmness in our conscience, when we are in the sea of this world, what
shall be the peace and calmness, when we shall be brought within that haven of
^he third heaven, where the salvation of God shall be our perpetual bulwark?
Old Jacob, when he considered the misery and famine of the Land from which he
parted, when he looked to the wagons and provision sent to him by his beloved
Joseph, and when he considered he was going to be with his own Joseph in honor
and great plenty, he departed willingly from the place of his former abode: So
let us consider this present world from which we part; it is a place of sin and
misery; let us consider, any provision of inward comfort God has sent us at
any time, it should be as a wagon and fiery chariot to carry our hearts
upwards toward God, the fountain of all comfort and happiness: Consider our
dear Joseph the Lord Jesus Christ, that was sold for our iniquities, is now at
the fathers right hand, the great Steward and Dispenser of grace and glory; by
death we are going to him, in whom and with whom we shall enjoy all happiness
for ever. If there be comfort sometimes from a drop of joy here, how full,
ever-flowing and overflowing will our joy be, that shall proceed from the
vision and fruition of God for ever? These everlasting pleasures and purest
joys, are that pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out
of the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. I close with that of the
Apostle Jude, ver. 24.25. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling,
and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy; to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and
power, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

