WHITEHALL, June 3. 1689.

Let this Letter to a Bishop, etc. be Printed.

Shrewsbury.

A LETTER TO A BISHOP Concerning the Present Settlement, AND THE NEW OATHS.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1689.

A LETTER to a BISHOP Concerning the Present Settlement, AND THE NEW OATHS.
My Lord,
I Have considered the Matter you mentioned to me with all the care and
attention that my other necessary Affairs would allow, and I account it indeed,
as your Lordship does, a great unhappiness, that any Protestants are
dissatisfied with our present Settlement, but especially, that some of those
Bishops are of this number, who were so lately made Confessors for the
Protestant Religion.

It is not without great Injustice, that some of those Gentlemen, who have put
Pen to Paper in defense of the New Oaths, take the liberty of charging these
Bishops as if their present dissatisfactions did spring from Pride, Interest,
Humor, Obstinacy, or a Fear of having their Wings clipped in this New
Settlement: I am confident that they, which charge any of these things upon
those Venerable and Excellent Men do not know Them, and they write as if they
had never heard any thing of Them before this unhappy Rupture. Undoubtedly They
who could go to a Jayl, and were ready to be ruined in their Estates, and to
sacrifice themselves for the two best things in the World, the Church of
England, and the Laws of the Land, do deserve no such Character. I am
persuaded, that what their Lordships, and many others with them, do in this
respect, proceeds purely from Conscience; and that if Themselves were so happy,
or others for them, to satisfy their Consciences about the Present Settlement,
and the New Oaths, They would as heartily comply with the present Settlement,
and act in it, as any other of their Majesty's Subjects.

But though, my Lord, this is my Judgment concerning their Dissatisfactions, that
they proceed from Conscience, yet I am persuaded that there are
Misapprehensions and Mistakes, which, if rectified, would make an alteration in
their Opinions; that too great stress is laid upon some things, that do not
deserve it, and too little upon others, that are of much greater moment. I say
this, with Reverence of them that are so much my Superiors, not taking upon me
to Judge what the Reasons of their Dissatisfaction may be: but for those of my
own rank, whom I am more conversant with, I may pretend to know most of their
Reasons; and, as far as I can recollect, all their Doubts and Dissatisfactions
may be reduced into a very narrow Compass.

Your Lordship required me to contract my thoughts into as small a Discourse as
I could; I will not forget your Lordship's Command: I think that all may be
reduced to these two Points; One is, The Scruple concerning the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy taken to King James the Second: And the Other, about
the New Oaths to their Present Majesty's, required of all persons who sit in
Parliament, or are in any Office Civil or Military, or in Ecclesiastical
Preferments. Now if I could prove, that the Oaths to King James have ceased to
oblige us, and that the New Oaths to King William and Queen Mary may be
lawfully taken; I presume that this will be allowed sufficient to remove the
Scruples, and will give satisfaction to such as will do me the right not to
carp at, or be angry at any single reason, but to consider them all together.

In relation to Oaths in general, I need not spend much time to enquire how
they may cease to oblige those who have taken them; that they cease to bind
when the Government of that Person to whom they were taken is at an end, I
think no body will deny. This is all I will desire to be granted me concerning
the Oaths to King James.

And in relation to Government, That may be said to cease several ways; as when
the Person entrusted with it dies; or when He will govern no longer, and so
withdraws himself from it voluntarily; or when He is conquered, and forced
thereby to withdraw himself involuntarily, and can give no longer Protection to
those who were his Liege Subjects.

These are the chief Instances, whereby the Government of any Particular Person
may cease.

There is no doubt concerning the first of them, but all our present dispute
will be about the rest; that is, whether any one, or all of them are applicable
to the Government of King James; whether He would govern no longer; and whether
He did withdraw himself from, and leave his Government voluntarily; or lastly,
whether He was driven out of it by a fair and just Conquest.

I think, my Lord, that the Proof of any one of these three Instances were
sufficient to satisfy all honest Men, that the Obligation of the Oaths to the
late King James is superseded by it: and I believe such a Proof to be no
difficult task.

For to begin with the first of them; The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
were taken to King James as King, and oblige no further nor longer than He
continued to be King, that is, to govern as King of England: Now that the late
King ceased to govern as King of England a good while before the Prince of
Orange either landed here, or, I believe, thought of coming hither, may I think
be made plain by these following Considerations.

I need not examine curiously here, my Lord, into the Nature of Government, and
the Diversities of it; my business only is to have it agreed what sort of
Government our English One is.

That it is a Mixed sort of Government is plain from our Constitution, whereby
every One of the Three Estates in Parliament are necessary to the making any
Laws whatever for the Nation as well as the King's Le Roy le veult.

It is the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
Parliament assembled, that make Laws; and not the King alone, or the Lords
alone, or the Commons alone; nor the King himself with any one or two of the
States of Parliament.

And as the King cannot here make Laws alone for the Nation, so He is,
according to our Constitution, obliged by a most Solemn Oath and Promise, at
his Coronation, to Govern according to the Laws made by Lawful Authority. This
I am assured is the Essence of a King of England, that He is One sitting upon
the Throne, and Governing, not by his own Will, or his own Edicts, but by the
known Laws of the Land.

These being, my Lord, the Two main Hinges of our Government, that all the Laws
the People of England can be governed by are made in Parliament, and that the
Government it self be administered according to these Laws; if either the King
alone, or any one, or both, of the Houses of Parliament take upon them to make
Laws, the One Hinge is broken off; and if the Government it self be not
administered, that is, if the King do not govern according to the Laws, the
Other Hinge is broken off also, and then the Constitution is at an end, and our
Legal Government does cease, whatever new, or better one be pretended to be set
over us instead of it.

Having premised this state of our Government and Constitution, I think it will
not be denied me, that wherever there has been a direct contravention to
either of those fundamental Supports of our Government, it has caused a
subversion of the Government it self.

I must now apply what I can of this to the late King, and see whether One or
Both of those Fundamental Supports of our English Government were not sorely
shook or subverted by Him.

As to the First, That all the Laws the People of England are governed with be
made in Parliament, it is as plain as the Sun at Noonday, that this was
subverted by the late King: Notwithstanding at his first taking his Chair at
the Council Board, upon his Brother's Death, He declared He would Govern by
Law, and that the Laws of the Land had made the King as great as He desired to
be; yet He did certainly change his Mind within less than six Months, and set
up for an Arbitrary Power over the Laws, by dispensing with them.

Now that Dispensing with the Laws of the Land is to all intents and purposes
the Making of Laws by his own Authority without the Concurrence of Parliament,
is what your Lordship heard so learnedly and so clearly proved at the Seven
Bishops Trial by your Council, and what may be shown in a very few words. I
will instance only in the Recusants, who were not only made incapable by the
Laws of the Realm of Civil and Military Commands, but of keeping their
Conventicles here: This was the Recusants Condition by the Laws, and they could
not be delivered out of this Condition but by a Law which should annul the
former Laws against them, and make them as capable of Places of Trust as any of
the Members of the Church of England: Now did not the late King by his
Dispensing Power and his Sole Authority make such a Law for them? Did He not
annul all the Laws in force against them, and qualify the Recusants and put
them into Places of Trust? What could any Law made by the true Legislative
Authority, a King with his Parliament, have done more for them, than the King
himself without a Parliament's Concurrence did?

I think, my Lord, this Instance sufficient to show, that the Dispensing Power
which King James used was to all intents and purposes a Legislative Power;
since, as I have proved it, no Law could have done more for any persons
aggrieved, than this Power; and therefore that This was a direct Subversion of
our Government, the chief Fundamental of which was, that the Laws should be
made by the King and Parliament. And if our Constitution was subverted, I
cannot see how his Legal Kingly Power was not subverted with it, nor that our
Oaths to Him were not at an end, when the Constitution we swore to was
dissolved, and He had of himself divested himself of, and laid aside, that
Authority, which we only swore to submit to and defend.

If your Lordship should ask me when this Dissolution of Government happened, I
think I should be able to fix the Time: Your Lordship does remember, that upon
the Duke of Monmouth's Rebellion, the late King gave Commissions to several
Popish Officers; this was the Forerunner of it: but when upon the sitting down
of the Parliament in October afterward, He not only in his Speech told his
Parliament, that He had done it, but that He was resolved to stand by it, and
thereupon dismissed his Parliament for their opposition to it, He finished his
Design, and our Ruin; and from that Moment, I look upon the English
Constitution to be altered, and must lay my finger upon this as the complete
Subversion of our Legal Government.

I know some will be offended at my urging this Practice of a Dispensing Power
so far as to make it a Subversion of our Government, and will not endure to
hear, that a King of England can forfeit or fall from his Authority; I am very
ready, my Lord, to beg these Gentlemen's Pardon, if they would but allow me one
satisfactory Argument to prove, that a Dispensing Power is not of that fatal
consequence to the Legal Power of Legislature that I have supposed it to be:
T^on est Rex, ubi dominatur voluntas, and non Lex. Bracton.
but till that is proved to me, I think I should deserve very great blame, if I
did not make the Dispensing Power to be what in reality it is, a Subversion of
our Constitution.

And for a Forfeiture, I would only know, why such a thing must be looked upon
as monstrous, intolerable, nay, impossible in England? Suppose the late King,
(besides his letting Papists into all Places of Trust, against the plainest and
the severest Laws, and his subverting all the Laws made in defense of the
Church and Government of England, by laying them aside for the Dissenters
sakes) had been pleased to impose what Taxes He pleased upon his Subjects, and
had levied them either by his own Army, or by Dragoons borrowed from France;
and had for the future annulled all the Laws made in Defense of the Church of
England, or the Rights and Properties of the Subject; and had laid every other
Law aside by his Royal Edicts which all Men should obey without reserve, as
much as he had done those made for the security of the Church of England by his
Declaration; I would only know by what name to call such Practices, and whether
our business in such a case is only with patience to suffer a King wholly to
alter the frame of the Government, and to make Bondslaves of those who were his
Freeborn-Subjects, born to the Protection and Privileges of Laws.

This is, my Lord, no wild or unreasonable Supposition, I am afraid, that we
should have been able, had the late King continued but a Year or two longer
upon the Throne, not to have been put to the trouble of making these Supposals,
but to have instanced in them, as we now do in the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience.

One would think that such Practices, which seem to be the plainest Instances
of the Subversion of a Government, should be so most especially of his share in
it, who was guilty of them; and he that will not allow any forfeiture or
destruction of a King's share in a Government by such a subversion of it, will
find it hard to maintain that a Government subsists though it be destroyed, and
that a King has not destroyed his own Power, though He has quite ruined that
Government in which and by which He enjoyed it.

My Lord, I am not willing to aggravate the Faults of any, nor to make the
Consequences of them look more ghastly than they are of themselves, much less
would I be guilty of such a thing toward Crowned Heads; however, I am not able
to alter the appearance of this, that the Public Safety and Happiness can
never be secured in any Constitution whatever, and that the Ends of Governments
are quite lost, if that Person who subverts any particular Government, do not
at the very same time destroy or forfeit, let Men call it what they please, his
own share in it.

To this Argument from the Dispensing Power, it may be answered, that the
Practice of it, as to the Instances which I have been able to mention, does not
amount to a Subversion of our Government, if those Laws were unjust and void in
themselves, which the King dispensed with. As for the Laws about Offices Civil
and Military, from which Papists were excluded, They say the Observator has
proved it often enough, that they were null and void, since no Laws can
preclude a King from making use of his Subjects. And for all the Laws against
Conventicles, the Author of a Paper, published very lately, and licensed too,
called, The Case of the Protestant Dissenters Represented and Argued, p. 2.
tells us very roundly, that they are void also, and that the Dissenters must be
excused if they have in their Practice expressed less Reverence for Laws made by
no Authority received either from God or man: and complains, that They are
injuriously reflected on, when it is imputed to them, that They have, by the
Use of their Liberty, acknowledged an Illegal Dispensing Power. We have, says
he, done no other thing herein, than we did when no Dispensation was given or
pretended, in Conscience of Duty to Him that gave us breath. Nor did therefore
practice otherwise, because we thought those Laws dispensed with, but because
we thought them not Laws.

So that the result is, that the late King ought not to be accused of
Subverting the Government, by setting aside those Laws which were void of
themselves.

But I need not trouble your Lordship with any Answer to such an Objection,
since I know your Lordship, nor any of those for whose sakes I write this, do
not believe a word of what these two do so dogmatically, and yet most unjustly
assert. I suppose the Observator will not be fond of standing by his
Assertions, and that the Author of the Dissenters Case ought to have shown some
more Manners, than to cast such saucy and bold Slanders upon our Parliaments,
while one is actually sitting. It is sufficient for my vindication, that the
present Parliament believes those Laws which the late King dispensed with, not
only to be true, but necessary Laws, whatever these two Gentlemen with so much
confidence have said to the contrary.

I will pass now to the other Fundamental of our Constitution, which is, that
the Government be administered according to the Laws of the Land. It is equally
evident, that this Fundamental was subverted by the late King, as well as the
former; for so far was he from governing according to Law, that his whole
Government, from the time of his claiming his Dispensing Power, seems to be a
downright opposition to the Laws. He was pleased to make Privy-Councellours
against Law, Judges against Law, Sheriffs against Law, Lord-Lieutenants and
their Deputies against Law, and Justices against Law; to have Men hanged up for
deserting in time of Peace against Law; to have Popish Chapels, Jesuits
Schools, and the Conventicles, opened against Law: in a word, his Resolution,
as well as his Practice, did show, that the Laws were not intended to be made
the Rule of his Government. This is the True State of King James's Government,
and This is inconsistent with that Essential of our Constitution, of Governing
according to Law.

Now if, my Lord, it be the Essence and the Definition of the King in our
Government, that He is One who governs the People committed to his charge
according to Law, how can we reckon in this Rank the late King from the time He
was so resolutely set upon governing against Law? In our Constitution, He that
does not govern by Law, does not govern at all; and He that does not, nor will
not govern at all, cannot nor will not be King; but ceases to be such from the
time He makes his Own Will, or his Evil Counselors Advices, the Rule of his
Government, and not the Laws.

I had almost forgot another Instance of the late King's Dispensing Power, and
that was his laying aside those Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which yet
are the grounds of most Men's scruples. How can this be looked upon otherwise
than as a Condemnation of the Oaths as unlawful; and if they were so, we have
the late King's Judgment also against the Obligation of these two Oaths; for if
He to whom the Oaths were taken, thought them unlawful, then they are certainly
fallen as to Him. This is as if a Person who had a Bond from another, which he
looked upon as unjust, should give it him up, and consent to the cancelling of
it.

So that, my Lord, if the breaking One of our Fundamentals, by not governing
according to Law, do not make such a Person cease being King, yet that breach
of the Other, the assuming a Legislative Power, which quite alters and tears up
the whole Frame of our Constitution, cannot do less than shake his Right to the
Government, who was so solicitous to destroy it. He See the Laws of K. Edw. the
Confessor, sect. 17.
that will not govern as King of England, will not govern at all; and if He
continue in this humor, as the late King did, from the time of assuming his
Arbitrary Rex autem ad hoc est Constitutus, ^t Regnum terrenum and populum
Domini -- and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, -- quod nisi fecerit, nec
nomen Regis in eo constabit.
Dispensing Power, how can he be longer King? and if He ceased to be King by
his leaving off to govern; the Oaths to Him were as much at an end, as if He
had ceased at the same time to live. And as the Oaths could certainly have no
further Obligation to Him, when He had divested himself of his Kingly Power, by
destroying that very Government whereby, and in which He was King, so did the
Declaration about taking up Arms upon no pretense against the King fall with
them. That Declaration every one will grant me, was made for the preservation
of the Government, which the late King took such indefatigable care to destroy.

That Declaration was never intended for the destruction and ruin of our
Government: and yet it must be the ruin of the Government, if it puts it into a
King's hands, to turn Tyrant without control, and to subvert our Legal
Constitution and undo a Nation without gainsaying: and therefore that
Declaration was intended for the security of, and was to be made to, a King
governing by Law, and therefore did not concern the late King from the hour He
set up his own Will against the Laws, and his own Power against that of the
Whole Kingdom in Parliament.

This, my Lord, is the first Case whereby a King ceases to Govern, or to be a
King, for they are synonymous. I think by the Instances I have produced, and
the Arguments I have offered, it may reasonably appear, that the late King had
subverted our Government, and destroyed his own share of enjoying the Kingly
Authority in it, and thereby ceased to be King: and if once He ceased to be
such, no body will deny that the Obligation of all Oaths to Him as King did
expire at the same time.

But since, my Lord, we have commonly received a very transcendant Notion of
our Monarchy, which will not allow the Destructive Practices I have now
mentioned, nor worse than these, to make a forfeiture of the Kingly Power here,
or to be the Subversion of our Monarchs Rights, whatever they be of the
Peoples, I shall wave the insisting further upon this Head.

Let it then be supposed for that Opinion's sake, that the King does not
destroy his own Right, or the Exercise of his Royal Authority, though He does
destroy our Constitution by ruling directly against the Laws, and making Laws
by his own Power. The next Enquiry is, Whether a King can lay down his
Government, and divest himself of all Authority, and whether King James did not
voluntarily leave his Government by withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, and
making no provision for the Public.

No body will dispute with me, that a King cannot lay down his Government: The
Case of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and, which comes nearer our own
concern, that of the Queen Christina of Sweden, are Instances of it, beyond
opposition. And I think it would be as little disputed, that the late King
James did by a voluntary withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom recede as fully
from his Government, if these few things were fairly considered.

First, That He was at that time of withdrawing himself actually upon a Treaty
with the Prince of Orange, and had Three Lords Commissioners with Him, who gave
the King such an account of their Negotiation, in a Letter brought to Him the
very night He withdrew, that He himself could not but give this Just Character
of the Prince's Proposals, as to say of them, that they were fairer than he
could or did expect; so that the King had no reason then to be afraid of his
Person, but might have continued with security in his Palace, and taken care of
the Government, and called such a Parliament as both Himself and the Prince
desired, which might have quietly and effectually settled this Nation, and
prevented all ill consequences to his Person or to his Affairs.

Secondly, That it was the Design of the Popish Party to persuade him to
withdraw himself; their End in it being to put us thereby into Confusion. This
they did not boggle to speak out; the Lord Dover and Mr. Brent made no secret
of it, but said it more than once, that the King would withdraw himself out of
the Kingdom, above a Fortnight before He did it. Nor were these Two the only
Persons in this Secret and of this Opinion. In the Letter that was sent down to
the King, while He was at Salisbury with his Army, and can be produced, He was
told, that it was the Unanimous Advice of all the Catholics here at London,
that He should come back from thence, and withdraw Himself out of the Kingdom,
and leave us in Confusion, assuring Him, that within Two Years or less we
should be in such Confusions, that He might return, and have his Ends of us, as
their phrase was. Now if the King was pleased to take such desperate
Counselors Advice, and thereupon to withdraw Himself out of the Kingdom, and
command his Army to be let loose upon the People by disbanding them at such a
Juncture, I can see nothing herein to make his going away involuntary.

If then his withdrawing Himself out of the Kingdom was done out of design and
willingly, He did as effectually divest Himself pro tempore of the Government,
as if He had left a formal Resignation of the Kingdom behind him, attested by
all his Privy-Councellors hands; and our Allegiance to Him did fall with it,
and our Oaths did no more oblige now, than the Oaths taken to Christina Queen
of Sweden did, when she resigned, and went to Rome; since in both Cases the
Government of these Two Princes was equally at an end, but our condition the
worse of the two, since Queen Christina left the Government to her Kinsman, but
our King left us to the Rabble, and his disbanded Army.

There is one Objection, my Lord, which I have often heard made against this,
that though the late King, out of a groundless fear, or for any other reason or
design whatsoever, did voluntarily withdraw himself out of the Kingdom, yet
this ought not to be accounted a complete Cession or Dereliction of the
Government, unless it could be proved withal, that there was not Animus
revertendi, that he never intended to return to us more.

But this Objection is of no weight in the Case of a Kingdom. For, whether the
King intended to return back any more, or no, signifies nothing herein; since
the withdrawing Himself, and making no manner of Provision for the Government
and Safety of the Nation, did actually put an end to his Government at least
for that time; and our Constitution can no more than any other Government in
the World be left in such a Condition, or can be said to subsist in such a
Case; and it is against all the sense and reason of Mankind to think that any
Nation either will or ought to continue without a settlement till the Governor,
who has left it unawares and in confusion, will be pleased to think of
returning. Does any one believe, that if the late King (when He withdrew)
intended not to return these ten Years, that we of this Nation should have
continued in the Anarchy He left us, and have no Government till He would come
back? Among all our Discontents, I hope none can be found so weak to imagine
this; and the same reason I am sure holds as fully against his leaving us one
Month as ten Years. So that whether the late King intended to return or no,
when He went away, He ceased to govern us; and the very same moment He was
pleased to leave off governing, by withdrawing himself, He cancelled the
Obligation of all Oaths and Allegiance to Him as King.

But beyond all this, I can grant, my Lord, that the late King, from the very
time of his withdrawing, nay, from the very minute of resolving to do it, had
Animum revertendi, did intend to return to us. I do believe, that those Papists
which advised him to withdraw, did design that He should return; and that He
himself did concur in both resolutions. But what was He to return for? Was it
not to have his Ends of us? What those Ends are, I suppose no Protestant needs
be told; none of those who make this Objection, can doubt of it since his late
coming to Ireland. Should we have waited then till the late King could return
with his borrowed Forces from France, to destroy our Protestant established
Religion, and our Civil Constitution, because He had Animum revertendi; and
therefore not have settled and provided for the Nations safety? Was the King's
Government not at an end, though He had withdrawn himself from us, and left no
Provision, because He was resolved to come back to destroy our Religion, and to
be revenged of the Nation? My Lord, I think such an Animus revertendi to be so
far from making the Dereliction lame and void, that it is as good a Proof of
making the late King's Action a complete Dereliction, as if He had left it
attested under his Hand and Great Seal, that He would never return to us, or
this Government more.

For my own part, I am persuaded, that the late King withdrew himself
voluntarily, and by the Advice of Popish Counsels out of this Kingdom; I am
persuaded that He went off with an Animus revertendi; and I am as fully
persuaded that the Intention of his returning was to ruin our Properties and
Laws, and to destroy our Reformed Religion, or, to put it into the Popish
Dialect, to have his Ends of us: From the first of these, to wit, his
Withdrawing voluntarily, I am satisfied that the late King James's Government
and our Allegiance to Him are fallen; and the last of them, the Intention of
his Return, will I hope satisfy all others as much as it has done me, that we
have no tempting reasons either to wait for the late King's Return, or to
accept of his Government, if He should get back.

I must now, my Lord, go on to another Consideration, for there are some who
are little satisfied, notwithstanding all the evidence that can be offered,
about the King's voluntary withdrawing himself, as they were at his
misgovernment, being urged as the destruction of his Royal Dignity: and though
these Gentlemen have not agreed with me hitherto, yet in this last
Consideration they must concur with me; and that is, that the late King was
conquered by the Prince of Orange, and driven away involuntarily at least: So
that if by this Conquest He was put out of the condition of Governing and
Protecting us, we were as much deprived of the liberty of paying obedience to
Him, who was now driven from us.

The Business to be examined here is, what sort of a Conquest this was, and
whether it was a just one, such a one as by reason of which the People of
England might lawfully submit to the Conqueror of their King.

To begin with the Expedition of his (then) Highness the Prince of Orange,
there appears to be all the reasons in it that could justify such an Invasion,
or make a Conquest just and good. The Prince was no Subject of England, but a
Sovereign Prince, who made this Descent into our Nation against our late King
in defense of his own Rights as well as of ours: and therefore his Action could
upon no account be styled a Rebellion.

But the Cause of his Expedition is above all other things to be enquired
after, for that must be the chief thing that can justify the Revolution here,
and ought to be highly reasonable, and such as can give satisfaction to all
wise and indifferent men; since though the Prince of Orange were never so much a
Sovereign Prince, yet if he had not a very justifiable reason of coming hither
with an Army, his Expedition had been altogether a most unaccountable Action,
and his Conquest unjust.

Now, to give all the satisfaction requisite to this justest Scruple, the
Prince's Reasons for coming hither in that manner, appear to be as just and as
good, as his Success was great; and if ever one Prince's Invasion of another
Prince's Kingdom were to be justified, the Prince of Orange's was. For, to
instance in one or two of these Reasons, He himself, as well as his Princess,
had most undoubted Right to the Succession of the Crown of England, and the
Dominions belonging to it, after the death of the late King James. This Right
was notoriously set aside, or made wholly useless to Them, by the Arts and
Counsels of those Papists who were about the King, and did influence him. The
Imposture of a Pretended Prince of Wales was thought of and pitched upon as the
most effectual Bar to either of their Titles, and did set Them as well as Her
Royal Highness the Princess Ann of Denmark aside, and deprive All Three
together of their Rights of Succession, and provide effectually against a
Protestant Successor, the only Person the People then in Power at Court were
afraid of.

But to wave the Instance of the setting up a pretended Prince of Wales betwixt
These Protestant Princes and their Right of Succession, because the Proof of
that Imposture has not been laid open as it might have been to the World, and
therefore cannot so strictly be insisted upon; though most people, even those who
are dissatisfied about the present Settlement are satisfied of the Imposture:
the Right of Succession, which was in the Two Royal Princesses, and the Prince
of Orange, was made wholly useless to Them, by the late King's putting the
Government of Part of the Dominions of the Crown of England into such hands as
would not deliver them up or submit to any Protestant Successor. Ireland is an
evident Proof of this, where all Offices Civil and Military, contrary to the
Laws of the Land, were put into Popish Hands, and such a Bigoted Irish Papist
was made their Governor, as that whatever Rogueries or Violences the Papists
should be guilty of toward the British Protestants among them, they should
never need to fear being called to account, being certain that his own
management of the Government as well as his Religion would keep him from ever
delivering up Ireland to any Protestant, while He had the Sword in his hands,
and such a thoroughly Popish Army at his Command.

Now in this case, when Ireland was wholly given up into such hands, and
Scotland was almost in the same condition, and England ready to be put into the
same, it was high time for the Prince of Orange to assert his own and his
Princesses Right; and it was most reasonable for Him by all justifiable Ways
and Means to prevent their being debarred their Right of Inheritance of these
Kingdoms, by bringing the late King to reasonable Terms, or by depriving Him of
the Power of doing Them or their Right any further Mischief herein.

This therefore, together with the Princes Concern for our Religion and our
Laws, which were violated in so high a degree by the late King, and with which
his own Right of Succession was interwoven, was a most just reason for the
Prince of Orange's coming with an armed force; and if the King would rather put
things to the hazard of Battles, than the decision of a free and legal
Parliament, no body else could help it: and if his Army would neither fight
for, nor stand by him, but suffer Him to be driven out of his Dominions, it was
because He had taken sufficient care to let all of them, as well as the rest of
the Nation, know how very unjust the War would be on his part, and how very
unreasonable it would be for them, who were the greatest part of them
Protestants, to assist Him in depriving his Children of the Hereditary Rights
of Succession, and ruining the Church of England, and the happy Constitution of
our English Government. Such Considerations as these made the late King's Army
so useless to Him, and the Prince's Victory so easy to Him, whose business was
not to Conquer here, but to do Himself and his Princess Right, and to preserve
our Government in Church and State; which if He had tamely looked on, and
suffered to be destroyed, His own Right would most infallibly have sunk with
them, being so entirely linkt with them.

Here some will be ready to call upon me, and tell me, that if the Prince was a
Conqueror, then all our Rights and our Possessions are in his hands, and at
his disposal; and that our condition is far from being mended, since we are by
this Conquest in that state which the late King was laboring to bring us to,
subjected absolutely in our Persons and Fortunes to the Arbitrary Will of a
Conqueror. But it is very easy to answer this fearful suggestion, by showing
them, that the King alone was conquered, and not the Nation with him. The
Prince in his Declaration had assured the Nation, that his only design of
appearing in Arms here, was to secure his Own and Their Rights, and He did
thereupon conjure them to assist Him in so good and so just a Design; which the
Nation did, either by not aiding the King, or by rising up in several parts of
the Kingdom for him: so that here was a True Contract betwixt the Prince of
Orange and the Nation, which has been faithfully observed, the Rights of the
Nation being entirely preserved to them, and not one of them invaded, nor the
least pretense to a Conquest over the Nation made by Him. Thus, my Lord, we see
our Rights are secure, notwithstanding the late King lost his, by bringing upon
himself the necessity of being driven out of his Dominions and conquered,
rather than he would do the Prince and the Nation that Right which He was
obliged to by the Laws and by his Coronation Oath.

Now since the late King did lose his Kingdom by these means and upon these
accounts, and was put out of the capacity of either Governing or Protecting
those who were his Subjects, it is become as impossible for us to perform
Allegiance to Him, as it is for Him to Govern us; and since the Prince and
Princess of Orange, by reason of this Conquest of the King, and by Virtue
partly of their own Hereditary Right, and partly of the Consent of the Nation
assembled in Convention, are in Possession of the Crown of England, and do
Protect and Govern the Nation according to the Laws of the Realm, and have
taken the Coronation Oath, that they will always continue to do so; the only
question is, whether our Allegiance in such a case is not transferred from the
late King, who was justly conquered, who does not govern us, and can no further
protect us, unto those Persons who are now invested with the Regal Power, and
in possession of the Government, and do protect the Nation.

The Resolution of this Case would have been very readily made by any of us,
had Providence placed us upon the Continent, in those Countries which have
lately been, and now are like to be, the seat of War, and not in an Island so
happily secured from the sudden Descent of Enemies. Had we lived in Germany or
Flanders for example, we should have learnt how far Allegiance is necessary,
and when it may be transferred from the Prince conquered to the Conqueror. No
prudent Man thinks the People of any Town in Flanders perjured, because,
notwithstanding their former Oaths to their Hereditary Prince the King of
Spain, the fortune of War necessitates them to take new Oaths of Allegiance to
a Conqueror. And I think Men ought to make the very same Judgment of things
here, that since the Government of King James is at an end, the Oaths to Him
have no further force; and that since He was fairly conquered by that Prince,
whom He was endeavoring to deprive of his Right of Succession to the Crown of
England, and is by that altogether incapacitated from governing and protecting
us, our Allegiance either wholly ceases, or is superseded as to Him, and We may
in our Circumstances give security to the Government, and pay Allegiance for
that Protection we enjoy from it.

This, my Lord, is agreeable to the Laws and Practice of all Countries, to the
Laws of our own Nation, to Reason, and, which is more, unto Scripture it self.
I need not trouble your Lordship much with showing its agreement with the Laws
of Nations, since almost every day's Practice does give Instances of it;
whereby People and Countries that were under their own Sovereign Prince, and
had taken Oaths of Fealty to Him, are by the Fortune of War made another
Prince's Subjects, and may lawfully according to the Law of Nations transfer
their Allegiance to their new Lord. The Reason of all this is founded upon the
Nature and End of Government it self, upon that mutual Obligation which is
supposed to be betwixt a Prince and his People, who upon his Power and his
Promise of protecting them in their Lives and in their Properties, do engage to
perform Allegiance, and to bear Faith to Him: now this stipulation does
naturally fall, when such a Prince is no longer Able or no longer Willing to
protect them; and the same Reason which obliged them to pay their Allegiance to
that Prince, does direct them now to transfer it from Him who is by the Fortune
of War disabled from affording Protection, to the Conqueror, who will engage
to protect them, and does preserve them in their Persons and their Estates and
in all their ancient Legal Securities.

And as this cannot be denied to be the Practice and the Law of all Countries
abroad, so the Laws and Customs of our own Kingdom do not only countenance such
a transferring of Allegiance to a Conqueror, but do indempnifie the paying
Allegiance to a mere King de facto who may be an usurper, and the defending Him
in his Government: Thus in the Statute made the Eleventh Year of Henry VII.
Chap. 1. it is declared to be against all Laws, Reason, and good Conscience,
that Subjects going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars, attending upon Him in
his person, or being in other places by his commandment within the Land or
without, any thing should lose or forfeit for doing their Duty and Service of
Allegiance; and it is enacted by the King, by the Advice and Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in Parliament assembled, that from
henceforth no manner of Person or Persons whatsoever He or They be, that attend
upon the King, and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time being, in his
person, and do Him true and faithful service of Allegiance in the same, or be
in other places by his command in his Wars within this Land or without: that
for the said deed, and true duty of Allegiance, He or They be in no wise
convict or attaint of High Treason, ne of other Offenses for that Cause, by Act
of Parliament, or otherwise, by any Process of Law, whereby he, or any of them
shall lose or forfeit Life, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or any other thing: but to be for that deed or
service utterly discharged of any Vexation, Trouble or Loss.

This Law does authorize any Subject to pay his Allegiance to the King in
being; and does secure him against all Penalties for the same; and therefore
reaches our Case, where there is not a bare Possession, but all the Right that
Conquest can give.

And in the famous Act of Parliament concerning Treasons, the 25th of Edward
III. my Lord Coke says, Coke's Institutes, Part 3. chapter 1. of High Treason.
that by the King, against whom Treason is committed in that Statute, is meant
the King in possession of the Throne, whatever his Right to it be. These, my
Lord, are his own words, This Act is to be understood of a King in possession
of the Crown and Kingdom: for if there be a King Regnant in possession,
although he be Rex de facto and non Rex de Jure, yet is He Seignior le Roy
within the purview of this Statute. And the other that has right and is out of
possession is not within this Act. Nay, if Treason be committed against a King
de facto and non de Jure, and after the King de Jure comes to the Crown, He
shall punish the Treason done to the King de facto: and a Pardon granted by a
King de Jure, that is not also de facto, is void.

This is sufficient to show the sense of our Laws in this case, and for its
being agreeable to Reason to transfer our Allegiance in the Circumstances
mentioned, I have already in part proved this, and I think it may be fairly
deduced further from the Writings of that great and excellent Casuist Bishop
Sanderson, whom all will allow to be a very competent Judge of the Dictates of
Reason. Whoever will read his Case of the Engagement, may find a great deal to
this purpose, but I intend only to insist on what he has delivered in his
Fifth Praelection concerning the Obligation of Conscience, where he disputes
for, and gives several reasons for the paying obedience to the Laws, and
submitting to the Government even of an unlawful Usurper; and he puts this very
case, that where any one, having driven away by violence the lawful Prince and
true Heir of the Kingdom, or having oppressed him so far as that he is unable to
stand up for his own Right, does, while the other is still living, take the
Government upon him, and act as King, when he is in reality rather an Usurper
than a King, and it is past doubt that downright Injury is done [to the
oppressed Prince]. If it be asked, (says he) what I think a good Subject should
do in this case, who has taken an Oath of Fealty to his lawful Prince, or if
he have not taken such an Oath, yet is as much obliged to the Prince, as if he
had sworn it; My opinion is, that it is not only lawful for a good Subject to
pay obedience to the Laws made by him that has the Supreme Power only de facto,
and not de jure, and to do what other things are commanded by him, (so that
nothing base or unjust be commanded) but that it is necessary oftentimes for
him to do these things, and that he should be wanting to his own Duty if he did
not Praelectio 5ta de Oblig. Conscientiae. XVI. p. 176.
.

What I would gather from this Case, put by the Great Bishop is, that if such
obedience be lawful, and very often necessary to one who is a mere Usurper by
unlawful Violence, the least he would have determined in our circumstances,
must have been, that Obedience might lawfully be paid to our present King and
Queen, who come to the Throne either by its being left empty by the last King,
or by a lawful and just Conquest. And what the Bishop has afterward urged in
the Case of his Violent Usurper, that, notwithstanding the obedience to him,
the Fealty due to the lawful Prince must be preserved inviolate, and nothing
done in prejudice of his Right, can have no place here; since the late King
fell perfectly from all Soveraigny here by deserting his Government, and the
Prince of Orange had a most just cause of War against him, and made as plain a
conquest over him, neither of which can be brought within the Bishop's Case:
and therefore, if Subjects may, (to keep to the Bishops Reasons upon the Case)
for their own sakes, for the preservation of their Lives and Estates, and for
the Protection they receive under those who have possession of the Government,
and for the Public sake, for the Trade and Commerce of the Nation upon which
the Public must subsist, live quietly under, and pay obedience to an usurped
Power; every one of these Reasons is more foreible upon us to pay our Obedience
to their Present Majesty's, who have Right of Just Conquest, Right of Lawful
Succession, and the Consent and Recognition of the Nation in Convention on
their side.

And as Reason has directed in such circumstances to transfer Obedience to the
Conqueror, under whom we can live safe and in quietness, so does the Scripture
it self, the Best Rule we can desire in our Case. As the Scripture commands,
under the greatest Penalties, Subjection to the Supreme Power, so it does not
pur men upon the rack about the Right of Governors, or upon examining who has
or who has not the true Right to a Crown; but directs obedience to the Powers
in being, to those who are in possession of the Supreme Power, how small soever
their claim to it may be. This I can make evident, my Lord, from the Instances
of some in the Old Testament, and of those to whom our Lord Jesus himself and
his Apostles did so strictly command Obedience in the New.

Upon the Death of Josiah King of Judah, the People of Judah took Iehoahaz, who
was the fourth and youngest Son of Josiah, and anointed him, [which was done by
the Chief Priest] and made him King in his Father's stead, setting aside the
Right of his Three Elder Brothers, 2 Kings 23. 30. Now that Iehoahaz was
Shallum no one will doubt, that will compare this place out of the 2d Book of
Kings with Jeremiah 22. Ver. 11. and that Shallum was the youngest Son of four
he can no more doubt that will consult 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. In this Instance we do
not find the Scripture condemn the peoples paying Allegiance to this Prince
thus set up; but on the contrary, God calls upon them by the Prophet Jeremiah,
(Ierem. 22. 10, 11, 12.) to weep sore for him that goes away, who was to
return no more nor see his native Country, that is to lament for their King
Shallum or Iehoahaz, who was carried by Pharaoh Nechoh into Egypt, and was to
die there.

After the Deposition of Shallum, Pharaoh Nechoh, who was his Conqueror, made
Eliakim King, whom he called by the name of Iehoiakim, though he was but the
second Brother: and no notice is taken of the eldest Brother Iohanan, who, if
he was then living; was certainly the true Heir to that Crown. This Iehoiakim
reigned eleven years, 2 Kings 23. 36. in the third whereof he was conquered by
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, Dan. 1. 1. who afterward took him away, and set
up his Son Iehoiachin or Ieconia or Conia in his stead. But he continued on the
Throne but three Months, for Nebuchadnezzar came again and besieged Jerusalem,
to whom Iehojachin surrendered himself, and was by him carried into captivity.
Then Nebuchadnezzar made his Uncle Zedekiah King, who was the third of those
four Brothers, 1 Chronicles. 3. 16. and he reigned near eleven years as King of
Judah, while the eldest Brother Iohanan was living, and the second Brother
perhaps Iehoiachim in the Babylonian's hands; without all doubt, if Iehoiakim
was dead, his Son Iehojachin the right Heir and the true King was living, for
we find him released out of Prison after 37 Years, 2 Kings 25. 27. during all
which time we never find God complaining of the peoples submitting and paying
Allegiance to this King Zedekiah that was set up by Nebuchadnezzar; but we meet
with Ieremiah's Lamentation taken up for this very King, whom he calls, The
Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, (Lamentations 4. 20.) though he
was made King, while the true King and Heir of that Crown was alive. Here we
have a Subject made King, and set up against the true King by the Conqueror,
whose power herein God did so far approve as to call Zedekiah's defection from
his Fealty to Nebuchadnezzar 2 Chronicles. 36. 13.
(whose power over Judah was no more than what a Conquest and an unjust one too
did give) a Rebellion, and to give him and all that belonged to him up to
Destruction and Captivity for it. Whoever will reflect upon these Examples,
will see how far the people were from being condemned, or discouraged from
transferring their Allegiance to these four Kings: the first of which Iehoahaz,
was set up by the People against the Right Line and before his Three Elder
Brethren; the second Iehoiakim, was by a Conqueror made King before his Elder
Brother Iohanan; the third Iehoiachin, was set up against his own Father; and
the fourth was of a Subject made a King, while the True King and Rightful Heir
was still in being.

There is another thing very observable here, and that is about the Oaths taken
to Kings, who were such merely by conquest. It was the manner of the Subjects
of Israel and Judah to take Oaths of Obedience to their Kings, as one may very
justly collect from that passage in Ecclesiastes 8. 2. where the Preacher
advises to keep the King's Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God,
that is, of the Oath of Obedience which the Subject had taken to the King. Now
this Oath was sworn, not only to King's of God's own appointment, or to their
Hereditary Successors, but to those who had no other Title or Right than that
of Conquest, when such Conquerours required it of them, though their own Princes
were still living. Thus Nebuchadnezzar made Zedekiah swear by God ( 2 Chronicles.
36. 13. with Ezekiel 17. 13.) to be faithful to him, while his own Prince
Iehojachin was yet alive; and Zedekiah took Authority from Nebuchadnezzar to
reign as King under him, which he continued to do according to his Oath for
some Years, but afterward rebelled against the Conqueror. This Oath God did
approve as lawful, and calls it Mine Oath, (Ezekiel. 17. 19.) and held himself
obliged to punish the breach of it, as he should have done if Zedekiah had
taken it to Iehojachin himself, and had broke it, as he did the Oath in this
case. This is plain from Ezekiel. 17. 15, 16, 18, 19.

And for those Kings in the New Testament to whom Allegiance is so strictly
commanded to be paid, it is most evident, that Augustus, and those after him,
were direct Usurpers upon the People and Senate of Rome, having gained the
Supreme Power into their hands by Craft and Arts, and chiefly by the assistance
of the Soldiery, whose Right to dispose of the Supreme Power over the People
and Subjects of Rome I cannot hear that any man does maintain: and this was
more particularly plain in the Advancement of Nero to the Throne by the
Soldiery, whom his Mother Agrippina had tampered with against Britannicus the
last Emperor's Son; and yet this is the very Emperor to whom St. Paul
teaches Obedience, under pain of damnation, Romans 13 1, 2.
for whom he exhorts the Christians to put up Prayers and Supplications, that
under him (who had no better Right to that Government than what I have just
mentioned) they might lead quiet and peaceable Lives in 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
all godliness and honesty.

Whoever, my Lord, will compare our present Case in England, with the Instances
I have produced out of Scripture, cannot deny me, that Scripture does allow the
transferring of Allegiance in the Case of Conquest from one Prince to another;
some of the Instances do reach further, which show the Command for, and the
Practice of Obedience to, those who had merely the Possession of the
Government, but no manner of Right or Title to it.

And now, my Lord, I have dispatched the Consideration of all your Lordship's
Commands, and of all I have been able to say in so narrow a Compass, and amidst
so many other necessary Avocations, upon this Subject; and yet I cannot
conclude without examining a little their Reasons and their Intentions, who are
so little satisfied with ours, or with the present Settlement.

If the present Settlement of this Nation under their Majesty's does not give
them satisfaction, and is such as they cannot with a Conscience submit to; it
must be because they have sworn Allegiance to Another Person, to whom they
believe it to be still due, because He is still alive. If they find themselves
under such an Obligation, then their Endeavors or at least their Wishes ought
to be, that the late King might be recalled to his Government; or that, if He
be unfit for Government, a Regency might be settled by the Consent of the Nation
in Parliament, He still retaining the Title of King. These Methods are the only
ones that either themselves, or any one for them thinks can salve their
Allegiance. But examine them singly and see whether they can.

If the late King should be recalled, either it must be upon Terms and
Conditions, or it must be without them. To recall Him to his Government without
Conditions, I never yet met, nor heard of one Protestant that was for it; but
they all cry out, upon Terms, or not at all; upon Conditions, or we are all
ruined in our Properties, and ruin our Religion. One Question then I have to
make to these Gentlemen, and it is, By what branch of their Oath of Allegiance
they are empowered to make Conditions with the King; and which of the Laws is
it, that gives the Subjects such an Authority over the King as to offer them?
They are absolutely against recalling or receiving the late King back without
Conditions. If so, then I will suppose that equitable Conditions were offered
the late King: and I can suppose very easily, that He will not be so obliged;
but requires to be admitted into the Possession of his Crown without any other
Terms than the Oath He took at his Coronation, and the Promises He then made of
defending our Church and governing us by Law. In this case, upon their own
grounds, these Gentlemen must resolve to resist his resuming his Government,
and must never admit him, if he will never condescend to Conditions; and then I
would know of them what is become of the whole Oath of Allegiance, or the
Obligation their Consciences were formerly under by it. This Matter is too
plain to need more words.

But suppose Conditions for his return were offered by the Nation, and accepted
by Him, and that as soon as He was secure of his Throne, He forgot them all, as
much as He did his First Promise at Council Board, and his Coronation Oath;
what must be done in this State, when the Nation will be in ten times worse
condition than it was this time twelvemonth, when his Dispensing Power, and
Arbitrary Government were at the height? No Man can suppose Conditions of any
worth, that have no security in them; and the least they can have in this case
must be, that if the King breaks them, then He forfeits the Benefit of them, to
wit, his Restitution to his Government; and we, as well as He, should
immediately be in the very condition we were in upon his leaving or losing the
Government. That such would be our condition inevitably, is the easiest thing
in the World to prove.

For 1st, No Conditions made for the securing Property to the Subject, and the
Protestant Religion to the Nation, can signify any thing to Him who is
governed wholly in all his affairs by French Counsels, and by the Jesuits, who
are not truer Enemies to our Reformed Religion, than French Counsels to the
Liberty and Property of Subjects.

But 2dly, His Religion is wholly inconsistent with our safety either in our
Properties or in our Religion; and this we have had experience enough of, one
would think, already; too much, to make us fond of trying the Experiment over
again. Let it but be considered, that by his Religion and by such Power, He is
obliged upon pain of forfeiting his Kingdoms, to extirpate Heretics, to
destroy every Protestant in England; and that by the Conditions made He will be
at least obliged to secure the Nation in their Protestant Religion and in their
Properties; and then I would ask such a Person, what the best and the safest
Conditions can avail in these circumstances? If an Obligation to destroy us,
and an Obligation to preserve us, be inconsistent; and no Man in the world can
perform both; I think the talk about Conditions ought to be at an end, since
there is no way to bring these contradictions to agree.

The Wisest Part, my Lord, of those who are dissatisfied do very easily see
into the Vanity and Inconsistency of this Project about Conditions, and grant
that they would be useless. And therefore since Conditions are vain, and that
the late King was unfit for Government, They were for having a Regency set up
during the late King's life, He retaining only the Title of King; and this they
thought would salve their Oaths to Him, and their Consciences. But this cannot
do the business, since it is plain that such a Regency would have been as much
against the Oath of Allegiance, as the present Settlement; and a submitting to
That would have been as direct a Violation of the Oath of Allegiance, as they
suppose a submission to the present Settlement is.

To prove this then; By a Regency the King would have been divested of all
Power, which the Regent must have been entrusted with; of the Revenue too,
which must be annexed to the Power wherever that is lodged, because by it the
Regent must have been supported in the Exercise of his Power; He would have had
no Command nor Authority left him, nothing but the bare Title of King, and to
have all business run in his Name, though he have nothing to do with it. Now is
not this as directly against the Oath of Allegiance as a thing can be? By the
Oath, as long as it obliges, every one is bound to preserve to the King and
maintain his Crown and Dignity. By a Regency the King is divested of all his
Power and Authority of making Laws, of having the Militia in his hands, and of
the Administration of the Government, which are the chief, if not only branches
of Royalty of his Crown and Dignity. And yet these Gentlemen think that a
Regency and their Oaths of Allegiance to the late King are consistent; whereas
by a Regency he is deprived of every thing but his bare Title, and by their
Oaths of Allegiance they are bound to preserve to Him every thing else as well
as his Title. I can see no more opposition in the present Settlement to the
Oath of Allegiance, than would have been in their Regency, since the Kingly
Power of K. James is equally destroyed by both; and Oaths do concern Matters of
Substance and not mere Shadows, such as the bare Title of a King is, where
there is not the least jot of power left. So that there is not any considerable
difference betwixt the present Settlement, and their Regency, upon the Oaths
account; and I wonder that so much ado should be made, and so much insisting
upon Leaving to the late King the bare Title of King, whereas a Title is a
thing of no worth; and if the Laws of St. Edward the Confessor might but be
heard, this Controversy about the mere Title would have fallen; since by them
a King by misgovernment, verum nomen Regis perdit, forfeits the Title of King
as well as the Power.

But I will suppose further, that this Project of a Regency had taken, and that
a Regent had been chosen for the late King's Life, I must now ask what they
would done with the King himself? either They must have had him kept in safe
custody, or let him, as he did, escape away. If they would have had him
secured, I would fain know whether it had been consistent with that Oath of
Allegiance which they took to King James, and think themselves obliged still
by. But if He was to be let go whither He would, and should have got back into
England with the same assistance by which He is now got into Ireland, I ask
them whether they should not look upon themselves as obliged to defend that
Regency which was set up for the absolute Good of the Nation, and to which they
had sworn Allegiance; and whether this would not have obliged Them to oppose
King James, who was come to break the Regency; and, though all had judged him and
knew him unfit for Government, was yet for regaining it by force. Either They
must, notwithstanding his Unfitness for our Government, have quietly submitted
because of their former Oath of Allegiance to Him, or they must in defense of
the Regency have fought against the late King himself, notwithstanding that
former Oath to Him.

My Lord, if those dissatisfied Gentlemen who were for the Regency will but
reflect upon what I have been able to say about it, I do not fear their being
any longer of opinion that a Regency was the only way could settle the Nation
in safety, and secure men's Consciences in peace; and I hope They will for the
future not be so sharp and severe against the present Settlement, as contrary
to our Oaths of Allegiance; since I have shown, that their own Regency is every
jot as much. I humbly beg of them, that they would examine things impartially,
and lay by all prejudices upon other accounts, and then I am confident that
they which did desire and contend for a Regency notwithstanding their late
Oaths of Allegiance, will see reason to submit to the present Settlement under
their Majesty's, notwithstanding those very Oaths, which I am sure are no more
against the present Settlement than against their Regency.

I am afraid I have tired your Lordship, and must beg pardon for this tedious
Letter; which, though it should be so unhappy as to do no service to any of those
persons for whom it was designed, yet will do my self a great one, in being a
Witness for me, how ready I am to obey your Lordship's Commands, and in giving
me this further opportunity of assuring your Lordship how much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient and most Humble Servant.


