THE PLAUSIBLE ARGUMENTS OF A Romish Priest ANSWERED BY AN English Protestant.

Seasonable and Useful for all Protestant Families.

Licensed,

May 24. 1686.
LONDON, Printed for R. Clavell, at the Sign of the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1686.

TO THE READER.
IN the following Dialogue (though not All, yet) the most Material Points
wherein the Roman Church differs from the Church of England, are briefly and
plainly discoursed: So that while by their little Tracts and short Catechisms,
daily Printed and sent abroad, the Romish Emissaries do labor to Seduce the
Weaker sort of Protestants, They may be provided with short and satisfactory
Answers to their most usual Fallacies. Their Assaults are generally in the
Dark* and because it is impossible always to stand by those particular Persons
whom they labor to Draw-in, it is thought fit to publish this little Manual,
to enable those that are Attacked readily to defend themselves: To which end
the Holy Scripture is here recommended as the best Touchstone to justify our
Doctrines, and discover their Corruptions; And the more their Guilt makes them
fly from it, the more our Sincerity should make us cleave to it. For this is in
every Protestants Hand; and there are so many and so plain Places of it which
condemn the Opinions and Practices of the Roman Church, that it requires no
great Skill nor Art to discern how different they are from Gods Word; And all
the Learning and Artisice of their greatest Doctors will not be able to hide it
from a plain and honest Enquirer, that will take but the Pains to read this
Divine, Unalterable, Universally received, and Infallible Book of God. I know
they pretend (especially to the Unlearned) That all Antiquity is clearly for
them; but it is best for those who are not Read in Ancient Authors, to leave
that Province to the Clergy of the Church of England, who have hitherto always
worsted them at that Weapon also. And since we can prove both by Scripture and
Antiquity, That all their Additional Articles of Faith are False and Erroneous;
and yet they do acknowledge all those Articles of Faith which we hold as
necessary to Salvation, to be True: Doubtless, Ours must be the safer Religion,
in which both Sides do agree. Again, The plain Words of Holy Scripture prove
Our Religion; but all those Points wherein they differ from us, cannot be
proved but by pretended Traditions, some of which are expressly contrary to Gods
Written Word. The Scripture was not made by us, but by the GOD of Truth; and it
is owned not by us alone, but by them and all Christians to be the Word and
Will of God, and this is clearly on Our Side: But those Traditions which they
fly to for their Evidence, are of their own Making, and in their own Keeping;
No other Christians do allow them, and We have nothing but their own Word in
their own Cause, to prove them to be Genuine: Which being the Case, I hope none
will ever be persuaded to leave a certain, plain and evident Religion of Gods
own prescribing, for an uncertain, obscure and Ill-proved Religion, which is no
more but a mere Human Invention, as the ensuing Pages will more fully declare.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Religion of the Church of England, Taught by Christ and his Apostles,
Page. 1 Concerning the Scriptures in an Unknown Tongue, p. 2 Concerning the
Pretended Roman Catholic Church, p. 3 Concerning St. Peter's Superiority and
Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles, p. 4 Concerning the Popes
Supremacy, p. 6 Concerning the Popes Infallibility, p. 7 Concerning Implicit
Faith; or Believing as the Church Believes, p. 8 Concerning Oral Tradition; or
the Faith delivered down by Word of Mouth from Age to Age, p. 9 The Church of
Rome full of gross Errors, p. 13 Concerning Image Worship, p. 14 Concerning
Invocation of Saints and Angels, p. 17 Concerning the Worship of the Blessed
Virgin, p. 22 Concerning the Adoration of Relics, p. 23 Concerning Divine
Service in an Unknown Tongue, p. 24 Concerning Transubstantiation, p. 27
Concerning Half-Communion; or denying the Cup to the Laity, p. 35 Concerning
the Doctrine of Concomitancy; or the Blood always accompanying the Body, p. 36
Concerning Auricular Confession; or that which is privately whispered into the
Ear of the Priest, p. 37 Concerning Priestly Absolution, p 38 Concerning
Satisfaction, or Penances, p. 39 Concerning Indulgences, p. 42 Concerning
Purgatory, p. 44 Concerning the Sanctity of Religious Orders, p. 50 Cencerning
Exorcisms, or Casting-out Evil Spirits, p. 52 The Conclusion, p. 53
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Popish Priest, AND A PROTESTANT OF THE Church of England.
Popish Priest. WHat Religion are you of?


Protestant. The Religion of the Church of England, taught by Christ and his
Apostles.
Of the same that Christ and his Apostles taught, which is professed by the
Church of England, whereof I am a Member.


Po. How do you know, that the Religion you profess is the same that was taught
by Christ and his Apostles?


Prot. By the Scriptures which they left behind them.


Po. How can you tell, whether they writ and left that Book behind them or no?


Prot. The Book is worthy of such Authors, and all Christians (though they
differ in other things) agree in this, nor dare you deny it.


Po. We do not deny it, only we say, you ought to confess you received this
Book from the Roman Church, and must learn the meaning of it from her.


Prot. This Book has been preserved in all Christian Churches; but we received
it from those good Protestants who translated it into English; The Scriptures
in an unknown Tongue.
whereas your Priests (as I am informed) kept it in Latin, and withheld it from
such plain Men as my self, while they had power here.


Po. Though they did ^o, it was only for fear you should wrest the Scripture to
your own destruction, 2 Pet. iii. 16.


Prot. That danger is only in some places hard to be understood, and which I
may safely be ignorant of: But in all things necessary to Salvation, it is so
plain as to give understanding to the Simple, Psalm. cxix. 130. Wherefore I
rather think they concealed it all from us, to keep us from seeing their
Errors; because the more I read it, the less I like your Religion.


Po. Is it not a strange presumption in you (that are but a Layman) to read
that which you cannot rightly understand?


Prot. It is no presumption to obey the Command of Christ, who bids us Search
the Scriptures, John v. 39. and declaring the not knowing them to be the cause
of Error, Math. xxii. 29. And the Beraeans are commended for examining the
Apostles Doctrine by Scripture, Acts xvii. 11. Now surely, if we have Commands
and Examples of Reading the Scripture, it must be supposed we can in some
measure understand it.


Po. Well, you read that Christ will be with his Church to the end of the
World, Math. xxviii. 20. and therefore you ought to believe the Catholic Church
can only give you the true sense of Scripture.


Prot. I do believe this, and am a Member of this Catholic Church, being
rightly baptized into it, and holding the same Creeds which were anciently and
universally believed in it; so that I am as likely to come to know the true
sense of Scripture, as any others.


Po. Not so, The pretended Roman Catholic Church.
by your favor, for you are no Member of the Roman Church, which I will prove
to be that Catholic Church mentioned in the Creeds; and then it must follow
that you neither have the true sense of Scripture, nor can you be saved out of
this Catholic Church.


Prot. I shall yield your Consequences when you prove the Antecedent; but then
you must not take it for granted without any Proof, as your Priests use to do.


Po. I do not think it needs much proof, for it is as visible as that the Sun
is in the Firmament.


Prot. That cannot be, for no body does or can deny this; but the far greater
part of Christians utterly deny the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church,
yea, and say it is Nonsense to affirm a part to be the whole, or a particular
to be universal: And it must be well proved from Scripture (which all
Christians agree to be Gods Word) be fore I can be persuaded that Christ (who
died for his whole Church) will suffer three parts of four of those which he
redeemed, to be damned for not believing this Opinion, as you most uncharitably
affirm.


Po. Well, St. Peter's Superiority and Jurisdiction over the rest of the
Apostles.
for your satisfaction I will undertake to prove, that S. Peter was the Chief
of the Apostles; and that Christ gave him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and built his Church on him as on a Rock; and that the Bishop of Rome is S.
Peter's Successor, and Head of that Church which Christ promised to lead into
all truth; and then you must confess the Roman Church to be that Catholic
Church which is mentioned in the Creeds.


Prot. I hope you will give me leave to hear and examine your Proofs, and on
that condition pray proceed.


Po. Do not the Scriptures, naming S. Peter in the first place, show he was the
Chief of the Apostles?


Prot. This shows he was an Eminent Apostle, but cannot imply any Superiority
over the rest, because Christ makes them all equal Judges sitting together upon
twelve Thrones, Math. xix. 28. and forbids any of them to pretend any
Superiority over the others; and though there was one Emperor then over many
lesser and inferior Princes, Christ says, It shall not be so among his
Apostles, Math. xx. 26. Luke xxii. 26. Nor would S. James have finally
determined in the Council of Jerusalem in S. Peter's presence, Acts xv. 13. or
S. Paul have so openly opposed and reproved him, if Christ had made him
Superior over all the Apostles, Galat. ii. 11, 14.


Po. Do you not read, that Christ gave to him first and singly the Keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, and promised to build his Church on him, as on a Rock, so
firm, that the Gates of Hell should never prevail against it? Math. xvi. 18, 19.


Prot. I read, that Christ in that place to Math. xvi. 19. did not give, but
only promise to give him those Keys afterward; which promise he made also to
all the Apostles, Math. xviii. 18. and when he came to perform it, he gave the
power of the Keys to them all alike, John. xx. 22, 23. And it was upon S.
Peter's Confession of Faith that Christ built his Church, not upon his Person,
since we see the Gates of Hell immediately prevailed too far against him, first
in his laboring to tempt Christ not to suffer, Math. xvi. 22. and secondly, in
his denying him with many Imprecations, Math. xxvi. 24. But if I should grant
all the Privileges you heap on S. Peter, without any good evidence from Gods
Word, that will not prove the Popes sole right to them all.


Po. Yes, without doubt: for the Bishop of Rome is certainly the Successor of
S. Peter, The Popes Supremacy.
and consequently the Vicar of Christ, and supreme Head of the Catholic Church.


Prot. The Bishop of Antioch has a better Title to be S. Peter's Successor,
because the Scripture (which never mentions his being at Rome) says expressly,
he was there: but if the Bishop of Rome had been S. Peter's Successor, that
could not make him Head of the whole Catholic Church, because S. Peter himself
never pretended to any such Power or Title: yea, he was peculiarly the Apostle
of the believing Jews, who had been Circumcised, Galat. ii. 7. and to them he
writes: Nor does Christ any where tell us, he would leave one such Head on
Earth, or give any Orders to all Christians to obey any one Apostle.


Po. But we do believe the Bishop of Rome to be S. Peter's Successor, and if so,
how can our Lord make good his Promise to be with his Church to the end of the
World, The Popes Infallibility.
if he do not make S. Peter's Successor as infallible as S. Peter himself was by
his presence and assistance?


Prot. If we grant an inspired Apostle to have been Infallible in order to
settling the Faith, and writing the Rule of it, it does not follow that his
uninspired Successors should have this Privilege, now the Faith and Rule of it
are fixed. For then the Bishops of Antioch, Jerusalem and Alexandria must be
Infallible now: And Christ's Promise is not made to S. Peter, or to any
particular Apostle, but to the whole Catholic Church; so that as long as the
true Faith is held in any one or more Churches, Christ's Promise is made good,
though other particular Churches fall away.


Po. But the Catholic Church in the Creed is an Apostolical Church, and it was
promised to the Apostles, that he would lead them into all truth, John xvi. 13.
which Privilege belongs to Rome, as being now the only free Apostolical Church
in the World.


Prot. All Churches in the World at first were planted immediately, or
mediately, by the Apostles; and Christ did certainly make this Promise good to
his Apostles, who were led into all Truth; and so long as any particular Church
keeps close to this Truth which the Apostles taught, the Promise is still made
good to that Church; and there were many particular Apostolical Churches under
Pagan Emperors, and may be now under the Turks; it being not temporal Freedom,
but adhering to the Apostles Doctrine which makes a particular Church,
Apostolical, and made the whole Catholic Church to be called so at first, when
the Creed was made.


Po. However, you must grant it is most prudent to take the best way to come to
the knowledge of the Truth: Now it is both the easiest and certainest way for
the People to come to this knowledge by believing as the Church believes.
Implicit Faith; or Believing as the Church believes.



Prot. It is neither so easy nor so certain a way, as to Search the Scriptures.


Po. This is a strange Assertion! Is it not easier to let your Pastors (who are
fitted for it by their Profession) judge of matters of Faith, than for you to
take pains to find them out in Scripture?


Prot. My Assertion is not so strange as true: For it is much more difficult
for such a man as I am, to know what these Pastors have judged about these
matters, than to know what the Scripture says of them.


Po. Have not Councils set this down; and is not the Pope always ready to
declare the Churches true Sense?


Prot. But how can I know which are lawful Councils, or what they have
determined? or if I did know the Words, and doubted of the Sense, it would be
very hard for me to get the Pope to tell me in words or writing what it was;
and if the Pope did this, he cannot speak or write plainer than God has done
in holy Scripture, and therefore (I am told) there is as much difference among
you about the Sense of Councils and Popes, as there is among us about the Sense
of Scripture.


Po. Well, but your own Catholic Bishop or Priest, can tell you the true
meaning of both Councils and Popes in all these matters.


Prot. So can our Protestant Bishops and Priests tell us the true meaning of
Scripture: But if you be forced to resort at last to particular fallible Men
for the certainty of your Faith; why do you boast of a better way to be
infallibly assured of the Truth, than Protestants can ever have, and upon that
false ground urge Men to come over to your Church?


Po. Because we rely upon that Oral Tradition; or the Faith delivered down by
Word of Mouth from Age. to Age.
Oral Tradition which has been delivered down through all Ages in the Roman
Church, and can never fail, so long as we have living Witnesses to declare it;
and is not this certainer than a dead written Rule, that may be interpreted as
every man pleases?


Prot. No sure, for all Men put things of greatest concern in Writing; and do
not trust things for Posterity, to be told by word of Mouth. A written Rule
says always the same words, and can have no ends upon us: but your living
Witnesses by forgetfulness, or to serve their Pride and Covetousness, may
deliver Tradition variously: And you have no Evidence that those things are
Apostolical Traditions, which your Church says are so; but either ancient
Writings, which are of far less credit than Scripture, (and then also you must
suppose those ancient Writings to be more evident than your Traditions, because
you prove these by them) or else you must trust to fallible Men, whose Interest
it may be, and is, to deceive you; and thus your present living Witnesses bear
sole Testimony to themselves, which is very suspicious at the best: So that
your way is neither certainer nor easier than ours.


Po. I know not what your way is, unless you make every private Man to be judge
of Scripture; when that declares, The People must enquire the Law from the
Priests Mouth, Malach. ii. 7. And Commands us to obey them that are over us in
the Lord, Hebr. xiii. 17. affirming, that no Scripture is of any private
Interpretation, 2 Pet. i. 20.


Prot. Our way is to read diligently, and pray heartily to be directed; And if
we doubt, then to go to our Protestant Bishops and Priests, (for they, and not
your Clergy, are over us in the Lord) and they are as able, as willing, and of
as great Integrity, as any among you, to give us Satisfaction. And though we do
not pretend that every private Man may interpret difficult places, without the
advice of his Pastor; Yet you are mistaken in your Interpretation of that Place
of S. Peter, 2 Pet. i. 20. Where the Apostle is proving the Scripture is a sure
Rule, because it was not written or first Interpreted by any private Man's Will
or Fancy, but the Authors spoke by the Holy Ghost, and according to the Will of
God: Which is nothing to your purpose.


Po. However it seems you are forced to rely on these Priests of yours, for the
true meaning of Scripture, and the final certainty of your Faith, and yet you
call this a slavish thing in Catholics.


Prot. Our Priests do not barely tell us, this or that is the Sense of
Scripture, and then forbid us all further enquiry, which would really be an
enslaving of their People: But they compare one Scripture with another, and
give us sound and solid reasons for all their Expositions, desiring us no
further to believe them, than the clearness of their evidence deserves, and
this allows us the freedom of rational Beings.


Po. But is it not contrary to Scripture and reason both, that the People
should judge of their Pastors Proofs and Declarations?


Prot. It is not contrary to Scripture; for there all Christians are expressly
commanded To prove all things and hold fast that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. v. 21.
and to try the Spirits. 1 John iv. 1. St. Paul bids the Corinthians Judge what
he said 1 Cor. x. 15. And likes those who tried his Declarations by the
Scripture, Acts xvii. 11. So that no doubt God will expect Men shall have
something more to say for that Faith on which they trust their Souls, than that
their Priest barely affirmed that it was true.


Po. Is not the Priest judge of the People, and can it be reasonable then that
they should be his Judges? Deuteronomy. xvii. 9.


Prot. We do not pretend to judge our Priests, but only to use our Reason,
(which God gave us not in vain,) in judging merely for our selves; because we
read that every Man shall bear his own burden, and therefore every man must
prove his own Work, Galat. vi. 4, 5. and this gives us not any power over
either our Priests or Fellow Christians; it is no judgment of direction for
others, but only a judgment of discretion, which to strip us of, is to degrade
us into the rank of Brutes.


Po. Well, though you seem fond of your own way, yet even the good effects of
our Method may convince any impartial Man it is better; For do you not see how
quiet and unanimous we are, by our Peoples entire relyance on their Pastors?


Prot. This may prove it a cunninger, but not a safer Method; The Turks are as
unanimous as they are in your Church, but they may thank ignorance and
severities for it: And for our parts we envy not their happiness, who have
found out a way (not prescribed by Christ) to live peaceably in gross Errors,
and to be unanimous in their Mistakes.


Po. I know you aim at your Church, and wonder how such a Man as you dare
charge the Roman Church with gross Errors and Mistakes?


Prot. Because I can make my Charge good; For if Scripture be the Rule of what
we ought to believe and practice, The Church of Rome full gross Errors.
then your kneeling and praying before Images, your Invocation of Angels and
Saints, adoring Relics, praying in an unknown Tongue, Transubstantiation, Half
Communion, Auricular Confession, Indulgences, and your Doctrine of Purgatory
(with diverse others which I can name) are gross errors and corruptions believed
and practiced in the Roman Church.


Po. You are very bold! But I doubt not to justify all these opinions and
practices, and to convince you so fully of the truth and innocence of them,
that I hope you will own your mistake, and embrace these very things which you
so rashly censure, therefore let us discourse the particulars.


Prot. I can never be persuaded to kneel down and pray before an Image,
Image Worship.
to offer up Incense and Gifts to it: Since I read in Scripture we must not bow
down to them nor worship them, Exodus xx. 4, 5. and find Idolatry so grievously
condemned there.


Po. I confess the Scripture condemns Idolatry, but sure you cannot be so weak
to think we take the Image for our God, as Heathens did.


Prot. We cannot see your Thoughts; but you do all those acts before your
Images, which Heathens did before theirs; and (I am told) they excused
themselves as you do, by saying they did not take the Image for their God, yet
all Christians count them flat Idolaters.


Po. They were so, because they worshipped Images of false Gods, but you must
not say we are so, because ours are Images of the true God, and his Saints.


Prot. They broke the First Commandment in having other Gods, and you break the
Second, which forbids the making any Image to worship it, not excepting the
Image of the true God, or of things in Heaven; so that this only proves your
Idolatry is of another kind; not that it is no Idolatry at all. The Jews were
as real Idolaters for worshipping the Golden Calf, though they took it for a
representation of the true God, Exodus xxxii. 4, 5. as when they worshipped
Baal-Peor, Numb. xxv. 2.


Po. Well, but we do not terminate any of our worship on the Image, but on that
which it represents; the Image only helps to raise up our minds to the thing
which is signified by it, and our worship passes through the Image to that
thing, which cannot be Idolatry.


Prot. If it be an Image of the Saints which are Creatures, it is Idolatry to
ask any thing of them which is in Gods power to give, and so your worship in
that case ends in flat Idolatry: And if it be an Image of God or Jesus Christ,
that worship which you give their Images, and intend shall terminate on God,
must be Divine worship. For otherwise you cannot worship God or Christ, by
worshipping your Images.


Po. But suppose our Church finds this way of worship helps devotion, may she
not command any mode of worship for so good an end?


Prot. No, she cannot command any mode of worship forbidden in Scripture upon
no pretense whatever: And surely Christ and his Apostles knew what would help
devotion as well as your Church, but there is not in their Writings one word
for this way of worshipping God, and there is a plain Commandment against it;
and if you would confess truth, the Carving, Painting and Gilding of the Image,
takes off your Thoughts from attending the matter of your Prayers, and so they
hinder rather than help devotion.


Po. Is it any more Idolatry in our Church to command this, than in yours to
enjoin you to bow at the Name of Jesus, and to bow to the Altar?


Prot. There is some sort of pretense from the Scripture, in Phil. ii. 10. for
Bowing at the Name of JESUS; but you cannot show any thing for Bowing to his
Image, whilst we show a Command against it. And we do not bow to the Altar, but
toward it, that is, we only look that way, when we worship the true God, but
have no visible representation of him before us when we do this: And besides,
this Ceremony is left at liberty, so that none are bound to observe it.


Po. But do we not respect the Image of our Prince or our Friend, for the sake
of those they represent, and ought not all Christians to respect the Images of
Christ and his Saints for their sakes?


Prot. We do not talk to these Pictures of our Prince or Friend, not make
Petitions to them, this would look like madness: We do respect the Image of
Christ, but that will not serve you, unless we fall down and worship it; but we
must answer you, We are to worship the Lord our God, and him only must we
serve. Math. iv. 10.


Po. I confess we cannot expect you should pray before the Images of Saints and
Angels till we have convinced you of your Error in not praying to Angels and
Saints, Invocation of Saints and Angels.
so that I shall now go on to prove, that it is lawful to call upon Angels to
help us, for did not Jacob do so? Genesis xlviii. 16.


Prot. Pray read the place, and you will find he prays only to the Angel that
redeemed him: That is, to Christ, who appeared as an Angel often to the
Patriarchs before his Incarnation, and is called the Angel of Gods presence,
Isai. lxiii. 9. But the created Angels would not suffer St. John so much as to
bow down to them, Revel. xix. 10. and Chap. xxii. 8. saying, that was a piece
of worship due to God: Yea the pretended humility of going not directly to God,
but by the Mediation of Angels, is called a deceit and plainly forbid by the
Apostle, Coloss. ii. 18. And Christ has Taught us to pray to his Father, if we
want the assistance of his Angels, Math. xxvi. 53.


Po. Does not your Bible tell you the Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar pray
for us? Revel. vi. 9, 10. And may we not then desire them to pray to God for us?


Prot. Those Spirits only pray in general for the speedy coming of the Day of
Judgment, and are bid to rest in quiet till then, Ver. 11. But this is no
ground for particular Men in distant places to ask particular things of them,
as Health, Wealth, Peace, Protection; Yea Pardon, Grace and Glory, which none
but God can give; Nor does the Scripture any where declare we should ask these
things of any other but God.


Po. How dare you that are a Sinner whom God will not hear, John. ix. 31.
presume to ask these things directly of God himself, without desiring his
Friends to pray for you?


Prot. Though I am unworthy, yet I am commanded to pray, and to ask all that I
need in Christ's Name, and am promised if I do so, I shall be heard, John. xiv.
13, 14. And Chap. xvi. 23, 24. Yea I am told he is my Advocate, 1 John. ii. 2.
And that there is but one Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy ii. 5. Now after
all this, I think it is a greater presumption, without any command, direction
or promise, to make use of the Saints as our Advocates and Mediators; for it is
to leave the way prescribed by God, and invent a new one of our own; it is to
take that Honor which belongs to the Son of God, and give it to his Servants,
so that we may well believe it will disoblige him we pray to.


Po. You do not consider that we hold, the Saints join their intercession to
that of Christ, and therefore to desire them to pray for us, can be no injury
to Christ; whom we deny not to be our Mediator.


Prot. It must suppose Christ's Intercession not to be sufficient, to add so
many other Mediators to him; Yea it seems you believe they have more power with
God, or love for us, than Christ has; otherwise you would not think it
necessary to join their Prayers to his, nor make more addresses to these
Servants, than to the Son. We know as Christ is God, he is most able, and as
Man, most willing to help us, Hebr. ii. 18. and are assured he is able to serve
to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, Hebr. vii. 25. And when the
Father has provided so All-sufficient a Mediator, to fly to others, and desire
them to add their interest to his, is both ingratitude to the Father, and a
disparagement to the Son, when you have laid all the fine colors on it you can.


Po. I will convince you by a practice of your own, that herein you censure us
unjustly: Do not you desire the Saints on Earth to pray for you, though Christ
be your Mediator, and is this any injury to Christ? why then may we not as well
desire those in Heaven to do it?


Prot. We have many Precepts and Examples in Scripture to desire holy Men on
Earth to pray with us and for us, which shows that is according to Gods Will, 1 John v. 14. but you have not one word to direct you, to desire this of the
Saints in Heaven. Besides, we do not kneel to good Men, and put their Names
into the same Litanies and Prayers with God Almighty, nor desire to be heard by
their Merits: They pray with us and for us, as our Fellow Sufferers, who see
and hear our wants in particular, and pray only in Christ's Name, and through
his Merits, and so are joint Petitioners with us, not joint Mediators with
Christ. And withal, every particular Man goes to them and tells them his case,
and then he is sure they know his wants; but Scripture is very clear, that
those who are dead, even the best Men, know not the particular wants of their
dearest Friends, 2 Kings xxii. 20. Job xiv. 2. Eccles. ix. 5. Isai. lxiii. 16.
Nor is it possible for any Creature to hear the Petitions of many thousands at
one time in diverse places; and if they cannot hear you, what are you better for
praying to them?


Po. This is easily answered; for since God knows all things, and they are with
him always, cannot he without any difficulty make our Prayers known to them?


Prot. We question not Gods power, but why should he do this since you pray to
them without his direction, and by doing so accuse the way which he prescribed
of being insufficient, nor have you any Promise that God will acquaint them
with your Prayers. Besides, you cannot but think it absurd, if not ridiculous,
to pray to the Saints to pray to God for you, and yet till God tell them first,
they cannot tell him what it is they are to desire of him; this is to employ
God to inform the Saints of our wants, and looks like writing to a Courtier
which cannot read, to desire him to beg a Favor of the King for us, because we
were unworthy to write immediately to the King, and yet knew before hand this
Courtier must go to the King himself to read the Letter.


Po. We value not your idle Comparisons, Our Church tells us the Saints do hear
us, and it is no matter whether or no we know how they do hear us.


Prot. The Scripture tells you they do not hear you, and Reason tells you they
cannot, and will you believe your Church against both? Your Church never durst
define the way how they come to hear you, because many Absurdities follow upon
all methods that ever yet were devised: And a wary man would scarce credit a
thing of this consequence that cannot be proved or made out; much less would he
go to Mediators, of whose hearing him he can have no other assurance than the
bare word of those Men who gain by the Doctrine, when he has an All-sufficient
Mediator, who he is sure can always hear and help him, and to whom he may pray
without any doubts to damp his Devotion.


Po. Did not the Virgin Mary prophecy, The Worship of the Blessed Virgin.
that all Generations should call her blessed, Luke i. 48. and have we not
reason to believe that the Mother of God has great power in Heaven?


Prot. We call her Blessed, and bless God for her; but she never said, All
Generations should pray to her, or impertinently repeat that Salutation, which
was proper to the occasion of her Conception of Christ, as if it were a formal
Prayer to her now: Nor is there one word in Scripture to direct us to pray to
her at all; much less to say more Ave's to her, than Pater nosters to God, and
to make larger Offerings to her than to Jesus, who declares he has all Power
in Heaven and Earth; so that all your worship of her is an Invention of your
own, and mere Superstition.


Po. We find it makes the People more devout, to propose so many glorified
Saints to them to be adored, than if we confined them to adore only one
invisible God.


Prot. You may observe, if you would own the Truth, that this impious Device
makes the Worship of God to be neglected, inclining your People to rely more on
the Saints help than on Gods, and to give them the honor due to him for those
Blessings which he alone bestows on them; and since God has confined us only
to worship and serve him, Math. iv. 10. it is Superstition and Idolatry, not
Devotion, for to make any other Beings the Objects of your Worship.


Po. Well, The Adoration of Relics.
but since God has wrought so many Miracles by the Relics of the Saints,
doubtless he is well pleased with our adoring them and their Relics.


Prot. There have been many false Relics proposed for true ones, and many
forged Miracles invented by cunning Priests for gain, as has been undeniably
proved; and if there be any true Relics of real Saints, and any certain
Miracles, it is not the Saint or his Relics, but God (by whose power the
Miracle was wrought, as S. Peter tells us, Acts iii. 12.) who is to have the
glory: And though we find in Scripture that Miracles were wrought by Moses Rod,
Elijahs Mantle, the Hem of Christ's Garment, S. Peter's Shadow, and S. Paul's
Handkerchief, we never read that any of the Faithful adored these things.


Po. Perhaps you have been told, we wholly neglect making Prayers to God by
Christ Jesus, whereas we have many Prayers in our Public Offices like yours,
directed to God in Christ's Name, and I hope you have no Objection against these.


Prot. You ought to have no other Prayers but such; and yet though these
Prayers be right as to their Matter, there is one intolerable Fault in them
all, that they are made in Latin, Divine Service in an unkown Tongue.
which the People do not understand.


Po. Is not the Church to direct in what manner Public Prayers shall be made,
and are we not to obey her Orders?


Prot. No doubtless, not where your Church expressly contradicts God and his
holy Apostle. The Spirit of God by S. Paul commands Men to pray with
understanding, and forbids any to use an unknown Tongue in Christian
Assemblies, enjoining the Priest so to make his Prayers and Praises, that the
most unlearned may join in them, be edified by them, and say Amen to them, 1
Cor. xiv. 14, 15, 16, 17. and 26. and your Church bids men pray without
understanding, and prescribes an unknown Tongue for the Priest to Pray and
Praise God in, wherein the People cannot join, and whereby they are not
edified, yea, to which they cannot with understanding say Amen: In such a case
to obey the Church is to disobey God, and a great Impiety.


Po. You must know Latin was the Language of the ancient Christians at Rome,
and we have not altered our Prayers, but only kept them in that Tongue in which
they were made at first by the Apostles, who planted our Church.


Prot. Now you have yielded the Cause, for if the Apostles who were Jews, did
not set up the Hebrew Prayers at Rome, but Latin, because that was the Language
which the People then understood; if you were of their Spirit, or followed
their steps, you ought now to turn them into other Languages, because the
People do not understand Latin, and because it is necessary they should pray
with understanding. Is this your Apostolical Church which acts contrary to the
Writings and Example of the Apostles, or could the Apostles leave you any
Tradition to contradict their own Commands and Practice?


Po. May not the People think of God and good things, and so be very devout at
these Prayers, though they do not understand the words?


Prot. They may think of God and good things at home, and so need not come to
the Public Service at all, if this be sufficient: We think Public Prayers
were designed for the People to come and unite their particular and hearty
desires to the Petitions made by the Priest; and this praying with one accord,
Acts i. 14. makes them more prevalent than private Prayer, S. Math. xviii. 20.
But your People are thinking of one thing when the Priest is saying another,
and cannot desire the particular things asked by the Priest, because they do
not know them: So that this turns the public Prayers into private, and the
Priest might as well pray without a Congregation.


Po. It is to God we speak in Prayer, and since he understands us, it is no
marter whether the People understand them or no.


Prot. By this Argument you need not Pray at all, because God knows your
necessities before you ask: Yet he bids us ask, that by the words of our
Prayers we may stir up our Desires, exercise our Devotion, and excite our
Faith, not that we may instruct him. Wherefore your People are robbed of all
that comfort and benefit which ours find so sensibly in our English Prayers;
merely, because your Church scorns to reform any thing; and you can never
expect that those who by Experience have found the sweetness and advantage of
our pious and plain Liturgy, will endure your dry, unprofitable Latin Prayers.


Po. Well, but some of your People think Sermons the main thing in Public
Worship, and we hope to gain them however because we Preach in English.


Prot. Possibly some of these may be caught by this Bait; but all wise
Protestants will ask you, why there is not as much reason for the People to
know what they are to speak to God, as what the Priest is to speak to them; and
will also desire to know, why you should read the Psalms and Lessons, and other
parts of Scripture in Latin, which God writ for our Learning and Instruction, 1
Cor. x. 11. and so make it as impossible the People should learn any thing from
it, or be instructed by it, as for Boys in Horn-Books to be made any wiser by
reading a Latin Author to them.


Po. I have told you before, This is lest the People should wrest the
Scriptures, if they were in a Language they understood.


Prot. Why then do you preach in English? May they not wrest your Sermons, as
well as Holy Scripture? Is there more danger now than in the Apostles times? Or
is your Church wiser than they? Did not they write it in a Language generally
understood? And was it not soon after turned into Latin, because the Romans
best understood that Language? Did they not deliver it to all, and command all
to read it and search it, to meditate on it and teach it to their Children?
Though some are Gluttons and Drunkards we must not deny all Men the use of Meat
and Drink; nor would you thus keep the Scriptures from the People, but only for
fear that such plain Men as I should discover your Corruptions.


Po. Methinks you should discover your own Corruptions there: For what is more
plainly expressed in Scripture than these words concerning the Sacrament of the
Altar, Transubstantiation.
This is my Body, Luke xxii. 19. and yet you will not own the real Flesh of
Christ to be there; Is not this to deny Christ's words, and disbelieve the
Scripture?


Prot. We may as well charge you with denying Christ's words, and disbelieving
Scripture, since you affirm his real Blood to be there, though he tells us;
This Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, Luke xxii. 20. 1 Cor. xi. 25. You
must confess there is a Figure in this Expression, or else you must affirm the
Wine is Transubstantiated into the New Testament; and if there be a Figure in
one Verse, why may there not be one also in the other, in regard this
substantial Change which you pretend, is either in both parts, or in neither?


Po. However we have much the advantage of you, because we take the Literal
sense, which is both the more common and the more easy sense, whilst you are
forced to fly to Tropes and Figures.


Prot. You must consider this Sacrament is a Mystery, and in discoursing of
Mysteries, it is more common in Scripture to speak Figuratively than Literally;
yea, what is more usual there, than to call the Sign by the name of the thing
signified, and the thing signified by the name of the Sign? So the Rock is said
to be Christ, 1 Cor. x. 4. and Christ is said to be Bread, John vi. 48. yet
none are so absurd to say, the Rock is substantially changed into Christ, or
Christ into Bread: And when the Church is called, The Body of Christ, Colos. i.
24. your selves do not affirm that there is any change made of the Church into
Christ's Flesh and Blood, though there be more said of this than of the
Sacramental Bread, viz That we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of
his Bones, Ephesians. v. 30. So when Christ is called a Vine, a Door, a Way, a
Branch, etc. it is very certain the Expressions are Figurative, and there are a
thousand places in the Holy Bible which cannot be otherwise understood.


Po. Well, but the Literal sense is not to be left, unless where the words
cannot be taken otherwise than Figuratively, which is not the case here.


Prot. Yes, that is the very case here; for the Literal sense is impossible and
full of Contradictions, but the Figurative is natural, plain and easy: For if
we take these words Literally, Christ's Body was whole and sitting at the
Table, and broken into pieces on the Table at the same time; it must be entire
now in Heaven, and yet all of it in ten thousand different and distant places
on the Earth. We must believe the substance of Flesh has none of its proper
Accidents, and that the Accidents of Bread can subsist without their proper
substance: We must think that to be real Flesh and Blood, which we see, smell,
taste and feel to be real Bread and Wine: We must believe there is a Miracle,
when all our Senses which are witnesses to all other Miracles, give Evidence
there is no Miracle at all here. In short, we must contradict our Reason, and
deny our Senses without any need, unless it be to uphold an unintelligible
Literal sense, when the Figurative is far more plain.


Po. It Is strange how Prejudice may blind Men; surely you cannot be in earnest
when you say, a Figurative Speech is plainer than a Speech without a Figure;
This only shows how desperate your Cause is, which drives you to these
Absurdities.


Prot. I will prove it is no Absurdity to maintain, that in this case the
Figurative sense is easier: For that is the easiest sense of any words, which
the Mind first apprehends when we hear them. For Example, if one point to an
House and Land, and say, This is my Estate, there the plain sense is the
Literal sense; But if one hold a Writing sealed in his Hand, and say, This is
my Estate, the easiest and plainest sense then is, This is that which conveys
my Estate, and all the benefits of it to me: So if Christ had pointed to
himself sitting at Table, and said, This is my Body, the Apostles would, and we
must have taken it Literally: but since he points to Bread, and says, This is
my Body; the first and most natural sense of the words is, This is that which
signifies my Body, and communicates all the benefits of my Incarnation and
Passion to you: and thus S. Paul expressly does expound it when he says, it is
the Communion of his Body and Blood, 1 Cor. x. 16.


Po. What then do you believe that Christ is in this Sacrament no otherwise but
in a bare figure and empty sign?


Prot. We believe that Christ is here verily and indeed taken and received by
the faithful, and really present as to all the effects and benefits of his
Passion, but this presence though it be real, yet is spiritual and apprehended
by Faith, not corporal and substantial, because then it must be discerned by
sense.


Po. From one absurdity granted many will follow, and your absurd exposition
forces you to hold this ridiculous assertion, That a Spiritual Presence is a
real Presence.


Prot. Dare you seriously deny this, which you call a ridiculous assertion? Is
not Christ really with his Church to the end of the World by his Spiritual
Presence? Is not the Holy Ghost really with every Regenerate Man by his
Spiritual Presence? The effects and benefits of Christ's Death, which we seek
in this Sacrament are Spiritual; such as Pardon, Peace, Grace and hopes of
Glory, yet they are very real, and therefore we think it fittest to expect them
in a Spiritual manner, especially since our Lord has told us, It is the Spirit
that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing, John. vi. 63. And the Aposte
says, Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. xi. 1. That is, It makes things invisible and Spiritual to be very
real to the true Believer.


Po. I find you delight much in calling this Spiritual Meat and Drink, but
would gladly understand how you dare do so, without any Authority of Scripture,
yea when the Scripture says, Christ will give us his Flesh to Eat, John. vi.
53.


Prot. We have good Authority of Scripture for this, viz* 1 Cor. x. 3, 4* Where
it is said that the Israelites had the privilege by certain signs to Eat and
Drink into Christ as well as we, in a mystical way: For they did all Eat of the
same Spiritual Meat, and did all Drink of the same Spiritual Drink: For they
Drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ: We
see it was Spiritual Meat and Drink which they had, yet it was the same with
ours, and therefore ours must be Spiritual Meat and Drink too. Again we are not
said, All to Drink into one Blood, but into one Spirit, 1 Cor. xii. 13. Nor can
we understand how St. Paul could call that which is the Communion of Christ's
Body, by the Name of Bread after Consecration, 1 Cor. xi. 26, 27, 28. If the
outward part did not remain unchanged in substance, though its use be changed,
and our Souls are certainly fed here, yet these are not capable of feeding
either on Bread or Flesh; Yea our Lord himself teaches us to Expound those
Words in St. John of a Spiritual Communication, of his Body, for he says, The
words he speaks to us are Spirit and Life, John. vi. 63.


Po. You do but prevaricate when you pretend to believe Christ is really
present in the Sacrament* for if you truly believed this, you would give Divine
Worship to the Host as we do.


Prot. We bend our Knees, address our Prayers and give Divine Worship to
Christ, who is really present to our Faith in this Sacrament: But since we are
sure that the outward part is not changed in nature, but only in use and
signification and does still remain Bread, we dare not give Divine Worship to
that which is a Creature, since it would be Idolatry so to do.


Po. Well, I will inform you of one very ill consequence of your denying
Christ's Flesh and Blood, to be substantially in this Sacrament, that is, you
make it to be only a Commemoration of the Sacrifice on the Cross; but we give
it far more honor, believing it to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of
quick and dead.


Prot. Neither you nor we ought to make the Sacrament what we please, we must
take our Notions of it from Scripture and from Christ, who instituted it, and
he bids us Do this in Remembrance of Him, Luke xxii. 19. And S. Paul does not
say it is the Lords Death, but the showing forth of his Death, 1 Cor. xi. 26.
Yea he makes this the main difference between the legal Sacrifices and that of
Christ on the Cross, that they were often Offered, but he was only to be
Offered once, and by that one Offering has perfectly satisfied for the Sins of
the whole World, Hebr. ix. 25, 26. And Chap. x. 14. So that this Sacrament is
certainly a Commemoration, as we say, but it cannot be a Sacrificing of Christ
again, as you say, if we refer the matter (as we ought) to be judged by
Scripture; wherein there is nothing to show that is a Propitiatory Sacrifice
for the Sins of the Living, much less for the Sins of the Dead, whose estate
can never be altered after this Life, Luke xvi. 26, 28. But as they fall they
must lie for ever, Eccles. xi. 3.


Po. The World may now see how unjustly you brag of your Magnifying the Merit
of Christ's Passion, and how falsely you accuse us of diminishing and disparaging
it, Since we hold it sufficient to pardon both Quick and Dead, and you deny it
can do any good to the Dead.


Prot. It is not for want of Merit in Christ's Passion, but for want of Capacity
in those who have not Repented in their Life Time, that hinders these Deceased
Persons from receiving the benefits of Christ's Death; Christ has declared he
will pardon none but them that do repent; and if Men do not repent before they
die, they cannot repent afterward, and so cannot receive any benefit of
Christ's Passion; and if living Men be taught, they may get a Pardon after
Death, it will encourage them to put off their Repentance to the very last: Nor
would so false a Doctrine without any ground in Scripture ever have been taught
in your Church, but only that the crafty Inventers of it found, it would make
Masses sell at dear Rates.


Po. You are very free of your Censures, but we despise them, being assured our
Doctrins and Practices are the true sense of Scripture, as it is interpreted to
us by the Holy Catholic Church.


Prot. Do you really think so? Half-Communion; or denying the Cup to the Laity.
Pray then before we leave this Subject, will you tell me, How the making only
some (that is the Priests) to Drink of the Cup, can possibly be the true
meaning of Christ's Words, Drink ye all of this, Math. xxvi. 27.


Po. Why, it is plain the Apostles were Priests and not Lay Men, and it was
only to the Apostles that Christ spoke these Words; and though we forbid the
People to Drink of this Cup, yet we Command the Priests to do it.


Prot. Was it not also only to the Apostles that Christ said then, Take Eat,
this my Body, Ver. 26. and will it not follow by your way of arguing, that none
but Priests must Eat of the Bread, and that the People must receive neither
Bread nor Wine? You know the Apostles stood then in the place of Laymen and
represented the Congregation as Christ did the Priest, so that S. Paul plainly
applies to the People, the Commands both of Eating and Drinking, which Christ
gave at first only to his Apostles. And nothing is more evident than that all
the People at Corinth did Drink of the Cup, and some of them too largely, 1
Cor. x. 21. Chap. xi. 21. and Ver. 27, 28, 29. Chap. xii. 13. So that I wonder
how you dare call the contradicting Christ's Commands and the Precepts and
Practice of the Apostles, the true sense of Scripture, and why you rob the
People of one half of the Sacrament.


Po. We rob them of nothing, The Doctrine of Concomitancy; or the Blood always
accompanying the Body.
because we declare we give them whole Christ, which is contained fully under
either species.


Prot. This is no more than if one who clipped off half the Kings Coin should say
it was still current Money: The very declaration it self supposes that our Lord
instituted two species when one was sufficient, and so to excuse your selves of
impiety you accuse him of doing things in vain: And since Christ is here set
out as having suffered for Sin, and so his Blood separated from his Body, we
cannot imagine how the Bread alone should be sufficient to set forth this
Mystery.


Po. There is danger lest we should spill the Cup in giving it to the People,
and lest it should be profaned by the rude mouths of Laymen.


Prot. This danger may be in giving it to the Priests; however you are not of
S. Paul's mind, who when the Cup was abused at Corinth even to excess, durst not
alter Christ's Institution, nor take it wholly away as you do, thereby committing
a grievous Sacrilege in keeping back part of that whereof God has made you
dispensers, and as much as in you lies, depriving the People of the benefit of
Christ's Blood.


Po. We can find more fault with your preparation for it, Auricular Confession;
or that which is privately whispered into the Ear of the Priest.
than you with our dispensing of it; for why do not you all go to a Priest to
confess your sins before you do receive, as the Scripture does appoint?


Prot. The Scripture appoints every Man shall examine himself before he Eat of
that Bread and Drink of that Cup, 1 Cor. xi. 28. Now of this you say very
little, but our Church strictly enjoins all thus to prepare: But Scripture no
where appoints it as necessary for all, to go to a Priest and confess before
every act of receiving.


Po. Does not Scripture declare that penitent Sinners confessed their Sins to a
Priest, Math. iii. 6. Acts. xix. 8. And command us to confess our faults one to
another, James. v. 16. and can there be any fitter time to do this than just
before we Communicate?


Prot. We do not forbid Men at any time to Confess to a Priest, but advise them
to it, in case of a troubled Mind, or a violent Temptation; and especially if
that be their condition who are to receive the Sacrament: But we dare not lay
such a Snare on our People, as to make this always necessary, since God has
not declared it is so. And those Examples you bring, concern Public Confession
of Sins before the Priest and the Congregation; and so does that place in S.
James, for it orders us to Confess not to the Righteous Man alone, but one to
another, that so the Righteous Man and all the rest may pray for Mercy for the
Penitent; and I have heard this was the Primitive way of Confessing Sins, and
is still here in our Church, where the Offenses are scandalous, and the Party
censured: But this is no ground for your Private Confessing into the Priests
Ear, and so getting an Absolution of course at Set times.


Po. Has not Christ granted to the Priests a power to remit men's sins,
Priestly Absolution.
or retain them, John xx. 23. and must not the Judge who is to condemn or set
free, of necessity hear all the particulars concerning the Criminal?


Prot. Our Priests will not grant us Absolution in particular Cases, unless we
do so far confess the Crimes we are guilty of, as to show our selves truly
penitent; but they do not compel us under pain of Damnation to come and tell
them all our Sins, which Scripture says is impossible, Psalm. xix. 12. Nor does
the Kings granting a Commission to certain Judges, to hear and to determine
Causes, oblige those who can make up their differences among themselves, to
come and be tried before them. Besides, the Priest is not the highest and last
Judge, nor can he infallibly tell when he does hear all that Men say of
themselves, whether they be Hypocrites, or true Penitents; and therefore we are
advised to confess all our Sins daily to God the Supreme Judge, and to labor
to prove our Repentance to be sincere to him by amending our lives: And we are
not obliged to go to a Priest, but in weighty Cases, and on great Occasions.


Po. This is one great Complaint we have against your pretended Reformation,
Satisfaction, or Pe^nances.
that you do not oblige Sinners to (...) any satisfaction for their Offenses,
and have laid aside the Sacrament of Penance.


Prot. We do account it necessary for notorious and scandalous Offenders to do
a public Penance, that their Shame and Sorrow may be as evident as their
Crimes, and this they are to do for Satisfaction to the Church, 2 Cor. ii. 7.
And we hold it necessary in more secret Sins, that the Sinner do heartily
bewail them, humbly confess them to God, and utterly forsake them for the time
to come; and upon these terms we doubt not God will forgive them for Christ's
sake, according to his Promises in Holy Scripture, Prove. xxviii. 13. Ezekiel.
xviii. 21. and we will trust Gods Word sooner than yours.


Po. But after God has pardoned the Sinner as to the eternal Punishment due to
him, which Christ bought off, He must satisfy the Divine Justice for temporal
Pains still remaining due to those Sins, by submitting to the Pennances laid on
him by his Priest.


Prot. This is a mere Device of your own, not grounded on Holy Scripture; for
there it is declared, that Christ has delivered us from all the Course due to
us, and saved us to the uttermost, and cleansed us from all Sin, and made our
Peace; so that if we have Interest in him there is no Condemnation to us. It Is
true, God may and does sometimes C^^^^^se good Men, after he resolves to pardon
them, 2 Samuel xii. 14. which is not to satisfy his Justice, but to warn them
not easily to run into the like Offenses, Heb. xii. 6. And true Penitents have
voluntarily put on Sackcloth and laid in Ashes, and Fasted and Prayed, etc. But
this was to show the sincerity of their Repentance, and the reality of their
Sorrow for offending God, or to make themselves more fit to pray earnestly for
the averting the Divine Displeasure: But Gods Word never makes these Acts any
part of Satisfaction to God, nor do we find one Precedent of Christ, or his
Holy Apostles, enjoining such Acts purely to satisfy Gods Justice for any
remaining Punishment.


Po. Well, you cannot deny it is more for the honor of Gods Justice to enjoin
the Offenders to make him some satisfaction, rather than to teach them he will
freely forgive; and you must grant it is more likely to restrain men from
future Crimes, if they suffer in Body or Goods for those that are past.


Prot. But it is not much for Gods Honor, that when your Church pretends God
will not remit these remaining temporal Pains without men do their Penance;
yet she will remit the Penance it self for a certain Price, and so Money will
buy off that which you say Christ's Death does not satisfy for: And indeed none
but the Poor almost do any Penance, with you, the Rich who can gratify the
Priest well are Absolved and Indulged; and however you order it in your Church,
there are as many notorious and customary Sinners for all these Pennances and
Payments, as any where else: yea, they sin with less fear and regret than
others, because they foresee a Pilgrimage, or a little Fasting; a few Lashes,
or a Sum of Money will make their Peace with the Priest, and so they take
little Care by a sincere Amendment to make their Peace with God.


Po. I suppose you reflect upon our Indulgences, Indulgences.
which are no other than the use of that Power of remitting Sins which Christ
gave to S. Peter, and in him to the Chief Pastor of the Catholic Church; and
doubtless it is a most comfortable thing when S. Peter's Successor, or his
Delegates, do so solemnly declare us clear from those Sins we have confessed.


Prot. S. Peter never sold this Power, Acts viii. 18. for he affirms, We are
not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, 1 Pet. i. 8. Had he
used the same gainful Trade which the Pope drives, he could not have said,
Silver and Gold have I none, Acts iii. 6. So that you must not mention that
holy Apostle as your Patron till you follow his Example, and grant Pardons to
none but them, that upon a strict search are found truly Penitent; and upon
these terms (which Christ makes necessary) the Poor must have them as soon as
the Rich, and both freely: But while your Church makes a mere Merchandise of
them, and grants them out to raise Money to enrich a Nephew, to marry a Niece
of the Popes, or to aggrandize a Favorite, and sends them into remote
Countries to Men and Women whose Faces he never saw, and of whose Penitence he
has no assurance, we Protestants must look on them as a holy Cheat, a
hindrance of true Repentance, and a trick to get Money.


Po. You are quite mistaken; the Church designs nothing by these Indulgences
but the Penitents Salvation; the Money is a voluntary Offering, and can you
blame Holy Church for receiving the Oblations of the People?


Prot. It is no Crime to receive voluntary Oblations, provided they be
dispensed to the Poor: But here is a certain Price set, and the Money received
goes in part to the Popes Coffers, and in part to the wealthy Delegates, or to
rich Monasteries; and it appears that Money is the main thing, because Poor Men
cannot get them, nor will they give an Indulgence freely to the Indigent,
though never so penitent* whereas the Rich, that show little signs of true
Repentance, may have them, and are thereby hardened in their Sins. Nor is it
this Point alone, but most of those disputed between us and you, that are
stiffly defended on your part, because they advance the Wealth and Power of
your Church; Such is the Popes power to receive Appeals, Images, Relics,
Saying Masses to deliver Souls, Confession, Pennances, and two more not yet
mentioned, viz. Purgatory, and the pretended Sanctity of your Religious Orders.


Po. It Is not the Advantage we have by these Doctrines, but the certain Truth
of them, which makes us so desirous you should believe them, as appears in this
Article of Purgatory, Purgatory.
which I shall prove first by Scripture, and then by Reason to be a great Truth.


Prot. The Scripture declares very often and very plainly, that there are two
places of eternal Rewards and Punishments, Heaven and Hell; and if there be any
Third place to which most Men are to go, to suffer very great temporary Pains,
I doubt not but God has revealed it as plainly and clearly as he has done
Heaven and Hell, and therefore let me see you prove it by plain Texts of Holy
Scripture.


Po. Our Savior says, The Sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come, Math. xii. 32. which plainly
supposes some Sins not pardoned here may be forgiven there; and that is one
ground of Purgatory.


Prot. This is far from a clear Proof, for here is no mention of Purgatory; and
this Phrase, The World to come, in the Gospel, often signifies the Days of the
Messiah, Heb. xi. 5. and vi. 5. And the Jews expected that Messiah (whom they
believed as yet not come) should pardon diverse great Sins, which could not be
expiated by Legal Sacrifices; and therefore Christ speaking to them in their
own Phrase, tells them, This Sin against the Holy Ghost should never be
pardoned under the Law, nor under the Gospel. But suppose this Phrase do
signify, The next World: Christ says not any other Sins shall be forgiven
then, but only that this Sin shall never be forgiven there nor here, which is
only a Phrase to set out it shall not be forgiven at all: So Genesis xxxi. 24. to
speak neither good nor bad; signifies, to say nothing at all.


Po. Does not S. Paul say, Every Man's work shall be made manifest, for the Day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by Fire, and the Fire shall try
every Man's work of what sort it is: And a little after, If a Man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire,
1 Cor. iii. 13, 15. Is not this a clear Proof of Purgatory Fire?


Prot. This place speaks only of Teachers, and the Persons are not to be burnt,
but their Works, that is, the False Doctrines which any of them teach; and the
whole place is Metaphorical and obscure; and that last Phrase of being saved,
but so as by Fire, is no more but a way of expressing a thing that shall be
done with great difficulty, Psalm. lxvi. 12. Zech. iii. 2. So that you may as
well pretend Sinners are in Purgatory here, because we are commanded, to save
them with fear, pulling them out of the Fire, Jude, ver. 23. And if this place
be to be understood Literally it must be referred to that Fire which shall burn
all the World at the Day of Judgment, which (I have been told) is that which
the Fathers understand by the Day and the Fire here mentioned, and so it has
no relation to Purgatory, which you must either prove (as we do Heaven and
Hell) from clearer places than this, or we shall not believe it.


Po. We have S. Peter also on our side, who tells us, That Christ went by the
Spirit to Preach to the Spirits in Prison, which sometimes were disobedient,
when once the Long-suffering of God waited in the Days of Noah, while the Ark
was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight Persons were saved by Water, 1 Pet.
iii. 19, 20.


Prot. This place is obscurer than any of the former, and so very unfit to
build an Article of Faith upon: But the plainest Sense of it is* That Christ by
his Spirit in Noah did Preach to those Wicked ones before the Flood, whose
Souls and Spirits were as it were Imprisoned in their Bodies; and those who
were saved by this Preaching were but a few, and those were saved by Water, and
not by Fire. And as far as we can gather from this Text, and 2 Pet. ii. 3, 5.
these Persons who were Preached to, remained disobedient, and were not saved at
all; so that you have no shadow of ground to fix Purgatory on this place.


Po. What think you of that Prison into which if we be cast by God, who is the
Sinners Adversary, they shall by no means come out thence till they have paid
the uttermost Farthing, Math. v. 26. Is not this Purgatory?


Prot. I think it is nothing to your purpose, for Christ uses it as an
Argument why we should Repent and make our Peace with God while we live;
whereas Purgatory gives Men pretenses to put off their Repentance till Death,
and fills them with false Hopes to be delivered afterward: And out of this
Prison there is no means to be delivered, but by the Persons own satisfying the
whole Debt, whereas you think the Prayers and Alms of others may get Men out of
Purgatory: Nor does the Text say, that the Sufferer can pay the utmost
Farthing, but rather suppose it impossible, and so his lying there till he pay
the utmost Farthing, must be meant of his lying in Hell for ever. And Christ
mentions Hell in that Chapter, Ver. 22, 29, 30. But there is no word of
Purgatory here, or any where in Scripture, and therefore pray try if you can
prove it from Reason, since Gods Word is not for you.


Po. Is there not great difference between some sins and others; and if God be
a Righteous Judge, he will make different punishments, so that it is very
reasonable to believe that Venial Sins shall only be punished with temporary
fire, not with eternal Flames.


Prot. If we consider the Holiness of the Law, or the infiniteness of the
Majesty offended, all Sin, even the least, deserves Damnation as its just
Wages, Romans vi. 23. and the least Sin unrepented of may prove Mortal, because
it is not so much (now under the Gospel) the Sin, as the final impenitence
which Damns Men; and he that will not repent, shows he would Eternally Sin; so
that whatever the instance be, he deserves Eternal Damnation: Yet alas! no Man
that repents not fully while he lives, is only guilty of these lesser Sins,
which in such persons never go alone, they are always guilty of greater Sins
which merit Eternal Flames. And that place of S. John on which you ground your
distinction of Mortal and Venial Sin, speaks of the event of Men's Sins, not of
the nature of them; So that if we see Men sin without any signs or hope of
their Repentance, he does not oblige us to pray for such, 1 John. v. 16.


Po. But is it not said, that nothing which is unclean shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven? Rev. xxi. 27. Wherefore reason teaches, that they who are
Defiled with any Sins, even those that are Venial must be Purged e're they can
come into the Kingdom of Heaven.


Prot. Surely poor Catholics are hardly used, to pay so much Money, and endure
so many Pennances, on pretense of purging away their Venial Sins; and yet after
all their Fastings, Whipping, and Pilgrimages, their Absolutions, Holy Water,
Alms and Extreme Unction, still they are to endure a Torment as grievous,
though not as long, as Hell Fire, for these light Transgressions: Besides, we
cannot imagine how Fire can purge a Soul unbodyed, nor why Purgatory should be
needful to cleanse us from some Sins, when Scripture declares, the Blood of
Christ cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John. i. 7. Or how Men who are to be Saved
by Christ should be condemned to Purgatory, when St. Paul says, There is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans viii. 1. It Is evident, it
hugely derogates from Gods Mercy and Christ's Merits, to teach Men, That after
all Gods Promises to justify us freely by his Grace, Romans iii. 24. And after
Christ's blotting out the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us,
Coloss. ii. 14. they must still smart so long and so severely, and are left to
pay so great a part of it themselves.


Po. You are mistaken again, for we hold, that because of the Communion of
Saints, one man may satisfy for another, and that the Alms and Prayers of the
Living, and especially of Holy Friars and Nuns, will avail, for the delivering
the Dead out of Purgatory.


Prot. You may hold what you please, but Scripture tells us, Every one shall
bear his own burden, Galat. vi. 5. and, that no Man can redeem his Brother, nor
make agreement to God for him, because it cost more to redeem their Souls, so
that he must let that alone for ever, Psalm. xlix. 7, 8. And that all the good
Works of the best Men are little enough for themselves, Math. xxv. 9. So that
we wonder the wiser Laymen will be deluded by a Doctrine which is so ill
proved, and tends so Apparently to make the People put off their Repentance
till their Death, and to give the Monks an opportunity to draw Legacies from
the dying, and large Gifts from their living Friends, that is, to make the
Laity Wicked, and the Clergy Rich, and to hazard the Salvation of both.


Po. We do not think the Money ill bestowed which we give to our Priests and
Friars, (...) of Religious (...).
whose Prayers are more pure and prevalent than those of your Clergy, because
they are under those three Holy Vows of Chastity, Poverty and Obedience.


Prot. Vows without observing them are but a snare and an aggravation of the
Sin, when they are broken, as two of these most notoriously are by your Priests
and Religious Orders, who are infamous in all Countries for those Artifices
they use to get Wealth, and for their unnatural and scandalous Lust; and your
Church is justly taxed with all the infamous Consequences of the Vow of
Chastity, because she imposes it on young Persons before they know their own
strength, and connives at Fornication in them rather than she will allow them
to Marry, that the Church may be their Heir, and that they may have less
dependence on Kings and States, as being single Persons.


Po. You would fain make this a piece of Policy, whereas it is Religion; for S.
Paul declares, single persons are fittest to wait upon the Lord without
distraction, 1 Cor. vii. 35. and on that account it is most proper for the
Religious and Priests.


Prot. The Apostle advises all Christians (and not Priests only) to continue
single if they were so, as best for those Times of Persecution, and provided
they found they could live Chastely Unmarried, otherwise to avoid Fornication he
Commands them even then to Marry, 1 Cor. vii. 2. Whereas you forbid it to all
your Religious in all Times and all Cases: Besides, he laid no Vow upon them
Ver. 35. Nor was he himself under any Vow but was free to Marry if he had
pleased, 1 Cor. ix. 5. And he allows a Bishop to be the Husband of one Wife, 1.
Tim. iii. 2. and supposes Deacons then had Wives, Ver. 11. Nor does he count
Marriage impurity in any, but affirms, It is honorable in all, and the Bed
Undefiled, Hebr. xiii. 4. he excepts not the Clergy, so that we doubt not our
Married Clergy's Prayers who live soberly according to Gods Ordinance are more
pure and prevalent than yours, most of which live in Perjury, burning Desires
and Fornication.


Po. But your Priests have not power by their Prayers to cast out Evil Spirits,
Exorcisms, or Casting out Evil Spirits.
as ours have; which shows, that Ours, not Yours, are the true Successors of
the Apostles, to whom Christ gave power over Unclean Spirits, Mark xvi. 17.


Prot. Christ gave his Apostles power then to drink Poison, and take up
Serpents without harm, as also afterward to Speak with Tongues, Heal the Sick
by a Touch, and Raise the Dead; yet your Priests dare not pretend to any of
these Miracles, which are all ceased long since, 1 Cor. xii. 8. Only they keep
up the Pretense to Cast out Evil Spirits, because that is more easily
counterfeited than any of the rest: And if this alone would serve, it is likely
Conjurers might prove themselves the Apostles Successors, as well as your
Priests; for they can Cast out Evil Spirits better than the Romish Priests, who
as may be noted, do Cast out the Devil as often out of the same Party in diverse
places, as there is occasion to make a Proselyte, or work upon the
Superstitious. Now this must be done either by Compact with the Devil, or the
Party pretended to be Possessed, and either way it is little to their Honor.
Besides, I have known a good Physician, by Natural Means, Cure those whom these
Priests pretended were Possessed, which shows they often cast the Devil out
when he was never in.


Po. Well, The Conclusion.
I cannot but pity your Obstinacy, and pray for you, who wilfully shut your
Eyes against the plainest Arguments for Catholic Truth.


Prot. There is more Reason for me to pity and pray for you, who in all these
Points do contradict Holy Scripture, which cannot deceive us, and believe false
and feigned Traditions, invented by designing Men for Evil ends: and for my
part, I count it a wise Resolution, and no Obstinacy, to give credit to God
rather than Men.


Po. You flatter your self with Scripture taken in your own sense, but you did
own the Catholic Church was the best Interpreter of Scripture; and I assure you
the Holy Fathers, who in all Ages have delivered down to us the Sense of the
Catholic Church, agree exactly with us in all these Opinions and Practices
which you Protestants reject; and can you think all these holy Ancient Doctors
were deceived, and that a few obscure Modern Reformers are in the right?


Prot. Truly, I have but little skill in these Writings of the Fathers; but I
have heard our Clergy (who are as well read in them as any of you) declare,
That all these Fathers condemn your Opinions, as much as Holy Scripture does,
and that these Opinions and Practices were late Inventions of your Church, and
were set up in Times of Ignorance and Superstition, merely to gain Power and
Wealth by them: And though I am not able to make this out, I promise you,
whenever you please, to bring one of our Churchmen that shall prove what I say.
In the mean time, because the Scripture was before the Fathers, I am well
satisfied that mine is the oldest and the best Religion, and am resolved
therefore by Gods Grace never to forsake it; and if you loved your own Soul
above your Worldly Interest, you would embrace it also; which I heartily pray
you may, and so bid you Farewell.


Books newly Published: Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1686.
THE Law and Equity of the Gospel, or the Goodness of our Lord as a Legislator:
Delivered first from the Pulpit in two plain Sermons, and now Repeated from the
Press, with others tending to the same end; to which is added, The Grand
Inquiry to be made in these Inquisitive Times, together with the Resolution of
Paul and Silas, as also an Improvement of that Inquiry, containing in its Parts
a Resolution unto it self, and a Scriptural Prognostic of Jesus Christ's
Second Advent to Judge the World: Lastly, A Preservative against Ambition. By
Thomas Pierce, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and Dean of Sarum.

The Excellency of Monarchical Government, especially of the English Monarchy;
Wherein is Treated, The several Benefits of Kingly Government, and the
Inconvenience of Common Wealths: Also, of the several Badges of Sovereignty in
General, and Particularly according to the Constitution of the Laws of England;
likewise of the Duty of Subjects, and the Mischiefs of Faction, Sedition, and
Rebellion: In all which, the Principles and Practices of our late
Common-Wealths-Men are considered. By Nathaniel Johnson, Doctor in Physic.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles, and Christians in all
Ages; designed to Supply the Omissions, Answer the Objections, and Rectify the
Mistakes of Mr. Selden's History of Tithes, Part I. A further Vindication of
the Divine Right of Tithes, Proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and Illustrated
by the Solemn Consecration and great Convenience of them; with an Answer to the
Objections of other Authors against them, Part II. To which is added, A
Discourse of Excommunication. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Precentor of York.

-- A Church Catechism, with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the
help of the meanest Capacities, and weakest Memories, in order to the
Establishing them in the Religion of the Church of England.

A Treatise of Spousals, and Matrimonial Contracts; wherein all the Questions
relating to that Subject are ingenuously debated and resolved. By the late
Famous and Learned Mr. Henry Swinborn, Author of the Treatise of Wills and
Testaments.

Sir William Dugdales Summons to all Parliaments since the 49th Year of King
Henry the Third.

The Dean of Durham's Counsel and Directions (Divine and Moral) in Letters of
Advice to a Young Gentleman, soon after his Admission into a College in Oxford.

Archbishop Stern's Logic.

The Popes Bull concerning the Damnation, Excommunication, etc. of Queen
Elizabeth, with Observations and Animadversions thereon. By Thomas Lord Bishop
of Lincoln. There is also Printed with it, the Popes Bull for the Damnation and
Excommunication of King Henry the Eighth.

The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest Answered by an English Protestant.
Written by an Eminent Hand: Seasonable and Useful for all Protestant Families.
Price Stich'd Six pence. Newly Published.

FINIS.

