To the Honorable the COMMONS of ENGLAND in Parliament Assembled.
The Second Humble Petition of Abel Carew an Excluded Doorkeeper from this
Honorable House, with a True Account of the Cause of the present Sergeants
Acting against your Petitioner. Also a Description of the Serjeant's Power in
reference to any Place belonging to this House:
Humbly Shows, Shoreditch of his wearing the Ribbon at Oxford with this
Motto, No Slavery, No Popery. Your said Petitioner further sets forth, That as
he was the last Parliament taken into Custody for speaking some Words of an
Alteration against Popery in Seven Years time, he has sufficient cause to
believe, that the whole House was at that time acquainted of him; for it
happened within a day or two after he was discharged: When the House was up, he
went in to see what it was of the Clock by the Dial; there remained some of the
Members behind, who took notice of him; and one of them asked your Petitioner,
What he did there? and bid him be gone, Saying, That he was one that wished for
the time to wear the Ribbon again. Thus your Petitioner, through much
difficulty, by the Intercession of a Friend, obtained his Liberty from a
Prison, with paying of Fees. And Sergeant Topham being now restored to his
Place, your said Petitioner agreeing to the Authority of this House against
Popery, and expecting for the said Sergeant to do likewise, he was willing to
humble himself to the said Sergeant in any manner that your Honors should
require of him: But the said Sergeant having thwarted the Authority of the
Members, in not admitting your Petitioner to his said Place; therefore your
said Petitioner further sets forth, That the Cause of the said Sergeants acting
against your Petitioner, and of his being offended at him, in keeping him out
of his said Door-keepers Place, does arise upon some old Grudge: Ever since he
did belong to this House, he has endeavored to undermine, and to sell your
Petitioner out of his said Door-keepers Place for 20 or 30 l. And accordingly
in the late King Charles's time, he was pleased to tell your Petitioner, he was
offered so much for it; and within a a short time after he turned your
Petitioner out, and was then Restored by some of the worthy Members of the
House; but was first told by one of the Worthy Members, that the Sergeant said,
That he should ask pardon; whereas your Petitioner is Conscious of no Crime
that he had committed against him; and the said Sergeant having no objections
against him, he was then restored without asking Pardon, and without paying any
Money for it. But it may be objected, That the Sergeant is a Patent Officer, and
so he has a Power to Depute Servants under him. For Answer, He has no Patent to
act unjustly, and to twhart the Authority of any of the Members of this House
against Popery; and your Petitioner being thankful to those Worthy Members, who
have spoken to the Sergeant in his behalf; and the said Sergeant pretends to
some of them, that he shall have share of the Profits, which is nothing at all;
and that he pretends that he offered your Petitioner a Messengers Place, which
your Petitioner is not capable of; and this is only with a design to exclude
your Petitioner for ever from his said Door-keepers Place; and so to make him
his Bondslave, and to turn your Petitioner out at his pleasure: And he makes an
Objection concerning Letters, which was occasioned about Six or Seven years
ago, upon the said Sergeants receiving some Money out of the Exchequer for the
Under-Servants belonging to this House, which was never paid to any other
Sergeant before this; for the Under-Servants did formerly use to receive it
themselves, (as the Door-keepers to the House of Lords, the Usher of the Black
Rod did never concern himself with their Money that they received out of the
Exchequer) but this Sergeant has endeavored to engross that Money to himself;
and accordingly he kept back part of your Petitioners Money, and threatened to
turn him out of his Place; thereupon he sent a Letter to the said Sergeant at
Windsor for his Money, who sent him an answer by his Son, wherein he does seem
to question your Petitioners due, and yet acknowledges the Debt: But your
Petitioner having confuted him in that Letter, and so fully convinced him of
his due, that he sent another Letter by his Son of what time he would be at
London, within some time after he paid him half a Guinea in part, though it was
in a great rage and storm: But when the said Sergeant came to Town again, your
Petitioner went to demand the rest of his Money; thereupon he stormed at your
Petitioner, and said, that it was not his due, and that he would not pay it
him; and after the said Sergeant received many Letters from your Petitioner,
and would show him no Reason and Justice; so that at the last, as he was in
Town, he stormed at your Petitioner and threatened to serve a Warrant upon him:
Thereupon your said Petitioner replied, That he would save him that trouble,
and go with him before any Magistrate without a Warrant; and if it was not his
due, he would not have a Farthing of him; and so your said Petitioner went
voluntarily with him without a Warrant, before Justice Dewcy, who forthwith
ordered the said Sergeant to pay him the rest of his Money. And thus your
Petitioner recovered his due: And by the payment thereof, (as your Petitioner
is able to make manifest by Letters) the said Sergeant does acknowledge the
said Inward Door-keepers Place to be your Petitioners Right, and his due, by
the Authority and Command of any Member of this House, who is pleased to give
it him, as being above the power of the Sergeant; though the said Sergeant, by
his Arbitrary Power, has denied diverse of the Members, and does still keep your
Petitioner out of his said Place; and though the Sergeant is trusted with a
Power to depute in case of a Vacancy, yet as he is a Servant himself, it is all
in reference to the Service of this House; and so they are all Servants under
the command of all your Honors, according to the Example of other old
Servants, and of Mr. Cooper, who was Outward Doorkeeper to this House about 40
years, till he died; and so was continued in by the Authority of the Members
against any Sergeant at Arms that opposed him; and according to the Example of
a Sergeant at Arms, (within the memory of your Petitioner) who disobeyed the
Order of the House; thereupon the House turned him out, and sent for another
Sergeant; yet notwithstanding the Door-keepers continued in their Places; and
if they were his Servants, then they were dismissed too; but they were Servants
to the House; and so they were mentioned in the Resolves of the House for
Collections to pay the Under-Servants attending the Service of this House; and
by a former Resolve of the House, as in the year 1671. for them to be
recommended to his Majesty to give order for a Recompense and Satisfaction of
the said Servants attending the Service of this House. And your Petitioner does
remember, that in the late King Charles's time, when the said Sergeant
threatened to turn him out; your said Petitioner told the said Sergeant, That he
was a ^ervant to the House of Commons; thereupon the said Sergeant threatened to
break your Petitioners Head, if he told him so again, saying, That he was the
Kings Sergeant at Arms; but, by the Sergeants Favor, as he is the Kings
Sergeant at Arms, so he is the Kings Servant; and as he is the Kings Servant,
so he is constituted by the King to attend the Service of this House. But your
Petitioner has sufficient cause to believe, that the said Sergeant at Arms
would Assume a Regal Power to himself. And now your Petitioner may say, that it
is an undeniable Argument by the Sergeants denying diverse of the Worthy Members
for your Petitioner to be admitted to his said Place, who has been a Sufferer
for speaking against Popery, that the said Sergeant does look upon his Old
Grudge; that it ought to take place before Loyalty, or it ought to extirpate
Loyalty, or any part of Loyalty to his Present Majesty; yea, if it was in his
power for lucre of gain, he would take any man into custody, that acts against
Popery; for he has commanded your Petitioner to depart the Lobby, and laid hold
on him to turn him out by Violence, when he has given him no provocation; and
has told him that the Door-keepers Place is no Place for him, who does agree to
the Authority of all your Honors against Popery. And thus the said Sergeant
stands brazening and confronting the Authority of your Honors in your Loyalty
to the Kings most excellent Majesty, who is Defender of the Faith against
Popery and Arbitrary Government. And the said Sergeant may consider, that
though he frowns upon your Petitioner, yet the Times do smile upon him: But the
said Door being still kept by the same Man that was put in the last Parliament
by Sergeant Shoreditch, who turned your Petitioner out for being against
Popery. And thus all the Places belonging to this House being under the
Authority and Jurisdiction of all your Honors;

Therefore your Petitioner does further humbly pray for the Consideration of
this Honorable House, That as it was his Fathers Place before him, so he hopes
that as consistent to the Benevolence of this House in point of Charity, and
his suffering upon the account of Popery, as concurrent to the Authority of
this House against Popery or Arbitrary Government, will be Arguments to prevail
with all your Honors to reconcile the said Sergeant to him, so that he may be
restored to his said Door-keepers Place.

And your Petitioner shall Pray, etc.


