Modern Reports, OR SELECT CASES Adjudged in the COURTS OF Kings Bench,
Chancery, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, since the Restoration of HIS MAJESTY
King Charles II.

Collected by a Careful Hand.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswell, and S. Heyrick.
MDCLXXXII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THese Reports (the first except the Lord Chief Justice Vaughans Arguments that
have been yet printed of Cases adjudged since His Majesty's happy Restoration)
though they are not Published under the Name of any Eminent Person, as some
other Spurious Ones have been, to gain thereby a Reputation, which in
themselves they could not Merit; yet have been Collected by a Person of Ability
and Judgment, and Communicated to several of known Learning in the Laws, who
think them not Inferior to many Books of this Nature which are admitted for
Authority. A great and well-spread Name may be Requisite to render a Book
Authentic, and to defend it from that common Censure, of which this Age is
become so very liberal. But its own worth is that only which can make it Useful
and Instructive.

The Reader will find here several Cases (as well such as have been Resolved
upon our modern Acts of Parliament, as others relating to the Common Law) which
are primae Impressionis, and not to be found in any of the former Volumns of
the Law; and the Pith and Substance of diverse Arguments, as well as Resolutions
of the Reverend Judges, on many other weighty and difficult Points.

And indeed, though in every Case, the main thing which it behooves Us to know,
is, what the Judges take and define to be Law: yet the short and concise way of
reporting it, which is affected in some of our Books, does very scantily answer
the true and proper end of reading them; which is not only to know what is Law,
but upon what Grounds and Reasons it is adjudged so to be; otherwise the Student
is many times at a loss, and left in the dark; especially where he finds other
Resolutions which seem to have a tendency to the contrary Opinion.

In this respect, these Reports will appear to be more satisfactory and
inlightning than many others: several of the Cases (especially those of the
most important Consideration) containing in a brief and summary way what has
been offered by the Counsel Pro and Con, and the Debates of the Reverend
Judges, as well as their Vltimate Resolutions; than which nothing can more
Contribute to the Advantage of the studious Reader, and to the settling and
guidance of his judgment, not only in the Point controverted, but likewise in
other matters of Law, where the Reason is the same. Ubi eadem ratio, idem jus.

As to the truth of these Reports, though the modesty of the Gentleman who
Collected them, has prevailed above the importunity of the Bookseller, and he
has rather chosen to see his Book, than himself gain the Public Acceptance
and Applause, whereby it has lost some seeming Advantage, which the prefixing
of his Name would have undoubtedly given it; yet the Reader may rest assured,
that no little Care has been taken to prevent any Mistakes or
Mis-representations. The Judgments having been examined, and the Authorities
here cited industriously compared with the Books out of which they were taken.

A TABLE of the Names of CASES contained in this Book.
A.
ABbot and Moor. 12 Jacob Aboab. 107 Addison versus Sir John Otway. 250 Alford
and Tatnel. 170 Amie and Andrews. 166 Anonymus. 75, 81, 89, 105, 113, 163, 169,
170, 180, 185, 200, 209, 211, 213, 216, 249, 253, 258, 272 Daniel Appleford. 82
Atkinson and Rawson. 208 Austin and Lippencott. 99
B.
BAker and Bulstrode. 104 Bascawin and Herle versus Cook. 223 Bassett and
Bassett. 264 Barker and Reate. 262 Barrow and Parrott. 246 Barry and
Trebeswycke. 218 Sir Anthony Bateman's Case. 76 Bear and Bennett. 25 Beckett
and Tailor. 9 Benson and Hodson. 108 Birch and Lake. 185 Bird and Kirk. 199
Birrel and Shaw. 24 Blackburn and Graves. 102, 120 Blissett and Wincott. 13
Blythe and Hill. 221, 225 Bonnefield. 70 Boswill and Coats. 33 Bradcatt and
Tower. 89 Brooking and Jennings. 174 Brown versus 118 Brown versus London. 285
Buckly and Turner. 43 Buckly and Howard. 186 Bucknal and Swinnock 7 Butler and
Play. 27 Burgis and Burgis. 114 Burnett and Holden. 6 Burrow and Haggett. 219
C.
CAlthrop and Philippo. 222 Caterall and Marshall 70 Clerk versus Rowel and
Phillips. 10 Clerk and Heath. 11 Cockram and Welby. 245 Cole and Forth. 94
Compton and uxor versus Ireland. 194 Coppin and Hernall. 15 Cox and St.
Albanes. 81 and Crisp versus the Mayor of Berwick. 36 Crofton. 34
D.
COrporation of Darby. 6 Darbyshire and Cannon. 21 Davies and Cut. 231 Daw and
Swain. 4 Deering and Farrington. 113 Delaval versus Maschall. 274 Dodwell and
uxor versus Burford. 24 Draper and Bridewell. 121 Sir Francis Duncomb's Case.
285 Dyer and East. 9
E.
ELlis and Yarborough. 227 Edwards and Weeks. 262
F.
FArrer and Brooks. 188 Farrington and Lee. 268 Fettyplace versus 15 Fitsgerard
and Maschal. 90 Fits and al. versus Freestone. 210 Fountain and Coke. 107 Fowl
and Doble. 181 Fox and al. Executors of Pinsent versus Tremayn. 47, 72, 296
Franklyn's Case. 68 Furnis and Waterhouse. 197 Fry and Porter in Chancery. 300
G.
GAvel and Perked. 31 Gayle and Betts. 227 Glever and Hynde. 168 Goodwin and
Harlow. 2 Gostwick and Mason. 3 Grafton. 10 Green and Proud. 117
H.
HAll and Wombell. 7 Hall and Sebright. 14 Jacob Hall's Case. 76 Hall and
Booth. 236 Haley's Case. 195 Haman and Truant. 72 Haman and Howell. 184 against
the Hambourough Company. 212 Owen Hanning's Case. 21 Harwood. 77, 79 Haspurt
and Wills. 47 Hastings. 23 Healy and Ward. 32 Heskett and Lee. 48 Higden
versus Whitechurch. 224 Holloway. 15 Horn and Ivy. 18 Horn and Chandler. 271
Horton and Wilson. 167 Hoskins versus Robins. 74 Howell and King. 190 Hughes
and Underwood. 28 Humlock and Blacklow. 64
I.
JAmes and Johnson. 231 Jefferson and Dawson. 29 Jemy and Norrice. 295 Ingram
versus Tothill and Ren. 216 Jones and Tresilian. 36 Jones and Wiat. 206 Jones
and Powel. 272 Jordan and Fawcett. 50 Jordan and Martin. 63 Justice and White.
239
K.
The King versus Baker. 35 Morris. 68 Leginham. 71 Holmes. 73 Sir Francis
Clark. 195 Thornbor' and Studly. 253 The Bishop of Worc. Jervason and Hinkly.
276 Leginham. 288 Neville. 295
King versus Standish. 59 Sir John Kirle versus Osgood. 22 Knowles versus
Richardson. 55
L.
LAke versus King. 58 Lampiere and Meriday. 111 Lassells and Catterton. 67 Lee
and Edwards. 14 Doctor Lee's Case. 282 Leg and Richards. 77 Leginham and
Porphery. 77 Lepping and Kedgewin. 207 Liese and Satingstone. 189 Love versus
Wyndham and Wyndham. 50 Lucy Lutterell versus George Reynell, George
Turbervile, John Cory, and Anne Cory. 282
M.
MAddox. 22 Magdalen-Colledge Case. 163 Major and Stubbing versus Bird and
Harrison. 214 Maleverer and Redshaw. 35 Manby and Scot. 124 Martin and Delboe.
70 Medlicot and Joyner. 4 Gabriel Miles's Case. 179 Milwood and Ingram. 205
Monk versus Morris and Clayton. 93 Moor and Field. 229 Lord Mordant versus
the Earl of Peterborough. 114 Moreclack and Carleton. 73 Mors and Sluice. 85
Mosedel the Marshall of the Kings Bench. 116
N.
NAylor against Sharply and others. 198 Norman and Foster. 101 Nosworthy and
Wildeman. 42
O.
OGnel versus the Lord Arlington, Guardian of, etc. 217 Osburn and Walleeden.
272
P.
PAge and Tulse. 239 Parker and Welby. 57 Parten and Baseden. 213 Parsons and
Perns. 91 Henry Lord Peterborough versus John Lord Mordant. 94 Doctor Poordage.
22 Porter and Fry. 86 Prin and Smith. 19 Pybus and Mitford. 121, 159
R.
RAndal and Jenkins. 96 Rawlin's Case. 46 Redman and Edelfe. 4 Redman. 10
Redman and Pyne. 19 Dominus Rex versus Vaws. 24 Dominus Rex versus Turnith. 26
Rich and Morris. 36 Richards and Hodges. 43 Roberts and Mariot. 42, 289 Rogers
and Danvers. 165 Rogers and Davenant. 194 Russel and Collins. 8
S.
SAvil against the Hundred of 221 Scudamore and Crossing. 175 Searl and Long.
248 Sedgewicke and Gofton. 106 Earl of Shaftsbury's Case. 144 Slater and Carew.
187 Smith and Wheeler. 16, 38 Smith and Bowin. 25 Smith, Lluellin and al.
Commissioners of Sewers. 44 Smith's Case. 209 Smith versus Smith. 284 The
Chapter of the Collegiate-Church of Southwell versus the Bishop of Lincoln. 204
Southcote and Stowell. 226, 237 The Company of Stationers versus Seymor. 256
Stead and Perryer. 267 Strode versus the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, and Sir
George Hornet and Masters. 230
T.
Tailor and Wells. 46 Tailor and Rowse Churchwardens versus their
Predecessors. 65 Lord Tenham versus Mullins. 119 Thredneedle and Lynham. 203
Sir John Thoroughgood. 107 Tildell and Walter. 50 Tomlin and Fuller. 27 Lord
Townsend versus Hughes. 232 Troy. 5 Turner and Benny. 61 Turner and Davies. 62
V.
VAughan and Casewell 7 Vaughton versus Atwood and alios. 202 Vere and Reyner.
19
W.
WAldron versus 78 Warren and Prideaux. 104 Warren and Sayer. 191 Watkyns and
Edwards. 286 Wayman and Smith. 63 Wilbraham and Snow. 30 Williams and Lee. 42
Williamson and Hancock. 192 Wilson and Robinson. 100 Wing and Jackson. 215 Wood
and Davies. 289 Wootton and Heal. 66 Wootton and Penelope. 290 Worthy and
Liddal. 21
Y.
YArd and Ford. 69
Z.
ZOuch and Clare. 92
Errata.
PAge 40. line 2. a Conveyance with power, lege a Conveyance reserving a power,
p. 50. l. 23. to Nicholas Love the Father, if he should so long live, lege to
Nicholas Love the Father for a term of years, if the Cestuy qui vies or any of
them should so long live, p. 54. l. 22. tenant for life, dele for life, p. 63.
l. 26. pro Quer', lege pro Defendent', p. 109. l. 20. if tenant in tail grant a
Rent, lege if tenant be, rendering a Rent, p. 112. l. 9. of the month next year,
lege of the same month, p. 127. l. 20. ab inconventi lege ab inconvenienti, p.
128. l. 2. and lining thereupon lege and linen. Thereupon, etc. p. 136. l. 7.
left lege lost, l. 28. left lege lost, p. 145. l. 20, 21. repeated lege
reported, p. 170. l. 2. jointly to lege jointly and severally to, p. 190. l.
31. A's ground lege B's ground, p. 193. l. 5. a stranger, a tenant in
possession lege a stranger tenant in possession, p. 206. l. 20. Shrewsbury, the
Liberties lege Shrewsbury, and the Liberties, p. 217. l. 8. shillings given
lege shillings be given, p. 223. l. 13 Mary, it would lege Mary, for if it
were, it would, etc. p. 245. l. 12. if he had lege that he had, p. 262. l. 13.
a verbal request lege a verbal discharge, p. 271. l. 12. Heley lege Offley, p.
285. l. 24. upon the Merchants lege upon the custom of Merchants.

The Cases of Trin. Term, 29 Car. 2. in Com. B. end with page 270. and from
that page to page 299. through a mistake of the Composer, it is printed C. B.
instead of B. R. which the Reader is desired to to amend with his Pen.

REPORTS Of diverse Select Cases In the Reign of CAROLI II.
Term. Mich. 21 Car. II. 1669. in Banco Regis.
ONe Mynn an Attorney entered a Judgment, by color of a Warrant of Attorney, of
another Term then was expressed in the Warrant; The Court consulting with the
Secondary about it, he said, That if the Warrant be to appear and enter
Judgment as of this Term or any time after, the Attorney may enter Judgment at
any time during his life; but in the case in question the Warrant of Attorney
had not those words, or at any time after: Wherefore the Secondary was ordered
to consider the charge of the party grieved, in order to his reparation. Which
the Court said concluded him from bringing his Action on the Case.

The Secondary said, That in Trin. and Hill. Term they could not compel the
party in a Habeas Corpus to plead and go to Trial the same Term, but in
Michaelmas and Easter Term they could.

Mr. Solicitor moved for a new Writ of Enquiry into London, and to stay the
filing of a former, because of excessive damages given; but it was denied.

An Affidavit for the changing of a Venue made before the party was Arrested,
and allowed.

Moved in Battery for putting an Arm out of joint, that the party might be held
to special Bail; but denied. Twisd. Follow the course of the Court.

Mr. Sanders moved to quash an Order made by the Justices of Peace for putting
away an Apprentice from his Master, and ordering the Master to give him so much
Money. Keeling. The Statute of 5 Eliz. leaves this to their discretion.

An Indictment was preferred in Chester for a Perjury committed in London: For
which Keeling threatened to have the Liberties of the County Palatine seized, if
they kept not within their bounds.

Goodwin and Harlow.
ERror to reverse a Judgment in Colchester, there being no appearance by the
party, but Judgment upon three defaults recorded. Reversed.

Twisd. If there be a Judgment against three, you cannot take out Execution
against one or two.

Upon a motion for a new Trial Twisden said, That in his practice the Heir in
an Action of Debt against him upon a Bond of his Ancestor, pleaded riens per
descent; the Plaintiff knew the Defendant had levied a Fine, and at the Trial
it was produced: but because they had not a Deed to lead the uses, it was urged
that the use was to the Conusor, and his heirs, and so the heir in by descent:
whereupon there was a Verdict against him; and it being a just and due Debt,
they could never after get a new Trial.

Gostwicke and Mason.
DEbt for Rent upon a Lease for a year, and so from year to year, quamdiu
ambabus partibus placuerit; there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff for two years
rent. Sanders moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff alleges indeed
that the Defendant entered and was possessed the first year, but mentions no entry
as to the second. Twisd. The Jury have found the Rent to be due for both years,
and we will now intend that he was in possession all the time for which the
Rent is found to be due.

A Prohibition was prayed to the Ecclesiastical Court at Chester to stay
proceedings upon a Libel against one William Bayles, for teaching School
without License; but it was denied.

Redman and Edolfe.
TRespass and Ejectment by Original in this Court. Sanders moved in Arrest of
Judgment, upon a fault in the Original: for a bad Original is not helped by
Verdict. But upon Mr. Livesey's certifying that there was no Original at all,
the Plaintiff had Judgment, though in his Declaration he recited the Original.

In an Action of Assault and Battery and Wounding; the Evidence to prove a
Provocation, was, That the Plaintiff put his hand upon his Sword and said, If
it were not Assize time I would not take such Language from you: The question
was, if that were an Assault? The Court agreed that it was not: for he
declared, that he would not Assault him the Judges being in Town; and the
intention as well as the act makes an Assault. Therefore if one strike another
upon the hand or arm, or breast, in discourse, its no Assault, there being no
intention to Assault: But if one intending to Assault, strike at another and
miss him, this is an Assault: so if he hold up his hand against another and say
nothing, it is an Assault. In the principal case the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Medlicott and Joyner.
EJectione firmae. The Plaintiff at the Trial offered in Evidence a Copy of a
Deed that was burnt by the Fire; the Copy was taken by one Mr. Gardner of the
Temple, who said he did not examine it by the Original, but he writ it, and it
always lay by him as a true Copy: and the Court agreed to have it read; the
original Deed being proved to be burnt. Twisd. Feoffee upon Condition is
disseised, and a Fine levied, and five years pass; then the Condition is
broken: the Feoffor may enter, for the Disseisor held the Estate subject to the
Condition, and so did the Conizee, for he cannot be in of a better Estate then
the Conizor himself was.

Dawe and Swayne.
AN Action upon the Case was brought against one for suing the Plaintiff in
placito debiti for 600 l. and falsely and maliciously affirming to the Bailiff
of Westminster, that he did owe him 600 l. whereby the Bailiff insisted upon
extraordinary Bail, to his Damage, etc. The Defendant traverses, absque hoc
that he did falsely and maliciously affirm to the Bailiff of Westminster that he
did owe him so much. Winnington moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Action
would not lie; But the Plaintiff had Judgment. Keel. If there had been no cause
of Action, an Action upon the Case would not lie, because he has a recompense
by Law, but here was a cause of Action. If one should arrest you in an Action
of 2000 l. to the intent that you should not find Bail, and keep you from
practice all this Term, and this is found to be falsely and maliciously, shall
not you have an Action for this? this Twisden said he knew to have been
Sergeant Rolls his Opinion. Morton. Foxley's case is, That if a man be outlawed
in another County, where he is not known, an Action upon the Case will lie; so
an Action lies against the Sheriff, if reasonable Bail be offered and refused.

Twisd. If three men bring an Action, and the Defendant put in Bail at the Suit
of four, they cannot declare; but if he had put in Bail at the suit of one,
that one might declare against him.

Judgment was entered as of Trinity Term for the Queen Mother, and a Writ of
Enquity of damages was taken out returnable this Term, and she died in the
Vacation-time; Resolved, that the first was but an interlocutory Judgment, and
that the Action was abated by her death. Twisd. Some have questioned how you
shall come to make the death of the party appear between the Verdict, and the
day in Bank; and I have known it offered by Affidavit, and by suggestion upon
the Roll, and by motion.

Troy an Attorney.
AN Information of Extortion against Troy an Attorney; It was moved in arrest
of Judgment, That Attorneys are not within any of the Statutes against
Extortion, and therefore the Information concluded ill, the conclusion being
contra formam Statuti. Twisd. The Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 7. is express against
Attorneys. Keel. I think as thus advised, that Attorneys are within all the
Statutes of Extortion. It was afterward moved in arrest of Judgment, because
the Information was insufficient in the Law: for Sir Tho. Fanshawe informed,
that Mr. Troy being an Attorney of the Court of Common Pleas, did at Maidstone
cause one Collop to be impleaded for 9 s. 4 d. debt, at the suit of one Dudley
Sellinger, etc. and this was ad grave damnum of Collop, etc. but it is not
expressed in what Court he caused him to be impleaded; and that which the
Defendant is charged with is not an offense, for he says that he did cause him
to be impleaded, and received the money the same day, and perhaps he received
the money after he had caused him to be impleaded: Then it is not sufficiently
alleged that he did illicite receive so much, and Extortion ought to be
particularly alleged. Nor is there any Statute, that an Attorney shall receive
no more than his just Fees. The profession of an Attorney is at Common Law, and
allowed by the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 26. and the Statute of 3 Jac. does not
extend to this matter. Non constat in this case, if what he received was for
Fees or no: besides the suit for an offense against that Statute must be
brought by the party, not by Sir Tho. Fanshawe. Keel. If the party grieved will
not sue for the penalty of treble damages given by that Statute; yet the King
may prosecute to turn him out of the Roll. Twisd. I doubt that: nor is it
clear, whether an Information will lie at all upon that Statute or not, for the
Statute does not speak of an Information. Keel. Whenever a Statute makes a
thing criminal, an Information will lie upon the Statute, though not given by
express words. Twisd. It appears here, that this money was not received of his
Client, for he was against Collop. But he ought to show in what Court the
impleading was; for otherwise it might be before Mr. Major in his Chamber. To
which the Court agreed. So the Information was quashed.

Burnet and Holden.
THere were these two points in the case. 1. If the Defendant dye after the day
of Nisi prius, and before the day in Bank, whether the Judgment shall be said
to be given in the life of the Defendant? 2. Admit it shall, yet whether the
Executor shall have the advantage taken from him, of retaining to satisfy his
own debt. To the first it was said, that the Act of Parliament only takes away
a Writ of Error in such case, but there is no day in Bank to plead. It was
ordered to stand in the paper.

Corporation of Darby.
THe Corporation of the Town of Darby prescribe to have Common sans number in
gross. Sanders. I conceive it may be by prescription: what a man may grant,
may be prescribed for; Co. Lit. 122. is express. Keel. In a Forest the King may
grant Common for Sheep, but you cannot prescribe for it. And if you may
prescribe for Common sans number in gross, then you may drive all the Cattle
in a Fair to the Common. Sanders. But the prescription is for their own Cattle
only. Twisd. If you prescribe for common sans number appurtenant to Land, you
can put in no more Cattle then what is proportionable to your Land; for the
Land stints you in that case to a reasonable number. But if you prescribe for
common sans number in gross, what is it that sets any bounds in such case?
There was a case in Glyn's time between Masselden and Stoneby, where Masselden
prescribed for common sans number, without saying levant and couchant, and that
being after a Verdict, was held good; but if it had been upon a Demurrer, it
would have been otherwise: Livesey said he was agent for him in the case.

Bucknall and Swinnock.
INdebitat. Assumpsit for money received to the Plaintiffs use; the Defendant
pleads specially, that post assumptionem praedictam there was an agreement
between the Plaintiff and Defendant, that the Defendant should pay the money to
J. S. and he did pay it accordingly. The Plaintiff demurrs. Jones. This plea
does not only amount to the general issue, but is repugnant in it self. It was
put off to be argued.

Hall versus Wombell.
THe question was, whether an Action of Debt would lie upon a Judgment given by
the Commissioners of Excise upon an Information before them. Adjornatur.

Vaughan and Casewell.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given at the grand Sessions
in Wales, in a Writ of Quod ei deforciat. Sanders. The point in Law will be
this; whether a Tenants vouching a Vouchee out of the line, be peremptory and
final, or that a Respondeas ouster shall be awarded? Mr. Jones. In an Assise
the Tenant may vouch another named in the Writ 9 H. 5. 14. and so in the Com.
fo. 89. b. but a voucher cannot be of one not named in the Writ, because it is
festinum remedium. In Wales they never allow foreign vouchers, because they
cannot bring them in. If there be a Counterplea to a Voucher, and that be
adjudged in another Term, it is always peremptory; otherwise, if it be
determined the same Term.

An Action of Trover and Conversion was brought against husband and wife, and
the wife arrested. Twisd. The wife must be discharged upon Common bail: so it
was done in the Lady Baltinglasse's case. And where it is said in Crook, that
the Wife in such case shall be discharged, it is to be understood that she
shall be discharged upon Common bail. So Livesey said the course was.

It was said to be the course of the Court, That if an Attorney be sued time
enough to give him two Rules to plead within the Term, Judgment may be given,
otherwise not.

Russell and Collins.
AN Assumpsit was brought upon two several promises, and entire damages were
given. Moved by Mr. Sympson in arrest of Judgment, that for one of the promises
an Action will not lie: It was a general indebitatus pro opere facto; which was
urged to be too general and uncertain. But per Cur' it is well enough, as pro
mercimoniis venditis and pro servitio, without mentioning the Goods or the
Service in particular. And the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Dyer versus East.
AN Action upon the Case upon a promise for Wares that the wife took up for her
wearing Apparel; Polyxfen moved for a new Trial. Keel. The husband must pay for
the wives Apparel, unless she does elope, and he give notice not to trust her:
that is Scott and Manby's case: which was a hard Judgment, but we will not
impeach it. The Plaintiff had Judgment.

Beckett and Tailor.
DEbt upon a Bond to submit to an Award. Exception was taken to the Award,
because the concurrence of a third person was awarded, which makes it void:
They award that one of the parties shall discharge the other from his
undertaking to pay a Debt to a third person: and it was pretended that the
third person being no party to the submission, was not compellable to give a
discharge. But it was answered that he is compellable, for in case the debt be
paid him, he is compellable in equity to give a Release to him that had
undertaken to pay it. Rolls 1 part 248. and Giles and Southwards case. Mich.
1653. Judgment nisi.

Seventeen Sergeants being made the 4th of November, a day or two after
Sergeant Powis, the Junior of them all coming to the Kings Bench bar, the Lord
Chief Justice Keeling told him, that he had something to say to him, viz. That
the Rings which he and the rest of the Sergeants had given, weighed but 18 s.
apiece, whereas Fortescue in his book de laudibus legum Angliae says, That the
Rings given to the Chief Justices, and to the Chief Baron, ought to weigh 20 s.
apiece: and that he spoke this not expecting a recompense, but that it might
not be drawn into a president; and that the young Gentlemen there might take
notice of it.

Clerk versus Rowell and Phillips.
A Trial at bar in Ejectment for Lands settled by Sir Pexall Brockhurst. The
Court said, a Trial against others shall not be given in Evidence in this
cause. And Twisden said, that an Entry to deliver a Declaration in Ejectment
should not work to avoid a Fine; but that it must be an express Entry. Upon
which last matter the Plaintiff was nonsuit.

Redmans Case.
IT was moved, that one Redman an Attorney of the Court, who was going into
Ireland, might put in special Bail. Twisd. A Clerk of the Court cannot put in
bail. You have filed a Bill against him, and so waved his putting in bail.
Keel. You may remember Woolly's case; that we discharged him by reason of his
privilege, and took Common bail. Twisd. You cannot declare against him in
custodia. But though we cannot take bail, yet we may commit him, and then
deliver him out by mainpernancy. Jones. If he be in Court in propria persona,
you cannot proceed against his bail. The Court agreed that the Attorney should
not put in bail.

Grafton.
GRafton, one of the Company of Drapers, was brought by Habeas Corpus. In the
Return, the cause of his Imprisonment was alleged to be, for that being chosen
of the Livery, he refused to serve. Per Cur' they might have fined him, and
have brought an Action of Debt for the sum: but they could nor imprison him.
Keel. The Court of Aldermen may imprison a man that shall refuse to accept the
Office of Alderman, because they are a Court of Record, and they may want
Aldermen else. So he was released.

It was moved for the Plaintiff, that a person named in the simul cum being a
material Witness, might be struck out, and it was granted. Keel. said, That if
nothing was proved against him, he might be a Witness for the Defendant.

Clerk and Heath.
EJectione firmae. The Plaintiff claims by a Lease from Th. Prin, Clerk.
Objected, That Prin had not taken the Oath according to the Act for Uniformity;
whereupon he produced a Certificate of the Bishop that had only a small bit of
Wax upon it. Twisd. If it were sealed, though the Seal be broken off, yet it
may be read, as we read Recoveries after the Seal broken off; and I have seen
Administration given in Evidence after the Seal broken off, and so Wills and
Deeds. Accordingly it was read. Obj. The Church is ipso facto void by the Act
of Uniformity, if the Incumbent had no Episcopal Ordination. So they showed
that Prin was ordained by a Bishop. It was likewise proved that he had declared
his assent and consent to the Common Prayer in due time, before St.
Bartholomew's day. Then it was urged, that the Act does not confirm the
Plaintiffs Lessor in this living; for that it is not a living with Cure of
Souls; for it has a Vicarage endowed. Twisd. If it be a living without Cure,
the Act does not extend to it. Mr. Solicitor. The Presentation does not mention
Cure of Souls. (So they read a Presentation of a Rector, and another of a
Vicar, in neither of which any mention was made of Cure of Souls: but the
Vicars was residendo.) If both be presentative, the Cure shall be intended to
be in the Vicar. Keeling. Why may not both have the Cure? Sol. If the Vicar be
endowed, the Rector is discharged of Residence by Act of Parliament. Twisd.
Synodals and Procurations are duties due to the Ordinary; which Vicars, when
the Parsonages are impropriated, always pay: but I question whether they that
come into a Church by Presentation to, and Institution by the Bishop, have not
always the Cure of Souls? It is true in Donatives, where the Ministers do not
come in by the Bishops Institution, there is no Cure: but they that come in by
Institution of the Bishop, have their power delegated to them from him, and
generally have Cure of Souls. Solic. There are several Rectories without Cure.
Twisd. When came Rectories in? Morton. After the Counsel of Lateran, and Vicars
came in in the Seventeenth year of King John. Moreton. Before the Council of
Lateran, the Bishop did provide Teachers, and received the Tithes himself; but
since he has appointed others to the charge, and says, accipe curam tuam and
meam. Keeling and Twisden. It is said so by my Lord Coke, but not done.
Twisden. Wherever there is a Cure of Souls, the Church is visitable, either by
the Bishop, if it belong to him: if to a Layman, he must make Delegates: if to
the King, my Lord Keeper does it. And where a man comes in by Presentation, he
is prima facie visitable by the Bishop. Keeling. I take it, that whoever comes
in under the Bishops Institution, has the Cure. Twisden. Grendon's Case is
expressly, That the Bishop has the Cure of Souls of all the Diocese, and does
by Institution transfer it to the Parson: so that prima facie, he that is
instituted has the Cure. The Vicarage is derived out of the Parsonage; and if
the Vicar come to poverty, the Parson is bound to maintain him. Twisd. There is
an Appropriation to a Corporation; the Corporation cannot have Cure of Souls,
being a body Politic; but when they appoint a Vicar, he coming under the
Bishop by Institution, has Cure of Souls: and a Donative, when it comes to be
Presentative, has Cure of Souls. Keeling agreed. Twisd. We hold that when the
Rector comes in by Institution, the Bishop has power to visit him for his
Doctrine and his life; for he has the particular Cure, but the Bishop the
general; and that the Bishop has power to deprive him.

Abbot and Moore.
THe Plaintiff declares, That whereas one William Moore was indebted to him 210
l. and whereas the said William Moore had an Annuity out of the Defendants
Lands, That the Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff had agreed that
the Defendant should pay so much money to the Plaintiff, the Defendant did
promise to pay it. After a Verdict, it was objected in arrest of Judgment, that
here was not any consideration; and the Court was of that opinion. Then the
Plaintiff would have discontinued, but the Court would not suffer that after a
Verdict.

Sir Edward Thurland moved to quash an Order made by the Justices of the Peace
for one to serve as Constable in Homeby. Moreton. If a Leet neglect to choose a
Constable, upon complaint to the Justices of Peace, they shall by the Statute
appoint a Constable. Twisd. In this case there are Affidavits, that there never
was any Constable there. And I cannot tell whether or no the Justices of Peace
can erect a Constablewick where never any was before: if he will not be sworn,
let them indict him for not executing the Office, and let him traverse, that
there never was any such Office there. Keeling. Go and be sworn, or if the
Justices of the Peace commit you, bring your Action of False Imprisonment.
Twisd. If there be a Court Leet that has the choice of a petty Constable, the
Justices of Peace cannot choose there: And if it be in the Hundred, I doubt
whether the Justices of Peace can make more Constables then were before.
High-Constables were not ab origin, but came in with Justices of the Peace. 10
H. 4. Keel. and Morton cont. Moreton. The book of Villarum in the Exchequer
sets out all the Vills, and there cannot be a Constablewick created at this
day. In this case the Court ordered him to be sworn. Thurl. If they choose a
Parliament-mans Servant Constable, they cannot swear him. Twisd. I do not think
the privilege extends to the Tenant of a Parliament man, but to his Servant.

Blissett and Wincott.
TWo persons committed for being at a Conventicle, were brought up by Habeas
Corpus. Twisd. To meet in Conventicles in such numbers as may be affrighting to
the people, and in such numbers as the Constable cannot suppress, is a breach
of the Peace, and of a persons Recognizance for the good behavior. Note, this
was after the late Act against Conventicles expired.

Lee and Edwards.
AN Action upon the Case was brought upon two promises, 1. In consideration the
Plaintiff would bestow his labor and pains about the Defendants Daughter, and
would cure her, he did promise to pay so much for his labor and pains, and
would also pay for the Medicaments. 2. That in consideration he had cured her,
he did promise to pay, etc. Raymond moved in arrest of Judgment, that he did
not aver that he had cured her, the consideration of the first promise being
future, and both promises found, and entire damages given. Twisd. It is well
enough; for now it lies upon the whole Record, whether he has cured her or no:
if it had rested upon the first promise, it had been naught. And in the second
promise there is an averment, that he had cured her. So that now after a
Verdict it is helped, and the want of an averment is helped by a Verdict in
many cases. Judgment nisi, etc.

Twisd. If a man be in prison, and the Marshal dye, and the Prisoner escape,
there is no remedy but to take him again.

Twisd. Pleas in abatement come too late after imparlance.

Hall and Sebright.
AN Action of Trespass, wherein the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant on
the 24th of January, did enter and take possession of his house, and did keep
him out of possession to the day of the exhibiting the Bill; The Defendant
pleads, that ante praedict. tempus quo, sc. etc. the Plaintiff did license the
Defendant to enjoy the house until such a day. Saunders. The plea is naught in
substance: for a license to enjoy from such a time, to such a time, is a Lease,
and ought to be pleaded as a Lease, and not as a License: it is a certain
present Interest. Twisd. It is true 5 H. 7. fo. 1. is, That if one does license
another to enjoy his house till such a time, it is a Lease; but whether it may
not be pleaded as a License, I have known it doubted. Judgment nisi, etc.

Coppin versus Hernall.
TWisden said upon a motion in arrest of Judgment, because an Award was not
good, that the Vmpirage could not be made, till the Arbitrators time were out:
And if any such power be given to the Vmpire, its naught in its constitution,
for two persons cannot have a several Jurisdiction at one and the same time.

The Law allows the Defendant a Copy of the Panel to provide himself for his
challenges.

Fetyplace versus --
ACtion upon the Case upon a promise, in consideration that the Plaintiff would
affeerere, instead of afferre, etc. it was moved in arrest of Judgment: and Cr.
3 part. 466. was cited Bedel and Wingfield. Twisd. I remember districtionem for
destructionem, cannot be helped: so neither vaccaria instead of vicaria. So the
Court gave directions to see if it were right upon the Roll.

Holloway
THe Condition of a Bond for performance of Covenants in an Indenture, does
estop to say there is no such Indenture, but does not estop to say there are no
Covenants.

Keel. The course of the Court is, that if a man be brought in upon a Latitat
for 20 l. or 30 l. we take the bail for no more, but yet he stands bail for all
Actions at the same parties suit; otherwise if a stranger bring an Action
against him. Twisd. They cannot declare till he has put in Bail, and when we
take bail, it is but for the sum in the Latitat, perhaps 30 l. or 40 l. but
when he is once in, he may be declared against for 200 l.

Smith versus Wheeler.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in the Common Pleas
upon a special Verdict in an Ejectione firmae. The Jury found that one Simon
Main was possessed of a Rectory for a long term, and having conveyed the whole
term in part of it to certain persons absolutely, he conveyed his term in the
residue, being two parts, in this manner; sc. in trust for himself during life,
and afterward in trust for the payment of the Rent reserved upon the original
Lease, and for several of his Friends, etc. Provided, that if he should have
any issue of his body at the time of his death, then the trusts to cease, and
the Assignment to be in trust for such issue, etc. and there was another
Proviso, that if he were minded to change the uses, or otherwise to dispose of
the premises, that he should have power so to do by writing in the presence of
two or more Witnesses, or by his last Will and Testament. They further find,
that he had Issue male at the time of his death, but made no disposition
pursuant to his power: and that in his life time he had committed Treason, and
they find the Act of his Attainder. The question was, whether the rest of the
term that remained unexpired at the time of his death, were forfeited to the
King? The points made were two. 1. Whether the Deed were fraudulent? 2. Whether
the whole term were not forfeited by reason of the trust, or the power of
revocation. Pemberton argued, that the Deed was fraudulent, because he took the
profits during his life, and the Assignees knew not of the Deed of trust. The
Court has in these cases adjudged fraud upon circumstances appearing upon
Record, without any Verdict: the case that comes nearest to this is in Lane;
42. etc. The King against the Earl of Nottingham and others. 2dly, He argued,
that there was a Trust by express words; and if there be a Trust, then not only
the Trust, but the Estate, is vested in the King by the express words of the
Stat. of 33 Hen. 8. The King indeed can have no larger Estate in the Land, then
the person attainted had in the Trust; and if this Conveyance were in Trust for
Simon Main only during his life, the King can have the Land no longer; but he
conceived it was a Trust for Simon Main during the whole term. A Trust, he
said, was a right to receive the profits of the Land, and to dispose of the
Lands in Equity. Now if Simon Main had a right to receive the profits, and a
present power to dispose of the Land, he took it to be a Trust for him: and
that consequently by his attainder it was forfeited to the King. Coleman
contra: As for the matter of Fraud, first there is no Fraud found by the Jury,
and for you to judge of Fraud upon Circumstances, is against the Chancellor of
Oxfords case, 10th Rep. As for the Trust, it must be agreed, that if there be
any either Trust or Condition by construction upon these Provisoes in Simon
Main in his life, between Mich. 1646. and the time of making the Act, the
Trust will be vested in the King: but whether will it be vested in the King, as
a Trust or as an Estate? For I am informed, that it has been adjudged between
the King and Holland* Styles Reports; That if an Alien purchase Copyhold
Lands, the King shall not have the Estate, but as a Trust; and the particular
reason was, because the King shall not be Tenant to the Lord of the Manor.
Keeling. The Act of Parliament takes the Estate out of the Trustees, and puts
it in the King. Coleman. But I say here is no Trust forfeitable. By the body of
the Deed all is out of him. If a man makes a feoffment in Fee to the use of his
Will, because he has not put it out of him, there arises an Use and a Trust
for himself. But in our case, he has put the Uses out of himself: for there
are several Uses declared. But there is a further difference: if Simon Main
had declared the Use to others absolutely, and had reserved liberty to himself
to have altered it by his Will, that might have altered the case: But here the
Proviso is, That if at the time of his death he shall have a Son, etc. so that
it is reduced to him upon a Condition and Contingency. As to the power of
Revocation, he cited the Duke of Norfolks case in Englefields case; which
Twisd. said came strongly to this. Adjourned. V. infr.

An Information was exhibited against one for a Libel. Coleman. The party has
confessed the matter in Court, and therefore cannot plead not guilty. Twisd.
You may plead not guilty with a relicta verificatione.

Horn and Ivy.
TResp. for taking away a Ship. The Defendant justifies under the Patent,
whereby the Canary-Company is incorporated and granted, that none but such and
such should Trade thither, on pain of forfeiting their Ships and Goods, etc.
and says, that the Defendant did Trade thither, etc. the Plaintiff demurs.
Polynxfen. He ought to have shown the Deed whereby he was authorized by the
Company to seize the Goods: 26 H. 6. 8. 14 Ed. 4. 8. Bro. Corp. 59. though I
agree, that for ordinary Employments and Services, a Corporation may appoint a
Servant without Deed, as a Cook, a Butler, etc. Plo. Com. 91. A Corporation
cannot License a stranger to sell Trees without Deed: 12 H. 4. 17. Nor can they
make a Diuessor without Deed, nor deliver a Letter of Attorney without Deed. 9
Ed. 4. 59. Bro. Corp. 24. 34. 14 H. 7. 1. 7 H. 7. 9. Rolls 514. tit.
Corporation, Dr. Bonhams case. Again, the plea is double: for the Defendant
alleges two causes of a breach of their Charter, viz. their taking in Wines
at the Canaries, and importing them here: which is double. Then, there is a
clause that gives the forfeiture of Goods and Imprisonment, which cannot be by
Patent: 8 Rep. 125. Waggoners case. Noy 123. in the case of Monopolies. This
Patent I take also to be contrary to some Acts of Parliament, viz. 9 Ed. 3. c.
1. 2 Ed. 3. cap. 2. 2 Rich. 2. cap. 1. 11 Rich. 2. cap. 2. and these Statutes
the King cannot dispense withal by a Non obstante. Twisd. For the first point,
I think they cannot seize without Deed, no more then they can enter for a
Condition broken without Deed. Keel. We desire to be satisfied whether this be
a Monopoly or not. It was ordered to be argued.

Pryn versus Smith.
SCire Facias in this Court, upon a Recognizance by way of Bail upon a Writ of
Error in the Exchequer Chamber. The Defendant pleaded, that the Plaintiff did
after Judgment sue forth a Capias ad satisfaciend. out of this Court to the
Sheriff of Middlesex, whereupon he was taken in Execution, and suffered to
escape by the Plaintiffs own consent. Jones. We have demurred because they do
not lay a place where this Court was holden, nor where the Plaintiff gave his
consent.

Redman and Pyne.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for speaking these words of the Plaintiff,
being a Watch-maker, viz. He is a bungler, and knows not how to make a good
piece of work: but there was no colloquium laid of his Trade. Pemberton. The
Jury have supplied that, having found that he is a Watch-maker. And it is true,
that words shall be taken in mitiori sensu: but that is when they are doubtful:
Caudry's case: 1 Cro. 196. Twisden. I remember a Shoemaker brought an Action
against a man, for saying that he was a Cobbler: And though a Cobbler be a Trade
of it self, yet held that the Action lay in Glyn's time. Saunders. If he had
said that he could not make a good Watch, it would have been known what he had
meant: but the words in our case are indifferent, and perhaps had no relation
to his Trade. Ordered to stay.

Vere and Reyner.
AN Action upou the Case upon a promise to carry duas carectatas, etc.
Rotheram. Its uncertain whether carectata signifies a Horse-load, or a
Cart-load. Judgment nisi, etc.

Twisd. I have known, if a Judgment be given, and there is an agreement between
the parties not to take out Execution till next Term, and they do it before,
that the Court has set all aside.

One brought up by Habeas Corpus out of the Cinque Ports, upon an Information
for breaking Prison, where he was in upon an Execution for Debt. Barrel moved
against it. Twisd. Suppose a man be arrested in the Cinque Ports for a matter
arising there, and then another has cause to arrest him here, is there not a
way to bring him up by Habeas Corpus? Barrel. It was never done, but there has
been a Habeas Corpus thither ad faciend. and recipiend. Keel. If a man be in
Prison in the Fleet, we bring him up by Habeas Corpus, in case there be a Suit
against him here. Twisd. Where shall such a man be sued, upon a matter arising
out of the Cinque Ports? Barrel. If it be transitory, he must be sued there;
if local, elsewhere. Twisd. Then you grant, if local, that there must be a
Habeas Corpus. And so it was allowed in this case.

Two Justices of Peace made an Order, in Session-time, against one Reignolds,
as reputed Father, for the keeping of a Bastard-child: Reignolds appealed to
the same Sessions, where the Justices made an Order that one Burrell should
keep it. Jones moved to set aside this Order, though an Order of Sessions upon
an Appeal from two Justices; because he said the first Order being made in
Session time, that Sessions could not be said to be the next within the Stat.
of 18 Eliz. and because the Justices at the Sessions, did not quash the Order
made by two Justices. Keel. They ought to have done that. Twisd. They may vacat
the first Order, and refer it back to two Justices as res integra. The Order
being read, one clause of it was, that Burrell should pay 12 d. a week for
keeping the Child, till it came to be twelve years of age: which Twisden said
was ill, for it ought to be so long as it continues chargeable to the Parish:
The parties were bound over to appear at the next Assizes in Essex.

Darby-shire versus Cannon.
SYmpson moved, that the Defendant having submitted to a Rule of Court for
referring the matter, and not performing the Award, an Attachment might be
granted against him. Which was granted: but when the party comes in upon the
Attachment, he may allege, that the Award is void; and if it appear to be so,
he shall not be bound to perform it.

Owen Hannings.
IN a Trial at Bar upon a Scire facias to avoid a Patent of the Office of
Searcher, exception was taken to a Witness, that he was to be Deputy to the
party that would avoid the Patent. Twisd. If a man promise another, that if he
recover his Land, the other shall have a Lease of it, he is no good Witness: so
neither is this man. But by the Opinions of the three other Judges he was
allowed, because the Suit here is between the King and the Patentee.

Worthy and Liddall.
SAunders moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, in a Suit there, for
calling the Plaintiff Whore. Twisd. Opinions have been pro and con upon this
point. The Spiritual Court has a Jurisdiction in cases of Whoredom and
Adultery; but if Suits there were allowed for such railing words, they would
have work enough from Billingsgate. Saunders relied upon this, that they were
only words of heat. Keel. They are Judges of that. Saunders. In Mich. 11 Jac.
Rot. 664. Crier versus Glover. in Com. B. The suggestion was, that she struck
him, and he said, thou art a Whore, and I was never struck by a Whores hand
before: there a Prohibition was granted, and I conceive the reason was, because
there was a provocation; so in our case, it appears, that they were Scolding.
According 15 Jac. Rot. 325. Short versus Cole, and 15 Car. 2. between Loveland
and Goose. The Court refused to grant a Prohibition.

Maddox.
WAllop moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court for one Maddox,
Incumbent of a Donative within the Diocese of Peterborough, who was cited into
the Spiritual Court for marrying there without a License; and cited Fairechilds
case, Yel. 60. But per Keeling, Moreton and Rainesford, the Prohibition was
denied. Twisden doubted; but said, if they might punish him in the
Ecclesiastical Court pro reformatione morum, at least they could not deprive
him.

Doctor Poordage.
BArtue moved for a Writ of Privilege for him, he being a practicing Physician
in Town, and chosen Constable in a Parish. The Court said, if the Office go by
Houses, he must make a Deputy. But upon consideration the motion was refused;
and a difference made between an Attorney or Barrister at Law, and a Physician:
the former enjoy their Privilege, because of their attendance in public
Courts, and not upon the account of any private business in their Chambers: and
a Physicians Calling is a private Calling. Wherefore they would not introduce
new Presidents.

Sir John Kirle versus Osgood.
AN Action for words, viz. Sir John Kirle is a forsworn Justice, and not fit to
be a Justice of Peace, to sit upon the Bench; and so I will tell him to his
face. Moved in arrest of Judgment, because to say a man is forsworn, is not
Actionable, for it may be understood of swearing in common discourse. Jones.
They are Actionable, because applied to his Suite. Stukely's case. 4 Rep. and
Fleetwood's case in Hob. Though a man's Office is not named, yet if the words do
refer in themselves, or are applied to it, they are Actionable: so in our case.
Winnington. They are not Actionable, for they admit of a construction in
mitiori sensu: in Stukely's case that has been cited, corruption in his Office
is necessarily employed, but not in this case. Rolls 56. Keeling. He calls him
in effect a corrupt Justice; and that supplies the communication concerning his
Office: words must be construed according to common acceptance. Morton. I see
little difference between this and Sir John Isam's case. 1 Cro. 14. and Sir
William Massam's case. Rainsford accorded. He cited 1 Rolls 53. and 4 Rep.
Stukelies case. Twisden was of the same Opinion: for the words read to disgrace
him in his Office. Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Hastings Attorney of the K. B.
WInnington complained to the Court an his behalf, that he being an Attorney of
this Court, was not suffered to appear for his Clyent in the Court at Stepney.
That Court, he said, was erected by Letters Patents within these two years; and
the Attorneys of this Court, being an ancient Court, ought not to be excluded.
On the other side it was urged, that they had a certain number of Attorneys
appointed by their Charter, as there is at the Marshals Court. Keeling. This is
a new Court, and for my part I think our Attorneys cannot be excluded. Hastings
may bring his Action. If a Patent erecting a new Court, may limit a certain
number of Attorneys that shall practice there, it may as well limit a certain
number of Counsel. Coleman. They have so in the Marshalsey, and in London.
Keeling. Their Courts in London are ancient, and their Customs confirmed by
Acts of Parliament. The now Court of the Marshalsey is indeed a new erected
Court, (for the old Court of the Verge was another thing) and as for their
having a certain number of Counsel or Attorneys, the question is the same with
this before us, whether they can legally exclude others. I do not see how the
King by a new Patent can ou^^e any man of his privilege. Twisden said it was a
new point, and that he had never heard it stirred before. Afterward being moved
again, Keeling said, they should have their Judgments quickly, if they stood
upon it.

Twisd. I have known this ruled, if you say you will refer the cause to such a
man, that ex consequente the cause must stay, because that man is made Judge;
and that the staying of the cause is employed in the reference.

Dominus Rex versus Vaws.
MOved to quash a Presentment for refusing to be sworn Constable of an Hundred,
because the Presentment does not mention before whom the Sessions were held,
which was quashed accordingly; and Twisden said, the Clerk of the Peace ought
to be fined for returning such a Presentment.

Birrell and Shawe.
SCire facias against the Bail. The Defendant pleads, that before the return of
the Writ of Scire facias, there was a Capias ad satisfaciend. against the
principal, by virtue whereof he was taken, and paid the money: but alleges no
place where the payment was. Twisd. You cannot make good this fault.

Dodwell and Ux. versus Burford.
THe Plaintiffs in an Action of Battery declared, that the Defendant struck the
Horse whereon the Wife rode, so that the Horse ran away with her, whereby she
was thrown down, and another Horse ran over her, whereby she lost the use of
two of her Fingers. The Jury had given them 48 l. damages, and they moved the
Court upon view of the maihem, to increase them: whereupon the Declaration was
read; but the Court thought the damages given by the Jury sufficient.

Smith versus Bowin.
ACtion upon a promise. The Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant, in
consideration that the Plaintiff would suffer him to take away so much of the
Plaintiffs Grass, which the Defendant had cut down, promised to pay him so much
for it, and also to pay him six pounds which he owed him for a Debt. After a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, Williams moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the
Plaintiff was an Infant, and he not being bound by the agreement, that the
Defendant ought not to be bound by it neither. Keeling. If an Infant let you a
House, shall he not have an Action against you for the Rent? Twisd. I have
known an Action upon the case brought by an Infant upon a promise to pay so
much money, in consideration that he would permit the Defendant to enjoy such a
House: it was long insisted upon, that this was not a good consideration,
because not reciprocal; for the Infant might avoid his promise, if an Action
were grounded upon it against him: but it was adjudged to be a good
consideration, and that the Action was maintainable. And in the principal case
the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, Nisi, etc.

Bear versus Bennett.
TWisden. When a man is arrested, and has lain in Prison three Terms, and is
discharged upon Common bail, whether shall the Plaintiff ever hold the
Defendant to special Bail afterward for the same cause, if he begins anew?
Keel. If he may, then may a man be kept in Prison for ever at that rate. At
last it was agreed, that if he would pay the Defendant his Costs for lying so
long in prison, he should have special Bail.

Mr. Masters moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court to stay a Suit
there against a man, for having married his Wives Sisters Daughter, alleging
the Marriage to be out of the Levitical degrees. Cur. Take a Prohibition and
demur to it, for it is a case of moment.

Dominus Rex versus Turnith.
MOved to quash an Indictment upon 5 Eliz. cap. 2. for exercising a Trade in
Chesthunt in Hertfordshire, not having been an Apprentice to it for seven
years: because the Statute says, they shall proceed at the Quarter Sessions,
and the word Quarter is not in the Indictment. Twisden. That word ought to be
in. And I believe the using of a Trade in a Country Village, as this is, is not
within the Statute. Morton accorded. Rainesford. It will be very prejudicial to
Corporations not to extend the Statute to Villages. Twisden. I have heard all
the Judges say, that they will never extend that Statute further then they
needs must. Obj. further, That there wanted these words, sc. Ad tunc and ibidem
onerati and jurati, for which all the three Judges, Keeling being absent,
conceived it ought to be quashed.

A cause was removed out of London by Habeas Corpus, wherein the Plaintiff had
declared against the Defendant as a feme sole Merchant; and Bartue moved for a
Procedendo, because (he said) they could not declare against her here as a feme
sole, for that she had a Husband. Jones contra. The Husband may then be joined
with her, for he is not beyond Sea. Twisd. I think a Procedendo must be granted
for the cause alleged. It was resolved in Langlin and Brewin's case, in Cro.
(though not reported by him) that if the Wife use the same Trade that her
Husband does, she is not within the Custom. And they are to determine the
matter there, whether this case be within their Custom: perhaps a Victualler
(as this Trade is) is not such a Trade as their Custom will warrant: and
whether it will warrant it or not, is in their Judgment. A Procedendo was
granted.

Tomlin versus Fuller.
A Special Action on the Case was brought for keeping a passage stopped up, so
that the Plaintiff could not come to cleanse his Gutter. After Verdict for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that there ought to have been a
request for the opening of it. Answ. Its true, where the Nuisance is not by the
party himself, there must be notice before the Action brought: but in this
case, the wrong began in the Defendants own time. Twisden. I know this has
been ruled: where a man made a Lease of a House with free liberty of ingress,
etc. through part of the Lessors House, the Lessor notwithstanding might shut
up his doors, and was not bound to leave them open for his coming in at one or
two of the Clock at night, but he must keep good hours. And must the Defendant
in this case keep his Gate always open expecting him? wherefore it seems he
ought to have laid a request. Cur. Its aided by the Verdict. Twisden. It is not
good at the Common Law; and the Defendant might well have demurred for that
cause. Judgment pro Querente.

Butler and Play.
UPon a motion for a new Trial in a cause, where the matter was upon protesting
a Bill of Exchange; Serj-Maynard said, the protest must be on the day that the
money becomes due. Twisden. It has been ruled, That if a Bill be denied to be
paid, it must be protested in a reasonable time, and that's within a Fortnight:
but the Debt is not lost by not doing it on the day. A new Trial was denied.

Hughes and Underwood.
KEeling. The very Sealing of the Writ of Error is a Supersedeas to the
Execution. Twisd. There was once a Writ of Error to remove the Record of a
Judgment between such and such: but some of the parties names were left out:
and by my Brother Wyld's advice, that Writ not removing the Record, they took
out Execution. But the Court was of Opinion, that, though the Record was not
removed thereby (of which yet, they said, he was not Judge, whether it was, or
not) yet, that it so bound up the cause, that they could not take out
Execution. It is indeed good cause to quash the Writ of Error, when it comes
up; but Execution cannot be taken out.

Term. Hill. 21 and 22 Car. II. 1669. in B. R.
Jefferson and Dawson.
IN a Scire facias upon a Recognisance in Chancery entered into by one
Garraway, There was a demurrer to part, and issue upon part. And the question
was, whether this Court could give Judgment upon the demurrer? Jones. The
Judgment upon the demurrer must be given in Chancery. The Court of Chancery
cannot try an Issue, and therefore it is sent hither to be tried: but with the
demurrer this Court has nothing to do. Indeed the books differ in case of an
Issue sent hither out of Chancery, whether the Judgment shall be here or there:
Keilway says, it ought to be given here. My Lord Coke in his 4 Inst. says, it
must be given in Chancery. But none ever made it a question, whether Judgment
upon a demurrer were to be given here or there? V. Co. Jurisdiction of Courts,
fol. 80. Saunders contra. When there is a demurrer upon part, and Issue upon
part, the Record being here, this Court ought to give Judgment; because there
can be but one Execution. Keeling. If the Record come hither entirely, we
cannot send it back again: I cannot find one Authority that the Record shall be
removed from hence. He cited Keilway 941. 21 H. 7. Co. 2. 12. Co. Entries, 678.
24 Ed. 3. fol. 65. there it is held, that Judgment shall be given here upon a
demurrer. Now if it must not be given here, there must be two Executions for
the same thing, or else they must loose half, for they can have but one Elegit.
At another day the Judges gave their Opinions severally, that Judgment ought to
be given in this Court upon the whole Record: for that it is an entire Record,
and the Execution one; and if Judgment were to be given there upon the
demurrer, there must be two Executions. And because the Record shall not be
remanded. Twisden said, the Record it self was here: and that it had been so
adjudged in King and Holland's case, and in Dawkes and Batter's case: though my
Lord Chief Baron, being then at the Bar, urged strongly, that it was but the
tenor of the Record that was sent hither. And it is a Maxim in Law, that if a
Record be here once, it never goes out again; for that here it is coram ipso
Rege: so that if we do not give Judgment here, there will be a failer of
Justice, because we cannot send the Record back. The Jury that tries the Issue
must assess the damages upon the demurrer. The Record must not be split in this
case. Accordingly Judgment was given here.

Willbraham and Snow.
TRover and Conversion. Upon Issue Not-guilty, the Jury find a special Verdict,
viz. that one Talbot recovered in an Action of Debt against one Wimb, and had a
Fierr facias directed to the Sheriff of Chester, whereupon he took the Goods
into his possession, and that being in his possession, the Defendant took them
away, and converted them, etc. and the sole point was, whether the possession
which the Sheriff has of Goods by him levied upon an Execution, is sufficient
to enable him to bring an Action of Trover? Winnington. I conceive the Action
does not lie. An Action of Trover and Conversion is an Action in the right, and
two things are to be proved in it, viz. a Property in the Plaintiff, and a
Conversion in the Defendant. I confess that in some cases, though the Plaintiff
have not the absolute property of the Goods, yet as to the Defendants being a
wrong-doer, he may have a sufficient property to maintain the Action against
him. But I hold, that in this case the property is not at all altered by the
seizure of the Goods upon a Fieri facias, (for that he cited Dyer, 98, 99. and
Yelvert. 44.) This case is something like that of Commissioners of Bankrupts:
they have power to sell, and grant, and assign: but they cannot bring an
Action: their Assignees must bring all Actions. It is true, a Sheriff in this
case may bring an Action of Trespass, because he has possession: but Trover is
grounded upon the right, and there must be a Property in the Plaintiff to
support that: whereas the Sheriff takes the Goods by virtue of a nude
Authority: As when a man devises, that his Executors shall sell his Land, they
have but a nude Authority. Cur. The Sheriff may well have an Action of Trover
in this case. As for the case in Yelvert. 44. there the Sheriff seized upon a
Fieri facias: then his Office determined: then he sold the Goods, and the
Defendant brought Trover. And it was holden, that the Property was in the
Defendant, by reason of the determining of the Sheriffs Office: and because a
new Fieri facias must be taken out, for that a venditioni exponas cannot issue
to the new Sheriff. They compared this case to that of a Carryer; who is
accountable for the Goods that he receives, and may have Trover or Trespass at
his Election. Twisden said, the Commissioners of Bankrupts might have an Action
of Trover, if they did actually seize any Goods of the Bankrupts, as they might
by Law. Rainsford said, let the Property, after the seizure of Goods upon an
Execution, remain in the Defendant, or be transferred to the Plaintiff, since
the Sheriff is answerable for them, and comes to the possession of them by the
Law, it is reasonable that he should have as ample remedy to recover damages
for the taking of them from him, as a Carryer has, that comes to the possession
of Goods by the delivery of the party. Morton said, if Goods are taken into the
custody of a Sheriff, and the Defendant afterward become Bankrupt, the Statute
of Bankrupts shall not reach them: which proves the Property not to be in the
Defendant. Twisd. I know it has been urged several times at the Assizes, that
a Sheriff ought to have Trespass, and not Trover, and Counsel have pressed hard
for a special Verdict. Morton, My Lord Chief Justice Brampston said, he would
never deny a special Verdict while he lived, if Counsel did desire it.

Gavell and Perked.
ACtion for words, viz. You are a Pimp and a Bawd, and fetch young Gentlewomen
to young Gentlemen. Upon Issue Not-guilty, there was a special Verdict found.
Jones. The Declaration says further, whereby her Husband did conceive an evil
Opinion of her, and refused to cohabit with her. But the Jury not having found
any such special damage, the question is, whether the words in themselves are
Actionable, without any relation had to the damage alleged. I confess, that to
call one Bawd is not Actionable: for that is a term of reproach used in
Scolding, and does not imply any act, whereof the Temporal Courts take notice:
for one may be said to be a Bawd to her self. But where one is said to be a
Bawd in such actions as these, it is actionable: 27 H. 8. 14. If one say, that
another holds Bawdry, it is Actionable: 1 Cro. 329. Thou keep a Whore in thy
House to pull out my Throat: these words have been adjudged to be Actionable:
for that they express an act done; and so are special, and not general railing
words. In Dimock's case 1 Cro. 393. Two Justices were of Opinion, that the word
Pimp was Actionable of it self. But I do not rely upon that, or the word Bawd;
but taking the words all together, they explain one another: the latter words
show the meaning of the former; viz. that her Pimping and Bawdry consisted in
bringing young men and women together, and what she brought them together for,
is sufficiently expressed in the words Pimp and Bawd; viz. that she brought
them together to be naught. And that is such a Slander, as if it be true, she
may be indicted for it, and is punishable at the Common Law. The Court was of
the same Opinion: and gave Judgment for the Plaintiff. Nisi, etc.

Healy and Ward.
ERror of a Judgment in Hull. Weston. The Action is brought upon a promise, cum
inde requisitus foret: and does not say, cum inde requisitus foret infra
Jurisdictionem. Twisd. Though the agreement be general, cum inde requisitus
foret, yet if he does request within the Jurisdiction, it is good enough; and
so it has been ruled: and this Error was disallowed.

Boswill and Coats.
TWo several Legacies are given by Will to Alice Coats and John Coats; the
Executors deposit these Legacies in a third persons hand for them: and take a
Bond of that third person, conditioned, That if the Obligor at the request of
(...) shall bring in Alice and John Coats, when they shall come to their Ages
of Twenty one years, to give such a Release to the Executors of Francis Gibbs
as they shall require, then, etc. one of the Legatees comes of age, and during
the minority of the other, the Bond is put in Suit; and this whole matter is
disclosed in the Pleading. And the question was, whether the Defendant was
obliged to bring him in, to give a Release, that was of Age before the Action
brought, or might stay till both were of Age, before he procured a Release from
either? The Court was of Opinion, that it must be taken respectively, and
because it appears, that the Legacies were several, that several Releases ought
to be given, upon the reason of Justice Wyndham's case, 5th Report. And Twisden
said, if there were no more in it, then this, sc. when they shall come to their
Ages of, etc. it were enough to have the Condition understood respectively: for
they cannot come to their Ages at one and the same time. And Judgment was given
accordingly.

Twisden. If an Executor plead several Judgments, you may reply to every one of
them, obtent. per fraudem; or you may plead separalia Judicia, etc. obtent. per
fraudem; but in pleading separalia Judicia obtent. per fraudem, if one be found
to be a true debt, you are gone.

Keeling and Twisden. Notwithstanding the Stat. of 23 H. 6. which obliges the
Sheriff to take Bail, yet he can make no other Return of a Capias, then either
cepi corpus, or non est inventus: for at the Common Law he could return nothing
else, and the Statute, though it compels him to take Bail, does not alter the
Return: and so in a case between Franklin and Andrews, it has been adjudged
here.

Crofton.
OFfley moved for a Certiorari to the Justices of Peace for Middlesex, to
remove an Indictment against one Crofton upon the late Statute made against
Nonconformist Ministers, coming within five miles of a Corporation: the
Indictment was traversed. He urged, that by the Statute, no Indictment will lie
for such Offense: For where an Act of Parliament enacts, that the Penalty shall
be recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information, (as the Statute upon which this
Indictment is grounded, does) there an Indictment will not lie: 2 Cro. 643.
Twisd. If the Statute appoint that the penalty shall be recovered by Bill,
Plaint, etc. and not otherwise, there (I confess) an Indictment will not lie:
but without negative words I conceive it will, though the Statute be
Introductive of a new Law, and create an Offense, which was none at the Common
Law. For whenever a thing is prohibited by a Statute, if it be a public
concern, an Indictment lies upon it: and the giving other remedies, as by Bill,
Plaint, etc. in affirmative words, shall not take away the general way of
proceeding which the Law appoints for all Offenses. Keeling differed in
Opinion, and thought, that where a Statute created a new Offense, and appointed
other remedies, there could be no proceeding by way of Indictment. Afterward
Offley moved it again, and cited 2 Cro. 643. 3 Cro. 544. Mag. Chart. 201. and
228. Upon the second motion. Keeling came over to Twisden's Opinion. But it was
objected, That upon an Indictment the Poor of the Parish would lose their part
of the penalty: to which Twisden said, that he knew it to have been adjudged
otherwise at Serjeants-Inn, and that where a Statute appoints the Penalty to be
divided into three parts, one to the Informer, another to the King, and the
third to the Poor; that in such case, where there is no Informer, as upon an
Indictment, there the King shall have two parts, and the Poor a third.

The King versus Baker.
AN Indictment in Hull for saying these words, viz. That whenever a Burgess of
Hull comes to put on his Gown, Satan enters into him. Levings moved, that
these words would not bear an Indictment. Keeling. The words are a Scandal to
Government. Levings. The Indictment concludes, in malum exemplum inhabitantium,
whereas it should be, quamplurimorum subditorum Domini Regis in tali casu
delinquentium. And for this adjudged naught.

Twisden. If the Defendant in an Action of Debt for Rent plead nil debet, he
may give in Evidence a suspension of the Rent.

A Parson Libels in the Spiritual Court against several of his Parishioners for
Tythe-Turfe. They pray a Prohibition. Keeling. Turfe, Gravel and Chalk, are
part of the Freehold, and not Tythable. They granted one Prohibition to all the
Libels, but ordered the Plaintiffs to declare severally.

Maleverer versus Redshaw.
DEbt upon a Bond of 40 l. the Condition was, for appearing at a certain day,
and concluded, if the party appeared, then the Condition to be void. The
Defendant pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. Coleman. The Bond is void by the
express words of the Statute, being taken in other form then the Statute
prescribes. Keeling. If the Condition of a Bond be, That if the Obligor pay so
much money, then the Condition to be void, in that case the Bond is absolute.
Twisden. I have heard my Lord Hobart say upon this occasion, that because the
Statute would make sure work, and not leave it to Exposition what Bonds should
be taken, therefore it was added, that Bonds taken in any other form should be
void. For, said he, the Statute is like a Tyrant, where he comes, he makes all
void: but the Common Law is like a Nursing Father, makes void only that part
where the fault is, and preserves the rest. Keeling. If the Condition had been,
that the party should appear, and had gone no further, it would then have been
well enough. Twisd. Then why may not that which follows be rejected, as idle,
and surplusage? Cur. Advisare vult.

Jones versus Tresilian.
AN Action of Trespass of Assault and Battery. Defendant pleads, de son assault
demesne. The Plaintiff replies, That the Defendant would have forced his Horse
from him, whereby he did molliter insultum facere upon the Defendant, in
defense of his possession. To this the Defendant demurred. Morton. Molliter
insultum facere is a contradiction. Suppose you had said, that molliter you
struck him down. Twisden. You cannot justify the beating of a man in defense
of your possession, but you may say that you did molliter manus imponere, etc.
Keeling. You ought to have replied; that you did molliter manus imponere, quae
est eadem transgressio. Cur. Quer' nil capiat per billam, unless better cause
be shown this Term.

Rich and Morris.
IN an Action of Debt for not performing an Award. The Plaintiff declares, that
inter alia Arbitratum fuit, etc. Twisd. That is naught.

-- and Crisp versus the Mayor of Berwick.
AN Action of Covenant is brought against the Mayor, Burgesses and Corporation
of Berwick, upon an Indenture of Demise; wherein the Plaintiffs declare, that
the Defendants did demise to them a House in Berwick, with a Covenant, That the
Plaintiffs should enjoy the same without interruption by them, or any other
person or persons whatsoever: and allege, that a Stranger claiming a Title,
did make an Entry upon them, and kept them out of possession. To this the
Defendants plead a local Plea: to wit, that the said Stranger did not enter
upon the Plaintiffs, etc. upon which Issue is joined. Then do the Plaintiffs
make a suggestion, and pray a Venire facias into the next County. Upon which
there is a Trial. Jones conceived this to be a mis-trial, and that the Venire
ought to have been de vicineto of the Castle of York, where the Covenant is
alleged to have been made: First, this fault is not aided by any of the
Statutes of Jeoffayles: not by the last and greatest of all. That aids where
the Venire facias is awarded from another place then it ought to be, but not
when awarded from another County; which is my Exception. That at the Common Law
this Venire facias is not well awarded, I rely upon Dowdale's case 6 Rep. if
an Action be brought upon a matter done out of the Kingdom, the Trial shall be
where the Action is laid. In our case the Action is grounded upon an Indenture,
supposed to be made within the County of York: but Issue is joined upon a
matter done out of the Kingdom; for so Berwick is. This Issue, I conceive,
ought to be tried where the Action is laid. It is true in the case of Wales,
the Law is otherwise: for I find, that Wales is parcel of the Realm of England,
though the Kings Writs do not run there. But Berwick is part of the Realm of
Scotland, and was conquered by King Edw. 4. and Acts of Parliament name
Berwick. When Calice was in possession of the Kings of England, and a matter
arising within Calice came in Issue, was ever any Venire facias awarded to
Dover? Twisd. There are two Presidents of such Trials: one in 12 Eliz. Rot.
630. and in 2 Rolls 97. I have asked my Brother Withrington, who was a knowing
man, how it came to pass that Berwick was put into Acts of Parliament? he said,
he knew no other reason then that the Recorder of Berwick was at first in
Parliament, and desired it, and therefore it has continued ever since. Mr.
Weston said, that 3 Cro. 465. was an Authority. In this case it happened, that
during the Cur. advisare vult, one of the Plaintiffs dyed: and the question
was, what should be done? Twisd. There is a case in Latch, wherein this
difference is taken, viz. If there be no Continuance entered, you may enter the
Judgment as at the day in Bank: but if Continuances are entered, then you cannot
go back, but must enter the Judgment to the time of the Continuances. It was
put off for Counsel to be heard in it.

Smith and Wheeler sup. 16.
IN this case Sergeant Maynard was about to argue, that the residue of the term
was not forfeited to the King. Keel. Brother Maynard, you would do well to be
advised, whether or no you, being of the Kings Counsel, ought to argue in this
case against the King? Maynard answered, that the Kings Counsel would have but
little to do, if they should be excluded in such cases: and that Sergeant Crew
argued Haviland's case, in which there was the like question. Twisd. In Stone
and Newman's case, I know the Kings Counsel did argue against Estates coming to
the Crown: but if my Lord thinks it not proper, my Brother Maynard may give his
argument to some Gentleman at the Bar to deliver for him. Afterward Term.
Pasch. 22 Car. 2. 1670. the case came to be argued again. Jones argued for the
Plaintiff in the Writ of Error: 1. Whether this Settlement be fraudulent or no?
that Fraud is not to be presumed, he cited the Chancellor of Oxford's case,
10th Rep. and 1 Cro. 549, 550. But for the second point, he held that here is a
Trust forfeitable to the King. He quoted Sir John Duncomb's case: 2 Cro. That
the Trust in this case is forfeited, he proved from the nature of a Trust,
which is an equitable Interest, or a right of perception of the profits of an
Estate: the cestuy que Trust, has jus habendi and jus disponendi. And though
he that has a Trust, has in Law neither jus in re, nor jus ad rem, yet in
Equity he has both: In Equity whatever I have a right to dispose of, I have a
right to take the profits of. For if a man makes a Conveyance to the use of one
and his heirs, in Trust that he shall convey over, though it is not expressed
that he shall take the profits, yet he shall take them. Now in the second
Proviso there is a double expression, one that amounts to a Revocation, the
other amounting to a disposition or limitation. Now he that has a power of
disposition, has a right that may be forfeited. And therefore the Duke of
Norfolk's case comes not to this, for we are not in the power of Revocation: I
decline that, but we are in a power of disposition. Now this is good by way of
Trust: in Law indeed such a Proviso is naught, but in a Trust the intention of
the parties carries it. I observe in forfeitures at the Common Law, where a man
has only jus disponendi, though he has no Estate, yet he may forfeit it: Plo.
Com. 260. A man is possessed of a term in the right of his wife, though he has
no Estate himself, yet he may forfeit it: and the reason is, because he has
jus disponendi. If a man might by such a disposition as this protect his Estate
from being forfeited, little Land would come to the Crown upon Attainders.
There are two badges of Ownership: the one is a perception of the profits, the
other a power of disposing: both which are in our case: and a favorable
construction ought not to be put upon a Deed for encouragement of Traitors.
Winnington contra. As for the first point, the Fraud ought to be found: and
this Lease was made long before the Attainder, or the Treason committed. For
the second point, the question will be, what our Law calls a Trust? Then I
shall examine whether there was such a thing in Mayn at the time of his
decease? A Trust I find to be a confidence reposed in the person, that another
shall take the profits, and that the Trustee shall Convey according to his
directions: this I gather from these books, viz. Plowd. 352. Delamere's case. 1
Rep. 121, 122. Co. Lit. 272. Now if these two qualities, or either, shall fall
in this case, then Simon Mayn had no Trust to forfeit: For that, the case will
depend upon the true-stating the words of the Deed. For the first Proviso, it
does not cohere with any of these qualities: for by virtue of that Proviso he
could not be said to have any Right: he has no jus disponendi, but upon
Contingencies. If he have no Children, he has no such power; nay, if he have
Children, they must be living at his death. Further, by these Provisoes, if the
Contingencies do happen, he has but a power to declare the Uses; he has no
Interest in him at all: Litt. Sect. 463. It is one thing to have a power or
possibility of limiting an Interest, another to have an Interest vested: 7 Rep.
11. and Moor's Reports 366. about the delivery of a Ring; where they hold, that
if it had been to have been done with his own hand, it had not been forfeited.
The case of Sir Edward Clear is different from ours: for if a man make a
feoffment to the use of his last Will, or to the use of such persons as shall
be appointed by his last Will; in this case he remains a perfect owner of the
Land. But if a man makes a Conveyance with power to make Leases, or to make an
Estate to pay Debts, he has here no Interest, but a naked power. The Duke of
Norfolk's case is full in the point: A Conveyance to the use of himself for
life, the Remainder to his Son in Tail, with power to revoke under Hand and
Seal: adjudged not forfeited: and yet he had a power to declare his mind, as in
our case. Pagett's case, Moor 193, 194. Keeling. If this way be taken, a man
may commit Treason pretty cheaply. Twisden. Whoever has a power of Revocation,
has a power of Limitation. The reason is, because else the feoffees would be
seized to their own Use. Sir William Shelly's case in Latch. Twisden. There is
no difference betwixt the Duke of Norfolk's case and this; only here it is
under his hand writing, and there under his proper hand writing.

Afterward Term. Pasch. 23 Car. 2. 1671. the Court delivered their Opinions
(Hales being then Chief Justice.) Morton. I conceive the Judgment in the
Common Pleas is well given: As for the first point, whether this Conveyance
made by Sir Simon Mayn be fraudulent or not, the Counsel themselves have
declined it; and therefore I shall say nothing to it: For the second, I
conceive no larger Interest is forfeited then during the Life of the Father. If
it be objected, that the Father had by this Proviso jus disponendi; I answer,
it is true, he had a power, if he had been minded so to do, but it was not his
mind and Will: Now animus hominis est ipse homo; but he must not only be minded
so to do, but he must declare his pleasure. Hobart says, if a man will create
a power to himself, and impose a Condition or Qualification for the Execution
of it, it must be observed. Now here is a personal and individual power, seated
in the heart of a man. And it seems to me a stronger case then that of the Duke
of Norfolk, put in Englefield's case, where yet the Condition was not given to
the King by the Statute of Hen. 8. There was a later case adjudged in Latch,
between Warner and Hynde: a case that walked through all the Courts in
Westminster Hall: there by reason of the ipso declarante, it could not be
forfeited. Rainsford. I hold it is not forfeited. My reason is, because the
Proviso is at an end and determined; for when he dyed and made no Will, there is
an end of the Proviso. The altering of the old Trust is to be done by Sir Simon
Mayn, and it is inseparable from his person: nothing can be more inseparable
then a man's Will. Moor 193. Twisd. I am of the same Opinion. Hales was of the
same Opinion: that nothing was forfeited but during Sir Simon's life. The
Proviso, he said, did not create a Trust, but potestatem disponendi, which is
not a Trust. He said he did not understand the difference between the Duke of
Norfolk's case and this. Accordingly the Judgment was affirmed.

In a cause wherein one Aston was Attorney, Keeling said, That a man may
discontinue his Action here before an Action brought in the Common Pleas: But
if he do begin there, and then they plead another Action depending here, and
then they discontinue, I take it the Attorney ought to be committed for this
practice. Twisden. When I was at the Bar, Error was brought, and Infancy
assigned, when the Man was thirty years old: and the Attorney was threatened to
be turned out of the Roll.

Sergeant Newdigate moved for a Certiorari to remove an Indictment hither from
Bedford, against several Frenchmen for Robbery. Keeling. Will it remove the
Recognisances there to appear? Twisden. I never knew such a motion made by any
but the King's Attorney or Solicitor. Rainsford. There is no Indictment yet
before a Judge of Assise. Keeling. You may have a Certiorari; but it must not
be delivered till the Indictment be found; and then the Judge has the
Prosecutors there, and may bind them over hither, and so the Trial may be here.

Keel. A Jury was never ordered to a view before their appearance, unless in an
Assise. Twisd. Neither shall you have it here but by consent.

Nosworthy versus Wyldeman.
THe Plaintiff declares in an Indeb. Assumpsit, that the Defendant was endebted
to him in 50 l. for so much money received of the Plaintiff by one Thomas
Buckner, by the appointment and to the use of the Defendant. After a Verdict
for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff could
not have an Action for money received by the Defendant to the use of the
Defendant. But because it might be money lent, which the Defendant received to
his own use, though he was to make good the value to the Plaintiff, the Court
will presume after a Verdict, that it appeared so to the Jury at the Trial. For
where a Declaration will bear two constructions, and one will make it good, and
the other bad, the Court after a Verdict will take it in the better sense. And
accordingly the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Willams versus Lee.
AN Action of Account. It was prayed that the Court would give further day for
giving the Account; the matter being referred to Auditors. Twisden. The
Auditors themselves must give further day. Keeling. The Auditors are Judges
whether there be a voluntary delay or not. If they find the parties remiss and
negligent, they must certify to the Court, that they will not account.

Roberts and Mariott.
MOved to discontinue an Action of Debt upon a Bond. Keeling. We will not
favor Conditions. Ruled, that the other side should show cause why they should
not discontinue.

Buckly versus Turner.
ACtion upon the case upon a Promise. The case was, that Edward Turner Brother
to the Defendant, was endebted to the Plaintiff for a Quarters. Rent, and the
Defendant, in consideration that the Plaintiff mitteret prosequi praedictum
Edwardum Turner, (so the words are in the Declaration) promised to pay the
money. After a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that here is not any consideration: for there is no loss to the Plaintiff in
sending to prosecute, etc. nor any benefit, but a disadvantage to the party
that owed the money: besides, there is an uncertainty whither, or to whom he
should send. Twisd. Mittere prosequi is well enough: for the Plaintiff must be
at charge in it. Keeling. Certainly it ought to have been omitteret; and if it
be so in the Office-book, we will mend it. Twisden. This being after a Verdict,
if you mend it, they must have a new Trial; for then it becomes another
promise. Jones moved for Judgment, and said, he found the word mitto did
signify to send, forbear, cease or let alone; as mitte me quaeso: I pray let
me alone, in Terence. And in the Latin and English Dictionary it has the
sense of forbearing. Keeling. I think the consideration not good, unless the
word mitto will admit of that sense. If it have a propriety of sense to
signify forbear, in reference to things as well as persons, it will be well.
Whereupon the Dictionary being brought, it was found to bear that sense. And
Twisden said, if a word will bear diverse senses, the best ought to be taken
after a Verdict. Court. Let the Plaintiff take his Judgment.

Richards and Hodges.
DEbt upon a Bond. The Condition was to save a Parish harmless from the charge
of a Bastard-child. The Defendant pleaded Non damnificatus. The Plaintiff
replies, that the Parish laid out three shillings for keeping the Child. The
Defendant rejoyns, that he tendered the money; and the Plaintiff paid it de
injuria sua propria. Whereupon it was demurred: the question being, whether
this re-joynder were a departure or no from the Bar? Saunders. It is a good
Rejoinder: for in our Bar we say, that the Parish is not damnified: that is,
not damnified within the intent of the Condition. If I am to save a man
harmless, and he will voluntarily run himself into trouble, the Condition of my
Bond is not broken. And so our Rejoinder is pursuant to our Bar, and shows that
there is no such damnification as can charge us. Twisden. The Rejoinder is a
departure; as in an Action of Covenant for payment of Rent, if the Defendant
pleads performance; and the Plaintiff reply, that the Rent is unpaid; for the
Defendant to rejoyn, that it was never demanded, is a departure. You should
have pleaded thus, viz. that non fuit damnificat. till such a time: and that
then you offered to take care of the Child, and tendered, etc. Judgment for the
Plaintiff, Nisi, etc.

Smith, Lluellyn, and al. Commission. of Sewers.
THey were brought into Court by Attachment, because they proceeded to Fine a
person after a Certiorari delivered. Twisd. Sir Anthony Mildmay was a
Commissioner of Sewers, and for not obeying a Certiorari, was Indicted of a
Praemunire, and was fain to get the Kings pardon. And I have known, that upon
an unmannerly receipt of a Prohibition, they have been bound to the good
Behavior. Keeling. When there are Informations exhibited against you, and you
are fined a 1000 l. a man, which is less then it was in King Edward the Third's
time, (for then a 1000 l. was a great deal more then it is now) you will find
what it is to disobey the Kings Writ.

Afterward they appeared again, and Coleman said, the first Writ was only to
remove Presentiments; the second to remove Orders; and we have made two Returns,
the one of Presentiments, the other of Orders: A general Writ might have had a
general Return. Keeling. Before you file the Return, let a clause of the
Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 9. be read; which being done, he said, that by the
Statute of 23 Henr. 8. no Orders of the Commissioners of Sewers are binding
without the Royal Assent; now this Statute makes them binding without it, and
enacts, that they shall not be Reverst but by other Commissioners. Yet it never
was doubted, but that this Court might question the Legality of their Orders
notwithstanding. And you cannot oust the Jurisdiction of this Court, without
particular words in Acts of Parliament. There is no Jurisdiction that is
uncontrollable by this Court. Sir Henry Hungate's case was a famous case, and
we know what was done in it. Morton. Since the making this Statute of Eliz.
were those cases in my Lord Coke's Reports adjudged, concerning Chester Mills.
If Commissioners exceed their Jurisdiction, where are such matters to be
reformed but in this Court? If any Court in England of an inferior
Jurisdiction exceed their bounds, we can grant a Prohibition. Twisd. I have
known it ruled in 23 Car. 1. That the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 9. where it is
said, there shall be no Supersedeas, etc. has no reference to this Court, but
only to the Chancery. But this is a Certiorari, whereby the King does command
the Cause to be removed, and voluit, that it be determined here, and no where
else. So the Court fined them for not obeying two Certioraries, but fining them
that brought them 5 l. a piece.

Jones moved, That one who was Partner with his Brother a Bankrupt, being
Arrested, might be ordered to put in Bail for the Bankrupt as well as for
himself. Twisden. If there are two Partners, and one breaks, you shall not
charge the other with the whole, because it is ex maleficio: but if there are
two Partners, and one of them dye, the Survivor shall be charged for the whole.
In this case you have admitted him no Partner by Swearing him before the
Commissioners of Bankrupts. So not granted.

Rawlin's Case.
MOved by Sergeant Scroggs, That Rawlins having personated one Spicer in
acknowledging a Judgment, that therefore the Judgment might be set aside.
Twisden. The Statute that makes it Felony, does not provide that the Judgment
shall be vacated. One Tymberly escaped with his life very narrowly: for he had
personated another in giving Bail: but the Bail was not filed. Then he moved,
that the Defendant had paid the Fees of the Execution, which the Plaintiff
ought to have done. So the Court granted an Attachment against the Bailiff.

Tailor and Wells.
TRover and Conversion, december parium tegularum and valorum, Anglice of ten pair
of Curtains and Valons. Obj. That it is not certain what is meant by a pair,
whether so many two's, or so many Sets: and that in Web and Washburn's case,
1652. four pair of Hangings held not good. Twisden. I remember that a pair of
Hangings has been held naught. Trover and Convers. pro december Ovibus and Agnis,
not expressing how many Ewes and how many Lambs, ruled naught. Another Action
of Trover de velis, not saying how many, held to be naught. It was urged, that
ten pair of Curtains and Valons is certain enough: for by pair shall be
understood two, and so there are Twenty in all. If it be objected, that it does
not appear how many of each, I answer the words, ten pair, shall go to both.
Besides, it is after a Verdict, and therefore ought to be made good, if by any
reasonable construction it may. If it had been ten Sets, or ten Suits, then
without question it had been well enough: now why may not a pair be understood
of Sets or Suits, or so many as will serve for a bed, if it shall not be taken
for a couple? They quoted some cases in which it had been adjudged, that in
Trover and Conversion for several things, though it did not appear how many of
each sort there were, yet it had been held good. Twisden acknowledged that
there had been such Resolutions, but said, he knew not what to think of such
cases, considering the uncertainty of the Declarations. And the word pair in
our case, is as uncertain as may be, there a pair of Gloves, a pair of Cards, a
pair of Tongs. The word applied to some things, signifies more, to others less,
and what shall it signify here? but by three Judges against Twisden, the
Plaintiff had Judgment.

Fox and alii Exec' of Pinsent versus Tremain.
THe Plaintiffs being Executors, and some of them under age, all appeared by
Attorney: and thereupon it was prayed, that Judgment might be stayed; for, 1.
An Infant cannot make a Warrant of Attorney. 2. An Infant appearing by
Attorney, may be amerced pro falso clamore: and the reason is, because it does
not appear that he is under age; but if he appear by guardian or prochein amy,
he shall not be amerced. 3. The Infant may be much prejudiced. For these
reasons, and because, they said, the practice had gone accordingly, Judgment
was stayed. The cases cited pro and con were, 3 Cro. 424. 2 Cro. 441. 1 Roll
288. Hutton and Askew's case, A Scire facias brought by two Executors,
reciting, that there was a third, but within age: resolved that all must join.
Colt and Sherwood's case: resolved, that an Infant Executor cannot defend by
Attorney. Twisden. Where there are several Executors, and one or more under
age, and the rest of full age, all must join in an Action, and Administration
durante minore aetate, cannot be granted, if any of them be of full age: Vid.
infr.

Haspurt and Wills.
A Special Action brought upon the Custom of Wharfage and Cranage in the City
of Norwich: The Declaration sets forth, that they have a common Wharfe, and a
Crane to it; and then they set forth a Custom, that all Goods brought down the
River, and passing by, shall pay such a Duty. Obj. That the Custom is not good,
for that it is Toll-thorough; which is malum Tolnetum. Twisd. There is a case
in Hob. 175. of a bad Custom of paying the Charges of a Funeral, though the
Plaintiff were a Stranger, and not buried in the Parish. So here, if they had
unladed at the Key, they should have paid the whole Duty: nay, if they had
unladed at any other place in the City, there would have been some reason for
it: or if the Declaration had set forth, that they had cleansed the River. At
Gravesend they claimed a Toll of Boats lying in the River of Thames; and it was
adjudged in Parliament to be malum Tolnetum. To stay.

Heskett and Lee.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in a common Recovery
in the County Palatine of Lancaster. Weston. The Tenant in the common Recovery
is an Infant, and appears by his Guardian: but there is a fault in the
admittance, for whereas he ought to have been admitted as Defendant, in this
form; scil. A. B. admittitur per C. D. Gardianum suum ad comparendum and
defendendum: he is admitted in the Record ad sequendum. The second Error is in
the appearance: which is entered in this manner; sc. qui admissus est ad
sequendum, etc. (following the Error of the admittance) ut Gardianus ipsius
Thomae in propria persona sua venit and defendit, etc. so that he is admitted
ad sequendum, which is the act of the Plaintiff. And as Guardian he defends;
which is the act of the Defendant: and further, it is said that the Guardian
appears in propria persona, which cannot be. Now I conceive that the Assignment
of the Guardian, and the appearance of the Guardian, is triable by the Record:
and if the Infant should bring an Action against his Guardian, he must declare
that he was admitted to appear and defend his right. Now whether will this
admittance ad sequendum, warrant such a Declaration? I conceive it will not,
and that therefore the Recovery is erroneous. Winnington. I am for them that
claim under the Recovery. And I conceive this whole Record is not only good in
substance, but according to the form used in all common Recoveries. If an
Infant Tenant appear per Gardianum, either as Defendant or Vouchee, he shall be
bound, as well as one of full age. And if the Guardian faint-pleads or
mispleads, the Infant has an Action against him: 9 Ed. 4. 34, 35. Dyer 104. b.
In our case there is a common Recovery, wherein the Tenant is an Infant, who
ought to appear by his Guardian: whether the admittance of him here by his
Guardian, be well entered or no, is the question: the word sequi signifies only
to follow the cause; and the Defendant does prosecute and act; a Venire by
Proviso may be taken out at the Defendants Suit: 35 H. 8. 7. so in a Replevin
the Defendant is the prosecutor: and the Tenant does sue in common Recoveries,
and is the only person that does prosecute and act; so that I think the word is
proper. It is true, one book is cited, where prosequendum is void in an
Ejectment: 2 Cro. 640, 641. Sympson's case, but that Judgment is upon the point
of prochein amy. There is a President for me in 6 Car. 1. which I believe, was
the president of this case. And Sir Francis Englefield's case where the Infant
came in as Vouchee, is the same with ours. As for the second Error assigned,
viz. that the Guardian is said to come in propria persona; In the Earl of
Newport's Case and in Englefield's Case propria persona is in the same manner
as here. Now the Law does not regard so much the manner of the admittance, as
that a good Guardian be admitted. Twisden. This is a Recovery suffered upon a
Privy Seal from the King, and upon a marriage settlement, upon good
consideration; and therefore ought to be favored. The word sequatur is as
proper for the Defendant as for the Plaintiff. And for the second, the words
propria persona are well enough, being applied to the Guardian, who does in
proper person appear for the Infant. For an Infant to suffer a common Recovery,
if it were res integra, it would hardly be admitted. But if an Infant will
reverse a common Recovery, he ought to do it whilst he is under age, as it was
adjudged here about two years ago, according to my Lord Coke's Opinion. Weston.
If you stand upon that, whether an Infant having suffered a common Recovery,
may reverse it after he is come of full age, I desire to be heard to it. Cur.
advisare vult.

Tildell and Walter.
A Vicar Libelled in the Spiritual Court for Tyth-wood. Barrel prayed a
Prohibition, suggesting, that time out of mind they paid no small Tithe to the
Vicar, but that small Tithes, by the Custom of the Parish, were paid to the
Parson. Twisden. If the Endowment of the Vicarage be lost, small Tithes must be
paid according to prescription.

Jordan versus Fawcett.
ERror of a Judgment in the Common Pleas. An Action was brought against an
Executor, who pleaded several Judgments, but for the last Judgment that he
pleads, he does not express where it was entered, nor when obtained. Coleman
held it well enough upon a general demurrer. Twisden. It is not good, for by
this plea he is tied up to plead nothing, but null tiel record. He might, if the
Judgment had been pleaded as it ought to have been, have pleaded perhaps
obtent. per fraudem. And Judgment was given accordingly.

Love versus Wyndham and Wyndham.
UPon an issue out of Chancery, the Jury find a special Verdict, viz. That one
Gilbert Thirle was seized of the Lands in question for three lives, and did
demise the same to Nicholas Love the Father, if he should so long live; that he
being so possessed, made his Will, and devised them in this manner; viz. to his
Wife for her life, and after her decease to Nicholas his Son for his life, and
if Nicholas his Son should dye without Issue of his body begotten, then he
devises them to Barnaby the Plaintiff. Then they find that the Wife was
Executrix, and that she did agree to this Devise. And whether this be a good
Limitation to Barnaby or not, is the question. Jones. I conceive it is a good
Limitation to Barnaby. I shall enquire whether a Termor having devised to one
for life, and after his death to another for life, may go any further: And
secondly, admitting that he may go further, whether the Limitation in our case,
which is to begin after the death of the second, without Issue of his body, be
good or no? For the first point, he said the reason given in Plo. Com. 519. and
in 8. Co. 94. why an Executory Devise of a term is good in Law, is because the
Law takes it as devised to the last man first, and then afterward to the first
man; without which transposition it is not good: for if it should be a Devise
to the first man first, there would be nothing left for the last but a
possibility, which is not grantable over. Now then, if a man may devise a term
after the death of another, then he may devise it after the death of two other.
It is true, this cannot be in Grants, for they are founded upon Contracts, and
there must be a certainty in them: according to the Rector of Chedington's
case. Now if a Devise may be good after the death of one or two, it is all one
if it be limited after the death of five or six. Now that a contingency may be
devised upon a Contingency, I take it, that the Authorities are clear: 14 Car.
1. Cotton and Herle: 1 Roll 612. resolved by three Justices. Et Hill. 9 Jac.
Rot. 889. 2 Cr. 461. And for the case of Child and Bailey, reported in 2 Cro.
459. and in Roll 613. I conceive it is not against our case; for they held the
Devise to be void, not because it was a Contingency upon a Contingency, but in
respect of the remoteness of the possibility, and because the term was wholly
devised to a man and his Assigns. So that by the express Authority of the two
first cases, and by the implication of this case, I do think that a Devise to a
man after such a manner is good, provided that it do not introduce a
perpetuity: so that where there is not the inconvenience of a perpetuity,
though there are many Contingencies, they are no impediment to the Devise.
Therefore where a Devise is upon a Contingency that may happen upon the
expiration of one or more men's lives, and where it is upon a Contingency that
may endure for ever, there is a great difference. The reason of the Rector of
Chedington's case was, because of the uncertainty; for in case of a grant of a
term, there is a great uncertainty; but ours is in case of a Devise; which is
not taken in the Law by way of remainder: 12 Ass. 5. so that I conceive a
Contingency may be limited upon a Contingency, provided that it be not remote.
The second point is, whether this Devise (thus limited) be a good Devise? Now I
conceive the limitation is as good, as if it had been to his Wife for her life,
and after her death to Nicholas for life, and after his death to Barnaby. I
agree, that if these words (if Nicholas dye without heirs of his body) shall
not be applied to the time of his death, it will be a void Devise. But the
meaning is, That if at the time of his death he shall have no Issue, then, etc.
Now that they must have such construction, I prove from the words of the Will.
The limitation of the Remainder must be taken so as to quadrate with the
particular Estate. As if there be a Conveyance to one for life, and if he dye
without Issue, to another, this is a good Remainder upon Condition, and the
Remainder shall rest upon the determination of the particular Estate, if the
Tenant for life have no Issue when he dies; but if a Man Convey to one, and
the heirs of his body, and if he dye without Issue, to another, there it must
be understood of a failer of Issue at any time; because the precedent
limitation goes further then his life. But admitting there were no precedent
words to guide the intention, and that common parlance were against me, yet if
there be but a possibility of a good construction, it shall be so construed:
and they may very well be understood of his dying without Issue of his body at
the time of his death. In Goodyer and Clerk's case in this Court: Trin. 12 Car.
Rot. 1048. I confess it was adjudged, that it should be understood of a failer
of Issue at any time; but in our case, if you shall not understand it of a
failer of Issue at the time of his death, it cannot have any construction at
all to take effect. I think there are no express Authorities against me: those
that may seem to be so, I will put, and endeavor to give an answer to them: As
for Child and Baylie's case, Reports differ upon the reason of that Judgment:
For Cro. says, it was held to be a void Devise, because it was taken, if he dye
without Issue at any time during the term: But Sergeant Rolls goes upon another
reason: Rolls 613. there he says it is void, because given absolutely to the
Son and his Assigns before. In Rolls first part, 611. Leventhorp and Ashly's
case, the Remainder there is said to be void, because when he had devised the
term to A. and the Heirs Males of his body, it shall go to the Executors of A.
and the Remainder there was to begin upon his dying without Issue at any time.
The case of Saunders and Cornish will not come to ours: for there were many
limitations for life successively to persons not in being, etc. In the case
cited 1st Report, 135. of an Estate for life limited to one, and to every heir
successively, an Estate for life, the limitation was naught, because it would
make a perpetual Freehold: and no body would know where the absolute Estate
should vest. So he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Coleman for the
Defendant. I conceive this to be a void limitation. Mr. Jones would make this a
middle case. I shall discharge him of the first point, though he has taken
pains to argue it: and I shall rest upon this, That the limitation of a term
after the death of a man, without Issue of his body, is void. The case is put
as a middle case to these two; viz. If a man possessed of a Lease for years,
Devise it to I. S. for life, the Remainder to J. N. for life, the Remainder to
J. G. for life; these Remainders are good. But if he do Devise to J. S. and the
Heirs of his body, the Remainder over; this Remainder he admits to be void,
because it depends upon so remote a possibility as may never happen. Now I
conceive it is the same thing to limit it to one for life, and if he dye
without Issue, then to another for life, as to limit it to one and the Heirs of
his body, with a Remainder over. He would tie it up from the ordinary and Legal
Construction, to issue at the time of his death. If it be to be understood of
dying without Issue at any time, then Child and Baylie's case, and Cornishe's
case, are full Authorities in the point. Vide 2 Cro. 459. Rolls, 612, 614.
There Lessee for years devises to one for life, and after to Wms. and his
Assigns, and if he dye without Issue then living, the Remainder to I. G. This
they say is good in case of a Fee-simple, but they will not allow it in case of
a term for years. Now Mr. Jones would by Construction bring the words then
living, into our case. The Legal Construction of the words, dying without
Issue, is, if there be a failer of Issue at any time to come. In Pell and
Brown's case, if the words then living had not been in the Will, the case had
not been so adjudged. Keeling. You go up Hill a little. Can Barnaby take so
long, as there is any Issue in being of Nicholas? Jones. He cannot. Keeling.
Then Barnaby's Interest depends upon a Contingency, that may never happen.
Jones. I grant, if Nicholas has Issue at the time of his death, that Barnaby
shall never take, but if he has none, he shall. Keeling. If I Devise Lands to
A. for life, and if he dye without Issue of his body, to B. A. shall have an
Estate Tail. So in our case, the words and limitation is the same, though, the
Devisor having but a Lease for years, there cannot be an Estate Tail of it: yet
he intended not that Barnaby should have any Estate as long as there were any
Issue in being of Nicholas his body. Twisden. It appears to me upon the reason
of the cases that have been cited, that the Remainder to Barnaby must be void,
because of the remote possibility: But then there will be a question, to whom
the Remainder of the term will go, if Nicholas dye without Issue? whether to
the Executors of Nicholas, or to the Executors of Doctor Love? If A. Tenant for
life of a term, Devise it to B. for life, the Remainder to C. for life, the
Remainder to D. for life; I have heard it questioned, whether these Remainders
are good or not? But it has been held, that if all the Remainder-men are
living at the time of the Devise, it is good: if all the Candles be light at
once, good. But if you limit a Remainder to a person not in being, as to the
first begotten Son, etc. and the like, there would be no end if such
limitations were admitted, and therefore they are void. And some Judges are of
the same Opinion to this hour. If I Devise a term to A. for life; after the
death of A. his Executors shall not have it, but it shall go to the Executors
of the Devisor: But if it be devised to A. generally, without saying for life,
it shall go to his Executors after his death. But a Devise for life vests in
him only during his life, and you may make a limitation over. Keeling. I take
it, that A. carries the whole term, when devised to him for life: because an
Estate for life is larger then the longest term. Twisden. As a term for years
does admit of Remainders, so it does of Reversions, if you will have it so; and
when he devises to A. during his life, A. shall have it for his life, but the
Reversion shall be to the Devisors Executors. But if he Devise it to A. for
life, and if he dye without Issue of his body, the Remainder to B. what shall
become of the Reversion then? Keeling. You start a new point. Court. You shall
have our Judgments this Term.

Knowles versus Richardson.
ERror of a Judgment in the Common Pleas in an Action upon the Case for
obstructing a Prospect. Sympson. The stopping of a Prospect is no Nuisance, and
consequently no Action on the Case will lie for it. Aldred's Case 9th Report is
express, that for obstructing a Prospect, being matter of delight only, and not
of necessity, an Action will not lie. Twisden. Why may not I build up a Wall
that another man may not look into my Yard? Prospects may be stopped, so you do
not darken the light. Judgment, nisi, etc.

Twisden. A man may be Indicted for Perjury in a Court Baron.

Jones moved to have a Trial at Bar for Lands in Northumberland of 50 l. per
annum. Keeling. Its a great way of off, and never any Jury came from thence in
your time. Twisden. But I have been of Council in Causes, wherein Trials have
been granted at Bar for Lands there. We have lost Cornwall; no Iuries from
thence come to the Bar, and we shall lose Northumberland too. The other side to
show cause.

Keeling upon a motion of Mr. Holt's, said; I have known many Attachments for
Arresting a man upon a Sunday; but still the Affidavit contained, that he might
have been taken on another day. Twisd. So for arresting a man as he was going
to Church, to disgrace him.

Term. Trin. 22 Car. II. 1670. in B. R.
Parker and VVelby.
AN Action upon the Case against a Sheriff for making a false Return. The
Plaintiff sets forth, that one Wright was endebted to him in 60 l. and did
promise to pay him, and that thereupon a Writ was sued out against him directed
to the Defendant, being Sheriff of Lincolnshire, who took him into his custody,
and after suffered him to go at large, whither he would, and at the day of
Return, he returned that he had his body ready. Jones. They have demurred to
the Declaration: which I conceive to be a good Declaration. For take the case,
that there went a Latitat to the Sheriff, and the Sheriff took the person upon
it, and let him go at large, no body will deny, but that an Action of Escape
will lie against him: and when he makes such a false Return, as here, that he
has the body ready, why will not an Action lie for a false Return? and this is
no new case, but has been adjudged Moor. plac. 596. 3 Cro. 460. ibid. 624. it
is at the Plaintiffs Election to follow the Sheriff with Amercements, or to
bring his Action for the false Return. And when this Action has been brought
formerly, they were forced to plead the Statute; none ever demurred generally.
Twisden. I remember a case in 21 Car. 1. Rot. 616. between Franklyn and
Andrews, where an Action upon the Case was brought against a Sheriff for such a
false Return: he pleaded the Statute, and they held in that case, that the
Sheriff could not Return any thing else but Cepi corpus. And old Hodson, that
sat here, remembered the case of Langton and Gardener reported in 3 Cro. and
said, the Court did amerce the Sheriff for a bad Return; but the Judgment was
given in that case for the Plaintiff, because there was a Traverse aliter vel
alio modo, which could not be, unless a false Return had been confessed, and
the Court ordered Judgment to be entered for the Plaintiff for that cause. In
the case of Franklyn, the Court held, that upon Issue Not-guilty, the Statute
might be given in Evidence: but upon a Demurrer you ought to plead the Statute,
and the general Demurrer cannot be helped in this case, unless you will say
that it is a general Law. Whelpdale's case is, that the Statute must be
pleaded, because it is a particular Law: but it concerns Extortion in all
Sheriffs; and the Statute of 13 Eliz. that concerns all Parsons, touching
Non-residency, is held to be a general Law: and it is not to be stirred now;
but if the point were to be adjudged again, perhaps we might be of another
Opinion. Keeling. They have relied here upon the false Return, and the general
Demurrer I take to be well enough. Morton and Rainsford accorded; wherefore
Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

Lake versus King.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Case for publishing a Libell, in
which he was defamed, etc. the publication was in delivering several Printed
Papers, wherein the Plaintiff was slandered, to several Members of a Committee
of the House of Commons. Jones. It is true, if a man make a complaint in a
Legal way, no Action lies against him for taking that course, if it be in a
competent Court. But that that we say is not lawful in this case, is his
causing the matter to be Printed and Published: agreeable to this case are the
common cases of Letters: if a man will write a scandalous Letter, and deliver
it to the party himself, this is no Slander. But if he acquaints a third person
with it, an Action will lie. So here, since he will publish this matter by
Printing it, or if he had but written it, it might have been Actionable: for
the Members ought not to be prepossessed.

King versus Standish.
AN Action upon the Statute of Praemunire for impeaching in the Chancery a
Judgment given in the King's Bench. The Defendant demurred. Bigland for the
Defendant. The question is, whether the Court of Chancery be meant within the
Statute of 27 Ed. 3. 3. This question has been controverted formerly, but has
not been stirred within these 40 years last past. It concerns the Chancery, as
it is a Court of Equity. Now the Statute cannot be applied to the Chancery as
such; for it was not a Court of Equity at that time; and if so, then must the
Statute be applied to other Courts, where the gravamen then was. Mr. Lambert in
his Jurisdiction of Courts, says of this Court, that the King did at first
determine Causes in Equity in person: and that about 20 Ed. 3 the King going
beyond Sea, delegated this power to the Chancellor. And then he says, several
Statutes were made to enlarge the Jurisdiction of this Court, as 17 Rich. 2.
cap. 6. etc. But the Chancellor took not upon him ex Officio, to determine
matters in Equity, till Edward the Fourth's time. For till then it was done by
the King in person, or he delegated whom he pleased. So that the Gravamen of
that Statute could not be in the Chancery. 2. It is not possible that the King
can be disinherited in his own Courts: and therefore the Statute must be
understood of Courts, that stand in opposition to the Kings Courts, and only
foreign Courts. But this Court is held by the Kings Seal, and the Judgments in
it are according to the Kings Conscience. Thirdly, It is said in the Statute,
that the Offenders shall have a day given them to appear before the King and
his Council, or in his Chancery, etc. and it is strange that the Chancery
should give the remedy, if that were one of the Courts wherein the Offense were
incurred. My fourth reason is from the penalty: the penalty is very rare and
great: for they must be put out of the Kings Protection, their Lands forfeited,
and their bodies imprisoned at the Kings pleasure. The penalty is fitted well
for those that draw the Kings Subjects out of the Kings Jurisdiction: but so
great a penalty to be inflicted for suing in the Kings Courts, is not so
reasonable. If a man sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for a matter Temporal,
shall he incur a Praemunire? An Action upon the Case may lie, when a man is
mistaken in the Court, in which he ought to sue, but to make it a Praemunire
seems not so reasonable. The Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome were the cause
of the making of this Statute, and all other Statutes of Praemunire: 28 Ed. 3.
cap. 1. 16 H. 6. cap. 5. the complaint was all along of the Bishop of Rome's
Usurpations; but not a word of the Chancery. Sir John Davies in his case of
Praemunire tells us, that all the Statutes were made upon this occasion. Of all
the Attainders of Praemunire, there never was one for suing in the Chancery.
The great Objection is from these words in the Statute, (or which do sue in any
other Court) now, say they, this last disjunctive must be applied to this
Court, and not to the Court or Courts mentioned before. But I answer, there
were other Ecclesisiastical Courts within this Realm, besides that that was a
standing Court, and had a constant dependence upon the Pope here; and they were
aimed at by this disjunctive. Those Courts derived their Jurisdiction from the
Court of Rome, and not from the King. There is an Authority in the point in 5
Ed. 4. 6. Now for Authorities, I confess there are great ones against me: 2
Cro. fol. 335. Heath and Ridley. Moor. 838. Courtney versus Glanvill. My Lord
Coke in his Chapter of Praemunire. 22 Ed. 4. fol. 37. But the greatest
Authority against me is the case of Throgmorton and Finch, reported by my Lord
Coke in his Treatise of Pleas of the Crown, Chapter Praemunire. But the
practice has been contrary, not one person attainted of a Praemunire for that
cause. In King James his time the matter was referred to the Counsel, who all
agreed, that the Chancery was not meant within the Statute: which Opinions are
enrolled in Chancery. And the King upon the report of their Reasons, ordered
the Chancellor to proceed as he had done; and from that time to this, I do not
find that this point ever came in question. And so he prayed Judgment for the
Defendant. Saunders. As to that objection, that at the time when this Statute
was made, there were no proceedings in Equity: I answer, that granting it to be
true, yet there is the same mischief: The proceedings in one part of the
Chancery are coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria, but an English Bill is directed
to the Lord Keeper, and decreed: so that there is a difference in the
proceedings of the same Court. But admit that Courts of Equity are the Kings
Courts, yet they are aliae Curiae, if they hold plea of matters out of their
Jurisdiction. 16 Ri. 2. cap. 5. Rolls first part. 381. There is a common
objection, that if there were no relief in Chancery, a man might be ruined: for
the Common Law is rigorous, and adheres strictly to its rules. I cannot answer
this Objection better then it is answered to my hand in Dr. and Stud. lib. 1.
cap. 18. he cited 13 Ri. 2. number. 30. Sir Robert Cotton's Records. It is to be
considered what is understood by being impeached: Now the words of another Act
will explain that, viz. 4 H. 4. cap. 23. by that Act it appears, that it is to
draw a Judgment in question any other way then by Writ of Error or Attaint. One
would think this Statute so fully penned, that there were no room for an
evasion. There was a temporary Statute which is at large in Rastall 31 H. 6.
cap. 2. in which there is this clause; viz. That no matter determinable at
Common Law, shall be heard elsewhere. A fortiori, no matter determined at
Common Law shall be drawn in question elsewhere. He cited 22 Ed. 4. 36. Sir
Moyle Finch and Throgmorton, 2 Inst. 335. and Glanvill and Courtney's case. He
put them also in mind of the Article against Cardinal Woolsey in Coke's
Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Chancery. So he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.
Keeling. It is fit that this cause be adjourned into the Exchequer-chamber, for
the Opinions of all the Judges to be had in it. We know what heats there were
betwixt my Lord Coke and Ellesmere, which we ought to avoid.

Turner and Benny.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment in the Common Pleas in an
Action upon the Case: wherein the Plaintiff declared, that it was agreeed
between himself and the Defendant, that the Plaintiff should surrender to the
use of the Defendant certain Copyhold Lands; and that the Defendant should pay
for those Lands a certain sum of money: and then he sets forth, that he did
surrender the said Lands into the hands of two Tenants of the Manor out of
Court, secundum consuetudinem, etc. Exception. The promise is to surrender
generally, which must be understood of a surrender to the Lord or to his
Steward: and the Declaration sets forth a surrender to two Tenants; which is an
imperfect surrender: 1 Cro. 299. Keeling. But in that case there are not the
words secundum consuetudinem, as in this case. Jones. Hill. 22 Car. 1. Rot.
1735. betwixt Treburn and Purchase, two points were adjudged: 1. That when there
is an agreement for a surrender generally, then such a particular surrender is
naught. 2. That the alleging of a surrender secundum consuetudinem is not
sufficient: but it ought to be laid, that there was such a Custom within the
Manor, and then, that according to that Custom he surrendered into, etc.
accordingly is 3 Cro. 385. Coleman contra. We do say that we were to surrender
generally, and then we aver, that actually we did surrender secundum
consuetudinem: and if we had said no more, it had been well enough. Then the
adding, into the hands of two Tenants, etc. I take it that it shall not hurt.
Besides, we need not to allege a performance, because it is a mutual promise,
and he cited Camphugh and Brathwait's case Hob. Twisden. I remember the case of
Treborne; he was my Clyent. And the reason of the Judgment is in Combe's case
9th Rep. because the Tenants are themselves but Attorneys. And they compared it
to this case: I am bound to levy a Fine: it may be done either in Court or by
Commission, but I must go and know of the person to whom I am bound, how he
will have it, and he must direct me. In the principal case the Judgment was
affirmed, Nisi, etc.

Turner and Davies.
AUdita Querela. The point was this; viz. an Administrator recovers damages in
an Action of Trover and Conversion for Goods of the Intestate taken out of the
possession of the Administrator himself: then his Administration is revoked,
and the question is, whether he shall have Execution of the Judgment,
notwithstanding the revocation of his Administration? Saunders. I conceive he
cannot, for the Administration being revoked, his Authority is gone. Doctor
Druries case in the 8th Report, is plain. And there is a President in the new
book of Entries 89. Barrel. I conceive he may take our Execution, for it is
not in right of his Administration: he lays the Conversion in his own time: and
he might in this case have declared in his own name; and he cited and urged the
reason of Pakman's case, 6th Report, and 1 Cro. Keeling. He might bring the
Action in his own name, but the Goods shall be Assets. If Goods come to the
possession of an Administrator, and his Administration be repealed, he shall be
charged as Executor of his own wrong: now in this case, the Administration
being repealed, shall he sue Execution, to subject himself to an Action when
done? Twisden. I think it has been ruled, that he cannot take out Execution,
because his Title is taken away. Judgment per Cur. versus Defendentem.

Jordan and Martin.
EXception was taken to an Avowry for a Rentcharge, that the Avowant having
distrained the Beasts of a Stranger for his Rent, does not say that they were
levant and couchant. Coleman. The Beasts of a Stranger are not liable to a
Distress, unless they be levant and couchant: Roll. Distress, 668. 672.
Reignold's case. Twisd. Where there is a Custom for the Lord to seize the best
Beast for a Heriot, and the Lord does seize the best Beast upon the Tenancy, it
must come on the other side to show that it was not the Tenants Beast. Keel.
The Cattle of a Stranger cannot be distrained, unless they were levant and
couchant; but it must come on the other side to show that they were not so. So
Judic. pro Quer'.

Wayman and Smith.
AProhibition was prayed to the Court of Bristol upon this suggestion; viz.
That the cause of Action did not arise within the Jurisdiction of the Court.
Winnington. There was a case here between Smith and Bond: Hill. 17 Car. 2. Rot.
501. a Prohibition to Marleborough: the suggestion grounded on Westminster. 1. cap.
34. granted: And there needs not a Plea in the Spiritual Court, to the
Jurisdiction: for that he cited, F. N. B. 49. But he said, he had an Affidavit,
that the cause of Action did arise out of their Jurisdiction. Twisden. I doubt
you must plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court. I remember a case here,
wherein it was held so: and that if they will not allow it, then you must have
a Prohibition. Winnington. Fitzherbert is full. Ruled, that the other side
shall show cause why a Prohibition should not go, and things to stay.

Humlock and Blacklow.
DEbt upon a Bond for performance of Covenants in Articles of agreement. The
Plaintiff covenanted with the Defendant to assign over his Trade to him, and
that he should not endeavor to take away any of his Customers; and in
consideration of the performance of these Covenants, the Defendant did Covenant
to pay the Plaintiff 60 l. per annum during his life. Saunders. The words in
consideratione performationis, make it a Condition precedent: which must be
averred: 3 Leon. 219. and those Covenants must be actually performed. Twisden.
How long must he stay then, till he can be entitled to his Annuity? as long as
he lives? for this Covenant may be broken at any time. That's an Exposition that
corrupts the Text. Judic. nisi, etc.

It was moved by one Hunt, that the Venue might be changed in an Action of
Indebitat. Assumpsit, brought by Mr. Wingfield. Jones. I conceive it ought not
to be changed, being in the case of a Counselor at Law, by reason of his
attendance at this Court. Twisd. In Mr. Bacon's case of Gray's Inn, they refused
to change the Venue in the like case. So not granted.

An Indictment against one Morris in Denbigh-shire, for Murder, was removed
into the Kings Bench by Certiorari, to prevent the Prisoners being acquitted at
the Grand-Sessions; and the Court directed to have an Indictment found against
him in the next English County; viz. at Shrewsbury. Vide infra.

Tailor and Rouse, Churchwardens of Downham, versus their Predecessors.
THe Action was, to make them Account for a Bell. They plead, that they
delivered it to a Bell-founder, to mend, and that it is yet in his hands. The
Plaintiff demurs; the cause of his Demurrer was, that this was no good Plea in
Bar of the Account, though it might be a good Plea before Auditors. 1 Roll 121.
Pemberton. I conceive it is a good Plea; for wherever the matter or cause of
the Account is taken off, the Plea is good in Bar. But he urged, that the
Action was brought for taking away bona Ecclesiae, and not bona Parochianorum,
as it ought to have been. Court. The Property is not well laid. So ordered to
mend all, and plead de novo.

Term. Mich. 22 Car. II. 1670. in B. R.
AN Inquisition was returned upon the Statute against pulling down Enclosures.
They took Issue as to the damages only. It was moved, that before the Trial for
the damages, there might be Judgment given to have them set up again, having
been long down. Twisden. When you have Judgment for the damages, then one
Distringas will serve for setting up the Enclosures and the damages too. As in
an Action, where part goes by default, and the other part is traversed, you
shall not take out Execution, till that part which is traversed be tried.

Upon a motion by Mr. Dolbin for an Attachment, Twisden said; if a man has a
Suit depending in this Court, and be coming to Town to prosecute or defend it
here, he cannot be sued elsewhere. But if a man come hither as a Witness, he is
protected eundo and redeundo.

Wootton and Heal.
AN Action of Covenant was brought upon a Warranty in a Fine, a term for years
being Evicted. Saunders. I acknowledge, that an Action of Covenant does well
lie in this case: but the Plaintiff assigns his breach in this; viz. that one
Stowell habens legale jus and titulum, did enter upon him and evict him; which
perhaps he did by virtue of a title derived from the Plaintiff himself: 2 Cro.
315. Kirby and Hansaker. Jones contra. To suppose that Stowell claimed under
the Plaintiff, is a foreign intendment: and it might as well come on the
Defendants side to show it: And since that case in 2 Crook, the Statute of 21
Jac. and the late Act, have much strengthened Verdicts. Twisden. The Statutes do
not help when the Court cannot tell how to give Judgment. The Plaintiff ought
to entitle himself to his Action, and it is not enough if the Jury entitle him.
Jones. You have waived the title here, and relied upon the Entry of the Issue
only, which is non intravit, etc. Cur. advisare vult.

Lassells and Catterton.
AN Action of Covenant for further assurance, the Covenant being to make such
Conveyance, etc. as Counsel should advise; they allege for breach, that they
tendered such a Conveyance as was advised by Counsel; viz. a Lease and Release,
and set it forth with all the usual Covenants. Levings moved in Arrest of
Judgment; I conceive they have tendered no such Conveyance as we are bound to
execute; for we are not obliged to Seal any Conveyance with Covenants, nor with
a Warranty. Besides, that which they have tendered, has a Warranty, not only
against the Covenantor, but one Wilson: 2 Cro. 571. 1 Rolls 424. Again, our
Covenant is, to convey all our Lands in Bomer: and the Conveyance tendered, is
of all our Lands in the Lordship of Bomer. Twisden. For the last exception, I
think we shall intend them to be both one: And I know it has been held, that
if a man be bound to make any such reasonable assurance, as Counsel shall
advise, usual Covenants may be put in; for the Covenant shall be so understood.
But there must not be a Warranty in it: though some have held, that there may
be a Warranty against himself; but I question whether that will hold. But
Weston on the other side said, that the Objection as to the Warranty was fatal,
and he would not make any defense.

The King versus Morris. Vid. sup.
MR. Attorney Finch showed cause why a Certiorari should not be granted to
remove an Indictment of Murder out of Denbighshire in Wales. Twisden. In 2 Car.
and 8 Car. it was held, that a Certiorari did lie into Wales. Morton. By 34 H.
8. the Justices of the great Sessions have power to try all Murders, as the
Judges here have, and the Statute of 26 H. 8. for the Trial of Murders in the
next English County, was made before that of the 34 H. 8. Twisden. I never yet
heard that the Statute of 34 H. 8. had repealed that of 26 Henr. 8. It is true,
the Judges of the Grand Sessions have power, but the Statute that gives it
them, does not exclude this Court. To be moved when the Chief Justice should be
in Court.

Franklyn's Case.
FRanklyn was brought into Court by Habeas Corpus, and the Return being read,
it appeared that he was committed as a Preacher at Seditious Conventicles.
Coleman prayed he might be discharged; he said this Commitment must be upon the
Oxford Act: for the last Act only orders a Conviction; and the Act for
Uniformity, Commitment only after the Bishops Certificate. And the Oxford Act
provides, that it shall be done by two Justices of the Peace upon Oath made
before them: and in this Return, but one Justice of Peace is named; for Sir
William Palmer is mentioned as Deputy Lieutenant, and you will not intend him
to be a Justice of Peace. Nor does it appear that there was any Oath made
before them. Twisden. Upon the Statute of the 18th of the Queen, that appoints,
that two Justices shall make Orders for the keeping of Bastard-children,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, I have got many of them quashed, because it
was not expressed, that one of them was of the Quorum. Whereupon Franklyn was
discharged.

Upon a motion for time to plead in a great cause about Brandy, Twisden said,
if it be in Bar, you cannot demand Oyer of the Letters Patents the next Term;
but if it be in a Replication, you may: because you mention the precedent Term
in the Bar, but not in the Replication.

Yard and Ford.
MOved by Jones in Arrest of Judgment; an Action upon the Case was brought for
keeping a Market without Warrant, it being in prejudice of the Plaintiffs
Market. He moved, that the Action would not lie, because the Defendant did not
keep his Market on the same day that the Plaintiff kept his: which he said is
implied in the case in 2 Rolls 140. Saunders contra. Upon a Writ of Ad quod
dampnum, they enquire of any Markets generally, though not held the same day.
In this case, though the Defendants Market be not held the same day that ours
is, yet it is a damage to us in forestalling our Market. Twisden. I have not
observed that the day makes any difference. If I have a Fair or Market, and one
will erect another to my prejudice, an Action will lie; and so of a Ferry. Its
true, for one to set up a School by mine, is damnum absque injuria. Ordered to
be moved again.

Pawlett moved in Trespass, that the Defendant pleaded in Bar, that he had paid
3 l. and made a promise to pay so much more in satisfaction; and said it was a
good plea, and did amount to an accord with satisfaction; an Action being but a
Contract, which this was. Twisden. An Accord executed is pleadable in Bar, but
Executory not.

Twisden. There are two clauses in the Statute of Usury; if there be a corrupt
agreement at the time of the lending of the money, then the Bonds and all the
Assurances are void: but if the agreement be good, and afterward he receives
more than he ought, then he forfeits the treble value.

Bonnefield.
HE was brought into Court upon a Cap. Excom. and it was urged by Pawlett that
he might be delivered, for that his name was Bonnefield, and the Cap. Excom.
was against one Bromfield. Twisden. You cannot plead that here to a Cap. Excom.
You have no day in Court, and we cannot Bail upon this; but you may bring your
Action of False Imprisonment.

Caterall and Marshall.
ACtion upon the Case, wherein the Plaintiff declares, that in consideration
that he would give the Defennant a Bond of sufficient penalty to save him
harmless, he would, etc. and sets forth, that he gave him a Bond with
sufficient penalty, but does not eppress what the penalty was. This was moved
in Arrest of Judgment. Jones. After a Verdict it is good enough, as in the case
in Hob. 69. Twisd. If it had been upon a Demurrer, I should not have doubted
but that it had been naught. Rainsford and Morton. But the Jury have judged the
penalty to be reasonable, and have found the matter of fact. Twisden. The Jury
are not Judges what is reasonable, and what unreasonable: but this is after a
Verdict. And so the Judgment was affirmed, the cause coming into the Kings
Bench upon a Writ of Error.

Martin and Delboe.
AN Action upon the Case, setting forth, that the Defendant was a Merchant, and
transmitted several Goods beyond Sea, and promised the Plaintiff, that if he
would give him so much money, he would pay him so much out of the proceed of
such a parcel of Goods as he was to receive from beyond Sea. The Defendant
pleaded the Statute of Limitations, and does not say, non assumpsit infra sex
annos, but that the cause of Action did not arise within six years. The
Plaintiff demurs, because the cause is between Merchants, etc. Sympson. The
plea is good; Accounts within the Statute must be understood of those that
remain in the nature of Accounts: now this is a sum certain. Jones accorded.
This is an Action upon the Case, and an Action upon the Case between Merchants
is not within the exception. And the Defendant has pleaded well in saying, that
the cause of Action did not arise within six years: for the cause of Action
arises from the time of the Ships coming into Port; and the six years are to
be reckoned from that time. Twisden. I never knew but that the word Accounts in
the Statute was taken only for Actions of account. An insimul computasset
brought for a sum certain, upon an Account stated, though between Merchants, is
not within the Exception. So Judgment was given for the Defendant.

The King versus Leginham.
AN Information was exhibited against him for taking unreasonable Distresses of
several of his Tenants. Jones moved in arrest of Judgment, that an Information
would not lie for such cause. Marlebr. cap. 4. says, that if the Lord take an
unreasonable Distress, he shall be amerced, so that an Information will not
lie. And my Lord Coke upon Magna Carta, says, the party grieved may have his
Action upon the Statute: but admit an Information would lie, yet it ought to
have been more particular, and to have named the Tenants; it is not sufficient
to say in general, that he took unreasonable Distresses of several of his
Tenants. And the second part of the Information, viz. that he is communis
oppressor, is not sufficient: Rolls 79. Moor 451. Twisden. It has so been
adjudged, that to lay in an Information, that a man is communis oppressor, is
not good. And a Lord cannot be indicted for an excessive Distress, for it is a
private matter, and the party ought to bring his Action. To stay.

Haman and Truant.
AN Action upon the Case brought upon a bargain for Corn and Grass, etc. The
Defendant pleads another Action depending for the same thing. The Plaintiff
replies, that the bargains were several; absque hoc, that the other Action was
brought for the same cause. The Defendant demurs specially, for that he ought
to have concluded to the Country. Polyxfen. When there is an affirmative, they
ought to make the next an Issue, or otherwise they will plead in infinitum. 3
Cro. 755. and accordingly Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Fox and alii Executors of Mr. Pinsent. Vide supra 47.
INdebitat. Assumpsit: The Defendant pleads, that two of the Plaintiffs are
Infants, and yet they all Sue per Attornatum. The question is, if there be two
Executors, and one of them under age, whether the Infant must sue per
Guardianum, and the other per Attornatum, or whether it is not well enough, if
both sue per Attornat.? Offley spoke to it, and cited 2 Cro. 541. Pasch. 11
Car. 288. Powell's case, Styles 318. 2 Cro. 577. 1 Inst. 157. Dyer 338. Morton.
I am of Opinion that he may Sue by Attorney, as Executor: though if he be
Defendant, he must appear by Guardian. Rainsford. I think it is well enough;
and I am led to think so by the multitude of Authorities in the point: And I
think the case stronger when Infants join in Actions with persons of full age.
He Sues here in auter droit; and I have not heard of any Authority against it.
Twisden concurred with the rest, and so Judgment was given.

Moreclack and Carleton.
UPon a Writ of Error out of the Court of Common Pleas, one Error assigned was,
that upon a relicta verificatione, a misericordia was entered, whereas it ought
to have been a capiatur. Twisden. The Common Pleas ought to certify us what
the practice of their Court is. Monday the Secondary said, it was always a
Capiatur. Its true in 9 Edw. 4. it is said, that he shall but be amerced,
because he has spared the Jury their pains; and 34 H. 8. is accordingly: but
say they in the Common Pleas, a Capiatur must be entered, because dedicit factum
suum. So they said they would discourse with the Judges of the Common Pleas
concerning it.

The King versus Holmes.
MOved to quash an Indictment of Forcible Entry into a Message, passage or
way: for that a passage or way is no Land nor Tenement, but an Easement: and
then it is not certain whether it were a passage over Land or Water: Yelv. 169.
the word passagium is taken for a passage over Water. Twisd. You need not
labor about that of the passage; we shall quash it as to that: but what say
you to the Messunge? Jones. It is naught in the whole: for it is but by way of
recital, with a quod cum, he was possessed, etc. Et sic possessionatus, etc.
but that Twisden said, was well enough. Jones. Then he says, that he was
possessed de quodam Termino: and does not say annorum. Twisden. That Is naught.
And the Indictment was quashed.

An Action was brought against the Hundred of Stoak, upon the Statute of Hue
and Cry: and at the Trial, some Housekeepers appeared as Witnesses, that lived
within the Hundred, who, being examined, said they were Poor, and paid no Taxes
nor Parish Duties: and the question was, whether they were good Witnesses or
not? Twisden. Alms-people and Servants are good Witnesses: but these are
neither. Then he went down from the Bench to the Judges of the Common Pleas, to
know their Opinions; and at his return said, That Judge Wyld was confident that
they ought not to be sworn, and that Judge Tyrrell doubted at first; but
afterward was of the same Opinion: their reason was, because when the money
recovered against the Hundred should come to be levied, they might be worth
something.

Hoskins versus Robins.
Hill. 23 Car. 2. Rot. 233.
IN this case these points were spoke to in Arrest of Judgment, viz. 1. Whether
a Custom to have a several Pasture excluding the Lord, were a good Custom, or
not? It was said, that a prescription to have Common so, was void in Law; and
if so, then a prescription to have sole Pasture, which is to have the Grass, by
the mouth of the Cattle, is no other then Common appendant: Daniel's case 1
Cro. so that Common and Pasturage is one and the same thing. They say that it
is against the nature of Common, for the very word Common supposes that the
Lord may feed. I answer, if that were the reason, then a man could not by Law
claim Common for half a year, excluding the Lord: which may be done by Law. But
the true reason is, that if that were allowed, then the whole profits of the
Land might be claimed by prescription, and so the whole Land be prescribed for.
The Lord may grant to his Tenants to have Common, excluding himself: but such a
Common is not good by prescription. The second point was, whether or no the
prescription here not being for Beasts levant and couchant, were good or not?
for that, a difference was made betwixt Common in gross and common appendant,
viz. That a man may prescribe for Common in gross without those words; but not
for Common appendant. 2 Cro. 256. 1 Brownl. 35. Noy 145. 15 Edw. 4. fol. 28.
32. Rolls, tit. Common 388. Fitz. tit. Prescription, 51. a third point was,
whether or no these things are not helped by a Verdict? As to that, it was
alleged, that they are defects in the Title, appearing on Record: and that a
Verdict does not help them. Saunders contra. In case of a Common, such a
prescription is not good, because it is a contradiction, but here we claim
solam Pasturam. Now what may be good at this day by grant, may be claimed by
prescription. As to the Exception, that we ought to have prescribed for Cattle
levant and couchant: its true, if one does claim Common for Cattle, levant and
couchant is the measure for the Common, unless it be for so many Cattle in
number: but here we claim the whole Herbage; which perhaps the Cattle levant
and couchant will not eat up. Hales. Notwithstanding this prescription for the
sole Pasture, yet the Soil is the Lords, and he has Mines, Trees, Bushes, etc.
and he may dig for Turfes. And such a grant, viz. of the sole Pasturage, would
be good at this day. 18 Edw. 3. though a grant by the Lord, that he will not
improve, would be a void grant at this day. Twisden. My Lord Coke is express in
the point. A man cannot prescribe for sole Common, but may prescribe for sole
Pasture. And there is no Authority against him. And for levant and couchant; it
was adjudged in Stoneby and Muckleby's case, that after a Verdict it was
helped. And Judgment was given accordingly.

Anonymus.
AN Action of Trespass was brought for taking away a Cup, till he paid him 20
shillings. The Defendant pleads, that ad quandam curiam he was amerced, and
that for that the Cup was taken. Hales. We cannot tell what Court it is,
whether it be a Court Baron by Grant or Prescription; if it be by Grant, then
it must be coram Seneschallo; if by Prescription, it may be coram Seneschallo,
or coram Sectatoribus, or coram both. Then it does not appear, that the House
where the Trespass was laid, was within the Manor: Then he does not say infra
Jur. Cur'. It was put upon the other side to show cause.

Jacob Hall's Case.
ONe Jacob Hall a Rope-dancer, had erected a Stage in Lincolns-Inn-fields: but
upon a Petition of the Inhabitants, there was an Inhibition from Whitehall: now
upon a complaint to the Judges, that he had erected one at Charingcross, he was
sent for into Court: and the Chief Justice told him, that he understood it was
a Nuisance to the Parish: and some of the Inhabitants being in Court, said, that
it did occasion Broils and Fightings, and drew so many Rogues to that place,
that they lost things out of their Shops every Afternoon. And Hales said, that
in 8 Car. 1. Noy came into Court, and prayed a Writ to prohibit a Bowling-Ally
erected near St. Dunstans Church, and had it.

Sir Anthony Bateman's Case.
IN the Trial at Bar, the Son and Daughter of Sir Anthony Bateman were
Defendants: the Action was an Ejectione Firmae. The Defendants admitted the
point of Sir Anthony's Bankrupcy: but set up a Conveyance made by Sir Anthony
to them for the payment of 1500 l. apiece, being money given to them by their
Grandfather, Mr. Russell, to whom Sir Anthony took out Administration. Hales.
It is a voluntary Conveyance, unless you can prove that Sir Anthony had Goods
in his hands of Mr. Russell, at the time of the executing it. So they proved
that he had, and there was a Verdict for the Defendants.

Leg and Richards.
EJectment. Judgment against the Defendant, who dies, and his Executor brings a
Writ of Error, and is nonsuited. It was moved that he should pay Costs.
Twisden. An Executor is not within the Statute for payment of Costs occasion
dilationis. Hales. I am of the same Opinion.

Harwood's Case.
HE was brought to the Bar by Habeas Corpus: being committed by the Court of
Aldermen for marrying an Orphan without their consent. Sol. North. We conceive
the Return insufficient, and that it is an unreasonable Custom to impose a
Penalty on a man for marrying a City-Orphan in any place of England. Now we
married her far from London, and knew not that she was an Orphan. Then they
have put a Fine of 40 l. upon him, whereas there is no cause why he should be
denied Marriage with her, there being no disparagement. Twisden. Mr. Waller of
Berkingsfield was imprisoned six months for such a thing. So the money was
ordered to be brought into Court. Vide infra 79.

Leginham and Porphery.
REplevin and Avowry for not doing Suit. The Plaintiff sets forth a Custom,
that if any Tenant live at a distance, if he comes at Michaelmas and pay eight
pence to the Lord, and a penny to the Steward, he shall be excused for not
attending; and then says, that he tendered eight pence, etc. and the Lord
refused it, etc. Polynxfen. I know no case where payment will do, and tender
and refusal will not do. Hales. Have you averred, that there are sufficient
Copyholders that live near the Manor? Polynxfen. We have averred, that there
are at least 120. Hales. Surely tender and refusal is all one with payment.
Twisden. An Award is made, that super receptionem, etc. a man should give a
Release, there tender and refusal is enough. Judgment for the Defendant.

Waldron versus etc.
HAles. It is true, one Parish may contain three Vills. The Parish of A. may
contain the Vills of A. B. and C. that is, when there are distinct Constables
in every one of them. But if the Constable of A. does run through the whole,
then is the whole but one Ville in Law. Or where there is a Tything-man, it may
be a Ville: but if the Constable run through the Tything, then it is all one
Ville. I know where three or four Thousand l. per annum has been enjoyed by a
Fine levied of Land in the Ville of A. in which are five several Hamlets, in
which are Tythings; but the Constable of A. runs through them all, and upon
that it was held good for all. Here was a case of the Constable of
Blandford-Forum, wherein it was held, that if he had a concurrent Jurisdiction
with all the rest of the Constables, the Fine would have passed the Lands in
all. In some places they have Tythingmen and no Constables. Polynxfen. Lambard
14. is, that the Constable and the Tything-man are all one. Hales. That is in
some places. Praepositus is a proper word for a Constable. and Decemarius for a
Tything-man.

An Indictment for retaining a Servant without a Testimonial from his last
Master. Moved to quash it, because it wants the words contra pacem. 2. Because
^^ey do not show in what Trade it was. So quashed.

Moved to quash another Indictment, because the year of our Lord, in the
Caption, was in Figures. Hales. The year of the King is enough.

Moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, for that they Sue a Parish for
not paying a Rate made by the Churchwardens only, whereas by the Law, the
major part of the Parish must join. Twisden. Perhaps no more of the Parish will
come together. Counsel. If that did appear, it might be something.

Hales. A Writ of Error will lie in the Exchequer-Chamber of a Judgment in a
Scire facias, grounded upon a Judgment in one of the Actions mentioned in the
27 of Eliz. cap. 8. because it is in effect a piece of one of the Actions
therein mentioned.

Harwood's Case.
HE was removed out of London by Habeas Corpus; the Return was, That he was
fined and committed there for marrying a City-Orphan without the consent of the
Court of Aldermen. Exception 1. They do not say that the party was a Citizen,
or that the Marriage was within the City: and they are not bound to take notice
of a City Orphan out of the City, for their Customs extend only to Citizens in
the City. Exception 2. They have not showed that we had reasonable time to show
cause, why we should not be fined. Twisden. These Objections were overruled in
one Waller's case. Afterward in the same Term Weston spoke to it. There are two
matters upon which the validity of this Return does depend; viz. The Custom and
the Offense within the Custom. The Custom is laid, that time out of mind the
Court of Aldermen have had power to set a reasonable Fine upon such as should
marry an Orphan without their leave, and upon refusal to pay it, to imprison
him. I conceive this Custom, as it is laid, to be unreasonable: it ought to be
locally circumscribed, and confined to the City: 17 Ed. 4. 7. there was an
Action brought upon the Statute of Laborers, for retaining one that was the
Plaintiffs retained Servant: the Defendant pleaded in abatement, that there was
no place laid where the Plaintiffs retainer was: and this was held a good Plea;
for that if it were in another County then where the Defendant retained him, it
was impossible for the Defendant to take notice of a Retainer in another
County. No more can we take notice who is a City Orphan in the County of Kent.
Then, they have returned a Custom to imprison generally; but it should have
been, that without reasonable cause shown they might imprison, and the party
have liberty to show cause to the contrary. Then, I conceive they have returned
the Fact as defective as the Custom: they say, that he married her without
their consent; they ought to have said, that he took her out of their custody:
and your Lordships will not intend that she was in their custody, when she was
out of the City. Offley of the same side; and cited 21 Ed. 3. Fitz. Guard. 31.
and Hob. in Moor and Hussey's case, 95. 3 Cro. 803. 3 Cro. 689. 1 Cro. 561. In
all the cases its returned that they were Freemen of the City. Mr. Solicitor
North on the same side, cited Day and Savage's case. Mr. Attorney General on
the other side said, that because it was impossible to give notice to all,
therefore ex necessitate rei, they must take notice at their peril. Hales. The
City has an Interest in the Orphan, wherever the Orphan be. And for notice, he
may enquire; there is no impossibility of his coming to the knowledge whether
she be an Orphan or no; therefore if he takes her, he takes her at his peril.
Twisden. And for the Fine, such a Fine was set in Langham's Case, and adjudged
good. Let a Citizen of London live where he will, his Children shall be
Orphans. Hales. Some things are local in themselves; some things adherent to
the person, and follow the person; now this is an Interest which follows the
person, and is transmitted to his Children: and the party must take notice of
it at his peril.

Cox and St. Albanes.
A Prohibition was prayed for to the City of London, because the Defendant had
offered a Plea to the Jurisdiction sworn, and it had been refused. Hales. In
transitory Actions, if they will plead a matter that arises out of the
Jurisdiction, and swear it before Imparlance, and it be refused, a Prohibition
shall go. There was a case, in which it was adjudged; 1. That upon a bare
surmise, that the matter arises out of the Jurisdiction, the Court will not
grant a Prohibition. 2. It must be pleaded, and the Plea sworn, and it must
come in before Imparlance. If all this were done, we would grant a Prohibition
here. It was also agreed in that case, that the party should never be received
to assign for Error that it was out of the Jurisdiction, but it must be
pleaded. Twisd. So in this Court, when there is a Plea to the Jurisdiction, as
that it is within a County Palatine, they plead it before Imparlance, and swear
their Plea.

Twisden. There was a Venire facias returnable coram nobis apud Westminster. whereas
it should have been ubicunque fuerimus, etc. yet because the Court was held
here, it was held to be good. Hales. I remember it. Hales. When in an inferior
Court the Venire facias is ad prox. Cur', it is naught, because it is uncertain
when the Court will be kept. But if it be at such a day ad prox. Cur. it is
good.

Anonymus.
A Writ of Error of a Judgment in White-chappel. After the Record was read,
Hales said, the acts of a Court ought to be in the present Tense, as praeceptum
est, not praeceptum fuit. But the acts of the party may be in the Preterperfect
Tense: as venit and protulit hic in Cur' quandam querelam suam; And the
Continuances are in the Preterperfect Tense, as venerunt, not veniunt. But upon
another Exception the Court gave time to move it again.

Moved for a melius inquirendum to be granted to the Coroner of Kent, who had
returned an Inquisition concerning the death of one that was killed within the
Manor of Greenwich: he had returned, that he dyed of a Meagrim in his head,
when he was really killed with a Coach. Hales. A melius inquirendum is
generally upon an Office post mortem, and is directed to the Sheriff. Twisden.
But this cannot be to the Sheriff. In 22 Ed. 4. the Coroner must enquire only
super visum corporis. And if you will have a new inquiry, you must quash this.
Indeed a new inquiry was granted in Miles Bartly's case. Thurland prayed that
the Court, being the supreme Coroner, would examine the misdemeanor of the
Coroner. Hales. Make some Oath of his misdemeanor, because he is a sworn
Officer. Without Oath we will not quash this Inquisition. Newdigate said, that
in the case of Miles Bartly the inquiry was not Filed, and that that was the
reason why a new one was granted. Hales. Let the Coroner attend; he must take
the Evidence in writing; and he should bring his Examination into Court.

Daniel Appleford's Case.
A Writ of Mandamus was directed to the Master and Fellows of New-Colledge in
Oxford, to restore one Daniel Appleford a Fellow. They return, that the Bishop
of Winchester did erect the College, and among other Laws, by which the
College was to be governed, they return this to be one, viz. That if a
Scholar, or other Member of the said College, should commit any crime, whereby
scandal might arise to the College; and that it appeared by his own
confession, or full Evidence of the Fact, that then he should be removed
without any remedy: and that Daniel Appleford a Fellow, was guilty of enormous
Crimes, and was convicted, and thereupon removed: and they pray Judgment
whether this Court will proceed? Jones. By this conclusion they rely chiefly
upon the Jurisdiction of the Court. I will lay this for a ground, that this
Court has Jurisdiction in Extrajudicial causes as well as Judicial: 11 Rep.
Bagg's case. And Appleford has no remedy but this. I will not say, that he may
not have an Action upon the Case, but by that he will not recover the thing,
but damages. And for an Assize; if a man be a Corporation sole, or head of a
Corporation aggregate, and be turned out wrongfully, he may have an Assize: but
for a man that is but an inferior Member of a Corporation, no Assize lies for
him: because he is but a part of the body politic, and does not stand by
himself, but must join with others; and as he cannot have an Assize, so he
cannot have an Appeal: Dyer, 209. and 11 Rep. in Bagg's case. 24 H. 8. 22. 25
H. 8. cap. 19. 4 Inst. 340. by these Authorities, it appears that we are
without remedy by way of Appeal. It may be objected, that there can be no
Appeal hither, because it is a spiritual Corporation. Now I say, this is not a
spiritual Corporation, as appears by the foundation: and I am of Opinion, that
if a Corporation be all of spiritual persons, yet unless there be a spiritual
end, it is no spiritual Corporation, but a Lay-one. But if it be a spiritual
Corporation; yet Deprivation is a temporal act: Dyer 209. Another Objection may
be, That the Founder has provided that there shall be no Appeal. I answer, the
Founder cannot by his foundation exclude Legal remedies against wrong. A
Custom, which is the strongest Foundation, does not bind a man up from his
Legal remedy: Litt. Sect. 212. If a man should dispose of his Estate by Will,
and provide therein, that if any difference should arise concerning the
Execution of the same, that it shall be determined by such and such, and no
Suit commenced upon it at the Common Law, this would be a vain appointment: he
must not erect a Jurisdiction of his own, to oust the Kings Courts of theirs.
Coleman. I conceive this is such a College, as no Mandamus shall go to it in
any case whatsoever: for it is but a private Society, and has no influence
upon the public. In Ryly's Records we find, that Mandamus's were only Letters
to Colleges, etc. and there were no Judicial Mandamus's till Bagg's case; and
I never knew them go, but when the party had not only a Freehold, but one that
was of public concern. Now a Fellowship of a College is for a private design,
only to study: and if you grant a Mandamus in this case, whither will it go at
last? Then the Foundation was to a spiritual intent; and what is committed to
the Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction, this Court does preserve.
Ecclesiastical men hold in Eleemosynam: Litt. Sect. 136. Linwood de Religiosis
domibus. When Colleges are founded under rule and order, it does give the
Bishop Jurisdiction: so that this Court will not enquire into this matter, no
more than it will enquire into causes of Deprivation, and matters relating to
the Institution of Clergymen. It has been denied, that a Fellow of a College
can bring an Assize. But as a Prebend has two capacities, sole and aggregate:
so a Fellow is a Member of a Corporation aggregate, and has a sole capacity in
respect of his Fellowship. For a Churchwarden who is admitted according to the
course of the Ecclesiastical Law, a Mandamus will not lie: Vide 6 H. 7. 10.
Twisden. In one Patrick's case, we all held that a College was a Temporal
Corporation. Hales. There is a reason given in Dyer why a Mandamus will not lie
in the case there, viz. because it was prayed to be awarded to a Temporal
Corporation. Coleman. It does appear by the Return, that the Founder has
appointed a Visitor, now to him there may be an Appeal; and we have returned
the Sentence of the Visitor, and need not return the cause of the Sentence. And
for Books, I do oppose Rolls, tit. Prerogative, Huntly's case, 209. to
Specott's case, and Ken's case in the Reports. In our case the party has a
remedy elsewhere, and therefore he shall not come hither. If a Mandamus shall
lie for a Mastership, Fellowship or Schollarship, it will in time come to lie
for turning out of Commons, and what a combustion will this raise then? The
Niceties of Husband and Wife were said by the Judges in Scott's case, to be
proper for the Spiritual Court, and not fit to be brought before the Judges.
Hales. That a Mandamus lies, I will not positively deny; but whether is it fit
for us to proceed after this Return? It must be taken for granted, that it is
not a spiritual Corporation; if it were, you ought to Appeal to the Visitor,
and then to the Delegates. It is a private Society, as an Inns of Court: and I
confess, that Mandamus's do generally respect matters of public concern. I
never heard of a Mandamus for a Monk. If there be a Jurisdiction in the
Visitor, and he has determined the matter, how will you get over that
Sentence? The Chancellor is Visitor of all the Kings Free-Chappels, and the 2
H. 5. does make him so of all Colleges of the Kings Foundation. Suppose a
Temporal Court, over which we have Jurisdiction, do give Judgment in Assize to
recover an Office: so long as that Judgment stands in force, do you think that
we will grant a Mandamus to restore him against whom the Judgment is given?
Twisden. In all Eleemosinary things there are Visitors appointed either by Law,
or by Creation of the party. Hales. The Free-Chappels of Windsor and
Wolverhampton are not of Spiritual Jurisdiction. Hales. At this rate we should
examine all Deprivations, Suspensions, Elections, etc. and by the 13 of the Qu.
the Laws of the University are confirmed. Hales. We ought not to grant a
Mandamus where there is a Visitor: but in this case the Visitor has given
Sentence.

Mors and Sluice.
A Trial at Bar. An Action upon the case was brought against a Master of a
Ship, who had taken in Goods to Transport them beyond Sea, for that he so
negligently kept them, that they were stolen away whilst the Ship lay in the
River of Thames. Maynard insisted upon it, that the Master was not chargeable:
say they, he is chargeable whilst he is here, but when he is gone out of the
Realm, he is not chargeable, though the Goods be taken from him. Which
distinction, he said, had no foundation in Law. Hales. It will lie upon you
that are for the Defendants, to show a difference betwixt a Carrier and a
Master of a Ship. And it will lie upon you that are for the Plaintiff, to show
why the Master of a Ship should be charged for a Robbery committed within the
Realm, and not for a Pyracy committed at Sea. It was urged for the Plaintiff,
that a Hoy-man and Ferry-man are bound to answer, and why not the Master of a
Ship? The Defendant proved that there was no carelessness nor negligent default
in him. Maynard. He is not chargeable, if there be no negligence in him,
because he is but a Servant, the owner takes the Freight. Hales. He is
Exercitor navis, If we should let loose the Master, the Merchant would not be
secure. And if we should be too quick upon him, it might discourage all
Masters: so that the consequence of this case is great. But the Jury gave a
Verdict for the Defendant; the Court, for the reasons aforesaid, inclining that
way.

Porter and Fry.
EJectione firmae, A special Verdict. The case was; A man devises to A. for
life, the Remainder to one and the Heirs of his body, upon condition, That if
he marry without consent of such and such, or dye without Heirs of the body of
his Mother, that then the Estate shall go to another and his Heirs. He marries
without their consent, and he in the Remainder enters. Mr. Attorney Finch. The
first question will be, whether this Proviso be a Condition or a Limitation? 2.
Whether notice be requisite in this case, or not? For the first, I take it to
be a Limitation, and that it must so be expounded, and not as a Condition.
Dyer: 10 Eliz. 317. Plowd. queres, 108. Moor. 312. 29 Eliz. Com. Banc. 1 Leon.
Plac. 383. 2 Leon. 581. Poph. 6, 7. 1 Roll. Condition 411. and the same case is
in Owen's Reports, 112. In case of a Devise, a Condition must be construed as a
Limitation: 3 Cro. 388. There seems to be an Authority against me in Mary
Portingtons case, 10 Rep. in a reason there given; but it is an accumulative
reason, and does not come to the point adjudged. I shall insist upon Wellock
and Hamond's case in Leon. it is reported likewise in Boraston's case, 3 Rep.
and my Lord Coke says, that it does resolve a Quaere in Dyer, 327. so that
express words of Condition, may by construction in a Will, amount to no more
then a Limitation. The second point is, whether he shall be excused for breach
of this Condition, for want of notice? First, I shall consider it in respect of
the person. Secondly, I respect of the grounds of notice in any case. First, in
respect of the person: now he may be considered in two capacities, as an
Infant, and as a Devisee. Now his Infancy cannot excuse him: for the Condition
was annexed to the Devise expressly, because he was an Infant. Secondly, He is a
Purchasor. Now if an Infant purchase an Advowson, and the Incumbent dye, Laps
shall incur, though he had notice of the death of the Incumbent: and there is
the same reason in this case, where he is Devisee. Thirdly, An Infant is bound
by all Conditions in Deed, though not by Conditions in Law. Com. 57. indeed 31
Ass. 17. is against it; but in Bro. Condition, Plac. 114. that case is said to
be no Law, and Bro. agrees with Plowd. 375. Secondly, Consider him as Devisee:
and then there will be less ground to excuse the want of notice. I take it to
be a good difference betwixt Lands devised to an Heir upon Condition, and Lands
devised to a Stranger upon Condition. To the Heir notice must be given, but not
to a Stranger: for the Heir is in by Descent, and a Title by Law cast upon him.
And he may very well be supposed to take no notice of a Devise, because the Law
takes no notice of a Devise to him. Now a Stranger, as he must needs take
notice of the Estate given, so he may very well be obliged to take notice of
the terms upon which it is given. 4 Report. 83. As for the grounds and reasons
of the Law when notice in any case is requisite, and when not; First, I take it
for a rule, that every man is bound to take notice, when none is bound to give
him notice: 1 H. 7. 5. 13 H. 7. 9. 5 Rep. Sir Henry Constable's case. 3 Leon.
Burleigh's case in the Exchequer. 1 Cro. 390. Rolls 856. Litt. Sect. 350. My
second ground is, that where persons are equally privy and concerned, there
needs no notice. Mich. 1649. Leviston's case. 1 Leon. 31. 7 Rep. 117.
Mallorie's case. 14 H. 7. 21. The third consideration arises from the
circumstances, and strict formality of all notice. You must not give notice of
a Will by word of mouth, but you must leave a Copy of it, compared: 8 Rep.
Fraunce's case. Now the Infant in Remainder is incapable of observing these
circumstances; and they being both Strangers, are both to take notice at their
peril. Now to answer Objections: one is, that the Condition is penal, and
inflicts a forfeiture of an Estate, and that therefore notice ought to be
given. I say, this is rather a declamation, then an argument in Law. I will put
a case, where he that is subject to a penalty, must give notice to preserve
himself: Poph. 10. so that penalty or no penalty is not the business; but
privity or no privity guides the case. And Fraunce's case 8 Report, was ruled
upon the privity, not upon the penalty. 2 Cro. 56. and a case adjudged in this
Court betwixt Lee and Chamberlyne, seem against me; but they differ from ours;
and the 1 Cro. a case between Alford and the Communalty of London, is an
Authority for me. Mr. Solicitor North pro Defendente. I will not speak much to
that point, whether it be a Condition or a Limitation. I shall rely for that
upon Mary Portington's case: that express words of Condition, cannot be
construed to be a Limitation. Dyer 127. Now, if this be a Condition, then the
Heir regularly ought to enter: which he cannot do in this case, because a
Remainder is here limited over. The Law does interpret Conditions according to
the nature and circumstances of the thing, and not strictly always according to
the Letter. I do not observe that in any case the Law suffers a man to incur a
forfeiture, where he has not notice, or is not in the Law supposed to have
notice. He cited 2 Cro. 144. Molineux and Molineux: and Fraunce's case 8
Report. He said it was not the intention of the party, that the Devisee should
be stripped of his Estate, and be never the wiser. Saunders and Gerard's case is
for me, of which I have a private report. He urged also the case of Curtis and
Wolverton, Dyer, 354. and Penant's case 4 Report. It is objected, That they
that are to have the benefit of the Estate, ought to take notice: I answer, the
same Objection might be made in Fraunce's case. Another reason given to excuse
the not-giving of notice, is, that the Condition imports no more then Nature
teaches: but I answer, in case the Executor consent, it is no matter whether
the Grandmother consent or not. And for their Authorities, I shall rely upon 1
Cro. 391. and upon Fraunce's case for answering them. So he prayed Judgment for
the Defendant. Hales. All the difference betwixt this case and Fraunce's is,
that in that case there is an Heir at Law, and not in this. Now the Chancery is
so just, as to observe the Civil and Canon Law, as to personal Legacies, but
not as to Land.

Anonymus.
AN Action upon the case upon a promise to pay money three months after, upon a
Bill of Exchange. The Defendant pleads, non Assumpsit infra sex annos; urged,
that as this promise is laid, he ought to have pleaded, that the cause of
Action did not accrue within six years. Sympson. Non Assumpsit infra sex annos,
relates to the time of payment, as well as to the promise. Hales. That cannot
be. Twisden. If I promise to do a thing upon request, and the promise were made
seven years ago, and the request yesterday, I cannot plead the Statute; but if
the request were six years ago, it must be pleaded specially, viz. that causa
actionis was above six years since.

Bradcat and Tower.
AN Action was brought upon a Charter-party. And Hales in that case said, that
upon a penalty you need not make a demand, as in case of a nomnine poenae; as
if I bind my self to pay 20 l. on such a day, and in default thereof to pay 40
l. the 40 l. must be paid without any demand.

Hales. If a man cut and carry away Corn at the same time, it is not Felony,
because it is but one Act: but if he cut it, and lay it by, and carry it away
afterward, it is Felony.

Hales. If a Declaration be general, Quare clausum fregit, and does not express
what Close, there the Defendant may mention the Trespass at another day, and
put the Plaintiff to a new Assignment. But if he say, Quare clausum vocat. Dale
fregit, etc. there the conclusion, Quae est eadem transgressio, will not help.

Fitz-gerard and Maskall.
ERror of a Judgment in the Kings Bench in Ireland: the general Error assigned.
Offered, 1. That the Eject. was brought de quatuor molendinis, without
expressing whether they were Wind-mills or Water-mills. Hales. That is well
enough. The Presidents in the Register are so. Secondly, That it was of so many
Acres Jampnor' and bruer', not expressing how many of each. Cur'. That has
always been held good. It was then objected, that the Record was not removed:
upon which it was ordered to stay.

Pemberton moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, for that they cited
the Minister of Mary-bone, which is a Donative, to take a faculty of Preaching
from the Bishop. Hales. If the Bishop go about to visit a Donative, this Court
will grant a Prohibition. But if all the pretense be, that it is a Chapel, and
the Chaplain hired, and the Bishop send to him, that he must not Preach without
License, it may be otherwise. Twisden. Fitzherbert says, if a Chaplain of the
Kings Free-Chappel keep a Concubine, the Bishop shall not Visit, but the King.
Hales. Indeed whether there be all Ornaments requisite for a Church, the Bishop
shall not enquire, nor shall he punish for not Repairing. Originally
Free-Chappels were Colleges, and some did belong to the King, and some to
private men. And in such a Chapel, he that was in, was entitled as Incumbent,
and not a Stipendiary. To hear Counsel.

Moved by Stroud for a Prohibition to the Bishops Court of Exeter, because they
proceeded to the Probate of a Will, that contained Devises of Lands as well as
bequests of personal things. Hales. Their proving the Will signifies nothing as
to the Land. Stroud urged Denton's case, and some other Authorities. Hales. The
Will is entire, and we are not advised to grant a Prohibition in such case.

Hales. It is the course of the Exchequer in case of an Outlawry, to prefer an
Information in the nature of a Trover and Conversion, against him that has the
Goods of the party Outlawed

Parsons and Perns.
TWo Women were Ioyntenants in Fee. One of them made a Charter of Feoffment,
and delivered the Deed to the Feoffee, and said to him, being within view of
the Land, Go, enter, and take possession: but before any actual entry by the
Feoffee, the feoffor and feoffee entermarry. And the question was, whether or
no this Marriage, coming between the delivery of the Deed and the Feoffees
Entry, had destroyed the operation of the Livery within the view? Polynxfen. It
has not: for the power and authority that the Feoffee has to enter, is
coupled with an Interest, and not countermandable in Fact, and if so, not in
Law. If I grant one of my Horses in my Stable, nothing passes till Election,
and yet the grant is not revocable: so till attornment nothing passes, and yet
the Deed is not revocable. If the Woman in our case, had married a Stranger,
that would not have been a revocation: Perk. 29. I shall compare it to the case
of 1 Cro. 284. Burdet versus -- Now for the interest gotten by the Husband by
the Marriage: he has no Estate in his own right. If a man be seized in the
right of his Wife, and the Wife be attainted of Felony, the Lord shall enter
and oust the Husband; he gains nothing but a bare perception of profits till
Issue had: after Issue had, he has an Estate for life. Where a man that has
title to enter, comes into possession, the Law does execute the Estate to him:
7 H. 7. 4. 2 R. 2. tit. Attornment. 28 Ed. 3. 11. Bro. tit. Feoffment, 57.
Moor, fol. 85. 3 Cro. 370. Hales said to the other side, you will never get
over the case of 38 Ed. 3. My Lord Coke to that case says, that the Marriage
without Attornment, is an execution of the grant: but that I do not believe;
for the attendance of the Tenant shall not be altered without his consent. The
effectual part of the Feoffment is, Go, enter, and take possession. Twisden.
Suppose there be two Women seized, one of one Acre, and another of another
Acre, and they make an exchange: and then one of them marries before Entry,
shall that defeat the Exchange? Hales. That is the same case. So Judgment was
given accordingly.

Zouch and Clare.
THomas Tenant for life, the Remainder to his first, second and third son, the
Remainder to William for life, and then to his first, second and third son: and
the like Remainders to Paul, Francis and Edward, with Remainders to the first,
second and third son of every one of them. William, Paul, Francis and Edward,
levy a Fine to Thomas, Paul having Issue two Sons at the time. Then Thomas made
a Feoffment. And it was urged by Mr. Leak, that the Remainders were hereby
destroyed. Hales. Suppose A. be Tenant for life, the Remainder to B. for life,
the Remainder to C. for life, the Remainder to a Contingent, and A. and B. do
join in a Fine, does not C's right of Entry preserve the contingent Estates? If
there had been in this case no Son born, the contingent Remainders had been
destroyed; but there being a Son born, it left in him a right of Entry, which
supports the Remainders: and if we should question that, we should question
all, for that is the very basis of all Conveyances at this day. And Judgment
was given accordingly.

Term. Pasch. 24 Car. II. 1672. in B. R.
Monk versus Morris and Clayton.
AN Action was brought by Monk against the Defendants, and Judgment was given
for him. They brought a Writ of Error, and the Judgment was affirmed. Jones
moved that the money might be brought into Court, the Plaintiff being become a
Bankrupt. Winning'. This case was adjudged in the Common Pleas; viz. a man
brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond, and had a Verdict, and before the day in
Bank, became a Bankrupt: it was moved, that that Debt was assigned over, and
prayed to have the money brought into Court, but the Court refused it. Coleman.
We have the very words for us in effect: for now it is all one as if Judgment
had been given for the Assignees of the Commissioners. Twisden. How can we take
notice that he is a Bankrupt? any Execution may be stopped at that rate, by
alleging, that there is a Commission of Bankrupts out against the Plaintiff.
If he be a Bankrupt, you must take out a special Scire facias, and try the
matter, whether he be a Bankrupt or not. Which Jones said they would do, and
the Court granted.

Twisden. If a Mariner or Ship-Carpenter run away, he loses his wages due:
which Hales granted.

Henry L. Peterborough verse. John L. Mordant.
A Trial at Bar upon an Issue out of the Chancery, whether Henry Lord
Peterborough had only an Estate for Life, or was seized in Fee-tail. The Lord
Peterborough's Counsel alleged that there was a settlement made by his Father
9 Car. 1. whereby he had an Estate in Tail, which he never understood till
within these three years: but he had claimed hitherto under a Settlement made
16 Car. 1. And to prove a Settlement made 9 Car. 1. he produced a Witness, who
said, that he being to purchase an Estate from my Lord the Father, one Mr.
Nicholls, who was then of Counsel to my Lord, gave him a Copy of such a Deed,
to show what title my Lord had. But being asked whether he did see the very
Deed, and compare it with that Copy, he answered in the negative: whereupon the
Court would not allow his Testimony to be a sufficient Evidence of the Deed:
and so the Verdict was for my Lord Mordant.

Cole and Forth.
A Trial at Bar directed out of Chancery upon this Issue, whether Wast or no
Wast? Hales. By protestation I try this cause, remembering the Statute of 4
Henr. 4. And the Statute was read, whereby it is Enacted, That no Judgment
given in any of the Kings Courts, should be called in question, till it were
reverst by Writ of Error or Attaint. He said this cause had been tried in
London, and in a Writ of Error in Parliament the Judgment affirmed; Now they go
into the Chancery, and we must try the cause over again, and the same point. A
Lease was made by Hilliard to Green in the year 1651. afterward he devises
the Reversion to Cole; and Forth gets an under-Lease from Green of the
premises, being a Brew House. Forth pulls it down, and builds the ground into
Tenements. Hales. The question is, whether this be Wast or no? and if it be
Wast at Law, it is so in Equity. To pull down a House is Wast, but if the
Tenant build it up again before an Action brought, he may plead that specially.
Twisden. I think the Books are pro and con: whether the building of a new House
be Wast or not. Hales. If you pull down a Malt-mill, and build a Corn-mill,
that is Wast: Then the Counsel urged, that it could not be repaired without
pulling it down. Twisden. That should have been pleaded specially. Hales. I
hope the Chancery will not Repeal an Act of Parliament. Wast in the House is
Wast in the Curtelage, and Wast in the Hall, is Wast in the whole House. So the
Jury gave a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and gave him 120 l. damages.

Term. Mich. 25 Car. II. 1673. in B. R.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Bond in an inferior Court; the Defendant
cognovit actionem, and petit quod inquiratur per patriam de debito. This
pleading came in question in the Kings Bench upon a Writ of Error: but was
maintained by the Custom of the place, where, etc. Hales said it was a good
Custom; for perhaps the Defendant has paid all the Debt but 10 l. and this
course prevents a Suit in Chancery. And it were well if it were established by
Act of Parliament at the Common Law. Wild. That Custom is at Bristow.

Randall versus Jenkins. 24 Car. 2. Rot. 311.
REplevin. The Defendant made Conusance as Bailiff to William Jenkins for a
Rentcharge, granted out of Gavel-kind Lands to a man and his Heirs. The
question was, whether this Rent should go to the Heir at Common Law, or should
be partible amongst all the Sons. Hardres. It shall go to the eldest Son, as
Heir at Law: for I conceive it is by reason of a Custom time out of mind used,
that Lands in Kent are partible amongst the Males. Lamb. Perambulat. of Kent
543. Now this being a thing newly created, it wants length of time to make it
descendible by Custom. 9 H. 7. 24. A feoffment in Fee is made of Gavel-kind
Lands upon Condition: the Condition shall go to the Heirs at Common Law, and
not according to the descent of the Land. Co. Litt. 376. If a warranty be
annexed to such Lands, it shall descend only upon the eldest Son. Now this
Rentcharge, being a thing contrary to common right, and de novo created, is
not apportionable: Litt. Sect. 222. 224. it is not a part of the Land, for if a
man levy a Fine of the Land, it will not extinguish his Rent, unless by
agreement betwixt the parties: 4 Edw. 3. 32. Bro. tit. Customs 58. if there be
a Custom in a particular place, concerning Dower, it will not extend to a
Rentcharge: Fitz. Dower 58. Co. Litt. 12. Fitz. Avowry 207. 5 Edw. 4. 7. there
is no occasion in this case, to make the Rent descendible to all: for the Land
remains partible amongst the Males, according to the Custom. And why a Rent
should go so, to the prejudice of the Heir, I know not. 14 H. 88. it is said,
that a Rent is a different and distinct thing from the Land. Then the language
of the Law speaks for general Heirs, who shall not be disinherited by
construction. The grand Objection is, whether the Rent shall not follow the
nature of the Land? 27 H. 8. 4. Fitzherb. said, he knew four Authorities that
it should: Fitz. Avowry 150. As for his first case, I say, that Rent amongst
Parceners is of another nature than this: for that is distreynable of Common
right. As for the second, I say the rule of it holds only in cases of
Proceedings and Trials; which is not applicable to his Custom. His third case
is, that if two Coparceners make a feoffment, rendering Rent, and one dies, the
Rent shall not survive. (To this I find no answer given) Litt. Sect. 585. is
further objected; where it is said, that if Land be deviseable by Custom, a
Rent out of such Lands may be devised by the same Custom: but Authorities clash
in this point. He cited farther these books; viz. Lamb. Peramb. of Kent: and 14
H. 8. 7, 8. 21 H. 6. 11. Noy, Randall and Roberts case 51. Den. cont. I
conceive this Rent shall descend to all the Brothers: for it is of the quality
of the Land, and part of the Land: it is contained in the bowels of the Land,
and is of the same nature with it: 22 Ass. 78. which I take to be a direct
Authority as well as an instance. Co. Lit. 132. ibid 111. In some Boroughs a
man might have devised his Land by Custom, and in those places he might have
devised a Rent out of it. The Stat. de donis conditionalibus brought in a new
Estate of Inheritance by way of entail: now this Estate Tail in Gavelkind Lands
has been taken to descend to all the Brothers; and the reason is, because it
is part of the Fee-simple, though created de novo: so Uses follow the nature of
the Land. The cases that have been cited, were not the Opinion of the Court,
but of them that argued. Lamb. 47. says, that the Custom extends to Advowsons,
Commons, Rent-charges, as well as to Land. It is objected, that here must be a
prescription: I answer, Gavel-kind Law is the Law of Kent, and is never pleaded
but presumed. 7 Edw. 3. 38. Co. Litt. 175. 2 Edw. 4. 18. and Co. Litt. 140.
says, the Customs of Kent are of common right, and if so, then our Rentcharge
will go of common right to all the Brothers. Hales, Rainsford and Wyld were of
Opinion, that the Rent ought to descend to all the Brothers, according to the
descent of the Land: because the Rent is part of the profits of the Land, and
issues out of the Land; and they gave Judgment accordingly.

A man covenanted to stand seized to the use of the Heirs of his body. Hales.
The Heir and the Ancestor are correlates, and as one thing in the eye of the
Law, and that is the reason why a man shall not make his right Heir a
Purchasor, without putting the whole fee-simple out of himself. If the Fathers
Estate turns to an Estate for life, there will be no question. In the case of
Bennet and Mitford, there did result an Estate for life, to knit the Limitation
to the original Estate. Here, 1. We are in the case of an Estate Tail; and the
Judges use to go far in making such a Limitation good: then, 2. We are in the
case of an Use, which is construed as favorably as may be to comply with the
intention of the party. This case is not as if he should have covenanted to
stand seized to the use of the Heirs of the body of J. D. there the Covenantor
would have had a Fee-simple in the mean time: but the case is all one as if the
Limitation had been to himself, and the Heirs of his own body: Vide the Earl of
Bedford's case. Twisden. We must make it good, if we can. Cur' advisare vult.

Austin and Lippencott.
A Special Verdict. Francis the Father was Tenant for life, the Remainder in
Fee to Francis the Son; and by the Deed, by which this Estate was thus settled,
100 l. a year was appointed to be paid to Francis the Son during the Fathers
life. The Son releaseth to the Father all arrears of Rent, Annuities, Titles
and Demands by virtue of that Indenture: and the question was, whether this
Release passed the Inheritance as well as the Annuity? Polynxfen. I conceive
this Release shall not pass any Estate in the Land: and my reason is, because
there is no mention of the Land, nor of any Estate therein. The principal thing
intended and expressed is the Annuity: then the Release concludes, to the day
of the Release, which does manifest, that he did not intend to Release any
thing that was not to come to him till after the death of his Father. It is
true, here is the word demand, but that will not do it: 3 Cro. 258. Then for
the word Titles: by Plowd. 494. and 8 Rep. 153. it is where a man has lawful
cause to have that that another does possess; sometimes it is taken in a larger
sense, and then it does include right. Upon construction of this Release I
think it ought to be taken in the stricter sense, and the intention of the
party must guide the construction. For where there are general words in the
beginning, and particular words afterward, the particular do restrain the
general: and so vice versa for enlargement: he cited Hen and Hanson's case, 15
Car. 2. in this Court: where a Release of all demands would not Release a
Rentcharge by the Opinion of three Judges against Twisden, for that reason;
and because words in Deeds are to be taken according to common acceptance: he
cited 2 Rolls 409. In our case, the general words of all Suits and Titles are
limited and restrained to the Annuity and Title of that, and shall not by a
large construction be extended to any thing else. Hales. How has the
Inheritance gone? Polynxfen. The Grandchild has that. Hales. I think a Release
of all demands will not extinguish a Rent: but if it were all demands out of
Land, it were another thing. It has been held over and over again, that it
does not extinguish and discharge a Covenant not broken. But what say you to
this Release of all Titles? for it appears in express terms, that the Son did
not only release the arrears of the Annuity, but the thing it self; and not
only so, but all other Titles by virtue of that Deed: suppose the case had been
but thus; the Father is Tenant for life, the Remainder to the Son for Life; the
Son releaseth to his Father all the Title that he has by virtue of that Deed:
had not this passed the Sons Estate for life? In the cases that you have cited,
it is allowed that a Release of all Titles, will pass a right to Land. He had a
Title to the Annuity, and a title to the Remainder: now he releaseth the
Annuity, and all other Titles which he has by that Deed, or otherwise
howsoever: To hear Sergeant Maynard on the other side.

Wilson and Robinson.
A Man devises all his Tenant-right Estate at Brickend, and all that my Father
and I took of Rowland Hobbs, etc. Levings. I conceive that these words pass
only an Estate for life; for it is not mentioned what Estate he has: 1 Cro.
447, 449. a Devise of all the rest of his Goods, Chattels, Leases, Estates,
Mortgages, Debts, ready money, etc. and the Court held, that no Fee passed, and
said it was a doubt, whether any Estate would pass in that case, but what was
for years; being coupled only with personal things. Trin. 1649. Rot. 153.
Jerman and Johnson: One devised all his Estate, paying his Debts and Legacies;
now his personal Estate came but to 20 l. and his Debts were 100 l. there
indeed all his real Estate passed because of the payment of his Debts. And in
our case, the following particulars are but a description of the Land, and
contain no limitation of the Estate. If a man devises black Acre to one and
the Heirs of his body, and also devises white Acre to the same person, he has
but an Estate for life in white Acre, though he has a Fee-simple in the other:
for the word also is not so strong as if it had been in the same manner. Moor
152. Yel. 209. Weston contra. I conceive an Estate of Inheritance does pass;
for the word Estate comprehends all his Interest. When a man devises all his
Estate, he leaves nothing in himself: in that case of Jerman it was held, that
all my Estate comprehends all my Title and Interest in the Land. If a man
devises all his Inheritance, this carries the Fee-simple of his Land: and the
word, all his Estate, is as comprehensive as that. Hales and Wyld. By a Grant
or Release of totum statum suum, the Fee-simple will pass: if the words had
been all my Tenant-right Lands, it had been otherwise: but the word Estate is
more then so: if a man devises all his Copyhold Estate, will not all his
whole Interest pass? Adjornatur.

Norman and Foster.
AN Action of Debt upon a Bond to perform Covenants in an Indenture of Lease,
one Covenant is for quiet enjoyment: and the Plaintiff assigns for breach, that
a Stranger entered, but does not say that he had Title. Hales. Habens Titulum at
that time, would have done your business. My Lord Dyer's case is, that another
entered claiming an Interest: but that is not enough; for he may claim under the
Lessee himself. He mentioned the cases in Moor 861. and Hob. 34. Tisdale and
Essex. If the Covenant had been to save him harmless against all lawful and
unlawful Titles, yet it must appear, that he that entered, did not claim under
the Lessee himself. Hales. If I Covenant that I have a lawful right to grant,
and that you shall enjoy notwithstanding any claiming under me; these are two
several Covenants, and the first is general, and not qualified by the second.
And so said Wyld: and that one Covenant went to the Title, and the other to the
possession: Dyer, 328. An Assumpsit to enjoy sine interruptione alicujus, that
is, whether by Title or by Tort, a quiet possession being to be intended to be
the chief cause of the Contract. 3 Leon. 43. 2 Cro. 425, 315. 444. Adjornatur.

Angel convicted of Barretry, produced a Pardon, which was of all Treasons,
Murders, Felonies, and all Penalties, Forfeitures and Offenses. The Court said
the words all Offenses, will pardon all that is not capital.

Blackburn and Graves.
A Copyholder surrenders to the use of several persons for years successive,
the Remainder in Fee to J. S. Wyld. An admittance of a particular Tenant is an
admittance of all the Remainders to all purposes, but only the Lords Fine: and
if the Custom be, that the Fine paid by the first Tenant shall go to all the
Remainders, then the admittance of the first man is to all intents and purposes
an admittance of all that come after. In this case the possession of the Lessee
for years is the possession of the Remainder-man. In one Baker and Dereham's
case, there was a surrender to the use of a man and his Heirs of Copyhold
Land, that descended according to the Custom of Borough-English: the
surrenderee dyed before admittance; and the Opinion of the Court was, that the
right would descend to the youngest, according to the Custom.

Upon a case moved, Hales said, That if a Tenant in Common bring a personal
Action without his fellow joining in the Suit, the Defendant ought to take
advantage of it in abatement: but if he plead Not-guilty it shall be good, but
then he shall recover damages only for a moiety. If a Tenant in Common seal a
Lease of Ejectment, he shall recover but a moiety.

A Justice of Peace committed a Brewer for not paying the duty of Excise; the
Brewer was brought into Court by Habeas Corpus. Sympson. It ought to appear
that he was a common Brewer. Hales. The Statute does prohibit the bringing of a
Certiorari, but not a Habeas Corpus. And want of averment of a matter of fact,
may be amended in a Return in Court: and if it be not true, at their peril be
it. So it was mended.

Money owing upon a Judgment given in the Kings Court cannot be attached.

Term. Hill. 25 and 26 Car. II. 1673. in B. R.
Baker and Bulstrode.
DEbt upon a Bond. The Condition was, to Seal and execute a Release to the
Plaintiff. The Defendant demurs, because the Plaintiff did not allege in his
Declaration a tender of a Release. It was urged, that the Condition was not, to
make, but only to Seal and Execute, etc. But per Curiam, he is bound to do it
without a tender. And the word Execute, or the word Seal, comprehends the
making. And Lamb's case was cited.

Warren and Prideaux. Trin. 24 Car. 2. Rot. 1472.
A Distress and Avowry for Toll. The prescription was for Toll, in
consideration of maintaining the Key, and keeping a Bushel to measure Salt;
viz. That in consideration thereof he and those, etc. have had time out of
mind, etc. a Bushel of Salt of every Ship that comes laden with Salt into
Slipper-point: For the Avowant it was alleged, that the maintaining of the Key
is for public good: Co. Magn. Cart. 222. Rolls 265. Its true, it is not
alleged, that they did actually use the Weights and Measures. 1 Leon. 231. but
it being alleged that the Ship came within Slipper-point, it is enough to
charge the Plaintiff with the payment. As for the Distress taken, which is part
of the Ships lading, viz. Salt; it is objected, that it cannot be distrained,
because it is part of the thing from which the duty arises: but I answer, that
this is not like to a Distress upon Land, nor to be judged of according to the
rules allowed in cases of such Distresses. There were cited on this side 21 H.
7. 1. 3 Cro. 710. Smith and Shepherd: Dyer 352. Courtney contra. I conceive
this prescription ought to have some consideration, and to be grounded on a
meritorious cause, to bind a Subject. The keeping of the Bushel is no
meritorious cause, because it is presumed, that the party has the use of it
himself. Hales. The prescription is not for a Port but a Wharfe. If any man
will prescribe for a Toll upon the Sea, he must allege a good consideration;
because by Magna Charta, and other Statutes, every one has liberty to go and
come upon the Sea without impediment. Wyld. This Custom or Prescription is
laid, to have a Bushel of Salt of every Ship that comes within the
Slipper-point; if a Ship be driven in by stress of weather, and goes out again
the first opportunity that presents, shall that Ship pay? Hales. If he had
said, that he had a Port, and was bound to maintain that Port, and that he and
all those whose Estate he had, etc. that might have been a good Prescription;
but in this case there must be a special inducement and compensation to the
Subject by reason of those Statutes by which all Merchants and others, have
liberty to come in and go out. They inclined that the Prescription was not good.

Anonymus.
A Trial at Bar concerning the River of Wall-fleet; the question was, whether
had not the right of Fishing there, exclusive of all others. Hales. In case of
a private River, the Lords having the Soil is a good evidence to prove that he
has the right of Fishing; and it puts the proof upon them that claim liberam
piscariam. But in case of a River that flows and re-flows, and is an Arm of the
Sea, there prima facie it is common to all; and if any will appropriate a
privilege to himself, the proof lies on his side; for in case of an Action of
Trespass brought for Fishing there, it is prima facie a good justification to
say, that the locus in quo is brachium maris, in quo unusquisque subjectus
Domini Regis habet and habere debet liberam piscariam. In the Severne there are
particular restraints, as Gurgites, etc. but the Soil does belong to the Lords
on either side: and a special sort of Fishing belongs to them likewise; but the
common sort of Fishing is common to all. The Soil of the River of Thames is in
the King: and the Lord Mayor is Conservator of the River; and it is common to
all Fishermen: and therefore there is no such contradiction betwixt the Soil
being in one, and yet the River common for all Fishers, etc.

Sedgewick and Gofton.
HAles said, That a Writ of Error in Parliament may be returned ad prox.
Parliament. such a day; but if a particular day be not mentioned, then it is
naught; and although there be a particular day expressed, yet if that day be at
two or three Terms distance, the Court will adjudge it to be for delay; and it
shall be no Supersedeas. And he said he had looked into the Books upon the
point. In the Register he said, there is a Scire fac. ad prox. Parliament. but
not a Writ of Error.

Term. Pasch. 26 Car. II. 1674. in B. R.
Fountain and Coke.
A Trial at Bar. Hales. An Executor may be a witness in a cause concerning the
Estate, if he have not the Surplusage given him by the Will: and so I have
known it adjudged. If a Lessee for years be made Tenant to the Praecipe for
suffering a common Recovery; that does not extinguish his term, because it was
in him for another purpose: which the whole Court agreed.

Jacob Aboab.
DEbt upon a Bond was brought against him by the name of Jacob: and he pleaded,
that he was called and known by the name of Jaacob, and not Jacob: but it was
overruled.

Sir John Thorowgood's Case.
IT was moved to quash an Indictment, because it ran in detrimentum omnium
inhabitantium, etc. Rolls 2 part 83. Wyld. I have known it ruled naught for
that cause. So quashed.

Benson versus Hodson.
A Writ of Error of a Judgment in the County Palatine of Lancaster in Replevin:
The Defendant makes Conusance as Bailiff to Ann Mosely: The Lands were the
Lands of Rowland Mosely, and he covenanted to levy a Fine of them, to the use
of himself and the Heirs males of his body, the remainder in Tail to several
others, the remainder to his own right Heirs. Provided, that if there shall be
a failer of Issue Male of his body, and Dame Elizabeth be dead, and Ann Mosely
be married, or of the age of 21 years, then she shall have 200 l. per annum for
ten years: Then Rowland dies, leaving Issue Sir Edward Mosely, Sir Edward makes
a Lease for 1000 years, then levies a Fine, and suffers a Recovery; Then dies
without Issue Male: And the Contingents did all happen. The question is,
whether this Rentcharge of 200 l. per annum be barred by the Fine and
Recovery, and shall not operate upon the Lease? Levings. I conceive the Fine is
not well pleaded, for nothing is said of the Kings Silver, and if that be not
paid, it is void: Then they have pleaded a Common Recovery, but not the
Execution of it by Entry. Now I conceive the Common Recovery does destroy the
Estate Tail, but not the Rent. The reason why a common Recovery is a Bar, is
because of the intended recompense. Now that is a fictitious thing: 9 Rep.
Beamonts case. 1 Cro. Stone and Newman, Cuppledicks case. Now this Rent is a
mere possibility, and has no relation to the Estate of the Land. Then again,
when the Recovery was suffered, the Rent was not in being: Now a Recovery will
never bar but where the Estate is dependant upon it, either in Reversion or
Remainder. For that case of Moor pl. 201. I conceive he is barred, because the
Reversion is barred by the Fine. 3 Cro. 727. 792. White and Gerishe's case, the
same case 2 And. 190. Noy p. 9. Another reason is, because the Rent remains in
the same plight, notwithstanding the Fine. Another reason is, it was a mere
possibility at the time of the Fine and Recovery. Pell and Brownes case is for
me. In our case is no Estate in esse to be barred. Then this Estate is granted
out of the Estate of the Feoffees, As in Whitlocks case 8 Rep. 71. the Estates
for years, which there is a power to make, shall be said to precede all the
Limitations. There is no other way for securing younger Childrens Portions by
the same Deed, but it may be done by another Deed, as in Goodyer and Clerks
case. Mr. Finch contra. I conceive the Rent is barred upon the reason of
Capells case. They say not. (1) Because it does only charge the Remainder. (2)
The intended recompense does not go to it. (3) This Lease for 1000 years does
precede the Fine. The Law will never invert the operation of a Conveyance, but
ut res magis valeat, Bredon's case. Then for the intended recompense, that
cannot be the reason of barring a Remainder, for the Estate Tail was barred
before. 3 Leon. 157. But Moor fol. 73. says, it is the favor the Law has for
Recoveries: And till the Reversion takes place in possession, the Rent cannot
arise out of the Reversion, nor so long as this Lease is in being. Hales. You
make two great points, (1) Whether the Rent be barred by the Common Recovery?
(2) Whether the Rentcharge shall arise out of the Lease for years? This is
plain; if Tenant in Tail grant a Rentcharge, and suffer a Common Recovery, the
Rentcharge will not be avoided; So that if Tenant in Tail grant a Rent, a
Recovery will not bar that, though it does a Reversion; but the reason of these
cases is, because the Estate of him that suffers the Recovery, is charged with
the Rent. Therefore if there be a Limitation of a Use upon Condition, and
Cestui que use suffers a Recovery that will not destroy the Condition, the
Estate being charged with it, for the Recoveror can have the Estate only as he
that suffered the Recovery had it; And therefore there is an Act of Parliament
to enable Recoverors to distrein without Attornment. Therefore so long as any
one comes in by that Recovery, he comes in in continuance of the Estate Tail,
and coming in so, he is liable to all the charges of Tenant in Tail. Now what
is the reason why Tenant in Tail, suffering a Common Recovery, a Rent by him in
Remainder shall be barred? The reason is, because the Recoveror comes in in the
continuance of that Estate that is not subject to the Rent, but is above all
those charges; now no recompense can come to such a Rent. And therefore there
is another reason why a Common Recovery will bar; at Common Law upon an Estate
Tail, which was a Fee-simple conditional, a Remainder could not be limited
over; because but a possibility: but now comes that Statute De donis
conditionalibus, and makes it an estate tail, and a Common recovery is an
inherent privilege in the Estate that was never taken away by that Statute De
donis, the Law takes it as a conveiance excepted out of the Statute, as if he
were absolutely seized in fee, and this is by construction of Law; It is true,
there can be no recompense to him that has but a possibility. But the
business of recompense is not material, as to this charge; And the reason of
Whites case and other cases put explain this. Now what difference between this
and Capels case? Say they, there the charge does arise subsequent, but here the
charge does arise precedent; why I say the charge does arise precedent to the
Remainder, but subsequent to the Estate tail, for it is not to take effect till
the Estate tail be determined. It was doubted in the Queens time, whether a
Remainder for years was barred, but it has been otherwise practiced ever since
and there is no color against it. Now you do agree that the Remainder to the
right Heirs of one living shall be barred, for the Estate is certain though the
Person be uncertain; So long as the Rent does not come within the compass and
limitation of the Estate tail the Rent is extinct and killed, there is nothing
to keep life in it: But whether does not the Lease for years preserve it?
Heretofore it was a question among young men, Whether if Tenant in Tail granted
a Rent Charge for Life, then makes a Lease for three Lives; In this case though
the Rent before would have dyed with Tenant in Tail, yet this Rent will
continue now during the three Lives, which it will. And it has been
questioned, if he had made a Lease for years instead of the Lease for lives if
that would have supported the Rent? Now in our case if the Lease for years were
chargeable the Rent would arise out of that; But if this Rent should continue
then most men's Estates in England would be shaken. Wild. The Lease for years
does not preserve the Rent, but the Common Recovery does bar it: For Pell and
Brownes case; in that Case the Recovery could not bar the possibility, for he
was not Tenant in Tail that did suffer the Recovery, but he had only a Fee
simple determinable, and the contingent Remainder not depend upon an Estate
Tail, nay did not depend by way of Remainder, but by way of Contingency; It is
true, Justice Dodridge did hold otherwise, but the rest of Judges gave Judgment
against him upon very good reason. Twisden. I never heard that case cited, but
it was grumbled at. Hales. But to your knowledge and mine, they always gave
Judgment accordingly. A man made a gift in Tail determinable upon his
non-payment of 1000 l. the Remainder over in Tail to B. with other Remainders,
Tenant in Tail before the day of payment of the 1000 l. suffers a common
Recovery, and does not pay the 1000 l. yet because he was Tenant in Tail when
he suffered the Recovery, by that he had barred all, and had an Estate in Fee
by that Recovery. At a day after Hales said, the Rent was granted before the
Lease for years, and is not to take effect till the Estate Tail be spent, and a
common Recovery bars it: If there be Tenant in Tail, reserving Rent, a common
Recovery will not bar it; so if a Condition be for payment of Rent, it will not
bar it: But if a Condition be for doing a collateeal thing, it is a bar. And so
if Tenant in Tail be with a Limitation so long as such a Tree shall stand, a
common Recovery will bar that Limitation.

Lampiere versus Mereday.
AN Audita Querela was brought before Judgment entered, which they could not do:
9 H. 5. 1. which the Court agreed; Whereupon Counsel said, it was impossible
for them to bring an Audita Querela before they were taken in Execution; for
the Plaintiff will get Judgment signed, and take out Execution on a sudden,
and behind the Defendants back. Thereupon the Court ordered the Postea to be
brought in, for the Defendant to see if Execution were signed. And at a day
after Hales said, If an Audita Querela was brought after the day in bank,
though the Judgment was not entered up, yet the Court would make them enter up
the Judgment, as of that day, So that they shall not plead Null tiel Record.

Wyld said, a Sheriffs bond for ease and favor was void at Common Law, and so
it was declared in Sir John Lenthalls case.

Twisden upon opening of a Record by Mr. Den said, It was already adjudged in
this Court, that a Rent issuing out of Gavelkind Land, is of the nature of the
Land, and shall descend as the Land does.

An Action of Debt upon a Bond. Sympson moved in Arrest of Judgment. The Bond
was dated in March, and the Condition was for payment, super vicessimum octavum
diem Martii prox' sequentem. It was sequentem which refers to the day which
shall be understood of the month next year. If it had been sequentis, then it
had referred to March, and then it had been payable the next year. But the
Court was of Opinion, that it should be understood the current month. Sympson
cited a case wherein he said it had been so held. Read versus Abington.

Hales. Formerly, if Execution was gone before a Writ of Error delivered or
showed to the party, it was not to be a Supersedeas. Wyld. He must not keep the
Writ in his pocket, and think that will serve. At another day Hales said, it
shall not be a Supersedeas, unless showed to the party, and he must not
foreslow his time of having it allowed, for if it be not allowed by the Court
within four days, it is no Supersedeas. Hales. A Writ of Error taken out, if it
be not shown to the Clerk of the other side, nor allowed by the Court, it is no
Supersedeas to the Execution: And that if a Writ of Error be sued bearing Test
before the Judgment be given, if the Judgment be given before the Retorn, it is
good to remove it, (though at first he said it was so in respect of a
Certiorari, but not of a Writ of Error.) And he said that Judgment, when ever
it is entered, has relation to the day in bank, viz. the first day of the Term:
So that a Writ of Error retornable after, will remove the Record when ever the
Judgment is entered.

Upon a motion concerning the amending of Leather-Lane. Hales. If you plead
Not-guilty, it goes to the Repair or not Repair; but if you will discharge your
self, you must do it by prescription, or ratione tenurae, and say that such an
one ratione tenurae, or such part of the Parish, has always used time out of
mind, etc.

Anonymus.
AN Action of Debt upon a Bond: the Condition, Whereas one Bardue did give by
his Will so much, if he should pay it such a day, etc. The Defendant pleads
been and verum est, he did give him so much by his Will and Testament; but he
revoked that, and made another last Will. The Court said, he was estopped to
plead so. Hales. It does not appear when the Bond was made, and it shall be
intended to be made after the parties death. Judgment pro Querente.

Deereing versus Farrington.
AN Action of Covenant, declaring upon a Deed by which the Defendant assignavit
and transposuit all the money that should be allowed by any Order of a Foreign
State to come to him in lieu of his share in a Ship. Tompson moved that an
Action of Covenant would not lie, for it was neither an express nor implied
Covenant: 1 Leon. 179. Hales. You should rather have applied your self to this;
viz. whether it would not be a good Covenant against the party, as, If a man
does demise, that is an implied Covenant; but if there be a particular express
Covenant, that he shall quietly enjoy against all claiming under him, that
restrains the general employed Covenant; But it is a good Covenant against the
party himself. If I will make a Lease for years, reserving Rent to a Stranger,
an Action of Covenant will lie by the party for to pay the Rent to the
Stranger. Then it was said, it was an Assignment for maintenance. Hales. That
ought to have been averred. Then it was further said, that an Assignment
transferring, when it cannot transfer, signifies nothing. Hales. But it is a
Covenant, and then it is all one as if he had covenanted that he should have
all the money that he should recover for his loss in such a Ship. Twisd. seemed
to doubt. But Judgment.

Lord Mordant versus Earl of Peterborough.
TRial at Bar, the question was, Whether the Earl of Peterborough was Tenant
for life only of the Manor of Maiden: The Defendant did not appear, the
Plaintiff thereupon desired to examine his Witnesses, that so he might preserve
their Evidence. Twisd. When they do not appear, what good will that do you? for
they will say, you set up a man of straw, and pull him down again. There was a
former Deed of entail, with a power of revocation in it, and after the Deed
exhibited was made, whereby the Estate was otherwise settled, and there was a
Ioynture to the present Lady, and done by persons of great Learning in the Law:
The Revocation was to be by Deed under my Lords Hand and Seal in the presence
of three Witnesses: Now the question was, whether this second Deed was a
revocation in Law, and an Execution of that power? And the Court told the
Counsel, they should find it specially if they would; but they refused. Hales.
In 16 Car. Snape and Sturts case, If there be a power of revocation, and a
Lease for years is made, it does suspend quoad the term, but after it is good.
Then it has been questioned formerly if there be such a power, and the person
makes a Lease and Release, whether it was a Revocation. But shall we conceive
the learned Counsel in this case would have ventured upon an implicit
revocation, and not have made an express revocation? So that you must be
nonsuit, or find it specially. But the issue being, If he we only Tenant for
life, he said he must go back to the Chancery to amend it, for by the Deed
produced, he has an Estate for life, and the Reversion in Fee.

Burgis versus Burgis. In Chancery.
A Man having a long Lease, settled it in Trust upon himself for life, the
Remainder to his Wife for life, the Remainder to the first Son of their two
bodies, the Remainder to the second Son, and so to the tenth Son; And if they
should have no Son or Sons then the Remainder, to such Daughter and Daughters
of their bodies, etc. The man and his wife died, and left only a Daughter, who
preferred her Bill against the Trustees for the executing of this Remainder to
her; The question is, whether this Remainder be a good Remainder, or whether it
be void? And the Lord Keeper Finch held it was a void Remainder, because it
does depend upon so many, and such remote Contingencies, for otherwise it would
be a perpetuity. And he said, he would allow one Contingency to be good, viz.
that to the first Son, though the first Son was not in esse at the time of his
decease. And he said, he did deny my Lord Cokes Opinion in Leon. Lovells case,
which says, that in case of a Lease settled to one and the heirs males of his
body, when he dies the Estate is determined; for he said it shall go to his
Executors. And he said there was the same case with this in this Court,
Backhurst versus Bellingham. And he said, that the Common Law did complain,
that this Court did encroach upon them, whereas they are beholding to this
Court for their rules in Equity, as, Formerly when Ecclesiastical persons made
Leases, a misnosmer would avoid them, but Elsmere in his time would
notwithstanding the misnosmer make them good. And he cited a case in Dyer, and
Matthew Mannings case, Leon. Lovell and Lampetts case, and Child and Bailies
case.

Another case in Chancery. One mortgaged Lands, then confessed a Judgment, and
died, The Mortgagee buys of the heir the Equity of Redemption for 200 l. The
Bill was preferred by the Creditor by Judgment against the Mortgagee and Heir,
either to be let in by paying the Mortgage money, or else that the 200 l.
received by the heir, might be Assets; And the Court said, that the Mortgagees
Estate should not be stirred; But it was left by my Lord to be made a case,
whether the two hundred pounds should be Assets in the hands of the heir.

Mosedell the Marshal of the K. B's. Case.
A Trial at Bar; An Action of Debt brought against Mosedell for the escape of
one Reynolds; The Plaintiff said, he could prove that he was at London three
long Vacations. Twisd. It is hard to put three Escapes upon the Marshal, for he
may be provided only for one, and he cannot give in Evidence a Fresh pursuit,
but it must be pleaded. Hales. I always let them give in evidence a Fresh suit
upon a Nil debet. And Wild said, it was generally done. So they gave evidence
of an Habeas corp. ad test', and that the Prisoner went down too long
beforehand, and stayed too long after the Assizes were done at Wells in
Somersetshire, and that he went back threescore miles beyond Wells before he
returned again for London. Hales. If an Habeas Corpus be granted to bring a
person into Court, and the Sheriff let him go into the Country, it is an
escape. And though he be not bound to bring him the direct way, because he may
be rescued, yet he ought not to carry him round about a great way for the
accommodation of the party; if he does it is an Escape; but by this Evidence
you let him go back threescore miles, to which there can be no answer. An
Habeas Corpus retornable immediate, is not fixed to an hour, but to a convenient
time. They answered, that he went back to carry back some Writings. Counsel,
Here is an escape of one of the parties, who dies before the Action brought,
whereby the whole charge is survived to the other before the Action brought;
and whether this shall purge the Escape is the question, or how far it shall
purge it? Wild. Before you brought your Action the Debt is gone, as to the
Escape. Hales. We are made the Engines of doing all the mischief if this shall
go unpunished, being by color of an Habeas Corpus. So the Jury brought in a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, who declared in Debt for 6200 l.

Green versus Proud.
A Trial at Bar; The question, whether a Will or no Will? The Plaintiff
produced a Deed indented, made between two parties, the Man and his Son: and
the Father did agree to give the Son so much, and the Son did agree to pay such
and such Debts and Sums of money: And there were some particular expressions
resembling the form of a Will; as, that he was sick of body, and did give all
his Goods and Chattels, etc. but the Writing was both Sealed and delivered as a
Deed; And they gave evidence, that he intended it for his last Will; which, the
Court said, was a good proof of his Will. Then the Defendant setting up an
Entail, the Plaintiff exhibited an Exemplification of a Recovery in the
Marquess of Winchesters Court in ancient demesne; The other side objected, that
they did not prove it a true Copy. But because it was ancient, the Court said
they should not be so strict upon the Evidence of it, for the other side said,
the Court Rolls were burned in Baseing-house in the time of the Wars. Hales. I
remember a case, where one had gotten a presentation to the Parsonage of
Gosnall in Lincolnshire, and brought a Quare Impedit, and the Defendant
pleaded an Appropriation; there was no License of Appropriation produced, but
because it was ancient, the Court would intend it. Then they objected, that
they ought to prove seisin in the Tenant to the Praecipe. Hales. It being an
ancient Recovery, we will not put them to prove that. He said the Mayor of
Bristol had offered in evidence an Exemplification of a Recovery under the Town
Seal, of Houses in Bristol, the Records being burned, and that Exemplification
was allowed for Evidence. Hales. If Tenant in Tail accept a Fine come ceo, etc.
this does not not alter his Estate: If Tenant for life accept of a Fine Sur
conusance, etc. he does forfeit his Estate, but it does not alter the Estate
for life. Objection, The Recovery is of Land in Kingscleare, whereas the Land
claimed is in a particular Ville called -- And the Vills are several, and there
are distinct Courts in every Ville. Hales. There are several Tythings of Dale,
Sale and Down, there is a Tythingman in every particular place; but the
Constable of Dale goes through all; these may go for several Vills, or one
Vill; There may be a Manor that has several little Manors within it, wherein
are held several Courts for the ease of the Tenants, but all but one Manor;
And a Writ of Right close is, Quod plenam rectam, etc. and runs to the Bailiff
of the Manor, and may extend to the Precinct of the whole Manor: as the
Manor of Barton has several little Manors under it, yet all within the
Manor. Hales. Where there is a Writ of Right close in ancient demesne, it is
not like a demand to a Sheriff here, where he has his direction for so many
Acres. Maynard. But then he must demand it in the particular Ville where it is.
Hales. If a Praecipe quod reddat be of Land in a Parish where it must be in a
Ville, there may be exception to the Writ, but if he recovers it is good, for
now the time is past; And so where it is infra manerium, if he recovers it is
good.

Brown versus --
AN Action brought in Canterbury Town; The Defendant removes it by Habeas
Corpus: Then the Plaintiff declares here. It was moved that it might be tried
in some other County, because the Judges came there so seldom, Court. Let them
show cause why they should not consent; and if they will plead Nil debet, the
Plaintiff will be willing to let them give any thing in Evidence. And Simpson
said, it was the Opinion of all the Judges, that upon Nil debet pleaded Entry
and Suspension may be given in Evidence, which the Court did not deny: So the
Court ordered the other side to show cause why they should not consent.

One Hillyard an Attorney sued for his Fees in this Court, in the Court at
Bristol: But the Court said, an Attorney ought not to wave this Court.

A motion was made by Sir William Jones for the Lord Mayor Starling, See
Bushel's case reported in Vaughan's Reports.
and the Recorder Howell: One Bushel brought an Action against them for False
Imprisonment. And because the plea was long, he prayed he might have time to
plead. Hales. I speak my mind plainly, that an Action will not lie; for a
Certiorari and an Habeas Corpus, whereby the body and proceedings are removed
hither, are in the nature of a Writ of Error; And in case of an erroneous
Iudgmene given by a Judge, which is reverst by a Writ of Error, shall the party
have an Action of False Imprisonment against the Judge? No, nor against the
Officer neither: The Habeas Corpus and Writ of Error, though it does make void
the Judgment, it does not make the awarding of the Process void to that
purpose; and the matter was done in a course of Justice: They will have but a
cold business of it. An Habeas Corpus and Certiorari is a Writ of right, the
highest Writ the party can bring. So day was given to show cause.

Lord Tenham versus Mullins.
A Trial at Bar about a fraudulent Deed. Hales. There are three things to be
considered, Fraud, Consideration, and Bona fide. Now the Bona fide is opposite
to Fraud. I remember a case in Twine's case; If the Son be dissolute, and the
Father with advice of Friends does settle things, so that he shall not spend
all, though here be not a consideration of money, yet it is no fraudulent Deed;
and a Deed may be voluntary, and yet not fraudulent, otherwise most of the
Settlements in England would be avoided; and so said Twisden.

Blackburne versus Graves.
TRover for 100 Loads of Wood; Not-guilty pleaded; A special Verdict, that the
Lands are Copyhold Lands, and surrendered to the use of one for eleven years,
the Remainder for five years to the Daughter, the Remainder to the right heirs
of the Tenant for eleven years; The eleven years expire, the Daughter is
admitted, the five years expire; And there being a Son and Daughter by one
Venture, and a Son by another Venture, the Son of the first Venture dies before
admittance, and the Daughter of the first Venture and her Husband bring Trover
for cutting down of Trees; And the question was, if the admittance of Tenant
for years, was the admittance of the Son in Remainder? Levings. I conceive it
is; and then the Son is seized, and the Daughter of the whole blood is his
heir; and he cited 4 Rep. 23. 3 Cro. 503. Bunny's case. Wyld. The Estate is
bound by the Surrender. Hales. If a man does surrender to the use of John
Styles, till admitted there is no Estate in him, but remains in the
Surrenderor; but he has a right to have an admittance; If a surrender be to J.
S. and his heirs, his heir is in without admittance if J. S. dies. About this
has indeed been diversity of Opinion, but the better Opinion has been
according to the Lord Coke's Opinion. I do not see any inconvenience, why the
admission of Tenant for life or years, should not be the admittance of all in
Remainder, for Fines are to be paid, notwithstanding by the particular
Remainders; and so the Books say it shall be no prejudice to the Lord. Twisd. I
think it is strong, that the admission of Lessee for years, is the admission of
him in Remainder; for as in a case of possessio fratris the Estate is bound, so
that the Sister shall be heir; so here the Estate is bound, and goes to him in
Remainder. Hales. I shall not prejudice the Lord; for if a Fine be assessed for
the whole Estate, there is an end of the business; but if a Fine be assessed
only for a particular Estate, the Lord ought to have another. If a surrender be
to the use of A. for life, the Remainder to his eldest Son, etc. or to the use
of A. and his heirs, and then A. dies, the Estate is in the Son without
admittance, whether he takes by purchase or descent. And Judgment was given
accordingly.

Draper versus Bridwell. Rot. 320.
ALL the Court held, that an Action of Debt would lie upon a Judgment after a
Writ of Error brought.

Twisden. They in the Spiritual Court will give Sentence for Tithes for
rakings, though they be never so unvoluntarily left, which our Law will not
allow of.

Wyld said, that Actions personal transitory, though the party does live in
Chester, yet they may be brought in the Kings Courts.

Hales. Show a President where a man can wage his Law in an Action brought upon
a Prescription for a duty; as, in an Action of Debt for Toll by Prescription,
you cannot wage your Law.

Pybus versus Mitford. Postea.
THe Chief Justice delivered his Opinion, Wyld, Rainsford and Twisden having
first delivered theirs. Hales. I think Judgment ought to be given for the
Defendant, whether the Son take by descent or purchase. I shall divide the
case, (1) Whether the Son does take by descent? (2) Admitting he does not,
whether he can take by purchase? We must make a great difference between
Conveyances of Estates by way of use, and at Common Law; A man cannot convey to
himself an Estate by a Conveyance at Common Law, but by way of Use he may. But
now in our case here does does retorn by operation of Law an Estate to Michael
for his life, which is conjoined with the Limitation to his heirs. The reason
is, because a Limitation to the heirs of his body, is in effect to himself:
this is perfectly according to the intention of the parties. Objection. The use
being never out of Michael, he has the old use, and so it must be a Contingent
use to the heirs of his body. But, I say, we are not here to raise a new Estate
in the Covenantor, but to qualify the Estate in Fee in himself: for the old
Estate is to be made an Estate for life, to serve the Limitation. Further
Objection, It shall be the old Estate in Fee, as, if a man devises his Lands
to his heirs, the heir is in of the old Estate. But, I answer, if he qualify
the Estate, the Son must take it so, as, in Hutton fo. So in this case is a new
qualification. Roll 789. 15 Jac. If a man makes a Feoffment to the use of the
heirs of the body of the Feoffor, the Feoffor has an Estate Tail in him,
Panel versus Fenne, Moor 349. Englefield and Englefield. (2) I conceive, if it
were not possible to take by descent, this would be a Contingent use to the
heirs of the body. Objection, It is limited to the heir when no heir in being;
Why, I say it would have come to the heir at Common Law, if no express
Limitation had been, and it cannot be intended that he did mean an heir at
Common Law, because he did specially limit it. Fitz. tit. Entayle 23.

An Assise for the Sergeant at Mace's place in the House of Commons. The
Plaintiff had his Patent read; The Court asked if they could prove Seisin; They
answered, that they had recovered in an Action upon the case for the mean
profits, and had Execution. Court. For ought we know, that will amount to a
seisin. Twisden. Upon your grant since you could not get seisin, you should
have gone into Chancery, and they would have compelled him to give you seisin.
Hales. A man may bring an Action upon the case for the profits of an Office,
though he never had seisin; So the Record was read of his Recovery in an Action
upon the case for the profits. Hales. This is but a seisin in Law, not a seisin
in Fact; The Counsel for the Plaintiff much urged, that the Recovery and
Execution had of the profits, was a sufficient seisin to entitle them to an
Assise. It was objected, that the Plaintiff was never invested into the Office.
Hales said, That an investiture did not make an Officer when he is created by
Patent, as this is; but he is an Officer presently. But if he were created an
Herald at Arms (as in Segars case) he must be invested before he can be an
Officer; a person is an Officer before he is sworn. Hales. You are the Pernor
of the profits, and they have recovered them; is not this a Seisin against you?
They shall find it specially, but they chose rather to be Nonsuit, because of
the delay by a special Verdict. And the Court told them, they could not
withdraw a Iuror in an Assise, for then the Assise would be depending. The Roll
of the Action sur le case fuit 19 Car. 2. Mich. Rot. 557.

Term. Trin. 15 Car. II. 1663.
Judge Hide's Argument in the Exchequer-Chamber.
Manby versus Scott.
A Feme Covert departs from her Husband against his will, Assumpsit verse Baron
and Feme pur Wares vend and deliver al Feme.
and continues absent from him diverse years; afterward the wife desires to
cohabit with her husband again, but the husband refuses to admit her; and from
that time the wife lives separate from him; during this separation, the husband
forbids a Tradesman of London to trust his Wife with any Goods or Wares; yet
for diverse years before and afterward, allows his wife no maintenance; the
Tradesman, contrary to the prohibition of the Husband, sells and delivers
diverse Wares to the wife upon credit, at a reasonable price; and the Wares so
sold and delivered to the wife are necessary for her, and suitable to the
degree of her husband: The Wares are not paid for; wherefore the Tradesman
brings an Action upon the case against the husband, and declares that the
husband was indebted to him in 40 l. for diverse Wares and Merchandises formerly
to the Husband sold and delivered, and that the Husband in consideration
thereof did promise to pay him the said 40 l. That the Husband has not paid
the same unto him, although thereunto required; and for that money the Action
is brought against the Husband. And, whether this Action will lie against the
Husband for the Wares thus sold and delivered to the wife, against the will,
and contrary to the Prohibition of the Husband, or not, is the question? This
case is the meanest that ever received Resolution in this place, but as the
same is now handled, it is of as great consequence to all the Kings people of
this Realm, as any case can be; it concerns every individual person of both
Sexes, that is, or hereafter shall be married within this Kingdom, in the first
and nearest Relation, that is, betwixt man and wife. The holy state of
Matrimony was ordained by Almighty God in Paradise, before the Fall of man,
signifying unto us that mystical Union which is between Christ and his Church,
and so it is the first Relation: And when two persons are joined in that holy
State, they twain become one Flesh, and so it is the nearest Relation. This
case touches the man in point of his power and dominion over his wife, and it
concerns the woman in point of her substance and livelihood. I will deliver my
Opinion plainly and freely, according as I conceive the Law to be, without
favoring the one, or courting the other Sex. I hold, that Judgment ought to be
given for the Defendant. The case has been so fully argued, and all the
Authorities so particularly vouched by my Brothers, who have already delivered
their Opinions, that nothing is left for me to say, which has not been spoken
by them in better terms than I can express my self. It will be a trouble to
your Lordships for me to repeat their Arguments, and yet without doing so, it
will be impossible for me to speak any thing to the purpose. It shall be my
endeavor therefore, rather to answer the reasons and objections given and made
by my two Brothers, who have so copiously argued for the woman's power, than to
argue the case again on the same grounds which have been already delivered.

It is agreed by all my Brothers who have argued, as I conceive, that a Feme
covert generally cannot bind or charge her husband by any Contract made by her,
without the authority or assent of her husband precedent or subsequent, either
express or employed. But the question in this case is, if the Contract of a Feme
covert for Wares for her necessary Apparel, made without the consent, and
contrary to the Prohibition of her husband, shall bind her husband?

First, I hold that the husband shall not be charged by such a Contract,
although he do not allow any maintenance to his wife.

Secondly, admit the husband were chargable generally by such a Contract, yet I
conceive that this Action does not lie for the Plaintiff, as this Declaration
is, and as this Verdict is found against the Defendant in this particular case.

For the first, every gift, contract or bargain, is or contains an agreement,
for the contractor or bargainor will that the donee or bargainee shall have the
things contracted for; and the other is content to take them, and so in every
Contract there is a mutual assent of their minds, which mutual assent is an
agreement: Plow. Com. Fogassa's case. Afterward in the same case fo. 17. it is
said, agreement is a word compounded of two words, scilicet, agregatio and
mentium, so that aggreamentum is aggregatio mentium, or thus, aggreamentum is
no other but a union or conjunction of two minds in any matter or thing, done,
or to be done, according to that of Sir Edward Cokes, Com. fo. 47. Contractus
est quasi actus contra actum: But a Feme Covert cannot give a mutual assent of
her mind, nor do any act without her husband; for her will and mind (as also
her self) is under and subject unto the will or mind of her husband; and
consequently she cannot make any bargain or contract (of her self) to bind her
husband. The second ground of the Law of England is the Law of God, Doctor and
Student cap. 6. fo. 10. In the beginning when God created woman an help-meat for
man, he said, they twain shall be one Flesh; and thereupon our Law says, that
husband and wife are but one person in the Law: Presently after the Fall, the
Judgment of God upon woman was, Thy desire shall be to thy Husband, for thy
will shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee, 3 Genesis 16.
Hereupon our Law put the wife sub potestate viri, and says, quod ipsa
potestatem sui non habeat, sed vir suus, and is disabled to make any grant,
contract or bargain, without the allowance or consent of her husband, Bract.
lib. 3. cap. 32. fo. 15. The books and authorities of our Law which prove this
point, have been all particularly vouched already, and I will not repeat them
again, nor do I know any one particular point to the contrary. The words of the
book are observable, namely, If a Feme Covert make a contract, or buy any thing
in the Market or elsewhere, without the allowance or consent of her husband,
although it come to the use of the husband, yet the contract is void, and shall
not charge the husband; but if a man command or license his wife to buy things
necessary, or agree that she shall buy, he shall be bound by this command or
license: Old N. Br. 62. 21 H. 7. 70. F. N. Br. 120. which proves, that it is
not the buying or contract of the wife, which binds or charges the husband (for
that is void in it self) but the command or license of the husband, which makes
it the contract or bargain of the husband.

As to my Brother Twisden's saying, that all those books are where the Wife
deals or trades as a Factor to her husband, and all grounded upon that reason,
the words themselves prove the contrary; for the difference taken by all these
books is, between the buying and contract of the wife without the knowledge or
consent of her husband; and a buying or contract had by the wife with allowance
or command of the husband. In the first case, the buying or contract is void,
in the other the allowance or command makes it good, as the contract or bargain
of the husband: Besides, weigh the inconveniences which would follow, if the
Law were otherwise. Judges in their Judgments ought to have a great regard to
the generality of the cases of the Kings Subjects, and to the inconveniences
which may ensue thereon by the one way or the other, 1 Rep. 52. Altenwoods case.

Judges in giving their resolutions in cases depending before them, are to
judge of inconveniences as things illegal, and an argument ab Inconventi is
very strong to prove that it is against Law. Plo. Com. 279. 379. then examine
the inconveniences which must ensue if the Law were according to my Brother
Twisdens and Tyrrells Opinions: If the contract or bargain of the wife, made
without the allowance or consent of the husband, shall bind him upon pretense
of necessary Apparel, it will be in the power of the wife (who by the Law of
God, and of the Land, is put under the power of the husband, and is bound to
live in subjection unto him) to rule over her husband, and undo him, maugre his
head, and it shall not be in the power of the husband to prevent it. The wife
shall be her own Carver, and judge of the fitness of her Apparel, of the time
when it is necessary for her to have new Clothes, and as often as she pleases,
without asking the advice or allowance of her husband; And is such power
suitable to the Judgment of Almighty God inflicted upon woman, for being first
in the Transgression? Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee. Will wives depend on the kindness and favors of their husbands, or
be observant toward them as they ought to be, if such a power be put into
their hands?

Secondly, Admit that in truth the wife wants necessary Apparel, Woollen and
Lining thereupon, she goes into Paternoster Row to a Mercer, and takes up
Stuff, and makes a contract for necessary Clothes, thence goes up into
Cheapside, and takes up Lining there in like manner, and also goes into a third
Street, and fits her self with Ribbonds, and other necessaries suitable to her
occasions and her husbands degree. This done, she goes away, disposes of the
Commodities to furnish her self with money to go abroad to Hide-Park, to score
at Gleeke, or the like. Next morning this good woman goes abroad into some
other part of London, makes her necessity and want of Apparel known, and takes
more Wares upon trust, as she had done the day before, after the same manner
she goes to a third and fourth place, and makes new Contracts for fresh Wares,
none of these Tradesmen knowing or imagining she was formerly furnished by the
other, and each of them seeing and believing her to have great need of the
Commodities sold her; shall not the husband be chargeable and liable to pay
every one of these, if the contract of the Wife does bind him? Certainly every
one of these has as just cause to sue the husband as the other, and he is as
liable to the Action of the last, as the first or second, if the wives contract
shall bind him; and where this will end no man can divine or foresee.

As for my Brother Tyrrells saying we may not alter the Law because an
inconvenience may follow thereon, that is true: but we ought to foresee and
provide against such inconveniences as may arise, before we adjudge or declare
the Law in a particular case in question, whether the Law be so or not. And
that is the case here; It is objected, that the husband is bound of common
right, to provide for, and maintain his wife; and the Law having disabled the
wife to bind her self by her contract, therefore the burden shall rest upon the
husband, who by Law is bound to maintain her, and he shall do it nolens volens;
generally the antecedent is most true; for she is bone of his bone, flesh of
his flesh, and no man did ever hate his own flesh, so far as not to preserve it.

But apply this general proposition to our particular case, and then see what
Logic there is in the argument. I am bound to maintain and provide for my
wife: therefore (my wife) departing from me against my will, shall be her own
Carver, and take up what Apparel she pleases upon trust, without my privity or
allowance, and I shall be bound to pay for it; this is our case, for there is
not a word throughout the whole Verdict, that the wife did want necessary
Apparel, that she ever acquainted her husband with any such matter, that she
ever desired the husband to supply her with money to buy it, or otherwise to
provide for her: or that the husband did deny, refuse, or neglect to do it.
Besides, although it be true, that the husband is bound to maintain his wife,
yet that is with this limitation, viz. so long as she keeps the station wherein
the Law has placed her, so long as she continues a help meet unto him; for if
a woman of her own head, without the allowance or Judgment of the Church, which
has united them, in the holy State of Matrimony (which only can separate that,
or dissolve this Union) depart from her husband against his will, (be the
pretense what it will) she does thereby put her self out of the husbands
protection, so that during this unlawful separation, she is no part of her
husbands care, charge or family. The King is the Head of the Commonwealth: his
Office is, and he is bound of right to protect and preserve his Subjects in
their Persons, Goods and Estates. And on that ground, every Loyal Subject is
said to be within the Kings Protection: Plo. 315. Case of Mines, F. N. Br. 232.

But a man may put himself out of the Kings Protection by his Offense, as, by
forsaking his Allegiance to the King, and owning or setting up any Foreign
Jurisdiction, and then every man may do unto him as to the Kings Enemy, and he
shall have no remedy or Recovery by the Kings Laws or Writs, 27 E. 3. case the
first. The husband is head of the wife, as fully as the King is Head of the
Commonwealth; and the wife by the Law is put sub potestate viri, and under his
protection, although he has not potestatem vitae and necis over her, as the
King has over his Subjects. When the wife departs from her husband against his
will, she forsakes and deserts his Government, she erects and sets up a new
Jurisdiction, and assumes to govern her self, besides, (at least if not
against) the Law of God and of the Land; and therefore it is but just that the
Law for this Offense, should put her in the same plight in the petit
Commonwealth of the Household, that it puts the Subject for the like Offense
in the great Commonwealth of the Realm; and this according to the Civil Law,
namely, Si Uxor propria (fine Culpa mariti) sit extra consortium viri nec tenet
maritus extunc ei extra consortium suum existenti aliqualit' subministrare,
videt' enim virum alendi obligatione fore exempt' quoniam Culpa sua extra viri
Consortium est. For, Nuptiae sunt Conjunctio maris and Foeminae and Consortium
ejus divini and humani Juris Communicatio, digest' de ritu Nuptiarum. Fleta
speaking of Appeals, has this expression, Foemina de morte viri sui inter
brachia sua interfecti, and non alit' potuit appellare, l. 1. Ca. 33. Bracton
is much to the same purpose, li. 3. Chap. 24. fo. 148. non nisi in duobos
casibus femina appellum habeat, sc. non nisi de violentia corpori suo illata,
sicut de raptu and de morte viri sui interfecti inter brachia sua; and the
words of the Writ of Appeal are suitable thereunto, sc. venit idem A. B. and
nequiter and in felonia, etc. occidit ipsum virum suum inter brachia sua, etc.
By the words inter brachia sua, in those ancient Authors is understood the
wife, which the dead person lawfully had in possession at the time of his
death: for she ought to be his wife of right, and also in possession, Com' S.
Ma. Char. fo. 68. The words of the Writ are observable, sc. occidit virum suum
inter brachia sua, and prove that the woman ought to be inter brachia viri sui,
or otherwise she has not the privilege of a wife.

By an argument a pari, as the wife shall not have remedy against the Murderer
of her husband after his death, if he were not inter brachia sua, at the time
of his death, pari ratione she shall not have support or maintenance from her
husband in his life, when she puts her self extra brachia sua, against his will.

But it is objected by my Brother Tyrrell; It appears not in whose default this
departure was, whether in his or her default. Thereto I answer, that the Law
does not allow a wife to depart from her husband in any case, or for any cause
whatsoever of her own head. An express command is laid upon her by the Law of
God to the contrary, Cor. 7. 10. To the married I command, yet not I, but the
Lord; let not the wife depart from her husband.

The provision which our Law has made for the safeguard of the person of a
woman, in case of cruelty by her husband, and for her maintenance in case the
husband refuses to allow it, proves, that it is not lawful for the wife to
depart from her husbad of her own head, upon any pretense whatsoever. If the
wife be in fear, or in doubt of her husband, that he will beat or kill her, she
shall have a Supplicavit out of the Chancery against her husband, and cause him
to find Sureties that he will not beat, nor entreat her otherwise then in civil
manner, and for to order and rule her, etc. F. N. Br. fo. 179. The words of the
Writ are, Quod ipsum B. coram te corporaliter venire fac', and ipsum B. ad
sufficien' manucaption' inveniend', etc. quod ipse praefat' B. been and Honest
tractabit Gubernabit ac dampnum and malum aliquod eidem A. de corpore suo alit'
quam ad virum suum ex causa regiminis and castigationis uxoris suae licite and
rationabilit' pertinet, non faciat nec fieri procurabit. And if the husband
refuse to give or allow necessary and fitting maintenance unto his wife, the
Law has provided a remedy for her, by complaint to the Ordinary in the
Ecclesiastical Court.

Next, it is alleged by my Brother Tyrrell, that the wife in our case did
return, and desire to cohabit with her husband again, which he refused, and so
she is remitted to her former condition. Admit that be true, yet her return
has not put her in a better condition then she was in before her departure, in
which case she could not be her own Carver, and have charged her husband
(according to her pleasure) with Apparel, but was to be clothed in such sort as
her husband thought fit. Besides, in our case the wife departed from her
husband, and lived from him diverse years after (before the Wares sold, or the
Action brought) then she desired to cohabit with him, which he refused to
admit; and from that time she lived from him. This is all that appears in our
case; and is this offense so easily purged, with a bare desire to cohabit,
without any other submission and satisfaction given of the better carriage in
futuro? The Law of God says, Wives be in subjection to your husbands as unto
the Lord: for the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is head of the
Church, 1 Pet 3, 4. Ephesians. 5. 22. The Church declares, that one of the
principal ends for which Marriages was ordained, is for the mutual society,
help and comfort, which the one ought to have of the other, in prosperity and
adversity. It is also there said, the woman of her self in contracting of
Marriage, makes a solemn Vow in facie Ecclesiae, to live together with her
husband, in the holy State of Matrimony, to obey him, and serve him, to love
him, and keep him in sickness and in health, till death them do part.

The wife, in our case, by departing from her husband against his will, breaks
all those commands, and her own Vow; she makes a voluntary separation, and
temporary Divorce between her self and her husband, she deprives him of that
mutual society, help and comfort (which she owes to him) for diverse years; and
are all these Offenses washed away with a bare desire, without submission or
contrition? No certainly, Confession and promise of future Obedience, ought to
precede her remitter, or restitution to the privileges of a wife. The Prodigal
Son in the Gospel, said, I will arise and go to my Father, and say, I have
sinned, before the Indulgent Father did receive or Cloth him. And this is
according to the rule in the Civil Law, Si Uxor quae (Culpa sua) recesserat
poenitentia ducta ad virum rediens nolit admitti, eam extunc Culpa purgatur in
virum transfundit' tenebitur quae ipsi seorsum habitanti alimenta praestare. So
that the wife ought to be a Penitentiary before the husband is bound to receive
her, or give her any maintenance. And no such thing appears, or is found in the
Verdict in our case.

Its said by my Brother Twisden: Although the wife departs from her husband,
yet she continues his wife, and she ought not to starve. If a woman be of so
haughty a stomach, that she will choose to starve, rather then submit, and be
reconciled to her husband, let her take her own choice. The Law is in no
default, which does not provide for such a wife. If a man be taken in
execution, and lie in Prison for Debt, neither the Plaintiff at whose suit he
is arrested, nor the Sheriff who took him is bound to find him Meat, Drink or
Clothes; but he must live on his own, or on the Charity of others; and if no
man will relieve him, let him dye in the name of God, says the Law; Plow. 68.
Dive and Manningham, so say I; if a woman who can have no Goods of her own to
live on, will depart from her husband against his will, and will not submit her
self unto him, let her live on Charity, or starve in the name of God; for in
such case the Law says, her evil demeanor brought it upon her, and her death
ought to be imputed to her own wilfulness. As to my Brother Tyrrells Objection,
it were strange if our Law, which gives relief in all cases, should send a
woman unto another Law or Court to seek remedy to have maintenance. I answer.
Its not sending the wife to another Law, but leaving the case to its proper
Jurisdiction; the case being of Ecclesiastical Conusance. Is it any strangeness
or disparagement to the Common Pleas, to send a Cutpurse, or other Felon taken
in the Court, to the King's Bench to be Indicted? or to the King's Bench, to send
a woman to the Common Pleas to recover her Dower? Why is it more strange for
the Common Law to send a Woman to the Ordinary to determine differences betwixt
her and her husband touching matters of Matrimony, then for our Courts at
Common Law to write unto the Ordinary to certify Loyalty of Marriage,
Bastardy, or the like, where Issue is joined on these points in the Kings
Courts? for although the proceeding and process in the Ecclesiastical Courts be
in the names of the Bishops, yet these Courts are the Kings Courts, and the Law
by which they proceed is the Kings Law: 5 Rep. 39. Caudries case, but the
reason in both cases is, quia hujusmodi causae cognitio ad forum spectat
Ecclesiasticum, 30 H. 6. b. Old book of Entries 288. according to that of
Bracton, lib. 3. fo. 107. Stamf. 57. Sunt casus spirituales in quibus Judex
secularis non habet cognitionem neque Executionem quia non habet coercionem: In
his enim casibus spectat cognitio ad Judices Ecclesiasticos qui regunt and
defendunt sacerdotium. Hereunto agrees Cawdries case, 5 Rep. 9. As in temporal
causes, the King by the mouth of his Judges in his Courts of Justice,
determines them by the temporal Law, so in causes Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
(the Conusance whereof belongs not to the Common Law) they are decided and
determined by the Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws; And that causes of Matrimony, and the differences between husband and
wife touching Alimony, or maintenance for the wife (which are dependant upon,
or incident unto Matrimony) are all of Ecclesiastical, and not of secular
Conuzance, is evident by the Books and Authorities of our Laws, de causa
Testamentari sicut nec de causa Matrimoniali Curia Regia se non intromittat,
sed in foro Ecclesiastico debet placitum terminari, Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 20.
fo. 7. All causes Testamentary, and causes of Matrimony by the Laws and Customs
of the Realm, do belong to the spiritual Jurisdiction, 24 H. 8. cap. 2.

The words of the Writ of Prohibition granted in such cases are, placita de
Catallis and debitis quae sunt de Testamento vel Matrimonio spectant ad forum
Ecclesiasticum. In a suit commenced by a woman against he husband before the
Commissioners for Ecclesiastical causes for Alimony, a Prohibition was prayed,
and granted, because it is a suit properly to be brought and prosecuted before
the Ordinary. In which, if the party find himself grieved, he may have relief
by Appeal unto the superior Court, and that he cannot have upon a sentence
given in the high Commission Court, 1 Cro. 220. Drakes case.

But it is objected by my Brother Tyrrell and Twisden, that the remedy in the
Ecclesiastical Court is not sufficient: for if the husband will not obey the
Sentence of the Ordinary, it is but Excommunication for his Contumacy, and will
neither feed nor cloth the wife. Are the Censures of the holy Mother the
Church, grown of so little Account with us, or the separation, a communione
fidelium, become so contemptible, as to be slighted, with but Excommunication?
has our Law provided any remedy so penal, or can it give any Judgment so
fearful as this? With us the rule is, committitur Marescal', or Prison' de
Fleet. There the Sentence is, traditur Satanae, which Judgment is more penal.
Take him Jailer till he pay the Debt, or take him Devil till he obey the
Church. And yet their Judgment is warranted by the rule of St. Paul, whom I
have delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. whereupon the Coment says, Anathema ab
ipso Christi corpore (quod est Ecclesia) recidit. Causa 3 quest. 4 Cam' Egell
trudam, and also, Nullus cum Excommunicatis in oratione aut cibo aut potis,
autesculo communicet, nec ave eis dicat. Causa, 2 quest. 3 Can. Excommunicat',
Bracton lib. 5. cap. 23. fo. 42. As much is said by our Law, and it is to the
same effect, Excommunicat' interdicitur omnis actus legitimus, Ita quod agere
non potest nec aliquem convenire cum ipso, nec orare nec loqui, nec palam, nec
abscondite vesci licet.

The second ground of the Law of Excommunication, is the Law of England; and it
is a ground in the Law of England, That he which is accursed shall not maintain
any Action, Doctor and Stu. 11. Where a man is excommunicated by the Law of the
Church, if he sue any Action, real or personal, the Tenant or Defendant may
plead, that he is Excommunicated, and demand Judgment, if he shall be answered,
Lit. 201. the Sentence is set forth at large in the old Statute Book of Magna
Charta, and is entitled, Sententia lata super chartas, namely, Authoritate Dei
patris omnipotentis and filii and spiritus Sancti Excom^unicamus Anathematizam.
and a liminibus Sanctae matris Ecclesiae sequestram' omnes illos, etc. 12 H. 3.
fo. 146. He which by the Renunciation is rightfully cut off from the Unity of
the Church, and Excommunicate, ought to be taken by the whole multitude as a
Heathen and a Publican, until he be openly reconciled by Penance. Act 33.
confirm' per 13 Eliz. cap. and this is grounded on the rule of our blessed
Savior, dic' Ecclesiae; And if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be as an
Heathen and Publican, Matt. 18. 17. Shall a man be accursed, barred of the
Company or Society of Christians, cut off from the body of Christ, accounted as
a Heathen and Publican, for not allowing maintenance to his wife, when the
Church enjoins him so to do; and shall not this be accounted a sufficient
remedy for the wife? I fear it is the want of Religion, and due credence to the
Censures of the Church, which occasions this Objection, rather then real want
of sufficient remedy in Law for her relief.

The last matter to be answered, is rather the Opinion of my Brother Twisden
and Tyrrell in their arguments, then an Objection in this case; namely, if an
Action upon the case does not lie against the husband upon the Contract of the
wife for necessary Apparel, yet an Action of Trover and Conversion does lie
against him for the Stuff; and so one way or other the husband must pay the
reckoning. If the Law should be so, it were a Conversion with a witness, for
then the husband should seem to be sub potestate foeminae: he might glory in
the words of St. Paul, I would have you know, that the head of the woman is the
man. But if the wife shall set his cap, or lay his headship in the Gaol, it
shall not be in the power of the husband to prevent or avoid it: one kind of
Divorce between husband and wife is, when Action of Trespass is brought against
them, and the husband only appears, and Process issue out against the wife,
until she be waived and outlawed, she can never purchase her pardon, or reverse
the outlawry, unless the husband will appear; so that if the husband please he
is divorced, 14 H. 6. 14. a. If the wife be outlawed by erroneous Process, and
the husband will not bring a Writ of Error, he may by this way be rid of a
Shrew, and that does countervail a Divorce, 18 E. 4. 4. a.

By these books it appears, that the Law puts a power in the husband to be rid
of his wife, and provides a remedy to tame a Shrew; but I never heard before,
that the Law has left it in the power of the wife to do so by her husband; and
I do not remember that my Brothers did vouch any Authority, or give any reason
for maintenance of their Opinions; and therefore I may with freedom deny the
Law to be as they have said: besides, the nature of an Action of Trover proves
that it lies not in this case. The count is, that the Plaintiff was possessed
of such Goods, (and names them) as of his own proper Goods, and casually left
them; that the Goods came to the Defendants hands by finding, yet he knowing
them to belong to the Plaintiff, refuses to deliver them to him, but has
converted them to his own use; so that an Action is grounded upon a wrong
supposed to be done by the Defendant, in converting the Goods of the Plaintiff
knowingly to his own use, against the will of the Plaintiff: and that is the
reason why the Plaintiff in that Action, must prove a demand of the Goods, and
an actual Conversion by the Defendant, or else he fails in the Action.

In an Action of the Case, for that the Defendant did find the Goods of the
Plaintiff, and delivered them to persons unknown, Non deliberavit modo and
forma, is no Plea, without saying Not-guilty, where the thing rests in
Feasance; and if the Action be, that the Plaintiff was possessed, Ut de bonis
propriis, and the Defendant did find and convert them to his own use: It is no
plea that the Plaintiff was not possessed, Ut de bonis propriis, but he must
plead Not-guilty to the misdemeanour, and give the other matter in Evidence, 33
H. 8. and Mar. Bro. Action sur le case.

In Trover the Plaintiff declares, that he was possessed of such Goods, and
casually left them, and the Defendant found them, and converted them to his own
use, the Defendant did plead, that the Plaintiff did gage the Goods unto him
for 10 l. and that he detained the Goods for 10 l. this is no Plea; but he
ought to plead Not-guilty, and give this matter in Evidence; for the Action
does suppose a wrong, which the Defendant ought to answer, 4 E. 6. Action sur
le case 113. What wrong is done to the Plaintiff in our case, when he himself
sells and delivers the Goods? It is not like the case where two men by mutual
consent, Wrestle or play at Football together, will an Action of Assault and
Battery lie for the one against the other, when the act is done by their mutual
agreement before hand? Put the case of Sale made to a man upon credit, and the
Vendee promises to pay for the Goods at Michaelmas, but fails to pay the money
accordingly, shall the Salesman have Trover against the Vendee, because he pays
not the money at the day? and will the Sale to this Feme Covert, alter the
case, or the Law, as to the Action? its true, that for a Conversion by the
woman before Coverture, or by the wife during the Coverture, an Action of
Trover lies against the husband and wife; but that is for a Conversion by
wrong, when she takes the Goods, and converts them against the will of the
owner, 1 Cro. 10. 254. Remis and Humfrey's case; as in case where a man comes
to buy Goods, and offers 10 l. for them, and the owner agrees to accept the
money, whereupon the buyer takes the Goods away without payment or delivery by
the owner, there an Action of Trespass or Trover lies, notwithstanding the
bargain, 21 H. 7. 6. otherwise it is if they agree upon a price, and the Vendor
takes the Vendee's word for payment, and delivers the Goods unto him; there the
Vendor is put to his Action for the money upon the Contract, and shall not
bring Trover for the Goods, 14 H. 8. 22.

If an Infant give or sells Goods, and delivers them with his own hand, he
shall have no Action of Trespass against the Donee or Vendee, by reason of the
delivery, 21 H. 7. 39. 26 H. 8. 2. but if an Infant give or sell Goods, and the
Vendee or Donee takes them by force of the gift or sale, the Infant may have an
Action of Trespass against him. So in our case: If a Feme Covert takes Wares of
a Shopkeeper against his will, upon pretense of buying them, an Action lies
against the husband; but if the owner sell the Goods to the wife upon trust,
and delivers the Goods unto her, he shall not have an Action of Trespass
against the husband, by reason of this delivery. If a man take my wife and
cloth her, this amounts unto a gift of the Apparel unto her, 11 H. 4. 83. and
I may take my wife with the Apparel, and no Action lies against me: by the same
reason, when a man delivers Stuff, or other Wares to my wife, knowing her to be
a Feme Covert, to make Apparel, without my privity or allowance, this shall be
construed to be a gift of the Stuff unto her, and I shall not be charged in any
Action for it; besides, consider the inconveniences which will follow, if an
Action of Trover should be against the husband: for then the husband shall be
barred of all those helps which my Brothers, (who maintain that Opinion) have
allowed unto him, and have made reasons, for which an Action of the case should
lie against him on the Contract; namely, the Jurors are to examine and set the
price or value, and the necessity and fitness of things, with relation to the
degree of the husband, whereby care is taken, that the husband have no wrong;
for in an Action of Trover, the Jury cannot examine any of those matters; but
are to enquire only of the property of the Plaintiff, and the Conversion by the
Defendant, and to give damages according to the value of the Goods: and so it
shall be in the power of the wife to take up what she pleases, and to have
what she lists without reference unto the degree or respect to the Estate of
her husband, and he shall be charged with it nolens volens.

It is objected, that the Jury is to judge what is fit for the Wives degree,
that they are trusted with the reasonableness of the price, and are to examine
the value; and also the necessity of the things or Apparel. Alas, poor man!
what a Judicature is set up here to decide the private differences between
husband and wife, the Wife will have a Velvet Gown, and a Satin Petticoat, the
husband thinks Mohair or Farendon for a Gown, and watered Tabby for a
Petticoat, is as fashionable, and fitter for his quality; The husband says,
that a plain Lawn Gorget of 10 s. pleases him, and suits best with his
condition, the Wife will have a Flanders Lace, or pointed Handkerchief of 40 l.
and takes it up at the Exchange. A Jury of Mercers, Silk-men, Sempsters, and
Exchange-men, are very excellent, and very indifferent Judges to decide this
controversy; It is not for their avail and support to be against the wife,
that they may put off their brayded Wares to the wife upon trust, at their own
price, and then sue the husband for the money. Are not a Jury of Drapers and
Milliners bound to favor the Mercer or Exchange-men to day, that they may do
the like for them to morrow?

And besides, what matter of Fact (and of that only the Law has made Jurors
the Judges) is there in the fitness of the Commodities with reference to the
degree of the husband? and whether this or that thing be the most necessary for
the wife? The matter of Fact is, to find that the wife wanted necessary
Apparel, and that she bought such and such Wares of the Plaintiff, at such a
price, to cloth her self, and leaves the fitness of the one, and the
reasonableness of the other, to the Court: for that is matter of Law, whereof
the Jurors have no Conusance. Lessee for life of a House, puts his Goods
therein, makes his Executors, and dies; whosoever has the House after his
death, yet his Executors shall have free Entry, Egress and Regress to carry
their Testators Goods out of the House by reasonable time, Litt. 69. And this
reasonable time shall be adjudged by the discretion of the Justices before whom
the cause depends, upon the true state of the matter, and not by the Jury, Co.
super Littleton 56. b. So it is in case of Fines for Admittance, Customs and
Services, if the Question be, whether the same be reasonable or not; for
reasonableness belongs to the knowledge of Law, 4 Rep. 27. Hubarts case. Lessee
for life makes a Lease for years, and dies within the term, in an Action of
Trespass brought by the first Lessor against the Lessee for years, he ought by
his Plea to set forth what day his Lessor dyed, and at what place, where the
Land lies, and at what day he did leave the possession, and so leave it to the
discretion of the Court, whether he did quit the possession in reasonable time
or not, 22 E. 4. 18. Soinors case. The fitness or necessary of Apparel, and the
reasonableness of the price, shall be judged by the Court upon the circumstance
of the matter, as the same appears by the Pleadings, or is found by the Jury;
but the Jurors are not Judges thereof. Again, there is a twofold necessity,
necessitas simplex, vel absoluta, and necessitas qualificata, vel
convenientiae; of a simple or absolute necessity in the case of Apparel or Food
for a Feme Covert, the Law of the Land takes notice, and provides remedy for
the wife, if the husband refuse or neglect to do it. But if it be only
necessitas convenientiae, whether this or that Apparel, this or that meat or
drink be most necessary, or convenient for any wife, the Law makes no person
Judge thereof, but the husband himself; and in those cases no man is to put his
hand between the bone and the flesh.

I will conclude the general question, or first point, with the Judgment of Sr.
Thomas Smith in his book of the Commonwealth of England, lib. 1. cap. 11. fo.
23. The naturallest, and first conjunction of two toward the making a further
Society of continuance, is of the husband and wife, each having care of the
Family, the man to get, to travel abroad, to defend; the wife to save, to stay
at home and distribute that which is gotten for the nurture of the Children and
Family, is the first and most natural but primate appearance of one of the best
kind of Commonwealths, where not one always, but sometime, and in some things,
another bears rule: which to maintain, God has given to the man greater wit,
better strength, better courage to compel the woman to obey, by reason or
force, and to the woman beauty, fair Countenance, and sweet words to make the
man obey her again for love. Thus each obeys, and commands the other, and
they two together rule the House, so long as they remain together in one. I
wish with all my heart, that the women of this age would learn thus to obey,
and thus to command their husbands: so will they want for nothing that is fit,
and these kind of Flesh-flies shall not suck up or devour their Husbands
Estates by illegal tricks.

I am come now to this particular case, as it stands before us on this Record.
Admit that the husband were chargeable by Law by the Contract of his wife, yet
Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff, upon this Declaration, as
this Verdict is found;

First, the Declaration is, That the Defendant was indebted to the Plaintiff in
90 l. for Wares and Merchandises by the Plaintiff to him before that time sold
and delivered; and the Verdict finds, that the Wares were not sold and
delivered to the Defendant, but the same were sold to his wife without his
privity or consent. So it appears, that the Plaintiff has mistaken his Action
upon the case, for Wares sold unto him, and ought to have declared specially,
according to the truth of his case, for Wares sold to his wife for necessary
Apparel. In an Action of Battery against the Husband and Wife, the Plaintiff
counted that they both did Assault and beat him. Upon Not-guilty pleaded, the
Jury found, that the Wife alone did make the Assault, and not the Husband; Yel.
106. Darcy and Deniers case: and the Verdict was against the Plaintiff, because
now the Plaintiffs Action appeared to be false; for the Husband ought not to be
joined but for Conformity, and there is a special Action for the Plaintiff in
that case: so this Verdict is against the case, because it appears, that the
Action brought by him is false, and that he ought to have brought another
Action upon the special matter of his case, if any such by Law lie for him.

Secondly, The Jury find, that the Defendants wife departed from him against
his will, and lived from him, and that the Defendant, before the Wares were
sold to his wife, did forbid the Plaintiff to trust his wife with any Wares.
And that the Plaintiff, contrary to his Prohibition, did sell and deliver those
Wares to the wife upon credit; and I conceive, that this Prohibition does so
far bar, or bind the Plaintiff, that he shall never have any Action against the
Defendant for Wares sold and delivered to his wife, after he was prohibited by
the husband. It is agreed by all, that a Feme Covert cannot generally make any
Contract, which shall charge or discharge her husband, without the authority or
consent of the husband, precedent or subsequent: so that the authority or
consent of the husband, is the foundation or ground which makes the contract
good against him: but when the husband forbids a particular person to trust his
wife, this Prohibition is an absolute Revocation or Countermand as to the
person of the general authority which the wife had before, and puts him in the
same plight as if the wife had never any authority given her.

It is said by my Brother Twisden and Tyrrell, that the Prohibition of the
husband is void, for (says Tyrrell) the husband is bound to maintain his wife,
notwithstanding her departure from him, and therefore he cannot prohibit others
to do it.

And Twisden says it is a right vested in her by the Law, and therefore the
Prohibition of the husband shall not divest, or take it away from her.

I have already answered and disproved these reasons, on which they ground
their Opinions, and will not repeat them here again: but admit that the husband
were by Law bound to maintain his wife, notwithstanding her departure from him
against his will, and that the Law does give her, or vest a right in the wife
to bind or charge the husband by her Contract for necessary Apparel; will this
be a good consequence thereupon; Therefore the husband cannot forbid this or
that particular person to trust his wife?

A man makes a Feoffment in Fee, upon condition that the Feoffee shall not
Alien, this Condition is void, Litt. Sect. 360. Were it not a strange
conclusion to say thereupon; If a man maks a Feoffment in Fee, upon Condition
that the Feoffee shall not Alien to J. S. that this Condition is likewise void?

The reason given by Littleton, why the Condition is void in the former, and
not in the later part of this second case, is applicable to our case; namely,
the Condition in the first case ousts the Feoffee of all the power which the
Law gives unto him, which should be against reason, and therefore the same is
void; but in the latter case the Condition does not take away all the power of
Aliening from the Feoffee; and therefore it is good: so in our case, if the
Prohibition were so general, that the wife were thereby disabled altogether to
Cloth her self, peradventeur it might be reasonable to say, that the
Prohibition was void; but it being a restriction only to one particular person,
there is no color to say, that it is not good.

It Is true (as my Brother Tyrrell says) that I cannot discharge others to deal
with my wife, although I may forbid my wife to deal with them; but it follows
not thereupon, but that my Prohibition to a particular person does make his
dealing with, or trusting my wife, to be at his own peril, so that he shall not
charge me thereby in an Action; as in case of a Servant, who buys Provision for
my Household by my allowance; If I forbid a Butcher or other Victualler, to sell
to my Servant without ready money, and he delivers meat to my Servant
afterward upon trust, it is at his peril, he shall have no Action against me
for it.

It appears not by this Declaration or Verdict, that the Defendants Wife did
want Apparel, that she ever desired her husband to supply her therewith, that
he refused to allow her what was fit, that the Wares sold to her by the
Plaintiff, were for necessary Apparel, or of what nature or price the Wares
were; so that the Court may Judge of the necessity or fitness thereof: but only
that the Plaintiff did sell and deliver upon credit diverse of the Wares
mentioned in the Declaration unto the wife (whereas none are mentioned therein)
for 43 l. that this was a reasonable price for these Wares, and the same Wares
were necessary for her, and suitable to the degree of her husband, and for
these reasons the Defendant ought to have Judgment in this particular case
against the Plaintiff, be the Law what it will in general.

I will conclude all, as the seven Princes of Persia (who knew Law and
Judgments) did in the case of Queen Vasthi, Esther 1 Ca. This Deed that this
woman has done, in departing from her husband against his will, and taking of
Clothes upon trust, contrary to his Prohibition, shall come abroad to all
women; and if it shall be repeated that her husband (by the Opinion of the
Judges) must pay for the Wares which she so took up, whilst she lived from him,
then shall their husbands be despised in their Eyes. But when it shall be known
throughout the Realm, that the Law does not charge the husband in this case,
all the Wives shall give to their Husbands honor, both great and small.

Judgment for the Defendant, Tyrrell, Twisden and Mallett dissenting.

Term. Trin. 29 Car. II. 1677. in B. R.
The Earl of Shaftsbury's Case.
HE was brought to the Bar upon the Retorn of an Habeas Corpus directed to the
Constable of the Tower of London. The effect of the Retorn was, that Anthony
Earl of Shaftesbury, in the Writ mentioned, was committed to the Tower of
London, 16 Feb. 1676. by virtue of an Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
in Parliament assembled; The tenor of which Order follows in these words;
Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the
Constable of His Majesty's Tower of London, his Deputy or Deputies, shall
receive the bodies of James Earl of Salisbury, Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, and
Philip Lord Wharton, Members of this House, and keep them in safe custody
within the said Tower, during his Majesty's pleasure, and the pleasure of this
House, for their high Contempt committed against this House; And this shall be
a sufficient Warrant on that behalf. To the Constable, etc.

John Brown Cler' Parl'.

The Earl of Shaftsbury's Counsel prayed that the Retorn might be Filed, and it
was so; And Friday following appointed for the debating of the sufficiency of
the Retorn; and in the mean time, directions were given to his Counsel, to
attend the Judges and the Attorny-General, with their Exceptions to the Retorn;
and my Lord was remanded till that day: And it was said, that though the Retorn
was Field, the Court could remand or commit him to the Marshal at their
Election.

And on Friday the Earl was brought into Court again, and his Counsel argued
the insufficiency of the Retorn. Williams said, That this cause was of great
consequence, in regard the King was touched in his Prerogative, The Subject in
his Liberty, and this Court in its Jurisdiction.

The cause of his Commitment (which is returned) is not sufficient, for the
general allegation, of high Contempts, is too uncertain; for the Court cannot
judge of the Contempt, if it does not appear in what act it is. Secondly, It is
not showed where the Contempt was committed, and in favor of Liverty it shall
be intended they were committed out of the House of Peers. Thirdly, The time is
uncertain, so that peradventure it was before the last Act of general Pardon, 1
Roll 192, 193. and 219. Russells case. Fourthly, It does not appear whether
this Commitment were on a Conviction, or an Accusation only; It cannot be
denied, but that the Retorn of such Commitment by any other Court, would be too
general and uncertain. Moore 839. Astwick was bailed on a Retorn, Quod
commissus fuit per mandatum Ni. Bacon, Mil. Domini Custodis magni Sigilli
Angliae virtute cujusdam Contempt' in Curia Cancellariae fact'; and in that
book it appears, that diverse other persons were bailed on such general Retorns,
and the cases have been lately affirmed in Bushells case, repeated by the Lord
Chief Justice Vaughan, where it is expressly said (that on such Commitment and
Retorns, being too general and uncertain) the Court cannot believe in an
implicit manner, that in truth the Commitment was for causes particular and
sufficient: Vaughans Rep. 14. accord 2 Inst. 52, 53, 55. and 1 Roll 218. And
the Commitment of the Jurors was for acquitting Pen and Mead, contra plenam and
manifestam Evidentiam; and it was resolved to be too general, for the Evidence
ought to appear as certain to the Judge of the Retorn, as it appeared before
the Judge authorized to Commit: Russells case 137. Now this Commitment (being
by the House of Peers) will make no difference: for in all cases where a matter
comes in Judgment before this Court, let the question be of what nature it
will, the Court is obliged to declare the Law, and that without distinction,
whether the question began in Parliament or no. In the case of Sir George
Binion in C. B. there was a long debate, whether an Original might be Filed
against a Member of Parliament during the time of privilege; and it was urged,
that it being during the Sessions of Parliament, the determination of the
question did belong to the Parliament. But it was resolved, an Original might
be Filed; and Bridgman then being Chief Justice, said, That the Court was
obliged to declare the Law in all cases that come in Judgment before them.
Hill. 24 E. 4. Rot. 4. 7. and 10. in Scacc' in Debt by Rivers versus Cousin.
The Defendant pleads, he was a Servant to a Member of Parliament, and ideo capi
seu arrest' non debet; and the Plaintiff prays Judgment, and quia videtur
Baronibus quod tale habetur privilegium quod magnates, etc. et eorum familiares
capi seu arrestari non debent, Sed nullum habetur privilegium quod non debent
implacitari, Ideo respondeat oustr'. So in Treymiards case, a question of
privilege was determined in this Court, Dyer 60. In the 14 E. 3. in the case
of Sir John and Sir Geoffrey Staunton, (which was cited in the case of the Earl
of Clarendon, and is entered in the Lords Iournal) an Action of Waste depended
between them in the Common Pleas, and the Court was divided, and the Record was
certified into the House of Parliament, and they gave direction that the
Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff. Afterward, in a Writ of Error
brought in this Court, that Judgment was reversed notwithstanding the
Objection, That it was given by Order of the House of Lords, for the Court was
obliged to proceed according to the Law in a matter which was before them in
point of Judgment.

The construction of all Acts of Parliament is given to the Courts at
Westminster. And accordingly they have adjudged of the Validity of Acts of
Parliament. They have searched the Rolls of Parliament, Hob. 109. Lord Hudsons
case. They have determined whether the Iournals be a Record, Hob. 110. When a
point comes before them in Judgment, they are not foreclosed by any Act of the
Lords. If it appears that an Act of Parliament was made by the King and Lords,
without the Commons, that is Felo de se, and the Courts of Westminster do
adjudge it void; 4 H. 7. 18. Hob. 111. and accordingly they ought to do. If
this Retorn contains in it that which is fatal to it self, it must stand or
fall thereby. It has been a question often resolved in this Court, when a Writ
of Error in Parliament shall be a Supersedeas. And this Court has determined
what shall be said to be a Session of Parliament, 1 Roll 29. and if the Law
were otherwise, there would be a failour of Justice. If the Parliament were
Dissolved, there can be no question, but the Prisoner should be discharged on a
Habeas Corpas; and yet then the Court must examine the cause of his Commitment:
and by consequence a matter Parliamentary. And the Court may now have
cognizance of the matter as clearly as when the Parliament is Dissolved. The
party would be without remedy for his Liberty, if he could not find it here;
for it is not sufficient for him to procure the Lords to determine their
pleasure for his Imprisonment, for before his enlargement he must obtain the
pleasure of the King to be determined, and that ought to be in this Court, and
therefore the Prisoner ought first to resort hither.

Let us suppose (for it does not appear on the Retorn, and the Court ought not
to enquire of any matter out of it) that a supposed contempt was a thing done
out of the House, it would be hard for this Court to remand him. Suppose he
were committed to a Foreign prison during the pleasure of the Lords, no doubt
that would have been an illegal Commitment against Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right. There the Commitment had been expressly illegal; and it may
be this Commitment is no less: For if it had been expressly shown, and he be
remanded, he is committed by this Court, who are to answer for his Imprisonment.

But secondly, The duration of the Imprisonment, during the pleasure of the
King and of the House, is illegal and uncertain; for since it ought to
determine in two Courts, it can have no certain period. A Commitment until he
shall be discharged by the Courts of King's Bench and Common Pleas is illegal;
for the Prisoner cannot apply himself in such manner, as to obtain a discharge.
If a man be committed till further Order, he is bailable presently; for that
imports till he shall be delivered by due course of Law, and if this Commitment
have not that sense, it is illegal; for the pleasure of the King is that which
shall be determined according to Law in his Courts; as where the Statute of
Westm' 1. cap. 15. declares, that he is not replevisable, who is taken by
command of the King, it ought to extend to an extrajudicial command, not in his
Courts of Justice, to which all matters of Judicature are delegated and
distributed, 2 Inst. 186, 187.

Wallop to the same purpose; he cited Bushells case, Vaughan's Rep. 137. that
the general Retorn for high Contempts was not sufficient; and the Court that
made the Commitment in this case, makes no difference; for otherwise one may be
imprisoned by the House of Peers unjustly for a matter relievable here, and yet
shall be out of all relief by such a Retorn; for upon a supposition, that this
Court ought not to meddle where the person is committed by the Peers, then any
person, at any time, and for any cause, is to be subject to perpetual
Imprisonment at the pleasure of the Lords. But the Law is otherwise; for the
House of Lords is the supreme Court, yet their Jurisdiction is limited by the
Common and Statute Law; and their excesses are examinable in this Court; for
there is great difference between the errors and excesses of a Court, between
an erroneous proceeding, and a proceeding without Jurisdiction, which is void,
and a mere nullity; 4 H. 7. 18. In the Parliament, the King would have one
Attaint of Treason, and lose his Lands, and the Lords assented, but nothing was
said of the Commons; wherefore all the Justices held that it was no Act, and he
was restored to his Land; and without doubt in the same case, if the party had
been imprisoned, the Justices must have made the like resolution, that he ought
to have been discharged.

It is a Sollecism, that a man shall be imprisoned by a limited Jurisdiction;
and it shall not be examinable whether the cause were within their Jurisdiction
or no. If the Lords without the Commons should grant a Tax, and one that
refused to pay it should be imprisoned, the Tax is void; but by a general
Commitment the party shall be remediless: So if the Lords shall award a Capias
for Treason or Felony: By these instances it appears, that their Jurisdiction
was restrained by the Common Law; and it is likewise restrained by diverse Acts
of Parliament, 1 H. 4. cap. 14. No Appeals shall be made, or any way pursued in
Parliament. And when a Statute is made, a power is implicitly given to this
Court by the fundamental constitution, which makes the Judges Expositors of
Acts of Parliament. And peradventure if all this case appeared upon the Retorn,
this might be a case in which they were restrained by the Statute 4 H. 8. cap.
8. That all Suits, Accusements, Condemnations, Punishments, Corrections, etc.
at any time from henceforth to be put or had upon any Member for any Bill,
speaking or reasoning of any matters concerning the Parliament to be communed
or treated of, shall be utterly void and of none effect.

Now it does not appear but this is a correction or punishment imposed upon the
Earl contrary to the Statute; There is no question made now of the power of the
Lords; but it is only urged, that it is necessary for them to declare by virtue
of what power they proceed; otherwise the Liberty of every Englishman shall be
subject to the Lords, whereof they may deprive any of them against an Act of
Parliament; but no usage can justify such a proceeding. Ellismeres case of the
Postnati, 19. The Duke of Suffolk was impeached by the Commons of High Treason
and Misdemeanors, the Lords were in doubt whether they would proceed on such
general Impeachment to imprison the Duke; And the advice of the Judges being
demanded, and their resolutions given in the negative, the Lords were
satisfied; This case is mentioned with design to show the respect given to the
Judges, and that the Judges have determined the highest matters in Parliament.

At a conference between the Lords and Commons 3 Aprilis, Car. 1. concerning
the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, It was declared and agreed, that no
Freeman ought to be restrained or committed by command of the King, or
Privy Council, or any other (in which the House of Lords are included) unless
some cause of the Commitment, Restraint or Deteynor be set forth for which by
Law he ought to be committed, etc. Now if the King (who is the Head of the
Parliament) or his Privy Council (which is the Court of State) ought therefore
to proceed in a legal manner; this solemn resolution ought to end all Debates
of this matter. It is true, 1 Roll 129. in Russells case. Coke is of Opinion,
that the Privy Council may commit without showing cause; but in his more mature
age he was of another Opinion: And accordingly the Law is declared in the
Petition of Right, and no inconvenience will ensue to the Lords by making their
Warrants more certain.

Smith argued to the same purpose, and said, That a Judge cannot make a
Judgment, unless the Fact appears to him on a Habeas Corpus: the Judge can only
take notice of the Fact returned. It is lawful for any Subject that finds
himself agrieved by any Sentence or Judgment, to Petition the King in an humble
manner for Redress; And where the Subject is restrained of his liberty, the
proper place for him to apply himself to, is this Court; which has the supreme
power, as to this purpose, over all other Courts; and an Habeas Corpus issuing
here, the King ought to have an account of his Subjects: Roll tit. Habeas Corp.
69. Wetherlies case. And also the Commitment was by the Lords; yet if it be
illegal, this Court is obliged to discharge the Prisoner, as well as if he had
been illegally imprisoned by any other Court. The House of Peers is an high
Court, but the King's Bench has ever been entrusted with the Liberty of the
Subject, and if it were otherwise (in case of Imprisonment by the Peers) the
power of the King were less absolute, than that of the Lords.

It does not appear but that this Commitment was for breach of privilege; but
nevertheless if it were so, this Court may give relief, as appears in Sir John
Benions case before cited; for the Court which has the power to judge what is
Privilege, has also power to judge what is Contempt against Privilege. If
the Judges may judge of an Act of Parliament, a fortiori they may judge of an
Order of the Lords, 12 E. 1. Butlers case, where he in Reversion brought an
Action of Wast, and died before Judgment, and his Heir brought an Action for
the same Wast; and the King and the Lords determined that it did lie, and
commanded the Judges to give Judgment accordingly for the time to come; this is
published as a Statute by Poulton, but in Ryley 93. it appears, that it is only
an Order of the King and the Lords, and that was the cause that the Judges
conceived that they were not bound by it, but 39 E. 3. 13. and ever since have
adjudged the contrary.

If it be admitted, that for breach of Privilege the Lords may commit, yet it
ought to appear on the Commitment, that that was the cause; for otherwise it
may be called a breach of privilege, which is only a refusing to answer to an
Action, whereof the House of Lords is restrained to hold plea by the Statute 1
H. 4. And for a Contempt committed out of the House they cannot commit; for the
word Appeal in the Statute extends to all Misdemeanors, as it was resolved by
all the Judges in the Earl of Clarendons case, 4 Julii, 1663.

If the Imprisonment be not lawful, the Court ought not to remand to his
wrongful Imprisonment, for that would be an act of Injustice to imprison him de
novo; Vaughan, 156.

It does not appear whether the Contempt was a voluntary act, or an omission,
or an inadvertency, and he has now suffered five months Imprisonment. False
Imprisonment is not only where the Commitment is unjust, but where the deteynor
is too long, 2 Inst. 53.

In this case, if this Court cannot give remedy, peradventure the Imprisonment
shall be perpetual; for the King (as the Law is now taken) may Adjourn the
Parliament for ten or twenty years.

But all this is upon supposition, that the Session has continuance; but I
conceive that by the Kings giving his Royal Assent to several Laws which have
been enacted, the Session is determined; and then the Order for the
Imprisonment is also determined.

Brook, tit. Parliament 36. Every Session in which the King signs Bills, is a
day of it self, and a Session of it self. 1 Car. 1. cap. 7. A special Act is
made, that the giving of the Royal Assent to several Bills, shall not determine
the Session; it is true, it is there said to be made for avoiding all doubts. In
the Statute 16 Car. 1. cap. 1. there is a Proviso to the same purpose. And also
12 Car. 2. cap. 1. 11. R. 2. H. 12. By the Opinion of Coke 4 Inst. 27. the
Royal Assent does not determine a Session; but the Authorities on which he
relies do not warrant his Opinion. For 1. In the Parliament Roll 1 H. 6. 7. it
appears, that the Royal Assent was given to the Act for the Reversal of the
Attainder of the Members of Parliament the same day that it was given to the
other Bills; and in the same year, the same Parliament assembled again; and
then it is probable the Members who had been attainted, were present, and not
before; 8 R. 2. n. 13 is only a Judgment in case of Treason, by virtue of a
power reserved to them on the Statute 25 E. 3. Roll Parliament (7) H. 4. n. 29.
and is not an Act of Parliament, 14 E. 3. n. 7, 8, 9. the Aid is first entered
on the Roll, but upon condition that the King will grant their other Petitions.
The inference my Lord Coke makes, that the Act for the Attainder of Queen
Katherine, 33 H. 8. was passed before the determination of the Session, is an
Error; for though she was executed during the Session, yet it was on a Judgment
given against the Queen by the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and the
subsequent Act was only an Act of Confirmation; but Coke ought to be excused,
for all his Notes and Papers were taken from him; so that this book did not
receive his last hand: But it is observable, that he was one of the Members of
Parliament, 1 Car. 1. when the special Act was passed. And afterward the
Parliament did proceed in that Session only, where there was a precedent
agreement betwixt the King and the Houses. And so concluded, that the Order is
determined with the Session, and the Earl of Shaftesbury ought to be discharged.

(...) argued to the same effect, and said, that the Warrant is not sufficient;
for it does not appear that it was made by the Jurisdiction that is exercised
in the House of Peers; for that is coram Rege in Parliamento: So that the King
and the Commons are present in supposition of Law. And the Writ of Error in
Parliament is, Inspecto Recordo, nos de Consilio, advisamento Dominorum
Spiritual' and Temporalium and Commun' in Parliament', praed' existen', etc. It
would not be difficult to prove, that anciently the Commons did assist there:
And now it shall be intended that they were present; for there can be no
averment against the Record. The Lords do several acts as a distinct House; as
the debating of Bills, enquiring of Franchises and Privileges, etc. And the
Warrant in this case (being by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal) cannot be
intended otherwise, but it was done by them in their distinct capacity: And the
Commitment being during the pleasure of the King and of the House of Peers, it
is manifest that the King is principal, and his pleasure ought to be determined
in this Court.

If the Lords should Commit a great Minister of State, whose advice is
necessary for the King and the Realm, it cannot be imagined that the King
should be without remedy for his Subject, but that he may have him discharged
by his Writ out of this Court.

This present recess is not an ordinary Adjournment: for it is entered in the
Iournal, that the Parliament shall not be assembled at the day of Adjournment,
but adjourned or prorogued till another day, if the King do not signify his
pleasure by Proclamation.

Some other exceptions were taken to the Retorn.

First, That no Commitment is returned, but only a Warrant to the Constable of
the Tower to receive him.

Secondly, The Retorn does not answer the mandate of the Writ; for it is to
have the body of Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, and the Retorn is of the Warrant
for the imprisonment of Anthony Ashly Cooper Earl of Shaftesbury.

Maynard to maintain the Retorn. The House of Lords is the supreme Court of the
Realm; It Is true, this Court is superior to all Courts of ordinary
Jurisdiction: If this Commitment had been by any inferior Court, it could not
have been maintained. But the Commitment is by a Court tht is not under the
comptroll of this Court, and that Court is in Law sitting at this time; and so
the expressing of the Contempt particularly, is matter which continues in the
deliberation of the Court: It Is true, this Court ought to determine what the
Law is in every case that comes before them; and in this case, the question is
only, whether this Court can judge of a Contempt committed in Parliament during
the same Session of Parliament, and discharge one committed for such Contempt?
When a question arises in an Action depending in this Court, the Court may
determine it; but now the question is, whether the Lords have capacity to
determine their own privileges; and whether this Court can comptroll their
determination, and discharge (during the Session) a Peer committed for
Contempt. The Judges have often demanded what the Law is, and how a Statute
should be expounded of the Lords in Parliament, as in the Statute of
Amendments, 40 E. 3. 84. 6. 8. Co. 157, 158. a fortiori the Court ought to
demand their Opinion when a doubt arises on an Order made by the House of Lords
now sitting.

As to the duration of the Imprisonment, doubtless the pleasure of the King is
to be determined in the same Court where Judgment was given. As also to the
determination of the Session, the Opinion of Coke is good Law, and the addition
of Proviso's in many Acts of Parliament, is only in majorem cautelam.

Jones Attorney General, to the same effect. As to the uncertainty of the
Commitment, it is to be considered, that this case differs from all other cases
in two circumstances; First, the person, that is a Member of the House, by
which he is committed. I take it upon me to say, that the case would be
different if the person committed were not a Peer.

Secondly, The Court that does commit: which is a superior Court to this
Court; and therefore if the Contempt had been particularly shown, of what
Judgment soever this Court should have been as to that Contempt, yet they could
not have discharged the Earl, and thereby take upon them a Jurisdiction over
the House of Peers. The Judges in no age have taken upon them the Judgment of
what is Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti; but here the attempt is to engage the
Judges to give their Opinion in a matter whereof they might have refused to
have given it, if it had been demanded in Parliament. This is true, if an
Action be brought where privilege is pleaded, the Court ought to judge of it
as an incident to the Suit, whereof the Court was possessed: but that will be
no warrant for this Court to assume a Judgment of an original matter arising in
Parliament. And that which is said of the Judges power to expound Statutes,
cannot be denied; but it is not applicable in this case.

By the same reason that this Commitment is questioned, every Commitment of the
House of Commons may be likewise questioned in this Court.

It is objected, That there will be a failer of Justice, if the Court should
not discharge the Earl; but the contrary is true, for if he be discharged,
there would be a manifest failer of Justice; for Offenses of Parliament cannot
be punished any where but in Parliament; and therefore the Earl would be
delivered from all manner of punishment for his Offense, if he be discharged:
For the Court cannot take Bail but where they have a Jurisdiction of the
matter, and so delivered out of the hands of the Lords, who only have power to
punish him.

It is objected, That the Contempt is not said to be committed in the House of
Peers; but it may well be intended to be committed there; for it appears he is
a Member of that House, and that the Contempt was against the House. And
besides, there are Contempts whereof they have cognizance, though they are
committed out of the House.

It is objected, That it is possible this Contempt was committed before the
general pardon; but surely such Injustice should not be supposed in the supreme
Court; and it may well be supposed to be committed during the Session in which
the Commitment to Prison was. It would be great difficulty for the Lords to
make their Commitments so exact and particular, when they are employed in the
various affairs of the Realm; and it has been adjudged on a Retorn out of the
Chancery of a Commitment for a Contempt against a Decree, that it was good, and
the Decree was not shown.

The limitation of the Imprisonment is well; for if the King or the House
determine their pleasure, he shall be discharged: for then it is not the
pleasure of both that he should be detained; and the addition of these words
(during the pleasure) is no more than was before implied by the Law: for if
these words had been omitted, yet the King might have pardoned the Contempt, if
he would have expressed his pleasure under the Broad Seal. If Judgment be given
in this Court, that one should be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure, his
pleasure ought to be determined by Pardon, and not by any act of this Court. So
that the King would have no prejudice by the Imprisonment of a great Minister,
because he could discharge him by a Pardon; the double limitation is for the
benefit of the Prisoner, who ought not to complain of the duration of the
Imprisonment, since he has neglected to make application for his discharge in
the ordinary way.

I confess by the determination of the Session, the Orders made the same
Session are discharged; but I shall not affirm whether this present Order be
discharged or no, because it is a Judgment: but this is not the present case;
for the Session continues notwithstanding the Royal Assent given to several
Bills, according to the Opinion of Cook, and of all the Judges, Hutton 61, 62.
Every Proviso in an Act of Parliament, is not a determination what the Law was
before; for they are often added for the satisfaction of those that are
ignorant of the Law.

Winington Solicitor General, to the same purpose; In the great case of Mr.
Seldom 5 Car. 1. the Warrant was for notable Contempts committed against us and
our Government, and stirring up Sedition; and though that be almost as general
as in our case, yet no objection was made in that cause in any of the
arguments, Rushworths Collections 18, 19. in the Appendix. But I agree, that
this Retorn could not have been maintained, if it were of an inferior Court;
but during the Session this Court can take no cognizance of the matter* And the
inconveniency would be great, if the Law were otherwise taken, for this Court
might adjudge one way, and the House of Peers another way; which doubtless
would not be for the advantage or liberty of the Subject; for the avoiding of
this mischief, it was agreed by this whole Court in the case of Barnadiston and
Soames, that the Action for the double Retorn could not be brought in this
Court, before the Parliament had determined the right of the Election, lest
there should be a difference between the Judgments of the two Courts.

When a Judgment of the Lords comes into this Court, (though it be of the
reversal of a Judgment of this Court) this Court is obliged to execute it; but
the Judgment was never examined or corrected here. In the case of my Lord
Hollis it was resolved, that this Court has no Jurisdiction of a misdemeanour
committed in the Parliament; when the Parliament is determined, the Judges are
Expositors of the Acts, and are entrusted with the lives, liberties and
fortunes of the Subjects: And (if the Sessions were determined) the Earl might
apply himself to this Court; for the Subject shall not be without place where
he may resort for the recovery of his liberty; but this Session is not
determined. For the most part the Royal Assent is given the last day of
Parliament; as says Plow. Partridges case. Yet the giving of the Royal Assent
does not make it the last day of the Parliament, without a subsequent
Dissolution or Prorogation. And the Court Iudicially takes notice of
Prorogations or Adjournments of Parliament, Cro. Jac. 111. Ford versus Hunter.
And by consequence, by the last Adjournment, no Order is discontinued, but
remains as if the Parliament were actually assembled, Cro. Jac. 342. Sir
Charles Heydon's case; so that the Earl ought to apply himself to the Lords who
are his proper Judges.

It ought to be observed, that these Attempts are primae Impressionis; and
though Imprisonments for Contempts have been frequent by the one and the other
House, till now no person ever sought enlargement here.

The Court was obliged in Justice to grant the Habeas Corpus, but when the
whole matter being disclosed, it appears upon the Return, that the case belongs
ad aliud examen, they ought to remand the party.

As to the limitation of the Imprisonment, the King may determine his pleasure
by Pardon under the Great Seal, or Warrant for his discharge under the Privy
Seal, as in the case of Reniger and Fogassa, Plow. 20.

As to the Exception, that no Commitment is returned, the Constable can only
show what concerns himself, which is the Warrant to him directed; and the Writ
does not require him to return any thing else.

As to the Exception, that he is otherwise named in the Commitment then in the
Writ, the Writ requires the body of Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, quocunque
nomine Censeatur in the Commitment.

The Court delivered their Opinion; and first Sir Thomas Jones Justice said,
such a Retorn made by an ordinary Court of Justice, would have been ill and
uncertain; but the case is different when it comes from this high Court, to
which so great respect has been paid by our Predecessors, that they deferred
the determination of doubts conceived in an Act of Parliament, until they had
received the advice of the Lords in Parliament. But now instead thereof, it is
demanded of us to comptroll the Judgment of all the Peers given on a Member of
their own House, and during the continuance of the Session. The cases where the
Courts of Westminster have taken cognizance of Privilege, differ from this
case; for in those it was only an incident to a case before them which was of
their cognizance; but the direct point of the matter now, is the Judgment of
the Lords.

The course of all Courts ought to be considered; for that is the Law of the
Court, Lane's case 2 Rep. And it has not been affirmed that the usage of the
House of Lords has been to express the matter more punctually on Commitments
for Contempts; And therefore I shall take it to be according to the course of
Parliament, 4 Inst. 50. it is said, that the Judges are Assistants to the Lords
to inform them of the Common Law, but they ought not to judge of any Law Custom
or usage of Parliament.

The objection as to the continuance of the Imprisonment, has received a plain
answer; for it shall be determined by the pleasure of the King, or of the
Lords; and if it were otherwise, yet the King could pardon the Contempt under
the Great Seal, or discharge the Imprisonment under the Privy Seal. I shall not
say what would be the consequence (as to this Imprisonment) if the Session were
determined, for that is not the present case; but as the case is, this Court
can neither Bail nor discharge the Earl.

Wyld Justice, The Retorn no doubt is illegal; but the question is on a point
of Jurisdiction, whether it may be examined here; this Court cannot intermeddle
with the transactions of the high Court of Peers in Parliament during the
Session, which is not determined; and therefore the certainty or uncertainty of
the Retorn is not material, for it is not examinable here; but if the Session
had been determined, I should be of Opinion that he ought to be discharged.

Rainsford Chief Justice, This Court has no Jurisdiction of the cause, and
therefore the form of the Retorn is not considerable; we ought not to extend
our Jurisdiction beyond its due limits, and the Actions of our Predecessors
will not warrant us in such Attempts; The consequence would be very
mischievous, if this Court should deliver the Members of the Houses of Peers
and Commons who are committed; for thereby the business of the Parliament may
be retarded; for perhaps the Commitment was for evil behavior, or undecent
Reflections on the Members, to the disturbance of the affairs of Parliament.

The Commitment in this case is not for safe custody, but he is in Execution on
the Judgment given by the Lords for the Contempt; and therefore if he be
bailed, he will be delivered out of Execution; because for a Contempt in facie
Curiae, there is no other Judgment or Execution. This Court has no
Jurisdiction of the matter, and therefore he ought to be remanded: And I
deliver no Opinion, if it would be otherwise in case of Prorogation.

Twisden Justice was absent; but he desired Justice Jones to declare, that his
Opinion was, that the party ought to be remanded.

And so he was remanded by the Court.

Term. Trin. 26 Car. II. 1674. in B. R.
Pybus versus Mitford. ante 121.
THis case having been several times argued at the Bar, received Judgment this
Term. The case was, Michael Mitford was seized of the Lands in question in Fee,
and had Issue by his second wife Ralph Mitford; and 23. Jan' 21 Jac. by
Indenture made between the said Michael of the one part, and Sir Ralph Dalivell
and others of the other part, he covenanted to stand immediately seized after
the date of the said Indenture (amongst others) of the Lands in question, by
these words, viz. To the use of the Heirs Males of the said Michael Mitford,
begotten or to be begotten on the body of Jane his wife, the Reversion to his
own right Heirs; after which Michael dyed, leaving Issue Robert his Son and
Heir by a first Venture, and the said Ralph by Jane his second wife; after the
death of Michael, Robert entered, and from Robert by diverse Mesne Conveyances a
Title was deduced to the Heir of the Plaintiff; Ralph had Issue Robert the
Defendant. And in this special Verdict the question was, If any Use did arise
to Ralph by this Indenture 23 Jan' 21 Jac'? Hales, Rainsford and Wyld, (against
the Opinion of Twisden) Michael Mitford took an Estate for life by implication
and consequence, and so had an Estate Tail. Hales (1) said it were clear if an
Estate for life had been limited to Michael, and to the Heirs males of the body
of Michael, to be begotten on the body of his second wife; that had been an
Estate Tail. (2) Which way soever it be, the Estate is lodged in Michael during
his life. (3) There is a great difference between Estates to be conveyeyed by
the rules of the Common Law, and Estates conveyed by way of Use: for he may
mould the Use in himself in what estate he will. These things being premised,
he said, This Estate being turned by operation of Law into an Estate in
Michael, is as strong as if he had limited an Estate to himself for life. (2) A
Limitation to the Heirs of his body, is in effect a Limitation to the Use of
himself; for his Heirs are included in himself. (3) It is perfectly according
to the intention of the party, which was, that his eldest Son should not take,
but that the Issue of the second wife should take.

His intent appears to be, 1 Object.
that it should take effect as a future use.

When a man limits a Use to commence in futuro; Respons.
and there is such a descendible quality left in him, that his Heirs may take
in the mean time, there it shall operate solely by way of future Use; as if a
man Covenant to stand seized to the use of J. S. after the expiration of 40
years, or after the death of J. D. there no present alteration of the Estate is
made, but it is only a future use, because the Father or the Ancestor had such
an Interest left in him which might descend to his Heir; viz. during the years,
or during the life of J. D. But when no Estate may by reason of the Limitation
descend to the Heir until the Contingency happen, there the Estate of the
Covenantor is molded to an Estate for life.

This would be to create an Estate by implication. 2 Object.


We are not here to create an Estate, Respons.
but only to qualify an Estate which was in the Ancestor before.

That the old Fee-simple shall be left in him. 3 Object.


Yet the Covenantor had qualified this Estate, Respons.
and converted it into an Estate Tail, viz. part of the old Estate.

That the intention of the parties appears that it should operate by way of
future use; 4 Object.
for that of other Lands he covenanted to stand seized to the use of himself,
and his Heirs of his body.

It is not the intention of the party that shall comptroll the operation of
Law; Respons.
and to the case 1 Inst. 22. though it be objected that it was not necessary at
the Law to raise an Estate for life by implication, yet my Lord Coke has taken
notice what he had said in the case of Parnell and Fenn, Roll Rep. 240. if a
man make a Feoffment to the use of the Heirs of his body, that is, an Estate
for life in the Feoffor, and in Englefields case, as it is reported in Moore
303. it is agreed, that if a man Covenant to stand seized to an use to commence
after his death, that the Covenantor thereby is become seized for life.

As to the second point, Twisden, Rainsford and Wyld, held, that no future use
would arise to Ralph, because he is not heir at Common Law, and none can
purchase by the name of heir, unless he be heir at Common Law; But Hales was
against them in this point, and he held, that it Ralph could not take by
descent, yet he might well take by purchase, (1) Because before the St' de
Donis, a limitation might be made to this heir, and so he was a special heir at
Common Law. (2) It is apparent that he had taken notice that he had an heir at
the Common Law, Litt. Sect. 35. 1 Inst. 22. So his intent is evident, that the
heir at the Common Law should not take. But on the first point Judgment was
given for the Defendant.

Term. Mich. 25 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Anonymus.
IF a man be liable to pay a yearly sum, as Treasurer to a Church, or the like,
to a Sub-treasurer or any other, and dies, the money being in arrear, an Action
of Assumpsit cannot be maintained against his Executors for these arrears. For
although, according to the resolution in Slade's case, 4 Report, (which Vaughan
Chief Justice said, was a strange resolution) an Assumpsit or an Action of Debt
is maintainable upon a Contract, at the parties Election, yet where there is no
Contract, nor any personal privity, as in this case there is not, an Assumpsit
will not lie. And in an Action of Debt for these Arrears, the Plaintiff must
aver, that there is so much money in the Treasury, as he demands; and in this
case of an Action against Executors, that there was so much at the time of the
Testators death, etc. for the money is due from him as Treasurer, and not to be
paid out of his own Estate. As in an Action against the Kings Receiver, the
Plaintiff must set forth, that he has so much money of the Kings in his Coffers.

Magdalen College Case.
INdebitat' Assumpsit against the President and Scholars of Magdalen College
in Oxford for threescore pounds due for Butter and Cheese sold to the College.
The Chancellor of the University demanded Conisance by virtue of Charters of
Privileges granted to the University by the Kings Progenitors, and confirmed
by Act of Parliament; whereby, amongst other things, power is given them to
hold plea in personal Actions, wherein Scholars or other privileged persons
are concerned, and concludes with an express demand of Conisance in this
particular cause. Baldw. Their privilege extends not to this case; for a
Corporation is Defendant; and their Charters mention privileged persons only.
Their Charters are in derogation of the Common Law, and must be taken strictly.
They make this demand upon Charters confirmed by Act of Parliament: and they
have a Charter granted by King Henry 8. which is confirmed by an Act in the
Queens time; but the Charter of 11 Car. 1. (which is the only Charter that
mentions Corporations) is not confirmed by any Act of Parliament, and
consequently is not material, as to this demand. For a demand of Conisance is
stricti Juris. But admitting it material, the Kings Patent cannot deprive us of
the benefit of the Common Law: and in the Vice-Chancellors Court they proceed
by the Civil Law. If you allow this demand, there will be a failer of Justice:
for the Defendants, being a Corporation, cannot be arrested, they can make no
stipulation, the Vice-Chancellors Court cannot issue Distringas's against there
Lands, nor can they be excommunicated. Presidents we find of Corporations suing
there as Plaintiffs (in which case the aforementioned inconvenience does not
ensue) but none of Actions brought against Corporations.

Maynard contra. Servants to Colleges and Officers of Corporations have been
allowed the privilege of the University; which they could not have in their
own right: and if in their Masters right, a fortiori their Masters shall enjoy
it. The word persona in the demand, will include a Corporation well enough.

Vaughan Chief Justice. Perhaps the words atque confirmat', etc. in the demand
of Conisance, are not material: for the privileges of the University are
grounded on their Patents, which are good in Law, whether confirmed by
Parliament, or not. The word persona does include Corporations: 2 Inst. 536.
per Coke, upon the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 7. of Cottages and Inmates. A
demand of Conisance is not in derogation of the Common Law: for the King may by
Law grant tenere placita: though it may fall out to be in derogation of
Westminster Hall. Nor will there be a failer of Justice: for when a Corporation
is Defendant, they make them give Bond, and put in Stipulators, that they will
satisfy the Judgment; and if they do not perform the Condition of their Bond,
they commit their Bail. They have enjoyed these privileges some hundreds of
years ago. The rest of the Judges agreed, that the University ought to have
Conisance. But Atkyns objected against the form of the demand, that the word
persona privilegiata cannot comprehend a Corporation in a demand of Conisance,
howsoever the sense may carry it in an Act of Parliament. Ellis and Wyndham. If
neither Scholars, nor privileged persons had been mentioned, but an express
demand made of Conisance in this particular cause, it had then been sufficient;
and then a fault, if it be one, in Surplusage, and a matter that comes in by
way of Preface, shall not hurt. Atkyns. It is not a Preface, they lay it as the
foundation and ground of their claim. The demand was allowed as to matter and
form.

Rogers and Danvers.
DEbt against S. Danvers and D. Danvers, Executors of G. Danvers, upon a Bond
of 100 l. entered into by the Testator. The Defendants pleaded that G. Danvers
the Testator had acknowledged a Recognisance in the nature of a Statute Staple,
of 1200 l. to J. S. and that they have no assets ultra, etc. The Plaintiff
replied, that D. Danvers, one of the Defendants was bound together with the
Testator in that Statute, to which the Defendants demur.

Baldwin pro Defendente. If this plea were not good, we might be doubly
charged. It is true, one of us acknowledged the Statute likewise: but in this
Action we are sued as Executors. And this Statute of 1200 l. was joint and
several; so that the Conisee may at his Election, either sue the surviving
Conisor, or the Executors of him that is dead: so that the Testators Goods that
are in our hands, are liable to this Statute. It runs, concesserunt se and
utrumque eorum: if it were joint, the charge would survive; and then it were
against us. It is common for Executors upon pleinment administer pleaded, to
give in Evidence payment of Bonds, in which themselves were bound with the
Testator: and sometimes such persons are made Executors for their security. The
Opinion of the Court was against the Plaintiff; whereupon he prayed leave to
discontinue, and had it.

Amie, and Andrews.
ASsumpsit. The Plaintiff declares, that whereas the Father of the Defendant
was endebted to him in 20 l. for Malt sold, and promised to pay it, that the
Defendant, in consideration that the Plaintiff would bring two Witnesses before
a Justice of Peace, who upon their Oaths should depose, that the Defendants
Father was so endebted to the Plaintiff, and promised payment, assumed and
promised to pay the money; then avers, that he did bring two Witnesses, etc.
who did swear, etc. The Defendant pleaded non Assumpsit; which being found
against him, he moved by Sergeant Baldwin in Arrest of Judgment, that the
consideration was not lawful: because a Justice of Peace not having power to
administer an Oath in this case, it is an extrajudicial Oath, and consequently
unlawful. And Vaughan was of Opinion, that every Oath not legally administered
and taken, is within the Statute against profane swearing. And he said it
would be of dangerous consequence to countenance these extrajudicial Oaths, for
that it would tend to the overthrowing of Legal proofs. Wyndham and Atkins
thought it was not a profane Oath, nor within the Statute of King James;
because it tended to the determining of a controversy. And accordingly the
Plaintiff had Judgment.

Horton and Wilson.
A Prohibition was prayed to stay a Suit in the Spiritual Court, commenced by a
Proctor for his Fees. Vaughan and Wyndham. No Court can better judge of the
Fees that have been due and usual there, then themselves. Most of their Fees
are appointed by constitutions Provincial, and they prove them by them. A
Proctor lately libelled in the Spiritual Court for his Fees, and amongst other
things demanded a groat for every Instrument that had been read in the cause:
the Client pretended that he ought to have but 4 d. for all. They gave Sentence
for the Defendant; the Plaintiff appealed, and then a Prohibition was prayed in
the Court of Kings Bench. The Opinion of the Court was, that the Libell for his
Fees was most proper for the Spiritual Court: but that because the Plaintiff
there demanded a customary Fee, that it ought to be determined by Law, whether
such a Fee were customary or no: and accordingly they granted a Prohibition in
that case. It is like the case of a modus for Tithes: for whatever arises out
of the custom of the Kingdom, is properly determinable at Common Law. But in
this case they were of Opinion, that the Spiritual Court ought not to be
prohibited: and therefore granted a Prohibition, quoad some other particulars
in the Libell, which were of temporal cognizance, but not as to the suit for
Fees. Wyndham said, if there had been an actual Contract upon the Retainer, the
Plaintiff ought to have sued at Law. Atkyns thought a Prohibition ought to go
for the whole. Fees, he said, had no relation to the Jurisdiction of the
Spiritual Court, nor to the cause in which the Proctor was retained. No Suit
ought to be suffered in the Spiritual Court, when the Plaintiff has a remedy at
Law: as here he might in an Action upon the case, for the Retainer is an
implied Contract. A difference about the grant of the Office of Register in a
Bishops Court, shall be tried at Common Law, though the Subjectum circa quod be
Spiritual: 2 Rolls 285. placito 45. and 2 Rolls 283. Wadworth and Andrews.
Shall a six-Clark prefer a Bill in Equity for his Fees? But a Prohibition was
granted, quoad, etc.

Glever versus Hynde and alios.
GLever brought an Action of Trespass of Assault and Battery against Elizabeth
Hynde and six others; for that they at York-Castle in the County of York, him
the said Plaintiff with force and arms did Assault, beat and evil entreat, to
his damage of 100 l. The Defendants plead to the Vi and armis, not-guilty: to
the Assault, beating and evil entreating, they say, that at such a place in the
County of Lancaster, one (...) Jackson a Curate was performing the Rites and
Funeral obsequies, according to the usage of the Church of England, over the
body of (...) there lying dead, and ready to be buried: and that then and there
the Plaintiff did maliciously disturb him; that they, the Defendants, required
him to desist, and because he would not, that they to remove him, and for the
preventing of further disturbance, molliter ei manus imposuerunt, etc. quae est
eadem transgressio, absque hoc that they were guilty of any Assault, etc.
within the County of York, or any where else, extra Comitatum Lancastriae. The
Plaintiff demurs. Turner pro Querente. The Defendants do not show that they had
any Authority to lay hands on the Plaintiff; as that they were Constables,
Churchwardens or any Officers: nor do they justify by the Authority of any
that were. If they had pleaded that they laid hands on him to carry him before
a Justice of Peace, perhaps it might have altered the case. The Plaintiff here,
if he be faulty, is liable to Ecclesiastical Censure; and the Statute of Ph.
and Ma. ann. 1. cap. 3. provides a remedy in such cases. Jones contra. If the
Statute of Ph. and Ma. did extend to this case, yet it does not restrain other
ways that the Law allows to punish the Plaintiff, or keep him quiet. Our
Savior himself has given us a President; he whipped buyers and sellers out of
the Temple; which act of buying and selling was not so great an impiety, as to
disturb the worship of God in the very act and exercise of it.

Court. The St. of 1 Ph. and Ma. concerns Preachers only: but there is another
Act made 1 Eliz. that extends to all men in Orders, that perform any part of
public Service. But neither of these Statutes take away the Common Law. And at
the Common Law any person there present might have removed the Plaintiff: for
they were all concerned in the Service of God, that was then performing; so
that the Plaintiff in disturbing it, was a Nuisance to them all; and might be
removed by the same rule of Law that allows a man to abate a Nuisance. Whereupon
Judgment was given for the Defendant, Nisi causa, etc.

Anonymus.
ACtion sur le Case: The Plaintiff declares, that whereas the Testator of the
Defendant was endebted to the Plaintiff at the time of his death in the sum of
12 l. 10 s. that the Defendant in consideration of forbearance, promised to pay
him 5 l. at such a time, and 5 l. more at such a time after, and the other 50
shillings when he should have received money; then avers, that he did forbear,
etc. and says, that the Defendant paid the two five pounds; but for the 50
shilllings residue, that he has received money, but has not paid it. The
Defendant pleaded non Assumpsit, which was found against him. Wilmot moved in
arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff does not set forth how much money the
Defendant had received, who perhaps had not received so much as 50 shillings;
he said, though the promise was general, yet the breach ought to be laid so, as
to be adequate to the consideration. And secondly, that the Plaintiff ought to
have set forth of whom the Defendant received the money, and when and where,
because the receipt was traversable. The Court agreed, that there was good cause
to demur to the Declaration: but after a Verdict they would intend, that the
Defendant had received 50* shillings; because else the Jury would not have
given so much in damages: and for the other exception, they held, that the
Defendant having taken the general issue, had waived the benefit thereof.

Alford and Tatnell.
GRegory and Melchisedec Alford were bound jointly to Tatnell in a Bond of 700
l. the Obligee brought several Actions, and obtained two several Judgments in
this Court against the Obligors; and sued both to an Outlawry. And in Mich.
Term. 18 Car. 2. both were returned outlawed. In Hill. Term following, Gregory
Alford was taken upon a Cap. utlagatum by Brown Sheriff of Dorset-shire; who
voluntarily suffered him to escape. Tatnell brought an Action of Debt upon this
escape against Brown, and recovered and received satisfaction: notwithstanding
which he proceeded to take Melchisedec Alford: who brought an Audita querela:
and set forth all this matter in his Declaration; but upon a demurrer, the
Opinion of the Court was against the Plaintiff for a fault in the Declaration,
viz. because the satisfaction made to the Plaintiff by the Sheriff, was not
specially pleaded, viz. time and place alleged where it was made, for it is
issuable, and for ought appears by the Declaration, it was made after the Writ
of Audita querela purchased, and before the Declaration. The Court said, if
Tatnell had only brought an Action on the case against the Sheriff, and
recovered damages for the escape, though he had had the damages paid, that
would not have been sufficient ground for the Plaintiff here to bring an Audita
querela; but in this case he recovered his Original debt in an Action of debt
grounded upon the escape, which is a sufficient ground of Action, if he had
declared well. They gave day to show cause, why the Declaration should not be
amended, paying Costs.

Anonymus.
AN Action of False Imprisonment. The Defendants justify by virtue of a
Warrant out of a Court within the County Palatine of Durham; to which the
Plaintiff demur'd. The material part of the Plea was, That there was antiqua
Curia tent. coram Vicecomite Comitatus, etc. vocat. The County Court, which was
accustomed to be held de 15 diebus in 15 dies, and that there was a Custom,
that upon a Writ of questus est nobis, issuing out of the County Palatine of
Durham, and delivered to the Sheriff, etc. that upon the Plaintiffs affirming
quandam querelam against such person or persons, against whom the questus est
nobis issued, the Sheriff used to make out a Writ in the nature of a cap. ad
satisfac. against him or them, etc. that such a Writ of questus est nobis
issued ex Cur' Cancellarii Dunelm. which was delivered to the Sheriff, who
thereupon made a precept to his Bailiffs to take the Plaintiff, who thereupon
was arrested, which is the same imprisonment.

Sergeant Jones for the Plaintiff, took exceptions to this plea; as, 1. The
Court is ill pleaded to be held coram Vicecomite; for in a County Court the
suitors are Judges: Cr. Jac. 582. and though this Court holds plea upon a
questus est nobis, which is the Kings Writ; yet that does not alter the nature
of the Court, nor its Jurisdiction. Jentleman's case, 6 Rep. 11. 2. The Custom
of holding this Court de quindecem diebus in quindecem dies, is void: being not
only against Magna Cart. 35. but against the 2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 25. which
enacts, That no County Court, etc. shall be longer deferred then one month from
Court to Court, etc. any Usage, Custom, Statute or Law to the contrary
notwithstanding. 3. He took these exceptions to the Custom; 1. It is absurd,
that if upon a questus est nobis, the party affirm quandam querelam, that then,
etc. for a questus est nobis is an Action upon the case, and this quaedam
querela may be in any other Action, though never so remote: the plaint ought to
be in pursuance of the Writ, and so to have been pleaded. 2. As this Custom is
laid, it does not appear, that the plaint ought to arise within the
Jurisdiction of the Court. 3. It is against the Law, that in any inferior
Court a Capias should be awarded before Summons. 1 Rolls 563. Seaburn and
Savaker. 2 Rolls 277. placit' 2. Pasch. 16 Jac. Banks and Pembleton. The 4th
exception to the Declaration was, that it does not appear whether this Writ
were purchased out of the Chancery of the City of Durham, or of that of the
County: the words ex Cur. Cancellar. Dunelm. are applicable to either. 5. Here
is not an averment, that the cause of Action did arise within the County
Palatine: it is said indeed, that he was endebted, and did assume within the
County; but it is the contract and cause of the debt that entities the Court
there to the Action. 6. He says, that he did levare quandam querelam; but does
not say that it was super brevi de questus est nobis: nor that it was in
placito praedict'; nor makes any application at all of the plaint to the Writ:
and then the plaint not appearing to be warranted by the Writ, and being for
above 40 shillings, the proceedings are coram non Judice. 7. The Sheriffs
Warrant is to Arrest, si inventus fuerit in balliva tua: and it does not appear
that the Bailiff had any Bayliwick. If the County were divided into several
divisions, and each Bailiff allotted to a several division, this ought to have
been shown; and that the place where this Arrest was made, was within this
Bailiffs proper division. 8. Of the Defendants own showing, the Court was not
held according to the Custom alleged, viz. de quindecim diebus in 15 dies: for
the last Court is said to have been held the 12th of March, and the next after
that on the 26th. Turner for the Defendant argued, that the imprisonment was
lawful. To the first exception he said, that the Court mentioned in the bar, is
not a County Court, nor so pleaded: it is pleaded as it is, Cur' vocat. Cur'
Comitat'; and there were never any Suitors known there to be Judges. It is not
to be examined according to the rules of County Courts properly so called: for
we plead it to be according to the Custom of the County Palatine of Durham,
which is an exempt Jurisdiction. As for the exception to its being held de 15
diebus in 15 dies, the answer to the first exception answers this also. The
Judges of Assize in Writs of false Judgment have allowed this Custom, and
affirmed Judgments given in this Court: of which we have many Presidents. For
the third exception, concerning the validity of the Custom; to the first
exception against it, he answered, that a Bar is good enough, if it be to a
common intent, and the common intent is, that the quaedam querela must be
pursuant to the questus est nobis: and in this case it was so; the questus est
nobis, and the precept upon which the Plaintiff was arrested, are both in an
Action of the case upon a promise. And to the second, that the cause of Action
is shown to arise within the Jurisdiction; for the promise, which is the ground
of this Action, is said to have been made infra Comitat. Palatin. To the third
exception, that in inferior Courts it is illegal to award a Capias before
Summons; but this Court is in a County Palatine; and such Courts are like to
the Courts at Westminster, and have the same Authority: Rowlandson landson and
Sympson, 1 Rolls 801. placito 11. and the Customs of those Courts are as good
Warrants for their proceedings, as the Custom of the Kings Bench is for their
issuing Latitats. To the fourth, he said it was a foreign intendment, to
suppose a Court of Chancery in the City of Durham; a Court of Equity cannot be
by grant, and there is no prescription in the City of Durham, to hold plea in
Equity. To the fifth, he said, the promise was laid to have been made within
the Jurisdiction. To the sixth, ut supra. To the seventh, that this Precept was
according to the form of all their Precepts in like cases. To the eigth, that
taking both days inclusively, there are 15 days. But admitting that there were
some defect in the proceedings, yet since that Court can issue such a Writ as
this is, it is sufficient to excuse the Officer: 10 Rep. the case of the
Marshalsey.

Cur'. This is not a County Court, but a Court vocat' Cur' Com', and it is
within a County Palatine; and for both those reasons not in the same degree
with other County Courts. And though it were a County Court, it might by
prescription be held before the Sheriff, as a Court Baron may by a special
prescription be held coram Seneschallo, and so it has been adjudged: in the
case of Armyn and Appletoft, Cr. Jac. 582. there is no such special
prescription as there ought to be, but a general prescription for a Court
Baron, and every Court Baron must be prescribed for. The County Palatine of
Durham is not of late standing, like that of Lancaster, but is immemorial: and
a Custom there is of great Authority. As to the objection against quandam
querelam; why it may not be as allowable for a man there to bring a questus est
nobis, and declare in what plaint he will, as it is here to arrest a man and
declare against him in any Action? But admitting the proceedings irregular, yet
since the Court can issue a Capias, that excuses the Officer in this Action:
and Judgment was given for the Defendant, Nisi causa, etc.

Term. Pasch. 26 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Brooking versus Jennings and alios.
THe Plaintiff declared as Executor against the Defendants, as Executors also;
they pleaded severally plene administravit. Upon one of the Issues a Special
Verdict was found; viz. that the said Defendant being Executor durante min'
aetate of an Infant, had paid such and such Debts and Legacies, and had
delivered over totum residuum status personalis of the Testator, to the Infant
Executor, when he came of Age. Justice Atkyns. This special Verdict does not
maintain the Defendants plea of fully administered: for that cannot be pleaded,
unless all Debts, etc. are discharged, as far as the Assets will reach: which
is not done here; for residuum status personalis is delivered over, etc. and
that residuum is liable to the payment of this Debt, which is yet undischarged.
But Vaughan, Wyndham and Ellis held, that however an Executor discharges
himself of the Estate that was the Testators, he may plead fully administered:
and that it is his safest plea.

It was found by the same Verdict, that the Testator left a personal Estate, to
the value of 2000 l. that there were owing by him 500 l. in Debts upon
specialties, 500 l. more upon simple Contracts; and that he had disposed of 400
l. in Legacies: and that this Defendant was Executor durante minor' of the
Testators Son; that he had paid 1400 l. in discharge of the Debts and Legacies
aforesaid; and had accounted with the Infant Executor, when he came of age, and
that upon the payment of 91 l. to him, the Infant Executor released to him all
Actions, etc. and whether upon this whole matter, this Defendant should be said
to have administered, was the question?

Vaughan. When an Infant Executor comes of age, the power of an Executor
durante minore aetate cease; and the new Executor is then liable to all
Actions: if the former Executor wasted, the new one has his remedy against
him; but he is not liable to other men's Suits. Nor is there any inconvenience
in this; for still, here is a person liable to all Actions: It is objected,
that possibly the new Executor is not of ability to satisfy: I answer; if in
some particular case it fall out to be so, that is by accident: and to argue
from the possibility of such an accident, is to suppose the Law fitted to
answer all emergencies. Atkyns accorded.

Vaughan. It is said that here are 1500 l. liable to pay this Debt: for to pay
debts upon simple Contracts, or Legacies before it, is a devastavit;
especially, the Defendant having notice of this debt (which was also found.)
That is a mistake, upon which some books run: but it is certainly no Law. Debts
upon simple Contracts may be paid before Bonds, unless the Executors have
timely notice given them of those Bonds; and that notice must be by Action.
Atkyns and Ellis agreed with Vaughan. Wyndham dubitabat. The case was put off
to be argued next Trinity Term: but in the mean time the Plaint discontinued.

Scudamore and Crossing. Exch. Chamber.
EJectione firmae. A special Verdict: it was found that a man by Deed did give
and grant, bargain and sell, alien, enfeoff and confirm to his daughter certain
Lands: but no consideration of money is mentioned, nor is the Deed enrolled;
there is likewise no consideration of natural Affection expressed (other then
what is employed in naming the Grantee his daughter) there is no Livery endorsed,
nor any found to have been made; nor was the daughter in possession at the time
of the Deed made. The question was, whether this were a void Deed, or had any
operation at all in the Law, and what was wrought by it? In the Kings Bench it
was adjudged by the whole Court to be a good Deed, and that it carried the
Estate to the daughter by way of covenant to stand seized. Upon a Writ of Error
before the Justices of the Common Pleas, and the Barons of the Exchequer, the
case was argued at Sergeants-Inn, by Sir William Jones against the Deed, and by
Sir Francis Winnington in maintenance of it.

Jones. Before the Statute of Uses, a man might either have retained the
possession, and have departed with the use, or he might have departed with the
possession, and have retained the use; or he might have departed with them both
together. The Statute unites the possession to the use; but leaves men at
liberty to convey their Estates by putting the possession out of themselves,
and limiting an use; or by raising an use, and let the possession follow that.
Now how shall it be known when an Estate must pass one of these ways, and when
the other? That must appear by the intention of the party expressed in the
Deed. Some Conveyances contain words that look both ways; some one way and some
another. If the words look both ways, then has he, to whom the Estate is
intended to be conveyed, election to take it whether way he likes best: Sir
Rowland Heyward's case, 2 Rep. Adams and Steer, 2 Cr. 210. so in Mich. 9 Jacob.
a man in consideration of money did grant, enfeoff, bargain and sell; and in
the deed there was a Letter of Attorney to make Livery; resolved, to be a good
Conveyance by way of bargain and sale, if the deed were enrolled: Rolls second
part 787. Where the words are only proper to pass an Estate by way of use,
there you shall never take an Estate at Common Law: Cr. Jac. 210. in Adams and
Steer's case: Denton and Fettyplace's case. 30 Eliz. is there cited, that by
the words of bargain and sale without attornment, a Reversion passes not. Vide
ibid. 50. Dr. Atkyns case: The King bargains and sells, etc. no use can rise,
because the King cannot stand seized to an use: Moor 113. On the other side,
where the words are proper to pass the Estate at Common Law, there nothing
shall pass by way of use: Dyer 302. b. a quaere is there made, whether or no,
if a man, in consideration of natural affection, etc. release to his brother,
who is not in possession; whether an use hereby arises to the relessee? but
this Quaere is resolved in a manuscript Report that I have of that case, viz.
That no use does arise. He cited Ward and Lambert's case: Cr. Eliz. 394. and
Osburn and Churchman's case, Cr. Jac. 127. which is the case in question. In
Rolls second part, fol. a man in consideration of marriage did give and grant
to his wife after his decease, to her and the heirs of her body, etc. and it
was resolved that nothing passed. This case is much stronger then ours: for
there is but one way to make this good, viz. by raising an use: for as a
Conveyance at Common Law, it cannot be good, because a Freehold cannot be
granted to commence in futuro: and yet rather then recede from the words of the
party, the deed was adjudged to be void. He cited Foster and Foster's case,
Trin. 1659. which himself had argued. In the deed here in question there are
words proper to pass an Estate in possession; give and grant. There is likewise
a clause of warranty; of which the Grantee should lose the benefit in a great
measure, if he were in the Post; for then he shall not vouch: and there are
Opinions that he cannot rebut; as in Spirt and Bence's case. There is also a
Covenant, that after the sealing and delivery, and due execution of, etc. the
party shall quietly enjoy, etc. now, what execution can be meant, but by Livery
of seisin? Foxe's case, 8 Rep. has been objected, in which it is resolved, that
the Reversion in that case should pass by way of bargain and sale, though the
words of grant were, demise, grant, set and to Farm let; all words proper to a
Common-Law-Conveyance: I answer, the consideration of money there expressed, is
so strong a consideration, as to carry it that way; but the consideration of
natural Affection is not so strong; and so the cases are not alike: the
consideration of money has been held so strong, as to carry an Estate of
Feesimple in an use, without words of Inheritance.

Winnington contra. He insisted upon the intention of the party, the
consideration of blood and natural affection, and the necessity of making this
deed good by way of Covenant to stand seized, because it could not take effect
any other way. The clause of warranty and covenant for quiet enjoyment, he
said, were but forms of Conveyances, and words of Clerks: but the effectual
words are those that contain the inducement of the party to make the
Conveyance, and the words that pass the Estate: he cited Plowd. queries placito
305. Rolls 2 part, 787. placito 25. 1 Inst. 49. Poph. 49. in Fosters case,
which had been cited against him, he said, the deed was as unformal to pass the
Estate one way as another. In Osburn and Churchman's case, he said, this point
was started; but that the resolution was not upon this point: it came in
question neither upon a special Verdict, nor a demurrer. Tibs and Purplewell's
case, 40 and 41 Eliz. Rolls 2 part 786, 787. answers all Objections against our
case, and is in form and substance the same with it. He cited one Saunders and
Savin's case, adjudged in the late times in the Common Pleas, viz. That where a
man seized in Fee of a Rentcharge, granted it to a Kinsman for life; and the
grantor dyed before attornment, it was resolved, that upon the sealing and
delivery of the deed an use arose. Wherefore he prayed that the Judgment might
be affirmed.

Turner Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Turner and Littleton Barons, and Atkyns,
Wyndham and Ellis Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, were for affirming the
Judgment. Vaughan Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Thurland puisne Baron
contra.

The six Judges argued, 1. That in a Covenant to stand seized, those words of
covenanting to stand seized to the use of, etc. are not absolutely necessary,
and that it is sufficient if there are words that are tantamount. 2. That no
Conveyance admits of such variety of words, as does this of a Covenant to stand
seized. 3. That Judges have always endeavored to support Deeds, ut res magis
valeat, etc. 4. That the grantor in this case by putting in plenty of words,
shows that he did not intend to tie himself up to any one sort of Conveyance.
5. That if the words give and grant had been alone in the deed, there would
have been no question: and that if so, then utile per inutile non vitiatur. 6.
That every man's deed must be taken most strongly against himself. 7. That the
words give and grant enure sometimes as a grant, sometimes as a Covenant,
sometimes as a Release: and must be taken in that sense which will best support
the intent of the party. 8. That the very point of this case has received two
full determinations upon debate: and that it were a thing of ill consequence to
admit of so great an uncertainty in the Law, as now to alter it. 9. That there
is here a clear intent that the daughter should have this Estate, a Deed, a
good consideration to raise an use, and words that are tantamount to a Covenant
to stand seized. Wherefore the Judgment was affirmed.

Thurland said, The intention of the party was not a sure rule to construe
deeds by: that if Lands were given in connubio soluto ab omni servitio, the
intent of the giver is, to make a gift in Frank-marriage; but the Common Law,
that delights in certainty, will not understand his words so, because he does
not say, in libero maritagio: In our case, the first intent of the Father was
to settle the Land upon his Daughter; his second intent was to do it by such or
such a Conveyance: what Conveyance he meant to do it by, we must know by his
words: the words give and grant do generally and naturally work upon something
in esse: strained constructions are not favored in the Law. Nor ought Heirs to
be disinherited by forced and strained constructions. If this Deed shall work
as a Covenant to stand seized, it will be in vain to study forms of
Conveyances; it is but throwing in words enough, and if the Lands pass not one
way, they will another. He cited Crook 279. Blitheman and Blitheman's case. And
34 and 35 Dyer 55 he said Pitfield and Pierce's case in March, was later then
that of Tibs and Purplewell, and of better Authority.

Vaughan accordant. It is not clear that the words give and grant are
sufficient to raise an use; but supposing that they are by a forced Exposition,
when nothing appears to the contrary; will it thence follow that they may be
taken in a sense directly contrary to their proper and genuine sense, in such a
place as this, where all the other parts of the deed are wholly inconsistent
with, and will not by any possibility admit of such a construction? he
mentioned several clauses in the deed, which he said were proper only to a
Conveyance at Common Law. He appealed to the Law before the Statute of Uses;
and said, that where an use would not rise by the Common Law, there the Statute
executes no possession: and that by such a deed as this no use would have risen
at the Common Law: but the Judgment was affirmed.

Gabriel Miles his Case.
HE and his Wife recovered in an Action of Debt against one Cogan 200 l. and 70
l. damages: the Wife dies, and the Husband prays to have Execution upon this
Judgment. The Court, upon the first motion, inclined that it should not survive
to the Husband; but that Administration ought to be committed of it, as a thing
in Action: but this Term they agreed that the Husband might take out Excution;
and that by the Judgment it became his own debt, due to him in his own right.
And accordingly he took out a Scire facias: Beaumond and Long's case, Cr. Car.
208. was cited.

Anonymus.
THe Plaintiff in an Ejectione firmae declared upon a Lease made the tenth day
of October, habend' from the 20th of November for five years. And the question
upon a special Verdict was, whether this were a good or a void Lease? Sergeant
Jones. There are many cases in which the Law rejects the limitation of the
commencement of a Lease, if it be impossible; as from the 31st of September, or
the like: now this being altogether uncertain, and since there is nothing to
determine your Judgments what November he meant, whether last-past, or
next-ensuing, it amounts to an impossible limitation. Rolls, tit. Estate,
placito 7. 849. ibid. placito 10. betwixt Elmes and Leaves. Baldwin contra. The
Law will reject an impossible limitation, but not an uncertain limitation.
Vaughan and Atkyns. The Law rejects an impossible limitation, because it cannot
be any part of the parties agreement: but an uncertain limitation vitiates the
Lease; because it was part of the agreement: but we cannot determine it, not
knowing how the Contract was. There are many examples of Leases being void for
uncertainty of commencements: which could not have been adjudged void, if the
limitation in this case were good. Wyndham and Ellis contra. And that it should
begin from the time of the delivery. It was moved afterward, and Ellis being
absent, it was ruled by Vaughan and Atkyns against Wyndham's Opinion, and
Judgment was arrested.

Foul and Doble's Case.
FOrmedon in the Remainder. The case was thus: There were three Sisters; the
eldest was Tenant in Tail of a fourth part of 140 Acres, etc. in three Villes,
A. B. and C. the Remainder in Fee-simple to the other two: the Tenant in Tail
takes Husband Dr. Doble the Defendant. The Husband and Wife levy a Fine sur
conisance de droit, to the use of them two, and the heirs of the body of the
Wife, the Remainder in Fee to the right Heirs of the Husband: and this Fine was
with warranty against them and the heits of the wife. The wife dies without
issue, living the Husband, against whom Lucy and Ruth, the other two Sisters,
to whom the Remainder in Fee was limited, bring a Formedon in the Remainder.
The Defendant, as to part of the Lands in demand, viz. 100 Acres, pleaded
Non-tenure, and that such a one was Tenant. To that plea the Plaintiff
demurred. As to the rest of the Lands, he pleaded this Fine with warranty. The
Plaintiffs made a frivolous replication, to which the Defendants demurred. The
Plaintiffs Council excepted to the Defendants plea of Non-tenure: 1. That he
does not express in which of the Villes the 100 Acres lie: 5 Ed. 3. 140. in the
old Print, 184. and 33 H. 6. 51. Sir John Stanley's case. But this was
overruled: for the Formedon being of so many several Acres, he is not obliged
to show where those lie, that he pleads Non-tenure of: he tells the Plaintiff
who is the Tenant, which is enough for him. 2. Because he that pleads
Non-tenure in abatement, ought to set forth who was Tenant die impetrationis
brevis orig. etc. But this was overruled also; for he says that himself was
not Tenant die impetrationis brevis origin. but that such another eodem die was
Tenant; which is certain enough. When the Tenant pleads Non-tenure to the
whole, he needs not set forth who is Tenant; otherwise when he pleads
Non-tenure of part: 11 H. 4. 15. 33 H. 6. 51. At the Common Law, if the Tenant
had pleaded Non-tenure as to part, it would have abated all the Writ: 36 H. 6.
6. but by the Statute of the 25 Ed. 3. cap. 16. it was enacted, that by the
exception of Non-tenure of parcel, no Writ should be abated, but only for that
parcel, whereof the Non-tenure was alleged. A third exception was taken to the
pleading of the Fine, viz. because he pleaded a Fine levied of a fourth part,
without saying in how many parts to be divided. This was also overruled, and 1
Leon. 114. was cited; where a difference is taken betwixt a Writ and a Fine:
and in a Fine it is said to be good, that being but a common assurance, aliter
in a Writ: 19 Ed. 3. Fitz. br^e 244. This exception seems levelled against the
Plaintiffs own Writ, in which he demands a fourth part, without saying in how
many parts to be divided. The matter in Law was, whether or no this warranty,
being against the husband and wife, and the heirs of the wife, were a bar to
the Plaintiffs, or survived to the Husband? and it was resolved to be a bar;
for this warranty as to the Husband, was destroyed as soon as it was created:
the same breath that created it put an end to it: for the Husband warranted
during his life only, and took back as large an Estate as he warranted; which
destroys his warranty: and this is Littleton's Text: if a man make a feoffment
in Fee with warranty, and take back an Estate in Fee, the warranty is gone. But
the destruction of the husbands warranty does not affect the wives: 20 H. 7. 1.
and Sym's case; upon which Ellis said, he much relied. Herberts case 3 Rep. can
give no rule here; for that here the husband is seized only in right of the
wife.

Vaughan said, That if the Fine in this case had been levied to a stranger for
life, or in Fee who had been impleaded by another stranger; that in that case
the Tenant ought to have vouched the surviving husband, as well as the heir of
the wife, or else he would have lost his warranty. 2. He said, if the Fine had
been levied to the use of a stranger, who had been impleaded by the heirs of
the wife, he questioned whether or no the Tenant could have rebutted them for
any more then a moity: and he questioned the resolution of Sym's case 8 Rep.
there is a Case cited in Symme's case out of the 45 Edw. 3. 23. which is
expressly against the resolution of the case: it is said in the Reports, that no
Judgment was given in that case, which is false; and that the case is not well
abridged by Brook, which is also false. If in case of a voucher, a man loses
his warranty, that does not vouch all that are bound; why should not one that is
rebutted have the like advantage? There is a resolution quoted in Sym's case
out of 5 Edw. 2. Fitz. tit. garranty 78 upon which the Judgment is said to be
founded, being, as is there said, a case in point; but he conceived not: for
Harvey, that gave the rule, said; le tenant poit barrer vous touts, ergo un
sole: in the case there were several coheirs, and if all were demandants, all
might have been barred; and if one be demandant, there is no question but she
may be rebutted for her part. But Sym's case is quite otherwise: for there one
person is coheir to the garranty, that is not heir to any part of the Land. In
6 Ed. 3. 50. there is a case resolved upon the ground and reason of the 45 Ed.
3. for these reasons he said, he could not rely upon Sym's case. He agreed with
the rest to the reason why the warranty is destroyed, viz. because the husband
takes back as great an Estate as he warranted: for then no use can be made of
the warranty. If a man that has Land, and another, warrant this Land to one and
his heirs: and one of them die without heirs, the survivor may be vouched
without question. The husband never was obliged by this warranty; but as to him
it was merely nominal: for from the very creation of it, it was impossible that
it should be effectual to any purpose: he cited Hob. 124. in Rolls and Osburn's
case. The whole Court agreeing in this Opinion, Judgment was given for the
Tenant.

Term. Trin. 26 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Hamond versus Howell, etc.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action of False Imprisonment against the Mayor of
London and the Recorder, and the whole Court at the Old Bailey, and the Sheriffs
and Jailer, for committing him to prison at a Sessions there held. The case was
thus: some Quakers were indicted for a Riot, and the Court directed the Jury,
if they believed the Evidence, to find the Prisoners guilty; for that the Fact
sworn against them was in Law a Riot: which because they refused to do, and
gave their Verdict against the direction of the Court in matter of Law, they
committed them. They were afterward discharged upon a Habeas Corpus. And one
of them brings this Action for the wrongful Commitment. Sergeant Maynard moved
for the Defendants, that they might have longer time to plead: for a rule had
been made that the Defendants should plead the first day of this Term. The
Court declared their Opinions against the Action, viz. That no Action will lie
against a Judge for a wrongful Commitment, any more then for an erroneous
Judgment. Monday the Secondary told the Court, that giving the Defendants time
to plead countenanced the Action, but granting imparlances did not. So they had
a special imparlance till Michaelmas Term next. Atkyns. It was never imagined,
that Justices of Oyer and Terminer and Jail-deliver would be questioned in
private Actions, for what they should do in Execution of their Office; if the
Law had been taken so, the Statute of 7 Jac. cap. 5. for pleading the general
Issue, would have included them as well as Inferior Officers.

Birch and Lake.
A Prohibition was granted to the Spiritual Court upon this suggestion, that
Sir Edward Lake Vicar General, had cited the Plaintiff ex officio to appear and
answer to diverse Articles. The Court said, that the citation ex officio was in
use, when the Oath ex officio was on foot: but that is ousted by the 17th of
Eliz. If Citations ex officio were allowed, they might cite whole Counties
without Presentment; which would become a trick to get money. And the party
grieved can have no Action against the Vicar General, being a Judge, and having
Jurisdiction of the cause, though he mistake his power. Per quod, etc.

Anonymus.
BAron and Feme Administrators in the right of the Feme, bring an Action of
Debt against Baron and Feme, Administrators likewise in the right of the Feme,
de bonis non, etc. of J. S. The Action is for Rent incurred in the Defendants
own time, and is brought in the debet and detinet. The Defendants plead, fully
administered: to which the Plaintiffs demurred. Serj. Hardes for the Plaintiff
said, the Action was well brought in the debet and detinet, for that nothing is
Assets, but the profits over and above the value of the Rent: he cited
Hargrave's case, 5 Rep. 31. 1 Rolls 603. 2 Cro. 238. Rich and Frank. ibid. 411.
ibid. 549. 2 Brook 202. 1 Bulstr. 22. Moor 566. Poph. 120. though if an
Executor be Plaintiff in an Action for Rent incurred after the Testators death,
he must sue in the detinet only, because whatever he recovers is Assets: but
though an Executor be Plaintiff, yet, if the Lease were made by himself, he
must sue in the debet and detinet. Then, the plea of fully administered, is not
a good plea: for he is charged for his own occupation. If this plea were
admitted, he might give in evidence payment of Debts, etc. for as much as the
term is worth, and take the profits to his own use, and the Lessor be stripped of
his Rent: in Styles Reports, 49. in one Josselyn's case, this plea was ruled to
be ill. And of that Opinion the Court was: and said, that Executors could not
waive a Term (though if they could, they ought to plead it specially) for it is
naturally in them, and prima facie is intended to be of more value then the
Rent: if it should fall out to be otherwise, the Executors shall not be liable
de bonis propriis, but must aid themselves by special pleading. For the plea,
they said there was nothing in it: and gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Buckly and Howard.
DEbt upon two Bonds, the one of 20 l. the other of 40 l. against an
Administratrix: the Defendant pleaded, that the intestate was endebted to the
Plaintiff in 250 l. upon a Statute Merchant: which Statute is yet in force, not
canceled nor annulled: and that she has not above 40 shillings in Assets,
besides what will satisfy this Statute. The Plaintiff replies, that the
Statute is burnt with Fire. The Defendant demurs. And by the Opinions of
Wyndham, Atkyns and Ellis, Justices, the Plaintiff had Judgment. For the
Defendant by his demurrer has confessed the burning of the Statute: which being
admitted and agreed upon, it is certain that it can never rise up against the
Defendant: for the Stat. of the 23 Hen. 8. cap. 6. concerning Recognisances in
the nature of a Statute-Staple, refers to the Statute-Staple, viz. that like
Execution shall be had and made, and under such manner and form as is therein
provided: the Statute-Staple refers to the Statute-Merchant: and that to the
Statute of Acton Burnel, 13 Ed. 1. which provides, that if it be found by the
Roll, and by the Bill, that the Debt was acknowledged, and that the day of
payment is expired, that then, etc. but if the Statute be burnt, it cannot
appear that the day of payment is expired; and consequently there can be no
Execution. If the Recognisee will take his Action upon it, he must say, hic in
Cur' prolat. 15 H. 7. 16. Vaughan differed in Opinion: he said, 1. That it is a
rule in Law, that matter of Record shall not be avoided by matter in pais;
which rule is manifestly thwarted by this resolution. He said, it was a matter
of Record to both parties; and the Plaintiff could not avoid it by such a plea,
any more then the Defendant could avoid it by any other matter of fact. He
cited a case, where the Obligee voluntarily gave up his Bond to the Obligor,
and took it from him again by force, and put it in suit: the Defendant pleaded
this special matter, and the Court would not allow it: but said, he might bring
his Action of Trespass. 2. Suppose the Defendant had taken issue upon the
Statutes being burnt, and it had been found to have been burnt; and yet had
been found afterward, the Defendant could not have any benefit of this
Verdict. He said it was a proper case for Equity.

Slater and Carew.
DEbt upon a Bond. The Condition was, that if the Obligor, his heirs,
Executors, etc. do yearly and every year, pay or cause to be paid to Tho. and
Dor. his wife during their two lives, that then, etc. the Husband dies, and the
question was, whether or no the payment should continue to the Wife? Sergeant
Baldwin argued, that the money is payable during their lives and the longer
liver of them: he cited Brudnel's case 5 Rep. and 1 Inst. 219. b. that whenever
an Interest is secured for lives; it is for the lives of them and the longer
liver of them: and Hill's case adjudged Pasch. 4 Jac. Rot. 112. in Warburton's
Reports. Seyse contra. The interest of this Bond is in the Obligee; the Husband
and Wife are strangers, and therefore the payment cease upon the death of
either of them: and of that Opinion was the whole Court; and grounded
themselves upon that distinction in Brudnel's case, betwixt where the Cestuy
que vies have an interest, and the cases of collateral limitations. They said
also, that in some cases an interest would not survive, as if an Office were
granted to two, and one of them dyed, unless there were words of Survivorship
in the Grant. So the Plaintiff was barred.

Term. Mich. 26 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Farrer and Brooks Administrat. of Jo. Brooks.
THe Plaintiff had Judgment in Debt against John Brooks the intestate: and took
out a Fieri facias, bearing test the last day of Trin. Term, de bonis and
catallis of John Brooks: before the Execution of which Writ John Brooks dies,
and Eliz. Brooks administers: the Sheriffs Bailiff executes the Writ upon the
Intestates Goods in her hands. Upon this Sergeant Baldwin moved the Court for
Restitution: for that a Fieri facias is a Commission, and must be strictly
pursued. Now the words of the Writ are de bonis of John Brooks: and by his
death they cease to be his Goods. The Plaintiff will be at no prejudice; the
Goods will still remain liable to the Judgment; only let the Execution be
renewed by Scire facias, to which the Administratress may plead somewhat.
Wyndham. The property of the Goods is so bound by the Test of the Writ, as
that a Sale made of them bona fide shall be avoided: which is a stronger case.
And since the Intestate himself could not have any plea, why should we take
care that the Administrator should have time to plead? And of that Opinion was
all the Court, after they had advised with the Judges of the Kings Bench: who
informed them that their practice was accordingly. But Vaughan faid, that in
his Opinion it was clearly against the rules of Law. But they said there were
cases to this purpose in Cr. Car. Rolls. Moor, etc.

Liefe and Saltingstone's Case.
EJect' firmae. The case upon a special Verdict was thus, viz. Sir Rich.
Saltingstone being seized in Fee of Rees-Farm, on the 17th day of Febr', in the
19th year of the King, made his Will in writing, in which were these words,
viz. for Rees-Farm in such a place, I will and bequeath it to my Wife during
her natural life: and by her to be disposed of to such of my Children as she
shall think fit: Sir Richard dyed: his Wife entered and sealed such a Writing as
this, viz. Omnibus Christi fidelibus, etc. Noveritis, that whereas my Husband
Sir Richard Salting-stone, etc. reciting that clause in the Will: I do dispose
the same in manner following; that is to say, I dispose it, after my decease,
to my Son Philip and his heirs for ever. The Wife died, and Philip entered and
dyed, and left the Lessor of the Plaintiff his Son and heir. The question was,
what Estate Philip took? or what Estate the Testator intended should pass out
of him? This case was argued in Easter-Term last past, by Sergeant Scroggs for
the Plaintiff; and by Sergeant Waller for the Defendant: and in Trinity-Term by
Sergeant Baldwin for the Plaintiff, and Sergeant Newdigate for the Defendant.
They for the Plaintiff insisted upon the word dispose; that when a man devises
his Land to be disposed by a stranger, it has been always held to be a
bequeathing of a Fee-simple, or at least a power to dispose of the Fee-simple.
19 H. 8. 10. Moor 5 Eliz. 57. per Dyer, Weston and Welshe: but they chiefly
relied on Daniel and Uply's case in Latch.

The Defendants Council urged, that the heir at Law ought not to be
disinherited without very express words. That if the Devisor himself had said
in his Will, I dispose Rees-Farm to Philip; that Philip would have had no more
then an Estate for life: and what reason is there, that the disposal being
limited to another, should carry a larger Interest, then if it had been
executed by the Testator himself? This Term it was argued at the Bench, and by
the Judgments of Ellis, Wyndham and Atkyns Justices, the Plaintiff had
Judgment: they agreed that the Wife took by the Will an Estate for her own
life, with a power to dispose of the Fee. She cannot take a larger Estate to
her self by implication, then an Estate for life; because an Estate for life is
given to her by express limitation: 1 Bulst. 219, 220. Whiting and Wilkins
case. For cases resembling the case in question were cited, 7 Ed. 6. Brook,
tit. Devise 39. 1 Leon. 159. and Daniel and Uply's case: and Clayton's case in
Latch. It is objected that in Daniel and Uply's case, there are these words, at
her will and pleasure: to which they answered, that if she have a power to
dispose according to her discretion, and as she her self pleases; and then
expressio eorum quae tacit insunt, nihil operatur. If I devise that J. S.
shall sell my Land, he shall sell the Inheritance: Kelloway 43, 44. 19 H. 8.
fol. 9. Where the Devisor gives to another a power to dispose, he gives to that
person the same power that himself had. Vaughan Chief Justice differed in
Opinion; he said, it is plain that the word dispose does not signify to give,
for if so, then it is evident that the Lessor of the Plaintiff cannot have any
title: for if the Wife were to give, then were the Estate to pass out of her,
which could not be by such an appointment as she makes here, but must be by a
legal Conveyance. Besides, she cannot give what she has not, and she has but an
Estate for life. If then it does not signify to give, what does it signify?
let us a little turn the words, and a plain certain signification will appear:
I will and bequeath Rees-Farm to such of my Children as my Wife shall think
fit, at her disposal: at this rate the Wife does but nominate what person shall
take by the Will. This is a plain case, and free from uncertainty and
ambiguity, which else the word dispose will be liable to. But Judgment was
given, ut supra.

Howell versus King.
TRespass, for driving Cattle over the Plaintiffs ground. The case was; A. has
a way over B's ground to Black-Acre, and drives his Beasts over A's ground to
Black-acre, and then to another place lying beyond Black-acre. And whether this
was lawful or no, was the question upon a demurrer. It was urged, that when his
Beasts were at Black-acre, he might drive them whither he would: Rolls 391. nu.
40. 11 H. 4. 82. Brook, tit. chimin. On the other side it was said, that by
this means the Defendant might purchase a hundred or a thousand Acres adjoining
to Black-acre, to which he prescribes to have a way: by which means the
Plaintiff would lose the benefit of his Land: and that a Prescription
presupposed a grant, and ought to be continued according to the intent of its
original Creation. The whole Court agreed to this. And Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

Warren qui tam, etc. versus Sayre.
THe Court agreed in this case, that an Information for not coming to Church,
may be brought upon the Stat. of 23 Eliz. only, reciting the clause in it that
has reference to Stat. 1. of the Queen: and that this is the best and surest
way of declaring.

Term. Hill. 26 and 27 Car. II. in Com. Banco.
Williamson and Hancock. Hill. 24 and 25 Car. 2. Rot. 679.
TEnant for life, the Remainder in Tail. Tenant for life levies a Fine to J. S.
and his heirs, to the use of himself for years, and after to the use of Hannah
and Susan Prinne and their heirs, if such a sum of money were unpaid by the
Conusor, and if the money were paid, then to the use of the Conisor and his
heirs. And this Fine was with general warranty. The Tenant for life died, the
money unpaid, and the warranty descended upon the Remainder-man in Tail. And
the question was, whether the Remainder-man were bound by this warranty or not?
Sergeant Maynard argued, that because the Estate of the Land is transferred in
the Post, before the warranty attaches in the Remainder-man, that therefore it
should be no Bar. He agreed, that a man that comes in by the limitation of an
use shall be an Assignee within the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 34. by an
equitable construction of the Statute, because he comes in by the limitation of
the party, and not purely by Act in Law: but this case of ours is upon a
collateral garranty, which is a positive Law, and a thing so remote from solid
reason and equity, that it is not to be stretched beyond the maxim. That the
Cestuy que use in this case shall not vouch, is confessed on all hands: and
there is the same reason why he should not rebutt. He said the resolution
mentioned in Lincoln College case, was not in the case, nor could be: the
warranty there was a particular warranty, contra tunc Abbatem
Westmonasteriensem and successores suos; which Abbey was dissolved long before
that case came in question. He said, Justice Jones upon the arguing of Spirt
and Bence's case, reported in Cr. Car. said, that he had been present at the
Judgment in Lincoln College case, and that there was no such resolution as is
there reported. Sergeant Baldwin argued on the other side: that at the Common
Law many persons might rebutt, that could not take advantage of a warranty by
way of Voucher: as the Lord by Escheat, the Lord of a Villain, a Stranger, a
Tenant in possession: 35 Ass. placito 9. 11 Ass. placito 3. 45 Ed. 3. 18.
placito 11. 42 Ed. 3. 19. b. a fortiori, he said, he that is in by the
limitation of an use, being in by the act of the party (though the Law
cooperate with it, to perfect the assurance) shall rebutt.

The Court was of Opinion that the Cestuy que use might rebutt, that though
Voucher lies in privity, an abater or intruder might rebutt. F. N. B. 135. 1
Inst. 385. As to Sergeant Maynard's Objection, that he is in the Post; they
said they had adjudged lately in Foul and Doble's case, that a Cestuy que use
might rebutt. So it was held in Spirt and Bence's case, Cr. Car. and in Jones
199. Kendal and Foxe's case. That Report in Lincoln College case, whether
there were any resolution in the case or no, is founded upon so good reason,
that Conveyances since have gone according to it. Atkyns said, there was a
difficult clause in the Statute of Uses, viz. That all and singular person and
persons, etc. which at any time on this side the first day of May, etc. 1536.
etc. shall have, etc. By this clause they that came in by the limitation of an
use before that day, were to have the like advantages by Voucher or Rebutter,
as if they had been within the degrees. If the Parliament thought it
reasonable, why was it limited to that time? Certainly the makers of that Law
intended to destroy Uses utterly, and that there should not be for the future
any Conveyances to Uses. But they supposed that it would be some small time
before all people would take notice of the Statute, and make their Conveyances
accordingly; and that might be the reason of this clause. But since, contrary
to their expectations, Uses are continued, he could easily be satisfied; he
said, that Cestuy que use should rebutt. Wyndham was of Opinion, that Cestuy
que use might vouch: he said there was no Authority against it, but only
Opinions obiter. They all agreed for the Defendant, and Judgment was given
accordingly.

Rogers versus Davenant Parson of White-Chappel.
NOrth Chief Justice: The Spiritual Court may compel Parishioners to repair
their Parish Church, if it be out of Repair, and may Excommunicate every one of
them, till it be repaired: and those that are willing to contribute must be
absolved, till the greater part of them agree to assess a Tax; but the Court
cannot assess them toward it; it is like to a Bridge or a Highway; a
Distringas shall issue against the Inhabitants, to make them Repair it: but
neither the Kings Court, nor the Justices of Peace can impose a Tax for it.
Wyndham, Atkyns and Ellis accorded; The Churchwardens cannot; none but a
Parliament can impose a Tax: but the greater part of the Parish can make a
By-Law; and to this purpose they are a Corporation. But if a Tax be illegally
imposed, as by a Commission from the Bishop to the Parson, and some of the
Parishioners, to assess a Tax; yet if it be assented to, and confirmed by the
major part of the Parishioners, they in the Spiritual Court may proceed to
Excommunicate those that refuse to pay it.

Compton and Vx. versus Ireland.
Mich. 26 Car. 2. Rot. 691.
SCire facias by the Plaintiffs as Executors, to have Execution of a Judgment
obtained by their Testator; unde Executio adhuc restat faciend. The Defendant
confesses the Judgment, but says that a Cap. ad satisf. issued against him,
upon which he was taken, and was in the custody of the Warden of the Fleet; and
that he paid the sum mentioned in the condemnation, to the Warden of the Fleet,
who suffered him to go at large. The Plaintiff demurred. This the Court held to
be no plea; but that it was a voluntary escape in the Warden, and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

Haley's Case.
PEr Cur'. If a Habeas Corpus be directed to an inferior Court, returnable two
days after the end of the Term, yet the inferior Court cannot proceed contrary
to the Writ of Habeas Corpus. North cited the case of Staples, Steward of
Windsor; who hardly escaped a Commitment, because he had proceeded after a
Habeas Corpus delivered to him (though the value were under five pounds) and
would not make a Return of it.

The King against Sir Francis Clerk.
Ent. Hill. 24. and 25 Car. 2. Rot. 594.
THe case upon a special Verdict was thus, viz. The King being seized in Fee of
the Manor of Leyborn in Kent, to which the Advowson of the Church of Leyborn
is appendant (which Manor came to him by the dissolution of Monasteries,
having been part of the possessions of the Abbot of Gray-Church) granted the
Manor to the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Successors, saving the Advowson;
Afterward the King presents to the Church, being void J. S. The Archbishop of
Canterbury grants the Manor, and the Advowson, to the King, his Heirs and
Successors; which grant is confirmed by the Dean and Chapter: the King grants
the Manor with the appurtenances, and this Advowson (naming it in particular)
which lately did belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to the Abbot of
Gray-Church: together with all privileges, profits, commodities, etc. in as
ample manner, as they came to the Kings hand by the grant of the Archbishop, or
by color or pretense of any grant from the Archbishop, or confirmation of the
Dean and Chapter, or by surrender of the late Abbot of Gray-Church, or as amply
as they are now, or at any time were in our hands, to Sir Edw. North and his
heirs, etc. The question was, whether or no by this grant the Advowson passed.
Sergeant Newdigate. The King is not apprised of his title, and therefore the
grant void: 1 Rep. 52. a. for he thought this Advowson came to him by grant
from the Archbishop. He cited Moor 318. Inglefields case. If the King be
deceived in Deed or in Law, his grant is void: Brook, Patents 104. 1 Rep. 51,
52. 1 Rep. 46, 49. 10 Rep. Arthur Legat's case. Hob. 228, 229, 230, etc. ibid.
223, 243. Dyer 124. 1 Rep. 50. Hob. 170. Moor 888. 1 Rep. 49. 2 Rep. 33. 11
Rep. 90. 9 H. 6. 28. b. 2 Rolls 186. Hob. 323. Coke's Entries 384. Sergeant
Hardes contra. He laid down four grounds or rules whereby to construe the Kings
Letters Patents: 1. Where a particular certainty precedes, it shall not be
destroyed by an uncertainty, or a mistake coming after; 2 Cr. 34. and Yel. 42.
2. Cr. 48. 3 Leon. 162. 1 And. 148. 29 Ed. 3. 71. b. 10 H. 4. 2. Godb. 423.
Markham's case, cited in Arthur Legate's case, 10 Rep. 2. There is a difference
when the King mistakes his title to the prejudice of his tenure or profit, and
when he is mistaken only in some description of his grant, which is but
supplimental, and not material nor issuable: 21 Ed. 4. 49. 33 H. 7. 6. ^. H. 8.
1. and 38 H. 6. 37. 9 Ed. 4. 11, 12. Lane's Reports 111. 2 Co. 54. 1 Bulstr. 4.
3. Distinct words of relation in the Kings grant, are good to pass away any
thing: Dyer 350, 351. 9 Rep. 24. etc. Whistler's case, 10 Co. 4. When the Kings
grants are upon a valuable consideration, they shall be construed favorably
for the Patentee, for the honor of the King: 18 Ed. 1. de Quo warranto. 2
Inst. 446, 447. 6 Rep. Sir John Molyn's case, 10 Co. 65. a. Then he applied all
these rules to the case in question, and prayed Judgment. Afterward Sergeant
Maynard argued against the passing of the Advowson. He said those two
descriptions of the Advowson, viz. belonging lately to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and formerly to the Abbey of Gray-Church, are coupled together with
a Conjunctive (et) so that both must be true. So here is a falsity in the first
and material part of the grant, viz. the description of the thing granted:
though the Advowson of Leyborn be named, yet it is so named, as to be capable
of a generality: for there may be more Advowsons then one belonging to that
Manor. This falsity goes to the title of the Church. No subsequent words will
aid this misrecital; for the description of the thing granted ends there. The
following words, viz. adeo plene, etc. and whatever comes after, do but set out
how fully and amply he should enjoy the thing granted: and being no part of its
description, cannot enlarge it or make it more certain: 8 H. 4. 2. Serj. Turner
contra, cited these books, viz. Bacon's Elements 96. 1 Leon. 120. Veritas
nominis tollit errorem demonstrationis. 29 Ed. 3. 7, 8. 1 And. 148. Plowd.
Comm. 192. 2 Co. Doddington's case. 10 Co. 113. 19 Ed. 3. Fitzherb. grants 58.
10 H. 4. 2. Sir John L'Estranges case. Markham's case 10 Co. in Arthur Legate's
case. Cr. Car. 548. Ann Needler's case, in Hob. 9 H. 6. 12. Brook Annuity 3.
Baker and Bacon's case, Cr. Jac. 48. and Bozoun's case, 4. Rep. 6 Co. 7. Cr.
Jac. 34. 1 Leon. 119, 120. 2 Rolls, Prerog. le Roy 200. 8 Co. 167. 21 Ed. 4.
46. 8 Co. 56. Rolls, tit. Prerog. 201. 10 Co. 64. 9 Co. the Earl of Salop's
case. 1 Inst. 121. b. Moor 421. 2 Rolls 125. This Term the Court gave their
Judgment, that the Advowson did well pass. In this grant there are as large
words, and the same words that are in Whistlers case 10 Rep. and the King is
not here deceived, neither in the value, nor in his title. And Judgment was
given accordingly.

Furnis and VVaterhouse.
IT was moved for a Supersedeas to stay proceedings upon a Grand Cape in Dower,
quia erronice emanavit: because the return of the Summons was not according to
the Stat. of 31 Eliz. cap. 3. the Stat. is, after Summons. 2. The Land lies in
a Ville called Heriock: and the Return is of a Proclamation of Summons at the
Parish Church of Halyfax: and it does not appear that the Land lies within that
Parish. 3. The Return is proclamari feci secundum formam Statuti: and it is not
returned to have been made upon the Land: Hob. 33. Allen and Walter. These were
all held erroneous; and the Grand Cape was superseded.

Term. Pasch. 26 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Naylor against Sharply and others Coroners of the County Palatine of Lancaster.
A Man brings an Action of Debt against B. Sheriff of the County Palatine of
Lancaster, and sues him to an Outlawry upon mean Process, and has a Capias
directed to the Chancery of the County Palatine, who makes a Precept to the
Coroners of the County, being six in all, to take his body, and have him before
the Kings Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster such a day. One
of the Coroners being in sight of the Defendant, and having a fair opportunity
to Arrest him, does it not: but they all return non est inventus: though he
were easy to be found, and might have been taken every day. Hereupon the
Plaintiff brings an Action against the Coroners, and lays his Action in
Middlesex; and has a Verdict for 100 l. Serj. Baldwin moved in Arrest of
Judgment: that the Action ought to have been brought in Lancaster: he agreed to
the cases put in Bulwer's case 7 Rep. where the cause of Action arises equally
in two Counties; but here all that the Coroners do, subsists and determines in
the County Palatine of Lancaster; for they make a Return to the Chancery of the
County Palatine only, and it is he that makes the Return to the Court. He
insisted upon Dyer 38, 39, 40. Husse and Gibbs. 2. He said this Action is
grounded upon two wrongs, one the not arresting him when he was in sight; the
other for returning non est inventus, when he might easily have been taken: now
for the wrong of one, all are charged, and entire damages given. He said two
Sheriffs make but one Officer, but the case of Coroners is different: each of
them is responsible for himself only, and not for his Companion. Sergeant
Turner and Pemberton contra. They said the Action was well brought in
Middlesex, because the Plaintiffs damage arose here, viz. by not having the
body here at the day. They cited Bulwer's case, and Dyer 159. b. the Chancery
returns to the Court the same answer that the Coroners return to him, so that
their false Return is the cause of prejudice that accrues to the Plaintiff
here. The ground of this Action is the return of non est inventus, which is the
act of them all: that one of them saw him, and might have arrested him, and
that the Defendant was daily to be found, etc. are but mentioned as arguments
to prove the false Return. And they conceived an Action would not lie against
one Coroner, no more then against one Sheriff in London, York, Norwich, etc.
But to the first exception taken by Baldwin, they said, admitting the Action
laid in another County then where it ought, yet after Verdict it is aided by
the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. if the Ven. come from any place of the County
where the Action is laid: it is not said, in any place of the County where the
cause of Action arises: now this Action is laid in Middlesex, and so the Trial
by a Middlesex Jury good, let the cause of Action arise where it will. Cur^.
That Statute does not help your case; for it is to be intended when the Action
is laid in the proper County, where it ought to be laid, which the word proper
County implies. But they inclined to give Judgment for the Plaintiff upon the
reasons given by Turner and Pemberton. Adjornatur.

Bird and Kirk.
IT was resolved in this case by the whole Court; 1. That if there be Tenant
for life, the Remainder for life of a Copyhold, and the Remainder-man for life
enter upon the Tenant for life in possession, and make a surrender, that
nothing at all passes hereby; for by his entry he is a Disseisor: and has no
customary Estate in him, whereof to make a surrender. 2. That when Tenant for
life of a Copyhold suffers a Recovery as Tenant in Fee, that this is no
forfeiture of his Estate; for the Freehold not being concerned, and it being
in a Court Baron, where there is no Estoppell, and the Lord that is to take
advantage of it, if it be a forfeiture, being party to it, it is not to be
resembled to the forfeiture of a Free-Tenant: that Customary Estates have not
such accidental qualities as Estates at Common Law have, unless by special
Custom. 3. That if it were a forfeiture, of this and all other forfeitures
committed by Copyholders, the Lord only, and not any of those in Remainder
ought to take advantage. And they gave Judgment accordingly. North Chief
Justice said, that where it is said in King and Lord's case in Cr. Car. that
when Tenant for life of a Copyhold surrenders, etc. that no use is left in
him, but whosoever is afterward admitted, comes in under the Lord; that that is
to be understood of Copy-holds in such Manors, where the Custom warrants only
Customary Estates for life; and is not applicable to Copy-holds granted for
life, with a Remainder in Fee.

Anonymus.
A Writ of Annuity was brought upon a Prescription against the Rector of the
Parish Church of St. Peter, in, etc. the Defendant pleads, that the Church is
overflown with the Sea, etc. the Plaintiff demurs. Sergeant Nudigate pro
Querente: The Declaration is good, for a Writ of Annuity lies upon a
prescription against a Parson, but not against an heir: F. N. B. 152. Rastall
32. the plea of the Church being drowned is not good: at best it is no more
then if he had said that part of the Glebe was drowned: it is not the building
of the Church, nor the consecrated ground, in respect whereof the Parson is
charged; but the profits of the Tithes and the Glebe. Though the Church be down
one may be presented to the Rectory: 21 H. 7. 1. 10. H. 7. 13. 16 H. 7. 9. and
Luttrel's case, 4 Rep. Wilmote contra. The Parson is charged as Parson of the
Church of St. Peter, we plead in effect that there is no such Church, and he
confesses it. 21 Ed. 4. 83. Br. Annuity 39. 21 Ed. 4. 20. 11 H. 4. 49. we
plead that the Church is submersa, obruta, etc. which is as much a dissolution
of the Rectory as the death of all the Monks is a dissolution of an Abbathie.
It may be objected that the Defendant has admitted himself Rector by pleading
to it: but I answer, 1. An Estoppel is not taken notice of, unless relied on in
pleading. 2. The Plaintiff by his demurrer has confessed the Fact of our plea.
By which mean the matter is set at large, though we were estopped. The Court
was clearly of opinion for the Plaintiff. The Church is the Cure of Souls, and
the right of Tithes. If the material Fabric of the Parish Church be down,
another may be built, and ought to be. Judicium pro Quer', nisi, etc.

Term. Trin. 27 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Vaughton versus Atwood and alios.
TRespass for taking away some Flesh-meat from the Plaintiff; being a Butcher.
The Defendant justifies by virtue of a Custom of the Manor of, etc. that the
Homage used to choose every year two Surveyors, to take care that no unwholesome
Victuals were sold within the Precinct of that Manor; and that they were sworn
to execute their Office truly for the space of a year: and that they had power
to destroy whatever corrupt Victuals they found exposed to sale; and that the
Defendants, being chosen Surveyors, and sworn to execute the Office truly,
examining the Plaintiffs meat (who was also a Butcher) found a side of Beef
corrupt and unwholesome, and that therefore they took it away and burnt it,
prout eis been licuit, etc. The Plaintiff demurs.

North. This is a case of great consequence, and seems doubtful. It were hard
to disallow the Custom, because the design of it seems to be for the
preservation of men's health. And to allow it, were to give men too great a
power of seizing and destroying other men's Goods. There is an Aletaster
appointed at Leets, but all his Office is, to make Presentment at the Leet, if
he finds it not according to the Assize. Wyndham, Atkyns and Ellis: It is a
good reasonable Custom. It is to prevent evil, and Laws for prevention are
better then Laws for punishment. As for the great power that it seems to allow
to these Surveyors, it is at their own peril if they destroy any Victuals that
are not really corrupt; for in an Action, if they justify by virtue of the
Custom, the Plaintiff may take issue, that the Victuals were not corrupt. But
here the Plaintiff has confessed it by the demurrer. Atkyns said, if the
Surveyors were not responsible, the Homage that put them in must answer for
them, according to the rule of respondeat superior. Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, unless, etc.

Thredneedle and Lynham's Case.
UPon a special Verdict, the case was thus. The Jury found that the Lands in
the Declaration are, and time out of mind had been parcel of the demesnes of
the Manor of Burniel in the County of Cornwall; which Manor consists of
demesnes, viz. Copyhold tenements demisable for one, two or three lives, and
services of diverse Freehold Tenants: that within the Manor of Burniel, there
is another Manor called Trecaer, consisting likewise of Copy-holds and
Free-holds: and that the Bishop of Exeter held both these Manors in the right
of his Bishopric. Then they find the Statute of 1. Eliz. in haec verba. They
find that the old accustomed yearly Rent, which used to be reserved upon a
demise of these two Manors, was 67 pounds, 1 s. and 5 d. then they find that
Joseph Hall Bishop of Exeter, demised these two Manors to one Prowse for 99
years, determinable upon three lives, reserving the old and accustomed Rent of
67 l. 1 s. and 5 d. that Prowse, living the Cestuy que vies, assigned over to
James Prowse the demesnes of the Manor of Trecaer, for, that afterward he
assigned over all his Interest in both Manors to Mr. Nosworthy, excepting the
demesnes of Treacer, then in the possession of James Prowse: That Mr.
Nosworthy, when two of the lives were expired, for a sum of money by him paid
to the Bishop of Exeter, surrendered into his hands both the said Manors,
excepting what was in the possession of James Prowse; and that the Bishop
(Joseph Hall's Successor) redemised unto him the said Manors, excepting the
demesnes of Trecaer, and excepting one Message in the occupation of Robert,
and excepting one Farm parcel of the Manor of Burniel, for three lives,
reserving 67 l. 1 s. 5 d. with a nomine poenae: and whether this second Lease
was a good Lease, and the 67 l. 1 s. 5 d. the old and accustomed Rent, within
the intention of the Statute of 1 Eliz. was the question. After several
arguments at the Bar, it was argued at the Bench in Michaelmas Term, Ann. 26
Car. 2. And the Court was divided, viz. Vaughan and Ellis against the Lease;
Atkyns and Wyndham for it. This Term North Chief Justice delivered his Opinion,
in which he agreed with Atkyns and Wyndham; so that Judgment was given in
maintenance of the Lease; and the Judgment was affirmed in the Kings Bench upon
a Writ of Error.

The Chapter of the Collegiate Church of Southwell versus the Bishop of
Lincoln, and J. S. Incumbent, etc.
IN a Qua. imp. the Incumbents Title was under a grant made by the Plaintiffs,
who were seized of the Advowson ut de uno grosso, in the right of their Church,
of the next avoidance, one Esco being then Incumbent of their Presentation, to
Edward King, from whom by mean assignments it came to Elizabeth Bley, who after
the death of Esco, presented the Defendant.

Upon a demurrer these points came in question, 1. Whether the grantors were
within the Statute of the 13 Eliz. or not? 2. Whether a grant of a next
avoidance be restrained by the Statute? 3. If the grant be void, whether it be
void ab initio, or when it becomes so? And 4. Whether the Statute of 13 Eliz.
shall be taken to be a general Law? for it is not pleaded. Sergeant Jones. For
the first point argued, that the Grantors are within the Statute; the words are
Deans and Chapters, which he said might well be taken severally; for of this
Chapter there is no Dean. If they were to be taken jointly, then a Dean were
not within this Law, in respect of those possessions, which he holds in the
right of his Deanery; but the subsequent general words do certainly include
them; and would extend even to Bishops, but that they are superior to all that
are expressed by name. For the second, he said the Statute restrains all gifts,
grants, etc. other then such, upon which the old Rent, etc. He cited Cr. Eliz.
440. 5. Co. the case of Ecclesiastical persons. 10 Co. the Earl of Salisbury's
case. For the third point, he held it void ab initio: it must be so, or good
for ever: For here is no Dean, after whose death it may become void: as in Hunt
and Singleton's case: the Chapter in our case never dies. For the fourth point,
he argued that it is a general Law, because it concerns all the Clergy:
Holland's case, 4 Rep. and Dumpor's case: ibid. 120. b. Willmote contra. North
Chief Justice, Atkyns, Wyndham and Ellis Justices, all agreed upon the three
first points as Sergeant Jones had argued. Atkyns doubted whether the 13 of
Eliz. were a general Law or not: but was overruled. They all agreed, that the
Action should have been brought against the Patron, as well as against the
Ordinary and the Incumbent; but that being only a plea in abatement, that the
Defendant has waived the benefit thereof, by pleading in Bar. And Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff, Nisi causa, etc. Hunt and Singleton's case being
mentioned, Atkyns said: he thought it a hard case; considering that the Dean
and the Chapter were all persons capable, that a grant should hold in force as
long as the Dean lived, and determine then. He thought, they being a
Corporation aggregate of persons, who were all capable, that there was no
difference betwixt that case and this. Ellis said, that in Floyd and Gregory's
case, reported in Jones, it was made a point: and that Jones in his argument
denied the case of Hunt and Singleton: he said, that himself and Sir Rowland
Wainscott reported it, and that nothing was said of that point; but that my
Lord Coke followed the Report of Sergeant Bridgeman, who was three or four
years their puisne, and that he mistook the case.

Milword and Ingram.
THe Plaintiff declares in an Action of the case upon a quantum meruit for 40
shillings, and upon an Indebitat. Assumpsit for 40 shillings likewise. The
Defendant acknowledged the promises; but further says, that the Plaintiff and
he accounted together for diverse sums of money; and that upon the foot of the
Account, the Defendant was found to be endebted to the Plaintiff in 3
shillings, and that the Plaintiff in consideration that the Defendant promised
to pay him those 3 shillings, discharged him of all demands. The Plaintiff
demurred. The Court gave Judgment against the demurrer: 1. They held, that if
two men, being mutually endebted to each other, do account together, and the
one is found in arrear so much, and there be an express agreement to pay the
sum found to be in arrear, and each to stand discharged of all other demands:
that this is a good discharge in Law, and the parties cannot resort to the
original Contracts. But North Chapter Just. said, if there were but one Debt
betwixt them, entering into an account for that would not determine the
Contract. 2. They held also, that any promise might well be discharged by
paroll, but not after it is broken, for then it is a Debt.

Jones and Wait.
SHrewsbury and Cotton are Towns adjoining; Sir Samuel Jones is Tenant in Tail
of Lands in both Towns: Shrewsbury and Cotton are both within the Liberties of
the Town of Shrewsbury. Sir Samuel Jones suffers a Common Recovery of all his
Lands in both Vills: but the Praecipe was of two Messuages and Closes thereunto
belonging (these were in Shrewsbury) and of, etc. (mentioning those in Cotton)
lying and being in the Ville of Shrewsbury, in the Liberties thereof. And
whether by this Recovery the Lands lying in Cotton, which is a distinct Ville
of it self, not named in the Recovery, pass or not, was the question. Sergeant
Jones argued against the Recovery. He cited Cr. Jac. 575. in Monk and Butler's
case, and Cr. Car. 269, 270. and 276. he said the Writ of Covenant, upon which
a Fine is levied, is a personal Action; but a Common Recovery is a real Action,
and the Land it self demanded in the Praecipe. There is no President, he said,
of such a Recovery. He cited a case Hill. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Rot. 223. Hutton
106. and Marche's Reports, one Johnson and Baker's case: which, he said, was
the case in point, and resolved for him. But the Court were all of Opinion that
the Lands in Cotton passed. And gave Judgment accordingly. Ellis said, if the
Recovery were erroneous, at least, they ought to allo(...)t, till it were
reversed.

Lepping and Kedgewin.
AN Action in the nature of a Conspiracy was brought by the Plaintiff against
the Defendant; in which the Declaration was insufficient. The Defendant pleaded
an ill plea: but Judgment was given against the Plaintiff upon the
insufficiency of the Declaration. Which ought to have been entered, Quod
Defendens eat inde sine die: but by mistake, or out of design, it was entered,
Quia placitum praedictum, in forma praedicta superius placitat' materiaque in
eodem contenta, bonum and sufficiens in lege existit, etc. ideo consideratum
est per Cur', quod Quer' nil capiat per billam. The Plaintiff brings a new
Action, and declares aright. The Defendant pleads the Judgment in the former
Action, and recites the Record verbatim as it was. To which the Plaintiff
demurred. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, nisi causa, etc. North
Chief Justice; There is no question, but that if a man mistakes his
Declaration, and the Defendant demurs; the Plaintiff may set it right in a
second Action. But here it is objected, that the Judgment is given upon the
Defendants plea. Suppose a Declaration be faulty, and the Defendant take no
advantage of it, but pleads a plea in bar: and the Plaintiff takes issue, and
the right of the matter is found for the Defendant; I hold that in this case
the Plaintiff shall never bring his Action about again: for he is estopped by
the Verdict. Or suppose such a Plaintiff demur to the plea in bar; there by his
demurrer he confesses the fact, if well pleaded; and this estops him as much
as a Verdict would. But if the plea were not good, then there is no Estoppel.
And we must take notice of the Defendants plea; for upon the matter, as that
falls out to be good, or otherwise, the second Action will be maintainable, or
not. The other Judges agreed with him in omnibus.

Atkinson and Rawson.
THe Plaintiff declares against the Defendant as Executor. The Defendant pleads
that the Testator made his Will, and that he the Defendant, suscepto super se
onere Testamenti praedict. etc. did pay diverse sums of money due upon
specialties, and that there was a Debt owing by the Testator to the Defendants
Wife; and that he retained so much of the Testators Goods, as to satisfy that
Debt, and that he had no other Assets: The Plaintiff demurred, because for
ought appears the Defendant is an Executor de son tort: and then he cannot
retain, for his own debt. The Plaintiffs naming him in his Declaration,
Executor of the Testament of, etc. will not make for him: for that he does of
necessity; he cannot declare against him any other way, and of that Opinion was
all the Court, viz. that he ought to entitle himself to the Executorship, that
it may appear to the Court, that he is such a person as may retain. And
accordingly Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Term. Hill. 27 and 28 Car. II. in Com. Banco.
Smith's Case.
A Man dies, leaving Issue by two several Venters; viz. by the first three
Sons; and by the second two Daughters. One of the Sons dies intestate: the
elder of the two surviving Brothers takes out Administration, and Sir Lionel
Jenkins Judge of the Prerogative Court, would compel the Administrator to make
distribution to the Sisters of the half-blood. He prayed a Prohibition, but it
was denied upon advice by all the Judges: for that the Sisters of the
half-blood, being a kin to the Intestate, and not in remotiori gradu then the
Brother of the whole blood, must be accounted in equal degree.

Anonymus.
AN Action was brought against four men, viz. two Attorneys and two Solicitors,
for being Attorneys and Solicitors in a cause against the Plaintiff in an
inferior Court, falso and malitiose, knowing that there was no cause of Action
against him: and also for that they sued the Plaintiff in another Court,
knowing that he was an Attorney of the Common Pleas, and privileged there. Per
tot' Cur', there is no cause of Action. For put the case as strong as you will:
suppose a man be retained as an Attorney to sue for a debt, which he knows to
be released, and that himself were a witness to the Release; yet the Court held
that the Action would not lie, for that what he does, is only as Servant to
another, and in the way of his Calling and Profession. And for suing an
Attorney in an inferior Court; that (they said) was no cause of Action: for
who knows whether he will insist upon his privilege or not? and if he does, he
may plead it, and have it allowed.

Fits and al. versus Freestone.
IN an Action grounded upon a promise in Law, payment before the Action brought
is allowed to be given in Evidence upon non Assumpsit. But where the Action is
grounded upon a special promise, there payment or any other legal discharge,
must be pleaded.

Bringloe versus Morris.
IN Trespass for immoderately riding the Plaintiffs Mare, the Defendant
pleaded, that the Plaintiff lent to him the said Mare. and licentiam dedit
eidem aequitare upon the said Mare, and that by virtue of this License the
Defendant and his Servant alternatim had rid upon the Mare. The Plaintiff
demurs. Serj. Skipwith pro Quer'. The License is personal and incommunicable:
as, 12 H. 7. 25. 13 H. 7. 13. the Duchess of Norfolk's case. 18 Ed. 4. 14.
Serj. Nudigate contra. This License is given by the party, and not created by
Law, wherefore no Trespass lies: 8 Rep. 146, 147. per Cur', the License is
annexed to the person, and cannot be communicated to another: for this riding
is matter of pleasure. North took a difference where a certain time is limited
for the Loan of the Horse, and where not. In the first case, the party to whom
the Horse is lent, has an interest in the Horse during that time, and in that
case his Servant may ride: but in the other case not. A difference was taken
betwixt hiring a Horse to go to York, and borrowing a Horse: in the first place
the party may set his Servant up; in the second not.

Term. Pasch. 28 Car. II. in Communi Banco
Anonymus.
A Man upon marriage Covenants with his Wives relations, to let her make a Will
of such and such Goods: she made a Will accordingly by her husbands consent,
and dyed. After her death, her Will being brought to the Prerogative Court to
be proved, a Prohibition was prayed by the Husband, upon this suggestion, that
the Testatrix was foemina viro cooperta, and so disabled by the Law to make a
Will. Cur'. Let a Prohibition go, Nisi causa, etc. North. When a question
arises concerning the Jurisdiction of the Spiritual Court, as whether they
ought to have the Probate of such a Will, whether such a disposition of a
personal Estate be a Will or not, whether such a Will ought to be proved before
a peculiar, or before the Ordinary, whether by the Archbishop of one Province
or another, or both, and what shall be bona notabilia; in these and the like
cases, the Common Law retains the Jurisdiction of determining; there is no
question, but that here is a good surmise for a Prohibition; to wit, that the
woman was a person disabled by the Law to make a Will; the Husband may by
Covenant depart with his right, and suffer his Wife to make a Will; but whether
he has done so here or not shall be determined by the Law: we will not leave
it to their decision: it is too great an invasion upon the right of the
Husband. In this case the Spiritual Court has no Jurisdiction at all: they have
the Probate of Wills, but a Feme-covert cannot make a Will. If she disposes of
any thing by her Husbands consent, the property of what she so disposes,
passes from him to her Legatee, and it is the gift of the husband. If the
Goods were given into another hands in trust for the wife; still her Will is
but a Declaration of the trust, and not a Will, properly so called. But of
things in Action, and things that a Feme-Covert has as Executrix, she may make
a Will by her Husbands consent: and such a Will, being properly a Will in Law,
ought to be proved in the Spiritual Court. In the case in question a
Prohibition was granted.

-- against the Hambrough Company.
THe Plaintiff brought an Action of Debt in London against the
Hambrough-Company, who not appearing upon Summons, and a Nihil being returned
against them, an Attachment was granted, to attach Debts owing to the Company,
in the hands of 14 several persons: by Certiorari the cause was removed into
this Court; and whether a Procedendo should be granted or not, was the question.

Sergeant Goodfellow, Baldwin, and Barrel argued, that a debt owing to a
Corporation is not attachable. Sergeant Maynard and Scroggs contra. Cur'. We
are not Judges of the Customs of London; nor do we take upon us to determine
whether a debt owing to a Corporation, be within the Custom of foreign
Attachment, or not. This we judge and agree in, that it is not unreasonable
that a Corporation's debts should be attached. If we had judged the Custom
unreasonable, we could and would have retained the cause: For we can overruled
a Custom, though it be one of the Customs of London, that are confirmed by Act
of Parliament, if it be against natural reason. But because in this Custom we
find no such thing, we will return the cause. Let them proceed according to the
Custom, at their peril. If there be no such Custom, they that are aggrieved may
take their remedy at Law. We do not dread the consequences of it. It does but
tend to the advancement of Justice; and accordingly a Procedendo was granted
per North Chief Justice, Wyndham and Ellis. Atkyns aberat.

Anonymus.
PEr Cur', if a man is indicted upon the Statute of Recusancy, Conformity is a
good plea: but not, if an Action of Debt be brought.

Parten and Baseden's Case.
PArten brought an Action of Debt in this Court against the Testator of Baseden
the now Defendant, and had Judgment. After whose death there was a devastavit
returned against the Defendant Baseden, his Executor: he appeared to it, and
pleaded, and a special Verdict was found, to this effect, viz. that the
Defendant Baseden was made Executor by the Will, and dwelt in the same house,
in which the Testator lived and died, and that before Probate of the Will he
possessed himself of the Goods of the Testator, prized them, inventoried them,
and sold part of them, and paid a Debt, and converted the value of the residue
to his own use; that afterward before the Ordinary he refused, and that upon
his refusal administration was committed to the Widow of the deceased. And the
question was, whether or no the Defendant should be charged to the value of the
whole personal Estate, or only for as much as he converted.

Sergeant Barrel argued, That he ought to be charged for the whole, because;
1. He is made Executor by the Will; and he is thereby complete Executor before
Probate, to all intents but: bringing of Actions. 2. He has possession of the
Goods, and is chargeable in respect of that. 3. He caused some to be sold, and
paid a Debt: which is a sufficient administration. There is found to discharge
him, 1. His refusal before the Ordinary. But that being after he had so far
intermeddled, avails nothing: Hensloe's case: 9 Co. 37. An Executor de son
tort, he confessed, should not be charged for more then he converted; and shall
discharge himself by delivering over the rest to the rightful Executor. But the
case is different of a rightful Executor, that has taken upon him the burden of
the Will. The second thing found to discharge him, is the granting of
Administration to another: but that is void, because here is a rightful
Executor that has administered: in which case the Ordinary has no power to grant
Administration. Hob. 46. Keble and Osbaston's case. The third thing found to
discharge him, is the delivery of the Goods over to the Administrator: but that
will not avail him; for himself became responsible by his having possession,
and he cannot discharge himself by delivering the Goods over to a stranger,
that has nothing to do with them. If it be objected, that by this means two
persons will be chargeable in respect of the same Goods; I answer, that payment
by either discharges both: Cr. Car. Whitmore and Porter's case.

The Court was of Opinion, that the committing of Administration in this case,
is a mere void act. A great inconvenience would ensue, if men were allowed to
Administer as far as they would themselves, and then to set up a beggarly
Administrator: they would pay themselves their own Debts, and deliver the
residue of the Estate to one that is worth nothing, and cheat the rest of the
Creditors. If an Administrator bring an Action, it is a good plea to say, that
the Executor made by the Will has administered. Accordingly Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

Major and Stubbing versus Bird and Harrison.
REsolved, that a plea may be a good plea in abatement, though it contain
matter that goes in bar; they relied upon the case in 10 H. 7. fol. 11. which
they said was a case in point, and Salkell and Skelton's case, 2 Rolls Reports:
and Judgment was given accordingly.

Term. Trin. 28 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
PEr North Chief Justice; if there are Accounts between two Merchants, and one
of them becomes Bankrupt, the course is not to make the other, who perhaps upon
stating the Accounts, is found endebted to the Bankrupt, to pay the whole that
originally was entrusted to him, and to put him for the recovery of what the
Bankrupt owes him, into the same condition with the rest of the Creditors; but
to make him pay that only which appears due to Bankrupt on the foot of the
Account: otherwise it will be for Accounts betwixt them after the time of the
others becoming Bankrupt, if any such were.

Wing and Jackson.
TRespass Quare vi and armis, the Defendant insultum fecit upon the Plaintiff
was brought in the County Court; and Judgment there given for the Plaintiff.
But it was reversed here upon a Writ of false Judgment, because the County
Court, not being a Court of Record, cannot fine the Defendant, as he ought to
be, if the cause go against him, because of the vi and armis in the
Declaration: but an Action of Trespass without those words will lie in the
County Court well enough.

Anonymus.
A Vicar libelled in the Spiritual Court for Tithes of of young Cattle, and
surmised that the Defendant was seized of Lands in Middlesex, of which Parish
he was Vicar, and that the Defendant had Common in a great Waste called
Sedgemore-Common, as belonging to his Land in Middlesex; and put his Cattle
into the said Common. The Defendant prayed a Prohibition, for that the Land
where the Cattle went was not within the Parish of Middlesex. The same
Plaintiff libelled against the same Defendant for Tithes of Willow-Faggots; who
suggests to have a Prohibition, the payment of 2 d. a year to the Rector, for
all Tithes of Willow. The same Plaintiff libelled also for Tithes of Sheep. The
Defendant, to have a Prohibition, suggests, that he took them in, to feed,
after the Corn was reaped, pro melioratione agriculturae infra terras arabiles
and non aliter.

As for the first of these no Prohibition was granted, because of that clause
in 2 Edw. 6. whereby it is enacted, that Tithes of Cattle feeding in a Waste or
Common, where the Parish is not certainly known, shall be paid to the Parson,
etc. of the Parish where the owner of the Cattle lives.

For the second, they held that a modus to the Rector is a good discharge
against the Vicar. For the third, they held that the Parson ought not to have
Tithe of the Corn and Sheep too, which make the ground more profitable, and to
yield more. Per quod, etc.

Ingram versus Tothill and Ren.
REplevin. Trevill leased to Ingram for 99 years, if Joan Ingram his wife,
Anthony and John Ingram his Sons should so long live, rendering an Heriot or 40
shillings to the Lessor and his Assigns, at the election of the Lessor his
heirs and Assigns, after their several deaths successive, as they are named in
the Indenture. Trevill devises the Reversion. John dies, and then Joan dies:
and the question was, whether or no a Heriot were due to the Devisee upon the
death of Joan. The Court agreed that the Avowry was faulty, because it does not
appear thereby, whether Anthony Ingram was alive or not at the time of the
distress taken; for if he were dead, the Lease would be determined. North.
Though Anthony were alive, the Devisee of Trevill could not distrain for the
Heriot, for that the reservation is to him and his Assigns, and although the
Election to have the Heriot or 40 shillings given to the Lessor, his heirs or
Assigns, yet that will not help the fault in the reservation. Ellis. There is
another fault, in the pleading; for it is pleaded that Trevill made his Will in
writing; but it is not said, that he dyed so seized; for if the Estate of the
Devisor were turned to a right at the time of his death, the Will could not
operate upon it. Also it is said, that the Avowant made his Election, and that
the Plaintiff habuit notitiam of his Election, but it is not said by whom
notice was given: for these causes Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. It was
urged likewise against the Avowant, that no Heriot could be due in this case,
because Joan did not die first: but the course of succession is interrupted;
and that a Heriot not being due of common right, the words of reservation ought
to be pursued: but as to this the Court delivered no Opinion.

Ognell versus the Lord Arlington Guardian of Sir John Jacob.
UPon a Trial at Bar the Court delivered for Law to the Jury, that if there be
Tenant by Elegit of certain Lands, and a Fine be levied of those Lands, and
five years with non-claim pass, that the interest of the Tenant by Elegit is
bound, according to Saffyn's case 5 Rep. otherwise, if the Land had not been
actually extended. Also, that if an Inquisition upon an Elegit be found, the
party before entry has the possession, and a fine with non-claim shall bar his
right; for before actual entry he may have Ejectione firmae or Trespass, and so
not like to an interesse termini.

Barry and Trebeswycke.
IF a Parson have a Pension by Prescription, he may either bring an Action at
the Common Law, or commence a Suit in the Spiritual Court; but if he brings a
Writ of Annuity at the Common Law, he can never after sue in the Spiritual
Court, for that his Election is determined.

Wakeman and Blackwell.
IN a Quare impedit the Defendant pleaded a recovery in this manner, viz. that
John Wakeman Grandfather to the Plaintiff was seized in fee of the Manor, to
which, etc. and that a Praecipe was brought against one Prinne and Philpotts,
adtunc tenentes liberi tenementi, etc. who appeared and vouched John Wakeman,
etc. and that this Recovery was to the use of J. S. under whom the Defendant
claims.

Strode, pro Defendente: it is not necessary that the Tenant in a Common
Recovery have a Freehold, at the time of the purchase of the Writ: if he have
at the time of the return, it suffices. 7 Ed. 3. 42. 7 Ed. 3. 70. Ass. of no.
diss. 43 Ed. 3. 21. in these Authorities the person against whom the Praecipe
is brought, comes in by right, after the purchase, and before the return of the
Writ. But in 26 Ed. 3. 68. there is an example, where the Tenant to the
Praecipe comes in by tort; but there is this difference: if he comes to the
Land by his own act, be it by right or by wrong, there he makes the Writ good:
otherwise if he come to it by act of Law. 8 Ed. 3. 22. a. Formedon. 25 H. 6. 4.
the reason why you shall not abate the Plaintiffs Writ by your own act, is
because you cannot give him a better.

The demandant here is estopped to say, that there was not a Tenant to the
Praecipe in this Recovery; for the Writ is but abatable, if brought against one
that is not Tenant: and as long as it stands not abated, but is pleaded to,
etc. it shall conclude all that are parties and privies, and all claiming under
them: 34 Ed. 3. F. tit. droit 39. here is in our case an estoppell, with a
recompense: Wakeman the Grandfather, who was the first Vouchee in this
Recovery, might have counterpleaded the lien and extorted the warranty; but
having vouched over, he is past that advantage, and is concluded, being made a
party by Voucher.

This being a common Recovery, the Court will do all they can to make it good.
A Fine is levied by Dedimus potestatem by Baron and Feme. The Commissioners did
not return the examination of the wife; and yet that is the discriminating
difference, upon which depends whether the wife shall be bound by the Fine or
not: 15 Ed. 4. 28. a. Litt. Sect. 670. 6 Ed. 3. 22. a. The Court must needs in
this case intend, that Prinne and Philpots came in by conveyance, because
Wakeman came in upon the Voucher, which he would not have done, if there had
not been a lien. He cited Cro. Jac. 454. Lincoln College case, 3 Rep. 48. and
Hob. 262. Duncomb and Wingfield's case. To which Pemberton answered, that tunc
tenens is a sufficient averment in the pleading of a Recovery, which is
favored in Law; but it is not good alone, when in the same sentence a matter
is set forth, that is inconsistent with it, and plainly contradictory, as in
this case; and of that opinion was the Court. The case in Hob. they said was
upon a special Verdict: where many things may be intended, which shall not be
so in pleading: and in Lincoln Col' case the Writ is said to be brought against
one Edw. Chamberlain in one part of the Record, and the Mother is said to be
Tenant in another part of the Record, and by the other party; but here in the
same sentence unto flatu, there is a flat contradiction.

Burrow and Haggett.
FOrmedon in the descender. The Defendant pleaded in abatement of the Count,
and took these exceptions* 1. That the demandant declares that the right
descended to him after the death of Leonard, as Brother and heir to Leon: and
Son and Heir of the Donee; but does not allege that Leonard died without
issue: 8 Rep. 88. Buckmere's case. In ancient Registers the clause is eo quod,
the issue dyed without issue: Co. Ent. 254. b. etc. Rast. Entr. 365. C. Yelv.
227. Glass and Gyll's case. 9 Ed. 4. 36. a man that entitles himself as heir,
must show how he is heir. Seyse contra. The presisidents are on our side: and
the difference is betwixt a Formedon in the descender, and a Formedon in the
remainder or reverter. In the former they do not mention the dying without
issue of him, after whose death they claim: for the Count there is in effect
only to set out their pedigree; but in a Formedon in the Remainder or Reverter,
it is otherwise: 39 Ed. 3. 27. Old Book of Ent' 339. tit. Formed', bar: plac'
3. Co. Lit. Mandevile's case, 26 b 7 H. 7. fol. 7. b. there our case is put in
express terms; the exception taken to the Count there by Keble, is the same
that is taken to ours here: and there it is overruled. North* I have looked
into presidents, and find the Count in this case according to them. It is a
plain and reasonable difference betwixt a Formedon in the discender, and a
Formedon in the remainder or reverter: nor could the demandant be brother and
heir to Leonard, if Leonard had left children, etc. Another exception was, that
the demandant does not set forth, that he was Son and heir of John, begotten on
the body of Jane his wife; for it was a gift in special tail. But this was
overruled; for in the Writ that is set forth, and in the Declaration, after
the words filio and haeredi praedict. Johannis, came an (etc.) which (etc.) let
the words of the Writ into the Count; and so it was held good. The
Prothonotaries said, that the forms of Counts were accordingly. And Judgment
was given to answer over, Nisi causa, etc.

Term. Mich. 28 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Blythe versus Hill.
DEbt upon an Obligation for the payment of money at a day certain. The
Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff, being desirous to have the money paid
before the day, took another Bond for the same sum payable sooner: and that
this was in full satisfaction of the former Bond; upon this plea the Plaintiff
took issue, and it was found against him. And Sergeant Maynard moved, that
notwithstanding this Verdict, Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff; for
that the Defendant by his plea has confessed the Action; and to say that
another Bond was given in satisfaction, is nothing to the purpose: Hob. 68. so
that upon the whole it appears that the Plaintiff has the right, and he ought
to have Judgment: 2 Cr. 139. 8 Co. 93. a. and day was given to show cause why
the Plaintiff should not have Judgment: Vide infra hoc eodem Termino.

Savill against the Hundred of --
THe Plaintiff in an Action upon the Stat. of Wint. had a Verdict, and it was
moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Felonious taking is not said to be in the
Highway: 2 Cro. 469, 675. North. An Action lies upon the Stat. of Winton,
though the Robbery be not committed in the Highway: to which the Court-agreed:
and the Prothonotaries said, that the Entries were frequently so. Per quod, etc.

Calthrop and Philippo.
ONe J. S. had recovered a Debt against Calthrop, and procured a Writ of
Execution to Philippo the then Sheriff of D. but before that Writ was executed,
Calthrop procured a Supersedeas to the same Philippo, who when his year was
out, delivered over all the Writs to the new Sheriff, save this Supersedeas,
which not being delivered, J. S. procures a new Writ of Execution to the new
Sheriff; upon which the Goods of Calthrop being taken, he brings his Action
against Philippo, for not delivering over the Supersedeas. After a Verdict for
the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Action would not
lie, for that the Sheriff is not bound to deliver over a Supersedeas. 1.
Because it is not a Writ that has a return. 2. Because it is only the Sheriffs
Warrant for not obeying the Writ of Execution. The Prothonotaries said, that
the course was to take out a new Writ to the new Sheriff. Sergeant Strode
argued, that the Supersedeas ought to be delivered over: because the Kings Writ
to the old Sheriff is, Quod Com' praedict' cum pertinentiis, uno cum rotulis,
brevibus, memorandis and omnibus officium illud tangentibus, quae in custodia
sua existunt, liberet, etc. Reg. 295. and 3 Co. 72. Westby's case. Besides, the
Supersedeas is for the Defendants benefit; and there is no reason why the
Capias should be delivered over, which is for the Plaintiffs benefit, and not
the Supersedeas, which is for the Defendants. And he said an Action will lie
for not delilivering over some Writs to the new Sheriff, though those Writs are
not returnable: as a Writ of Estrepement. The Court inclined to his Opinion:
but it was adjourned to a further day, on which day it was not moved.

Bascawin and Herle versus Cook.
THo. Cook granted a Rentcharge of 200 l. per annum to Bascawin and Herle for
the life of Mary Cook, habend' to them, their heirs and assigns, ad opus and
usum of Mary, and in the Indenture covenanted to pay the rent ad opus and usum
of Mary. Bascawin and Herle upon this bring an Action of Covenant, and assign
the breach in not paying the Rent to themselves, ad opus and usum of Mary. The
Defendant demurs: 1. Because the words in which the breach is assigned, contain
a negative pregnant. Baldwin for the Plaintiff; we assign the breach in the
words of the Covenant. Cur' accord. 2. Because the Plaintiff does not say that
the money was not paid to Mary, it would satisfy the Covenant. 3. This
Rentcharge is executed to Mary by the Stat. of Uses, and she ought to have
distrained for it: for she having a remedy, the Plaintiffs, out of whom the
Rent is transferred by the Statute, cannot bring this Action: Hereupon two
questions were made, 1. Whether this remedy by Action of Covenant be
transferred to Mary by the Stat. of Uses or not? And 2dly, if not, whether the
Covenant were discharged or not? North and Wyndham: When the Statute transfers
an Estate, it transfers together with it such remedies only, as by Law are
incident to that Estate, and not collateral ones. Atkyns accordant. There is a
clause in the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 10. which gives the Cestuy que use of a
Rent all such remedies, as he would have had, if the Rent had been actually and
really granted to him: but that has place only where one is seized of Lands in
trust that another shall have a Rent out of them: not where a Rent is granted
to one to the use of another. They agreed also that the Covenant was not
discharged. And gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, Nisi, etc.

Higden versus VVhitechurch, Executor of Dethicke.
A Udita Querela. The Plaintiff declares, that himself and one Prettyman became
bound to the Testator for the payment of a certain sum: that in an Action
brought against him he was Outlawed: that Dethick afterward brought another
Action upon the same Bond against Prettyman, and had Judgment: that Prettyman
was taken by a Cap. ad satisfaciend', and imprisoned, and paid the Debt, and
was released by Dethick's consent: upon this matter the Plaintiff here prays to
be relieved against this Judgment and Outlawry. The Defendant protestando that
the Debt was not satisfied, pleads the Outlawry in disability. The Plaintiff
demurs. Baldw. for the Plaintiff. Non datur exceptio ejus rei, cujus petitur
dissolutio. He resembled this to the cases of bringing a Writ of Error or
Attaint, in neither of which Outlawry is pleadable. 3 Cr. 225. 7 H. 4. 39. 7 H.
6. 44. Seyse contra. Outlawry is a good plea in Audita querela. 2 Cr. 425. 8
Co. 141. this case is not within the maxim that has been cited; a writ of
Error and Attaint is within it: for in both them the Judgment it self is to be
reversed. But in an Audita querela you admit the Judgment to be good: only upon
some equitable matter arising since, you pray that no Execution may be upon it:
Vide 6 Ed. 4. 9. b. and Jason and Kite's case: Mich. 12 Car. 2. Rot. 385. Adj.
Pasch. 13. Cur' accord'. If the Judgment had been erroneous, and a writ of
Error had been brought, the Outlawry, which was but a superstructure, would
fall by consequence; but an Audita querela meddles not with the Judgment: the
Plaintiff here has no remedy, but to sue out his Charter of Pardon.

Blythe and Hill, supra 221.
THe case being moved again, appeared to be thus, viz. The Plaintiff brought an
Action of Debt upon a Bond against the Defendant as heir to the Obligor. The
Defendant pleaded, that the Obligor, his Ancestor, dyed intestate, and that one
J. S. had taken out Letters of Administration, and had given the Plaintiff
another Bond in full satisfaction of the former. Upon this, issue being joined,
it was found for the Defendant. It was said for him, that one Bond might be
taken in satisfaction of another; and 1 Inst. 212. b. 30 Ed. 1. 23. Dyer 29.
were cited. North Chief Justice: If the second Bond had been given by the
Obligor himself, it would not have discharged the former: but here, being given
by the Administrator, so that the Plaintiffs security is bettered, and the
Administrator chargeable de bonis propriis, I conceive it may be a sufficient
discharge of the first Bond. Wyndham accord', else the Administrator and Heir
might both be charged. Scroggs accord. Atkyns. There are many Authorities in
the point; and all directly, that one Bond cannot be given in satisfaction of
another. So is Cr. Eliz. 623, 697, 716. 727. and many others. But yet I hold
that Judgment ought to be given for the Defendant; for though it be an
impertinent issue, yet being found for him, he ought by the Statute of 23 H. 8.
to have Judgment. If no issue at all had been joined, it would have been
otherwise: 2 Cro. 44. 575. Sergeant Maynard cites 9 H. 6. but that case was
before the Statute: so I ground my Judgment upon that point. North. I took it,
that unapt issues are aided by the Statute, but not immaterial ones. And so
said Scroggs. Judic' pro Defendente* Nisi, etc.

Southcot and Stowell. Intrat' Hill. 25 and 26 Car. 2. Rot. 1303.
COvenant for non-payment of money. The case was thus; viz. Thomas Southcote
had issue two Sons; Sir Popham and William; and in consideration of the
marriage of his Son Sir Popham, covenanted to stand seized to the use of Sir
Popham and the heirs Males of his body; and for default of such issue, to the
use of the heirs Males of his own body, the remainder to his own right heirs.
Sir Popham dies, leaving issue Edward his Son, and four Daughters: then Thomas
the Father died; and then Edward died without issue, and the question was,
whether Sir Pophams Daughters or William had the better title? Two points were
made, 1. Whether the limitation of the Remainder to the Heirs Males of the body
of the Covenantor, were good in its creation, or not? 2. Admitting it to be
good originally, whether it could take effect after the death of Edward; he
leaving Sisters, which are general heirs to the Covenantor. North, Wyndham and
Atkyns, upon admission of the first point, were of opinion for William: and
that he should have the Estate, not by purchase, but by descent from Edward:
for after the death of the Father, both the Estates in tail were vested in him:
and he was capable of the remainder by purchase: and being once well vested in
a purchaser, the Estate shall afterward run in course of descent: Scroggs
doubted. But they all doubted of the first point, and would advise. V. infr'
Pasch. 29 Car. 2.

It was said by the Justices in the Countess of Northumberlands case, That if a
Knight be but returned on a Jury, when a Nobleman is concerned, it is not
material whether he appear and give his Verdict or no. Also, that if there be
no other Knights in the County, a Sergeant at Law that is a Knight, may be
returned, and his privilege shall not excuse him.

Gayle and Betts.
DEbt upon a Bond. The Defendant demands Oyer of the Bond and Condition; which
was to pay forty pounds per annum quarterly so long as the Defendant should
continue Register to the Arch deacon of Colchester; and says that the Office
was granted to A. B. and C. for their lives: and that he enjoyed the Office so
long as they lived and no longer, and that so long he paid the said 40 l.
quarterly. The Plaintiff replies, that the Defendant did enjoy the Office
longer, and had not paid the money. The Defendant demurs, supposing the
replication was double. Cur'. The Replication is not double: for the Defendant
cannot take issue upon the non-payment of the money; that would be a departure
from his plea in bar: so if upon a plea of nullum fecit arbitrium, the
Plaintiff in his Replication set forth an award and a breach, the Defendant
cannot take issue upon the breach, for that would be an implicit confession of
what he had denied before. North. If the Defendant plead that he did not
exercise the Office beyond such a time, till which time he paid the money, the
Plaintiff may take issue either upon the payment till that time, or reply upon
the continuance; but if he do the latter, he must show a breach; for the
continuance is in it self no breach.

Ellis and Yarborough.
ACtion upon the Case against a Sheriff for an Escape. The Plaintiff declares,
that one G. was endebted to him in 200 l. and that the Defendant took him upon
a Latitat at the Plaintiffs suit: and afterward suffered him to escape. The
Defendant pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 10. and that he let G. out upon
Bail, according to the said Statute, and that he had taken reasonable Sureties,
A. and B. persons having sufficient within the County. The Plaintiff replies
and traverses, absque hoc, that the Defendant took Bail of persons having
sufficient within the Country: the Defendant demurs. Skipwith. The Sheriff is
compellable to take Bail. If he take insufficient Bail, the course is for the
Court to amerce the Sheriff, and not for the party to have an Action upon the
case: Cr. Eliz. 852. Bowls and Lassell's case, and Noy 39. if the Sheriff
takes no Bail, an Action lies against him: and all Actions brought upon this
Statute are founded upon this suggestion: 3 Cro. 460. Moor. 428. 2 Cro. 280.
but if he take insufficient bail, it is at his own peril; and no Action lies:
the Sheriff is Judge of the bail, and the sum is at his discretion: Cr. Jac.
286. Villers and Hastings: and so are the number of the persons, he may take
one, two or three, as he pleases. He cited Cr. Eliz. 808. Clifton and Web's
case. Besides the traverse is pregnant, for it implies that the persons have
sufficient out of the County; and the Sheriff is not bound to take bail only of
persons having sufficient within the County.

Sergeant Barrel contra.

The Court not agreeing in their Opinions upon the matter of Law, it was put
off to the next Term, to be argued.

Baldwin for the Defendant, cited 3 Cr. 624. 152. 2 Cr. 286. Noy 39. Rolls,
tit. Escape, 807. Moor 428. that the Sheriff is compellable to let him to bail,
and is Judge of the sufficiency of the Sureties. The Statute was made for the
Prisoners benefit, for the mischief before was, that the Sheriff not being
compellable to bail him, would extort money from him to be bailed: and the word
sufficient is added in favor of the Sheriff; and so are the words, within the
County. The Sheriff is not compellable to assign the bail Bond; and then, if
the Plaintiff cannot have the security given by the Defendant for his
appearance, it is all one to him, whether it be good or no.

Strode contra. Why must the Sheriff always aver that he has taken sufficient
Sureties, if their sufficiency be not material? Why is an Action allowed to
lie, if the Sheriff take no Sureties at all, since according to my Brothers
Opinion, the party has no interest in them? If the Law be as they argue, the
Statute has left the Plaintiff in a worse condition then he was at the Common
Law: for it has deprived him of the remedy that he had before; and the
Amercements belong not to him, but to the King.

Cur'. The sufficiency of the bail is not material: it is only for the Sheriffs
own security. If he take no bail at all, an Action lies against him, for then
he does not act by color of this Law. Atkyns. The Statute is not advantageous
to the Plaintiff at all, unless the Sheriff let go the prisoner without taking
any bail; and then he must render treble damages. And by the Opinion of the
whole Court Judgment was given for the Defendant.

Moor versus Field.
A Custom was alleged, that all persons in a Parish that had Sheep upon their
ground on Candlemas-day, should be discharged of Tithes of all Sheep that
should be upon their ground after in that year, upon payment of full Tithes for
all the Sheep that were there upon that day; and this was adjudged an
unreasonable Custom. Sergeant Turner argued for it, and cited Rolls Abr' 2
part, 647, 648.

Term. Hill. 28 and 29 Car. II. Communi Banco.
Strode versus l'Evesque de Bath and Wells, and Sir George Horner and Masters.
QUare Impedit, the Plaintiff entitles himself by virtue of a Grant of the next
Avoidance made by Sir George Horner, and counts that Sir George was seized in
fee of the Manor of Dowling; to which the advowson was appendant, and
presented J. S. who was admitted, instituted, etc. and that then he granted the
next Avoidance to the Plaintiff, and that J. S. died and it belongs to him to
present.

Sergeant Barton. The Plaintiff has failed in his Count, he says, That Sir
George was seized, and presented, but he does not say, That he presented
tempore pacis, F. N. B. 33. Hob. 102. 6 Co. 30. 1 Inst. 249. F. N. B. 31. 5 Co.
72. Vaug. 53.

Strode. When the Plaintiff makes his Title by a Presentation, he ought to say,
That it was tempore pacis; but Sir Georges Title is by reason of his being
seized of the Manor of Dowling, to which the Advowson is appendant. So that
the difference, as to that, will be betwixt an Advowson in gross and an
Advowson appendant.

Cur. When a man shows a precedent Right, and then alleges a Presentation, in
pursuance of that Right, as in this case the Plaintiff does in Sir George
Horner, there it needs not be alleged to have been tempore pacis; but where no
Title is alleged, so that the Presentation only makes the Title, there it must
be pleaded tempore pacis.

Davies and Cut.
DAvies as Administrator to Eliz. B. a feme Covert, brings an Action of Debt
upon a Bond against Cut. The Defendant pleads, That Administration of the
Wives goods ought de jure to be committed to the Husband, who was then alive:
upon this there was a Demurrer, and it was resolved for the Plaintiff, for he
is rightful Administrator till his Letters of Administration are repealed.

James and Johnson.
TRespass. For taking and driving away some Beasts of the Plaintiff, the
Defendant justifies, for that he and all they whose Estate he has in such a
Manor (the Manor of Blythe) have had a Toll for all Beasts driven over the
said Manor, viz. d. a Beast, if under twenty; and if above, then 4 d. a score.
Issue being joined upon this justification, a special Verdict was found, viz.
That the Manor aforesaid was parcel of the Possessions of the Priory of
Blythe, that the Prior had by Prescription such a Toll, as appurtenant to the
said Manor: that by the dissolution it came to the Crown, and so to Sir
Gervase Clifton, and at last to one Bingley; in whose Right, as Servant to him
the Defendant justifies, but then they conclude, that if the Defendant may
entitle himself to it by a que estate, they find for the Defendant; if not,
then for the Plaintiff.

Sergeant Baldw. For the Plaintiff it does not appear, whether the Toll which
the Defendant claims, be a Toll-thorough, or a Toll-traverse, or what sort of
Toll it is. A Toll-thorough is against common Right, because it is to be taken
in the Kings Highway. And no Prescription can be for it, unless he that claims
it, show that the Subject has some advantage by it. And when a man claims a
Toll-traverse, he must lay it to be for a way over his own Freehold, Keil. 148.
Statham, Toll 2. Pl. 236. Moor 574. Cr. Eliz. 710. Keil. 152. A Toll supposes
a Grant from the Crown, and therefore when the Manor of Blythe came to the
Crown, the Toll was disjoined from the Manor, and became in gross. Nor can a
Toll be appendant to a Manor, nor claimed by a que estate.

Sergeant Maynard. The Jury have found exactly whatever the Defendant has
disclosed in his Plea, and have made a special conclusion upon a Point of
pleading. Toll may be appurtenant to a Manor, as well as any other profit a
prendre. Nor does it become in gross by the Manor coming to the Crown. The
difference is, as to that, betwixt things, that had a being in the Crown,
before they were granted out to Subjects, and things which had not, 9. Rep. The
Case of the Abbot of Strata Marcella. There is no such legal difference between
a Toll-thorough and a Toll-traverse, as has been offered: the words are used
promiscuously in our Books. A Toll-thorough may be by Prescription, without any
reasonable cause alleged of its commencement: for having been paid time out of
mind, the true cause of its beginning, in the intendment of the Law cannot be
known. And for the que estate; indeed a thing that lies in grant, cannot be
claimed by a que estate directly by it self, but it may be claimed as
appurtenant to a Manor, by a que estate in the Manor, etc. Cur. accord. and
gave Judgment for the Defendant. Atkyns. When Toll is claimed generally, it
shall be intended Toll-thorough, and so is the case in Cr. Eliz. 710. Smith and
Shepherd.

Lord Townsend versus Hughes.
AN Action upon the Stat. de Scandalis Magnatum, for these words, viz. My Lord
Townsend is an unworthy Person, and does things against Law and Reason. Upon
issue Not Guilty, there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and four thousand
pounds damages given. The Defendant moved for a new Trial, because of the
excessiveness of the damages: and a President was cited a of new Trial granted
upon that ground, and no other. And Atkins was for granting a new Trial. North,
Windham and Scroggs contr. for that the Jury are the sole Judges of the damages.

At another day it was moved in arrest of Judgment, That the words are not
actionable: And of that Opinion was Atkyns. But North, Windham and Scroggs
contr. And so the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Atkyns. The occasion of the making of the Stat. of 5 Rich. 2. appears in Sir
Robert Cotton's Abr. of the Records of the Tower, fol. 173. number. 9. 10. he says
there, That upon the opening of that Parliament, the Bishop of St. David's in a
Speech to both Houses declared the Causes of its being summoned, and that
amongst the rest one of them was to have some restraint laid upon Slanderers
and Sowers of Discord: which sort of men were then taken notice of to be very
frequent. Ex malis moribus bonae Leges.

The Preamble of the Act mentions false News and horrible Lies, etc. of things,
which by the said Prelates, etc. were never said, done nor thought. So that it
seems designed against telling stories by way of News concerning them. The
Stat. does not make or declare any new Offense. Nor does it inflict any new
Punishment. All that seems to be new is this, 1. The Offense receives an
aggravation, because it is now an Offense against a positive Law, and
consequently deserves a greater Punishment; as it is held in our Books, That if
the King prohibit by his Proclamation, a thing prohibited by Law, that the
Offense receives an aggravation by being against the King's Proclamation. 2.
Though there be no express Action given to the party grieved, yet by operation
of Law the Action accrews. For when ever a Statute prohibits any thing, he that
finds himself grieved, may have an Action upon the Statute 10 Rep. 75. 12 Rep.
100. there this very Case upon this Statute was agreed on by the Judges. So
that that is the second new thing, viz. a further remedy, An Action upon the
Stat. 3. Since the Stat. the party may have an Action in the tam, quam. Which
he could not have before. Now every lie or falsity is not within the Stat. It
must be horrible, as well as false. We find upon another occasion such a like
distinction; It was held in the 12 Rep. 83. That the High Commission Court
could not punish Adultery; because they had Jurisdiction to punish enormous
Offenders only. So that great and horrible are words of distinction.

Again, it extends not to small matters, because of the ill consequences
mentioned; Debates and Discord betwixt the said Lords, etc. great peril to the
Realm, and quick subversion and destruction of the same. Every word imports an
aggravation. The Stat. does not extend to words that do not agree with this
Description, and that cannot by any reasonable probability have such dire
effects. The Cases upon this Statute are but few and late, in respect of the
antiquity of the Act. It was made Anno 1379. for a long time after we hear no
tidings of an Action grounded upon it. And by reading it one would imagine,
that the makers of it never intended that any should be. But the Action arises
by operation of Law; not from the words of the Act, nor their intention that
made it. The first Case that we find of an Action brought upon it, is in 13 H.
7. which is 120 years after the Law was made: so that we have no contemporanea
expositio, which we often affect. That Case is in Keil. 26. the next in 4 H. 8.
where the Duke of Buckingham recovered 40 l. against one Lucas, for saying that
the Duke had no more conscience than a Dog; and so he got money, he cared not
how he came by it. He cited other Cases, and said he observed, That where the
words were general, the Judges did not ordinarily admit them to be actionable;
otherwise, when they charged a Peer with any particular miscarriage. Sergeant
Maynard observed well, That the Nobility and great men are equally coucerned on
the Defendants part: for Actions upon this Statute lie against them, as well as
against the meanest Subject. Acts of Parliament have been tender of racking the
King's Subjects for words. And the Scripture discountenances men's being made
Transgressors for a word. I observe that there is not one case to be met with,
in which upon a motion in arrest of Judgment, in such an Action as this, the
Defendant has prevailed. The Court has sometimes been divided: the matter
compounded: the Action has abated by death, etc. but a positive Rule that
Judgment should be arrested we find not. So that it is time to make a
President, and fix some Rules according to which men may demean themselves in
converse with great persons. Misera est servitus, ubi jus est vagum. Since we
have obtained no Rules from our Predecessors in Actions upon this Statute, we
had best go by the same Rules that they did in other Actions for words. In
them, when they grew frequent, some bonnds and limits were set, by which they
endeavored to make these Law certain. The Actions now increase. The stream
seems to be running that way. I think it is our part to obviate the mischief.
So he was of Opinion, That the Judgment ought to be arrested; but the Court
gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

North. There are three sorts of Hab. Corp. in this Court, 1. Hab. Corp. ad
respondendum, and that is, when a man has a cause of suit against one, that is
in prison, he may bring him up hither by Hab. Corp. and charge him with a
Declaration at his own suit. 2. There is a Hab. Corp. ad faciendum and
recipiendum, and that Defendants may have, that are sued in Courts below, to
remove their Causes before us. Both these Hab. Corp. are with relation to the
suits properly belonging to the Court of Common Pleas. So if an inferior Court
will proceed against the Law, in a thing of which we have Conisance, and commit
a man; we may discharge him upon a Hab. Corp. this is still with relation to
Common Pleas. A third sort of Hab. Corp. is for privileged Persons. But a Hab.
Corp. ad subjiciendum is not warranted by any Presidents that I have seen.

Term. Pasch. 29 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Hall and Booth.
NOrth. In Actions of Debt, etc. the first Process is a Summons, if the
Defendant appears not upon that, a Cap. goes, and then we hold him to Bail. The
reason of Bail is upon a supposition of Law, that the Defendant flies the
Judgment of the Law. And this supposition is grounded upon his not appearing at
the first. For if he appear upon the Summons, no Bail is required. And this is
the reason, why it is held against the Law for any inferior Court, to issue
out a Capias for the first Process. For the liberty of a man is highly valued
in the Law, and no man ought to be abridged of it, without some default in him.

A Church is in decay, the Bishops Court must proceed against the whole Parish,
to have it repaired: they cannot Rate any particular person toward the repair
of it. But the Churchwardens must summon the Parish; and that needs not be
from house to house, but a general public Summons at the Church is sufficient:
and the major part of them that appear, may bind the Parish. If the Church and
Chancel be out of repair, the Parishioners are only chargeable to be
contributory toward the Repairs of the Navis Ecclesiae. If a Libel be against
the Parish, for not repairing the Church, though the word Ecclesia, may include
the Chancel, yet we will not grant a Prohibition. If a Tax be set by the major
part of the Parish, pro reparatione Ecclesiae, it is well enough: and afterward
any part of the money raised be laid out upon the Chancel, the Parish ought not
to allow it upon the Churchwardens accounts. But if a Tax be imposed expressly
for the repair of the body of the Church, and of the Chancel, we will not
suffer them to proceed. Or if a Libel be against a Parish for not repairing the
Navis Ecclesiae and the Chancel, we will prohibit them. If a Church be down,
and the Parish increased, so that of necessity they must have a larger Church,
the major part of the Parish may raise a Tax for the enlarging it, as well as
the repairing it, per Cur. It was insisted on at the Bar, that to a Tax for the
increasing of a Church, the consent of every Parishioner must be had. But the
Court was of another Opinion.

Southcote and Stowell, super Mich. 28 Car. 2.
BAldw. for the Plaintiff. Thomas the Covenantor may be said to take an Estate
for life by implication, and then it will be all one as if an express Estate
for life had been limited to him, with a remainder to his Heirs males, which
would be a fee-tail executed in himself: and if so, then William has a good
Title: 1 And. 265. the Lord Paget's Case, 1 Rep. 154. in the Rector of
Chedington's Case, Fenwyke and Mittfords Case, Moor. 284. 1 And. 256. and Cr.
Eliz. 321. Hodgekinson and Wood's Case, 1 Cr. 23. Lane and Pannell's Case, 1
Rolls.

But if this will not hold, then William may take an estate by way of a future
springing use: for this he quoted 2 Rolls, Uses, p, 794. Mills and Parsons,
number. 7.

If neither of these ways will serve, yet the remainder to the Heirs males of
Thomas, may vest in Edward (for Sir Popham died in the Covenantor's lifetime)
and William may take by descent, as special Heir per formam doni, though he be
not Heir of the body of Edward, in whom the remainder first vests.

Stroud contr. The limitation of a remainder in tail to the Heirs males of the
Covenantor, is bad in its original creation. For no man can make himself or his
own Heirs Purchasers, without departing with the whole Fee-simple, Dyer 309. b.
42 Ass. 2. 1 H. 5. 8. per Skrene, 24 Ed. 3. 28. Bro. Estates 23. 1 H. 8. 65.
per Hull, 42 Ed. 3. 5. Br. Estates 66. Dyer 69. b. 2 H. 5. 4. b. 1 H. 5. 8. 14
H. 4. 32. a. Cook 2 Inst. 333. 1 Inst. 22. b. 32 H. 8. Bro. Livery 61. but all
these Cases are of Estates passed by Conveyance at Common Law, and not by way
of use. But Uses are directed by the Rules of the Common Law, and as to the
vesting of them differ not from Estates conveyed in possession. 1 Rep. 138.
Chudleigh's Case. No favorable construction ought to be made for Uses against
a Rule of Law. The Stat. of H. 8. seems intended to extirpate all private Uses,
and was in restitution of the Common Law. He cited the Earl of Bedford's Case,
1 Rep. 130. a. Poph. 3 and 4. and Moor. 718. and Fenwyke and Miltford's Case, 1
Inst. 22. b. If Thomas took any estate by this settlement, he took a
Fee-simple. For no estate being limited to him, if he took any, the Law vested
it in him. Now the act of Law will not settle in him an Estate tail, which is a
fettered Estate, but a Fee-simple, if any thing. And the rather, because the
reason of it must be upon a supposition, that the old Use continues still in
him, being never well limited out of him. Then he argued, that admitting the
limitation to be good, yet since it vested in Edward as a Purchasor, it is
spent by his dying without issue.

But North, Windham and Atkins were of Opinion, That if an Estate limited to a
man and the Heirs of the body of his Father, vest in him, be it either by
descent or purchase, that if he die without issue, it shall go to his Brother,
etc. so that in this case, if the remainder to the Heirs males of Thomas, ever
vested in Edward, it comes to William, as Heir male of the body of Thomas, and
he is a special Heir to take by descent.

2. They agreed that at the Common Law a man could not make his right Heir a
Purchasor, without parting with the whole fee; but that by way of Use he might:
Creswold's Case in Dyer is of an Estate executed. They agreed the limitation of
the remainder in this case to be good, and that it vested in Edward, as a
Purchasor.

North. It cannot take effect as a springing Use; because where the limitation
is of a remainder, the Law will never construe it so, as to support it any
other way. This (he said) he had known resolved in one Cutler's Case in the
Kings Bench.

Scroggs agreed to the Judgment; but said, he went contrary to the Books in so
doing: which go upon nice and subtle differences, little less than
Metaphysical.

Justice versus White.
IN an Action of Debt against the Defendant, as Executor to John White, the
Defendant pleaded, That John did make a Will, but made not him Executor, and
that the said John had bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses, and that the
Archbishop of Canterbury committed Administration to the Defendant, and
concluded in bar, to which there was a demurrer.

Sergeant Turner. 1. This is a plea in a abatement only, and the Defendant has
concluded in bar, Cr. Eliz. 202. Isham and Hitchcot. 2. The Defendant does not
traverse, absque hoc that he ever administered as Executor, 20 H. 6. 1. b. per
Fortescue. 3. The Defendant does not show when Administration was committed to
him: for if it were committed hanging the Writ, it will not abate it, 21 H. 6.
8. 5 H. 5. 10, 11. Br. tit. Executors 7. 4. Hob. 49. 4. The Defendant does not
lay it expressly that John White died intestate: but only says, that he made a
Will, but did not appoint him, the Defendant to be his Executor by that Will,
and that Administration was granted to him. Now also the Defendant was not made
Executor by the Will, yet he might have been made so, by a Codicil annexed to
the Will, Rolls Rep. 2 part 285. 5. He says not in what Province the bona
notabilia were: and perhaps they were in the Province of York. The Court gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff, nisi causa, etc. chiefly for the first and fourth
Reasons.

Page and Tulse.
MIdd', sc. Henricus Tulse nuper de Lond' Miles, and Robertus Jeffries nuper de
Lond' Miles, nuper vicecom' Com' praedict' attachiati fuer^ ad respondendum
Thomae Page de placito transgress. super casum, etc. unde idem Tho. per Bale
Attornatum suum queritur, quare cum quidem Sam. Wadham, alias Waddam, Term.
Sanct. Trin. Ann. Regni Dom. Regis nunc vicesimo sexto, and antea indebitatus
fuisset eidem Tho. Page in 34 libris monetae Angliae, idemque Tho. pro
obtentione earund' eodem Term. Sanct' Trin. anno vicesimo sexto supradict'
debito modo prosecutus fuisset extra Cur Domini Regis nunc coram ipso Rege
(eadem curia apud Westmonast' in praedict' Com' Mid tunc existente) quoddam
praeceptum ipsius Domini Regis versus praedict' Samuelem, Vicecom' Midd'
direct. per quod eid. tunc Vicecomiti praecept fuit, quod caperet praefatum
Samuelem, si etc. and enum salvo, etc. ita quod haberet corpus ejus cor dict.
Dom. Rege apud Westmonast. die Veneris prox. post. tres septimanas Sancti Mich.
prox' sequent ad respondendum eidem Tho. de placito transgr ac etiam billae
ipsius Tho. versus praedict' Sam. pro triginta quatuor libris super
assumptionem secund' consuetud' Cur dict' Dom' Regis cor ipso Rege exhibend'
and quod idem vicecomes haberet ibi tunc praeceptum illud, etc. quod quidem
praeceptum idem Thomas postea and ante return' ejusd', scil. quarto die Jul.
anno vicesimo sexto supradict' apud Westmonast' in Com. praedict' praefat
Henric^ and Roberto tunc Vicecom' praedict' Com' Midd deliberavit, ea
intention quod praedict' Samuel virtute praecepti illius caperetur and
arrestaretur, and ad praed. diem return^ ejusdem in dict' cur' dict' Dom' Regis
coram ipso Rege secundum consuetudinem ejusdem cur' custodiae Marischalli
Marischalciae Dom' Regis cor' ipso Rege committeretur, ad intentionem quod idem
Tho. versus praefat Samuel. custodiae ejusdem Marischalli Marischalciae sic
commissum, and in custod' sua existent secund' consuetudinem dict' Cur' dict'
Dom' Regis coram ipso Rege per bill ipsius Tho. versus praed' Samuel. in eadem
Cur' exhibend' in placito transgressionis super casum super assumptionem ipsius
Sam. pro praed. 34 libris eid. Tho. solvend' and pro recuperatione earund'
narraret and implacitaret, and quod praed' Sam. antequam ipse ab hujusmodi
custod' praedict' Marischall Mariscalciae deliberetur aut ad largum ire
dimitteretur, imponeret in eadem Cur' in praed' placito transgressionis super
casum sufficientes manucaptores eid. Tho. inde responsur' secund' consuetudinem
Cur' illius, virtute cujus quidem praecepti praedictus Henricus and Robertus
postea and ante return^ ejusdem, scil. 14 die Julij ann. 26 supradict' tunc
vicecom' Com' praed' ut praefertur, existentes praefat Samuel. apud
Westmonaster' praedict' in Com' praedict' ceperunt and arrestaverunt, and ipsum
Samuel. in custodia sua ex causa praedict' habuerunt and detinuerunt, praedicti
tamen Henricus and Robertus, officij sui Vicecom' debitum in vera and justa
executione praecepti istius, iis, ut praefertur, direct' and deliberat, minime
curantes, sed machinantes ipsum Thomam minus rite praegravare, and in
prosecutione sectae suae praedictae penitus frustrare, and de assentione and
obtentione praedict' 34 librarum omnino impedire, praedict. Samuelem in
custodia sua in forma praedict' detent existent (eodem Thoma de praedict' 34
libris seu aliquo denario inde minime satisfacto) sine licentia and contra
voluntatem ipsius Thomae vicesimo secundo die Septembris Ann. 26 supradicto,
apud Westm' praed' extra custodiam ipsorum Henrici and Roberti tunc Vicecom'
Com' praedict' existent ad largum ire quo voluit libere and voluntary ire and
evadere permiserunt, and nihilo minus ad praed. diem returni praecepti praed'
ipsi praectid' Henricus and Roberus Vicecom' praed' Com' Midd', ut praefertur,
existentes, in praedict' Cur dicti Dom. Regis, coram ipso Rege apud
Westmonaster' praedict' in ipsius Tho. grave damnum and praejudicium falso and
fradulenter returnaverunt praeceptum praedict. in forma sequente, viz. quod
ipse virtute cujusdam brevis sibi direct. cepisset corpus praedict. Samuelis,
cujus quidem corpus ad diem and locum in eodem praecept content cor dict'
Domino Rege parat habuerunt, prout per idem praecept sibi praecipiebatur, ubi
revera praedict. Henricus and Robertus corpus praedicti Samuelis, ad locum in
praecept praedict. content non parat habuerunt juxta exigentiam praecept
praedict. and return suum praedict. sed praedictus Samuel post evasionem suam
praedict. seipsum ad loca eidem Thomae penitus incognita elongavit and
retraxit, quorum praetext idem Tho. non solum in prosecutione sectae suae
praedictae manifesto retardatus existit, verum etiam de obtentione praedictar
34 librarum ei, ut praefertur debit omnino impeditus and defraudatus existit,
ad dampum ipsius Tho. 40 librarum and inde producit sectam.

Et praedictus Henricus and Robertus per Joh. Tister Attornatum suum veniunt
and Defendunt vim and injuriam quando, etc. and dicunt quod praedictus Thomas
actionem suam praedictam inde versus eos habere seu manutenere non debet, quia
dicunt quod cum per quendam Actum in Parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis
Angliae, etc. sexti post conquestum, apud Westomaster in Com. Midd. 24 die
Februarij anno Regni sui 23 Tent editum, inter alia inactitatum existit
authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti quod Vicecomes, sub-vicecomes, Clericus Vicecom
Seneschallus sive Ballivus Franchesiae vel Ballivus sive Coronator non caperet
aliquid color Officii per ipsum nec per aliquam personam ad ejus usum de
aliqua persona pro confectione alicujus return sive panell. and pro copia ejusd
panell. praeterquam 4 denarios, and quod praedict. Vicecomes and omnes alii
Officiar and Ministri praedicti emitterent extra prisonam, Angl. should let out
of prison, omnimodas personas per ipsos vel eorum aliquos arrestat. seu
existent in eorum Custodia vigore alicujus brevis billae sive warrant. in
aliqua action personali vel causa indictamenti pro transgressione, super
rationabili securitate sufficientium personarum habentium sufficiens infra Com
ubi tales personae sint, ad ballivum sive manucaptionem tradit. ad custodiend.
dies suos in talibus locis, prout praedict. brevia, billae sive warranta
requirerent, tali persona sive personis quae fuit vel forent in eorum custodia
per condemnation. execution. cap. utlagatum sive excommunicat. and pro
securitate pacis, and omnibus talibus personis quae forent Commiss. ad custod.
per speciale mandatum aliquorum Justiciariorum, and vagrantibus recusantibus ad
serviendum secundum firmam Statuti de laboratoribus tantummodo exceptis, prout
per actum praedictum before apparet, and iidem Henricus and Robertus ulterius
dicunt quod ipsi decimo quarto die Julii anno Regni dicti Dni Regis nunc, etc.
vicesimo sexto supradict. in dicta narratione superius specificat. iisdem Henr.
and Roberto tunc Vicecom' Com' praed. existentibus, apud Parochiam S. Clementis
Dacorum in Com praed. ceperunt and arrestaverunt praedictum Samuelem Wadham
virtute praecepti praedicti in narratione praedict. superius specificat. ac
ipsum ad prisonam dicti Dom. Regis sub custodia Vicecom. Com. praed. tunc
existent. tunc and ibidem commiserunt, praedictoque Samuele sub custodia
praedict. Henr. and Roberti existent. pro eadem causa and pro nulla alia causa,
praedict. Sam. Wadham postea and ante return. praecepti illius, scil. praedicto
decimo quarto die Julii anno vicesimo sexto supradicto apud paroch. praedict'
in Com' praedict' invenit and obtulit praedict' Henrico and Roberto adtunc
Vicecom' Com' praedict' existentibus rationabilem securitatem sufficentium
personarum habentium sufficiens infra Com' praedict' Middlesex ad servandum
diem suum praedict' in praecepto praedict' superius specificat. ad rndum
praefato Tho. de placito transgressionis ac etiam billae ipsius Tho. versus
praefatum Samuelem pro triginta quatuor libris super assumptioem secundum
consuetudinem Cur ipsius Dni Regis coram ipso Rege exhibend' secundum
exigentiam praecepti illius, viz. Willielmus King de paroch. Sancti Martini in
campis in Com' Middlesex Generos. and Tho. Williams de eadem paroch. in Com
praedict. Tailor, qui quidem Willielmus King and Tho. Williams eundem Samuelem
ad tunc manucapere obtulerunt quod ipse idem Sam. Wadham compareret coram dicto
Dno Rege apud Westmon. die veneris prox' post tres septimanas Sancti Mich.
prox' sequent. ad respondend. praefat. Tho. Page de placito transgressionis and
billae praedict. in narratione praedict. superius specificat. secundum formam
and effectum actus praedicti; and iidem Henr. and Robertus ulterius dicunt,
quod postea and ante returnum praecepti praedicti scil. praedicto decimo quarto
die Julii ann. vicesimo sexto supradicto iisd' Henr and Roberto tunc Vicecom
Com praed. existent. apud paroch Sancti Clementis Danor praed' vigore Statut.
praed. cep. de praefat' Samuele rationabilem securitatem praedict', viz.
Willielmum King and Tho. Williams qui quidem Willielmus King and Tho. Williams
iisdem die and anno apud paroch. praedict' Sancti Clementis Danor in Com
praedict. per quoddam Scriptum suum obligatorium subsigill. praedictor
Willielmi King and Tho. Williams, cujus dat. est decimo quarto die Jul. ann.
vicesimo sexto supradict. concessissent and quilibet eorum concessit se teneri
praefato Henric. and Robert. ut Vicecom Com praed' in summa 70 librar bonae and
legalis monetae Angliae cum condition eidem Script. Obligator subscript quod
praedict. Samuel compareret coram dicto Dom Rege apud Westmonast. praedict. die
veneris prox' post tres septimanas Sancti Michaelis prox' sequent. ad
respondend' praefato Tho. Page de placit' transgressionis and billae praedict'
secundum exigentiam praecepti praedicti and superinde ad tunc and ibid'
emiserunt praefat' Sam extra prisonam praedict' secundum formam Statuti
praedict' ut eis been licuit, quae est eadem ad largum ire permssio praedict'
unde praed' Tho. Page superius versus eos queritur and ulterius iidem Henr. and
Robert. dicunt quod ipsi postea scil. ad diem returni ejusdem praecepti coram
dicto Dno Rege apud Westmonast' praedict. iisdem Henr and Robert. tum Vicecom
Com praed. existent. returnaverunt praeceptum praedictum quod ipsi virtute
praecepti praedicti cepissent praefatum Samuelem cujus corpus coram dicto Dom
Rege ad diem and locum in eodem praecept. content. parat. habuerunt, prout per
idem praecept. praecipiebatur, and hoc parati sunt verificare, unde petunt
judicium and damna sua occasion praedict. sibi adjudicand'.

Et praedict. Tho Page dicit quod ipse per aliqua per praedict. Henric. and
Robert. superius placitando allegat. ab action sua praedict. versus praed.
Henr. and Robert. habend. praecludi non debet, quia protestando quod praedict.
Henr. and Robert. non ceperunt securitatem sufficientium personarum pro
comparentia praedict. Samuelis ad diem and locum in praecepto praed. superius
specificat. prout praed. Henr. and Robert. superius placitando allegaverunt,
pro placito idem Thom. dicit quod iidem Henr and Robert. corpus praefati
Samuelis ad diem and locum in praecept. praed. content. cor dicto Dno Rege non
parat. habuerunt juxta exigentiam praecepti praedict. and returnum suum
praedict. and hoc paratus est verificare, unde petit judicium and damna sua
occasion praemissorum sibi adjudicari.

The Defendants demur to this replication, and the Plaintiff joins in demurrer.

Sergeant Strode pro Defendente. Before the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 10. no
man could make an Attorney without the Kings Writ de Attornato faciendo: and
there was no other return at the Common Law then cepi corpus, or non est
inventus. Vide 32 H. 6. 28. The Statute of 32 H. 6. does not alter the Return.
The design of that Statute is only to provide for the Defendants ease, and
against the extortion of Sheriffs and their Officers: so that the Sheriff being
obliged to return a Cepi, and yet to let the Defendant to bail, there can be do
reason why he should be charged for not having the body at the day. He cited
Langton and Gardners case Cr. Eliz. 460. Barton and Aldworth: Cr. Eliz. 624. in
Bowls and Lassel's case, ibid. 852. The Sheriff took bail according to this
Statute, and returned a languidus in prisona, though the Defendant was at
large: resolved that no Action lay against the Sheriff. Trin. 13 Jac. Rolls
Abr. 1. part 92. no Action lies against the Sheriff for not having the body at
the day, because he is compellable by the Statute to let him to bail: and so he
said it was resolved in a case between Francklyn and Andrews Br. 24 Car. 1. but
adjudged for the Plaintiff upon the insufficiency of the pleading.

Sergeant Conyers for the Plaintiff. I agree that an Action of Escape will not
lie against the Sheriff, because he is compellable to let him to bail: but this
is an Action at the Common Law for a false Return; which if it should not be
maintainable, the design of the Statute would be defrauded: for the Plaintiff
cannot control the Sheriff in his taking bail, but he may take what persons
and what bail he pleases: and if he should not be chargeable in an Action for
not having the body ready, the Plaintiff could never have the effect of his
Suit: and although the Sheriff be chargeable, he will be at no prejudice; for
he may repair his loss by the bail-bond: and it is his own fault if he takes
not security sufficient to answer the Debt. The last clause in the Statute is,
That if any Sheriff return a Cepi corpus or reddidit se, he shall be chargeable
to have the body at the day of the Return, as he was before, etc. that (if)
implies a Liberty in the Sheriff not to return a Cepi corpus or reddidit se.
But notwithstanding, by the opinion of North Chief Justice, Wyndham and Atkyns
Justice, the Plaintiff was barred. Bowls and Lassel's case, they said, was a
strong case to govern the point; and the return of paratum habeo is in effect
no more then if he had the body ready to bring into Court, when the Court
should command him; and it is the common practice only to amerce the Sheriff
till he does bring in the body: and therefore no Action lies against him; for
it is not reasonable that he should be twice punished for one Offense, and that
against the Court only. Scroggs delivered no Opinion: but Judgment was given,
ut sup.

Cockram and Welby.
ACtion upon the Case against a Sheriff, for that he levied such a sum of money
upon a Fieri facias at the Suit of the Plaintiff, and did not bring the money
into Court at the day of the return of the Writ, Per quod deterioratus est, and
dampnum habet, etc. the Defendant pleads the Statute of 21 Jac. of Limitations.
To which the Plaintiff demurs.

Sergeant Barrel. This Action is within the Statute. It arises ex quasi
contractu: Hob. 206. Speak and Richard's case. It is not grounded on a Record,
for then nullum tale Recordum would be a good plea; which it is not: it lies
against the Executors of a Sheriff, which it would not do, if it arose ex
maleficio.

Pemberton. This Action is not brought upon the Contract; if we had brought an
Indebitatus Assumpsit, which perhaps would lie, then indeed we had grounded our
selves upon the Contract, and there had been more color to bring us within the
Statute; but we have brought an Action upon the case for not having our money
here at the day, Per quod, etc.

North. An Indebitatus Assumpsit would lie in this case against the Sheriff or
his Executor; and then the Statute would be pleadable. I have known it
resolved, that the Statute of Limitations is not a good plea against an
Attorney, that brings an Action for his Fees, because they depend upon a Record
here, and are certain.

Next Trinity Term, the matter being moved again, the Court gave Judgment for
the Plaintiff, Nisi causa, etc. if the Fieri facias had been returned, then the
Action would have been grounded upon the Record, and it is the Sheriffs fault
that the Writ is not returned: but however the Judgment in this Court is the
foundation of the Action. Debt upon the Stat. of 2 Edw. 6. for not setting out
Tithes, is not within the Stat. for oritur ex maleficio: so the ground of this
Action is maleficium, and the Judgment here given. In both which respects it is
not within the Statute of Limitations.

Barrow and Parrot.
PArrot had married one Judith Barrow an Heiress. Sir Herbert Parrot, his
Father, and an ignorant Carpenter, by virtue of a dedimus potestatem to them
directed, took the conusance of a Fine of the said Judith, being under age, and
by Indenture the use was limited to Mr. Parrot and his wife for their two
lives, the remainder to the Heirs of the Survivor; about two years after the
wife died without issue; and Barrow as heir to her prayed the relief of the
Court. Upon examination it appeared, that Sir Herbert did examine the woman
whether she were willing to levy the fine? and asked the husband and her,
whether she were of age or not? both answered that she was. She afterward,
being privately examined touching her consent, answered as before, and that she
had no constraint upon her by her husband, but she was not there questioned
concerning her age. Sir Herbert Parrot was not examined in Court upon Oath,
because he was accused; and North said, this Court could no more administer an
Oath ex Officio, then the Spiritual Court could. North and Wyndham, There is a
great trust reposed in the Commissioners, and they are to inform themselves of
the parties age; and a voluntary ignorance will not excuse them. But Atkyns
opposed his being fined: he cited Hungates case, Mich. 12 Jac. Came. Stell. 12.
Cook, 122, 123. where a Fine by Dedimus was taken of an Infant, and because it
was not apparent to the Commissioners, that the Infant was within age, they
were in that Court acquitted. But North, Wyndham and Scroggs agreed, that the
Son should be fined; for that he could not possibly be presumed to be ignorant
of his Wifes age. Atkyns contra. But they all agreed, that there was no way to
set the Fine aside.

Term. Trin. 29 Car. II. in Communi Banco.
Searle and Long.
QUare Impedit against two; one of the Defendants appears; the other casts an
essoyn: wherefore he that appeared had idem dies; then he that was essoyn'd
appears, and the other casts an essoyne. Afterward an issued for their not
Attachment appearing at the day; and so Process continued to the great
distress: which being returned, and no appearance, Judgment final was ordered
to be entered according to the Statute of Marlebr. cap. 12.

It was moved to have this rule discharged, because the party was not summoned,
neither upon the Attachment nor the great distress, and the Sureties returned
upon the Process were John Do and Richard Roo: an Affidavit was produced of
Non-summons, and that the Defendant had not put in any Sureties, nor knew any
such person as John Do and Richard Roo.

It was objected on the other side, that they had notice of the suit; for they
appeared to the Summons; and it appeared that they were guilty of a voluntary
delay, in that they forched in essoyne: and the Stat. of Marlebr. is
peremptory; wherefore they prayed Judgment.

Sergeant Maynard for the Defendants. If Judgment be entered against us, we have
no remedy, but by a Writ of Deceit. Now in a Writ of Deceit the Sumners and
veyors are to be examined in Court: and this is the Trial in that Action: but
feigned persons cannot be examined. It is a great abuse in the Officers to
return such feigned names. The first cause thereof was the ignorance of
Sheriffs, who being to make a return, looked into some Book of Presidents for a
form; and finding the names of John Do and Rich. Roo put down for examples,
made their return accordingly, and took no care for true Sumners and true
Manucaptors. For Nonappearance at the return of the great Distress in a plea
of Quare Impedit, final Judgment is to be given, and our right bound for ever,
which ought not to be suffered, unless after Process legally served, according
to the intention of the Statute. In a case Mich. 23. of the present King,
Judgment was entered in this Court in a plea of Quare impedit, upon
nonappearance to the great Distress; but there the party was summoned, and
true Summoners returned; upon nonappearance an Attachment issued, and real
Sumners returned upon that: but upon the Distress it was returned, that the
Defendants districti fuerunt per bona and catalla, and manucapti per Joh. Do
and Rich. Roo: and for that cause the Judgment was vacated. Cur'. The design of
the Statute of Marlebridge was to have Process duly executed, which if it were
executed as the Law requires, the Tenant could not possibly but have notice of
it. For, if he do not appear upon the Summons, an Attachment goes out; that is
a command to the Sheriff to seize his body, and make him give Sureties for his
appearance: if yet he will not appear, then the great distress is awarded; that
is, the Sheriff is commanded to seize the thing in question; if he come not in
for all this, then Judgment final is to be given. Now the issue of this Process
being so fatal, that the right of the party is concluded by it, we ought not to
suffer this Process to be changed into a thing of course. It is true, the
Defendant here had notice of the Suit; but he had not such notice as the Law
does allow him, And for his fourching in essoyn, the Law allows it him.
Accordingly the Judgment was set aside.

Anonymus.
FAlse Judgment out of a County Court; the Record was vicious throughout, and
the Judgment reversed; and ordered that the Suitors should be amerced a Mark:
but the Record was so imperfectly drawn up, that it did not appear before whom
the Court was held: and the County Clark was fined Five pounds for it.

Cessavit per biennium: the Defendant pleads Non-tenure. He commenceth his
plea, quod petenti reddere non debet: but concludes in abatement.

Sergeant Barrel. He cannot plead this plea, for he has imparled. Cur^.
Non-tenure is a plea in bar: the conclusion indeed is not good; but he shall
amend it.

Barrel. Non-tenure is a plea in abatement. The difference is betwixt
Non-tenure, that goes to the tenure (as when the Tenant denies that he holds of
the demandant, but says that he holds of some other person; which is a plea in
bar) and Non-tenure that goes to the Tenancy of the Land: as here he pleads
that he is not Tenant of the Land: and that goes in abatement only. The
Defendant was ordered to amend his plea.

Addison versus Sir John Otway.
TEnant in tail of Lands in the Parishes of Rippon and Kirby-Marleston in the
Towns of A. B. and C. Tenant in Tail makes a Deed of bargain and sale to J. S.
to the intent to make J. S. Tenant to the Praecipe, in order to the suffering
of a common Recovery of so many Acres in the Parishes of Rippon and
Kirby-Marlestone. Now in those Parishes there are two Towns called Rippon and
Kirby-Marlestone; and the Recovery is suffered of Lands in Rippon and
Kirby-Marlestone generally; all this was found by special Verdict: and further,
that the intention of the parties was, that the Lands in question should pass
by the said recovery, and that the Lands in question are in the Parishes of
Rippon and Kirby-Marlestone, but not within the Townships: and that the
bargainor had no Lands at all within the said Townships. The question was,
whether the Lands in question should pass by this Recovery or not?

Shaftoe: They will pass. The Law makes many strained constructions to support
common Recoveries, and abates of the exactness, that is required in adversary
Suits. 2 Rolls 67. 5 Rep. Dormer's case. Ear and Snow, Plo. Com. Sir Moyle
Finche's case, 6 Rep. Cr. Jac. 643. Ferrers and Curson. In Stork and Foxe's
case: Cr. Jac. 120, 121. where two Villes Walton and Street were in the Parish
of Street; and a man having Lands in both, levied a Fine of his Lands in
Street, his Lands in Walton would not pass: but there the Conusor had Lands in
the Town of Street to satisfy the grant: but in our case it is otherwise. He
cited also Rolls Abridgm. Grants 54. Hutton 105. Baker and Johnson. The Deed of
bargain and sale, and the Recovery, make up in our case but one assurance, and
construction is to be made of both together: as in Cromwells case 2 Report. The
intention of the parties Rules, Fines and Recoveries, and the intention of the
parties in our case appears in the Deed, and is found by the Verdict. Rolls
Abridgm. 19. 2 part. Winch. 122. per Hob. Cr. Car. 308. Sir George Symond's
case: betwixt which last case and ours all the diffreence is, that that case is
of a Fine, and ours of a Common Recovery: betwixt which Conveyances, as to our
purpose, there is no difference at all. He cited Jones and Wait's case, Trin 27
Car. 2. in this Court, and a case 16 Reg. nunc, in B. R. when Hide was Chief
Justice, betwixt Thynne and Thynne.

North. The Law has always stuck at new niceties, that have been started in
cases of Fines and Common Recoveries, and has gotten over almost all of them. I
have not yet seen a case that warrants the case at Bar in all points. Nor do I
remember an Authority expressly against it: and it seems to be within the reason
of many former resolutions. But we must be cautious how we make a further step.

Wyndham. I think the Lands in question will pass well enough: and that the
Deed of bargain and sale, which leads the uses of the Recovery, does
sufficiently explain the meaning of the words Rippon and Kirby Marlestone, in
the recovery. I do not so much regard the Iuries having found what the parties
intention was, as I do the Deed it self, in which he expresses his own
intention himself: and upon that I ground my Opinion.

Atkyns agreed with Wyndham. Indeed when a place is named in legal proceedings,
we do prima facie intend it of a Ville, if nothing appears to the contrary;
stabitur praesumptio donec probetur in contrarium. In this case the Evidence of
the thing it self is to the contrary. The reason why prima facie we intend it
of a Ville, is because as to civil purposes the Kingdom is divided into Villes.
He do not intend it of a Parish, because the division of the Kingdom into
Parishes is an Ecclesiastical distribution to Spiritual purposes. But the Law
in many cases takes notice of Parishes in civil affairs, and Custom having by
degrees introduced it, we may allow of it in a Recovery as well as in a Fine.

Scroggs accordant. If an Infant levy a Fine, when he becomes of full age, he
shall be bound by the Deed that leads the Uses of the Fine, as well as by the
Fine it self, because the Law looks upon both as one assurance. So the Court
was of Opinion that the Lands did pass.

It was then suggested, that Judgment ought not to be given notwithstanding;
for that the Plaintiff was dead. But they said they would not stay Judgment for
that, as this case was. For between the Lessor of the Plaintiff and the
Defendant there was another cause depending, and tried at the same Assizes,
when this issue was tried, and by agreement between the parties the Verdict in
that cause was not drawn up, but agreed that it should ensue the determination
of this Verdict, and the title to go accordingly. Now the submission to this
Rule was an implicit agreement not to take advantage of such occurrences as
the death of the Plaintiff in an Ejectione firmae, whom we know to be no wise
concerned in point of interest, and many times but an imaginary person. It was
said also to have Judgment, that there lived in the County where the Lands in
question are, a man of the same name with him that was made Plaintiff. This the
Court said was sufficient, and that were there any of that name in rerum
natura, they would intend that he was the Plaintiff.

Cur^. We take notice judicially, that the Lessor of the Plaintiff is the
person interested, and therefore we punish the Plaintiff, if he release the
Action, or release the damages. Accordingly Judgment was given.

Anonymus.
DEbt upon an Obligation was brought against the Heir of the Obligor; hanging
which Action, another Action was brought against the same Heir, upon another
Obligation of his Ancestor. Judgment is given for the Plaintiffs in both
Actions; but the Plaintiff in the second Action obtains Judgment first. And
which should be first satisfied was the question.

Barrel. He shall be first satisfied, that brought the first Action. North. It
is very clear, That he for whom the first Judgment was given, shall be first
satisfied. For the Land is not bound, till Judgment be given. But if the Heir,
after the first Action brought, had aliened the Land, which he had by descent,
and the Plaintiff in the second Action, commenced after such alienation, had
obtained Judgment, and afterward the Plaintiff in the first Action had Judgment
likewise, in that case the Plaintiff in the first Action should be satisfied,
and he in the second Action not at all.

What if the Sheriff return in such a case, that the Defendant has Lands by
descent, which indeed are of his own purchase? North. If the Sheriffs return
cannot be traversed, at least the party shall be relieved in an Ejectione
firmae.

Dominus Rex versus Thorneborough and Studly.
THe King brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of (...) and Thorneborough
and Studly, and declares, That Queen Elizabeth was seized in see of the
Advowson of Redriff in the County of Surrey, and presented J. S. that the Queen
died, and the Advowson descended to King James, who died seized, etc. and so
brings down the Advowson by descent, to the King that now is. Thorneborough the
Patron pleads a Plea in Bar, upon which the King demurs. Studly the Incumbent
pleads, confessing Queen Elizabeth's seisin in fee in right of her Crown, but
says, that she in the second year of her Reign, granted the Advowson to one
Bosbill, who granted to Ludwell, who granted to Danson, who granted to
Hurlestone, who granted to Thorneborough, who presented the Defendant Studly,
and traverseth absque hoc that Queen Elizabeth died seized.

The Defendants Council produced the Letters Patents of secundo Reginae to
Bosbill and his Heirs.

The King's Council give in evidence a Presentation made by Queen Elizabeth by
usurpation anno 34 Regni sui, of one Rider, by which Presentation the Advowson
was vested again in the Crown. The Presentation was read in Court; wherein the
Queen recited, that the Church was void, and that it appertained to her to
present.

North Chief Justice. Is not the Queen deceived in this Presentation; for she
recites, that it belongs to her to present, which is not true? If the Queen had
intended to make an usurpation, and her Clerk had been instituted, she had
gained the Fee-simple; but here she recites, that she had right.

Maynard. When the King recites a particular Title, and has no such Title, his
Presentation is void: but not when his recital is general, as it is here. And
this difference was agreed to in the Kings Bench, in the Case of one Erasmus
Dryden.

The Defendants Council showed a Judgment in a Quare Impedit against the same
Rider, at the suit of one Wingate in Queen Elizabeth's time: whereupon the
Plaintiff had a writ to the Bishop, and Rider was ousted. Wingate claimed under
the Letters Patents of the Second of the Queen, viz. by a Grant of one Adie to
himself; to which Adie one Ludwell granted it, anno 33 Eliz.

Baldwin. It appears by the Record of this Judgment, that a writ to the Bishop
was awarded: but no final Judgment is given, which ought to be after the three
points of the writ enquired.

North. What is it that you call the final Judgment? there are two Judgments in
a Quare Impedit: one that the Plaintiff shall have a writ to the Bishop, and
that is the final Judgment, that goes to the right betwixt the parties. And the
Judgment at the Common Law. There in another Judgment to be given for Damages
since the Stat. of West. 2. cap. 5. after the points of the writ are enquired
of. Which Judgment is not to be given but at the instance of the party.

Pemberton. This Wingate that recovered, was a stranger, and had no title to
have a Quare Impedit. Now I take this difference; where the King has a good
Title, no recovery against his Clerk, shall affect the King's Title; he shall
not be prejudiced by a Recovery, to which he is no party. If the King have a
defeasible Title, as in our case by Usurpation, there if the rightful Patron
recover against the King's Incumbent, the King's Title shall be bound, though
he be not a party: for his Title having no other Foundation than a
Presentation, when that is once avoided, the Kings Title falls together with
it. But though the Kings Title be only by Usurpation, yet a Recovery against
his Clerk by a stranger, that has nothing to do with it, shall not predudice
the King: covin may be betwixt them, and the King be tried. Now Wingate had no
Right: for he claimed by Grant from one Adie, to whom Ludwell granted ann. 33
Eliz. But we can prove this Grant by Ludwell to have been void, for in the 29th
of the Queen he had made a Prior Grant to one Danson; of which Grant we here
produce the Inrolment. This Grant to Danson was an effectual Grant, for anno 11
Jacobi a Presentation was made by J. R. and Th. Danson, which proves that this
Grant took effect, and the Defendant himself deduceth the Title of his own
Patron under that Grant.

Barrel. Wingate is not to be accounted a stranger; for he makes Title by the
Letters Letters Patents of 2 Eliz. so that he encounters the Queen with her own
Grant: and his Title under that Grant was allowed by the Court, who gave
Judgment accordingly. There was no faint Pleader in the Case, as appears by the
Record, that has been read. And covin shall not be presumed, if it be not
alleged. We deduce our Title under the Grant made to Danson, 29 Eliz. in our
plea, but that is only by way of inducement to our traverse.

Cur. By that Judgment temp. Regin. Eliz. the Queens Title was avoided. We must
not presume that Wingate had a Title. Ex diuturnitate temporis omnia
presumuntur solemniter esse acta. That Quare Impedit was brought when the
matter was fresh. Without doubt Danson would have asserted his Title against
Wingate, if he had had any. The Defendant did not do prudently in conveying a
Title to his Patron under the Grant made to Danson: but issue being taken upon
the Queens dying seized, he shall not be concluded to give in Evidence any
other Title to maintain the Issue. Upon which Evidence the Jury found for the
Defendant, that Queen Elizabeth did not die seized.

North said, He was clearly of Opinion, That the Kings Title by Usurpation
should be avoided by a Recovery against his Clerk, though the Recoverer were a
mere stranger.

The Company of Stationers against Seymour.
THe Company brought an Action of Debt against Seymour for printing Gadbury's
Almanacks without their leave. Upon a special Verdict found, the question was,
Whether the Letters Patents whereby the Company of Stationers had granted to
them the sole printing of Almanacks, were good or not. The Jury found the Stat.
of 13 and 14 Car. 2. concerning Printing. They found a Patent made by King
James of the same Privilege to the Company, in which a former Patent of Queen
Elizabeth's was recited; and they found the Letters Patents of the King that now
is. Then they found that the Defendant had printed an Almanac, which they
found in his verbis and figuris: and that the said Almanac had all the
essential parts of the Almanac, that is printed before the Book of Common
Prayer: but that it has some other additions, such as are usual in common
Almanacks, etc.

Pemberton. The King may by Law grant the sole-printing of Almanacks. The Art
of Printing is altogether of another consideration in the eye of the Law, than
other Trades and Mysteries are; the Press is a late Invention. But the
Exorbitancies and Licentiousness thereof has ever since it was first found out
been under the care and restraint of the Magistrate. For great Mischiefs and
Disorder would ensue to the Commonwealth, if it were under no Regulation: and
it has therefore always been thought fit to be under the Inspection and
Control of the Government. And the Stat. 14. Car. 2. recites that it is a
matter of public Care. In England it has from time to time been under the
Kings own Regulation, so that no Book could lawfully be printed without an
Imprimatur granted by some that derive authority from him to License Books. But
the question here is not, Whether the King may by Law grant the sole-Printing
of all Books; but of any, and of what sort of Books? the sole-printing of
Law Books is not now in question; that seemed to be a point of some difficulty,
because of the large extent of such a Patent, and the uncertainty of
determining what should be accounted a Law-Book, and what not. And yet such a
Patent has been allowed to be good by a Judgment in the House of Peers. When
Sir Orlando Bridgeman was Chief Justice in this Court, there was a question
raised concerning the validity of a Grant of the sole-printing of any
particular Book, with a Prohibition to all others to print the same, how far it
should stand good against them that claim a Property in the Copy paramount to
the Kings Grant? and Opinions were divided upon the Point. But the Defendant in
our Case makes no Title to the Copy; only he pretends a nullity in our Patent.
The Book which this Defendant has printed, has no certain Author: and then,
according to the Rule of our Law, the King has the property; and by consequence
may grant his Property to the Company.

Cur. There is no difference in any material part betwixt this Almanac and
that that is put in the Rubric of the Common Prayer. Now the Almanac that is
before the Common Prayer, proceeds from a public Constitution; it was first
settled by the Nicene Council, is established by the Canons of the Church, and
is under the Government of the Archbishop of Canterbury. So that Almanacks may
be accounted Prerogative Copies. Those particular Almanacks, that are made
yearly, are but applications of the general Rules there laid down for the
moveable Feasts for ever, to every particular year. And without doubt, this may
be granted by the King. This is a stronger Case than that of Law Books, which
has been mentioned. The Lords in in the Resolution of that Case relied upon
this, That Printing was a new Invention, and therefore every man could not by
the Common Law have a liberty of printing Law Books. And since Printing has
been invented, and is become a common Trade, so much of it as has been kept
enclosed, never was made common: but matters of State, and things that concern
the Government, were never left to any man's liberty to print that would. And
particularly the sole. Printing of Law Books has been formerly granted in other
Reigns. Though Printing be a new Invention, yet the use and benefit of it is
only for men to publish their Works with more ease than they could before: Men
had some other way to publish their Thoughts before Printing came in; and
forasmuch as Printing has always been under the Care of the Government since it
was first set on foot, we may well presume that the former way was so too.
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First, granted such Patents
as these; and the Law has a great respect to common usage. We ought to be
guided in our Opinions by the Judgment of the House Peers; which is express in
the point: the ultimate resort of Law and Justice being to them. There is no
particular Author of an Almanac: and then by the Rule of our Law, the King has
the Property in the Copy. Those additions of Prognostications and other things
that are common in Almanacks, do not alter the Case; no more than if a man
should claim a property in another man's Copy, by reason of some inconsiderable
additions of his own. Accordingly Judgment was given for the Plaintiffs, nisi
causa, etc.

Anonymus.
ACtion of Trespass for taking away four loads of Wheat, four loads of Rye,
four loads of Barley, four loads of Beans, and four loads of Pease: The
Defendant as to part pleaded, Not guilty. And as to the other part justified;
for that the Plaintiff is Rector of the Rectory Impropriate of Bradwardyne in
the County of Hereford, and so bound to repair the Chancel; and that the
Chancel being out of Repair, the Bishop of Hereford, after monition to the
Plaintiff to repair the same, had granted a Sequestration of the Tithes, etc.
of the Rectory, and that the Defendants, being Churchwardens, had taken them
into their hands, and and so justified by virtue of the Sequestration. To which
the Plaintiff demurred.

Sergeant Barrel. I do not deny but that the Rector of a Rectory Impropriate
may perhaps be bound of common right to repair the Chancel. But since the Stat.
of 31 H. 8. and 32 H. 8. c. 7. has converted the Tithes of such Rectories into
a Lay-Fee, it has consequently exempted them from the Jurisdiction of the
Ordinary. A doubt was conceived upon the Stat. of 31 H. 8. whereby Pensions,
Proxies and Synodals are saved, what remedy lay for the recovery of them; and
it was therefore provided by the Stat. 32 H. 8. that the Church should be
sequestered. The Possessions of Ecclesiastical Persons were subjected to the
Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and might be sequestered in many cases by Process
out of the Bishops Courts: but whenever the Possessions of Laymen were
charged with any Ecclesiastical payment or Spiritual charge, the Ordinary could
not take the Land into his hands, nor meddle with the Possession thereof in any
sort; but the constant usage was to compel the persons by Ecclesiastical
Censures. Anno 1570. there was application made to the Queen to provide a
remedy for the Reparation of the Chancels of such Churches, whereof the
Parsonages were Impropriated. Moreover, he said, A Sequestration does not bind
the Interest, nor put the Rector out of possession, the not submitting to it is
only matter of contempt; and it can no more be pleaded in Bar to an Action of
Trespass, than a Sequestration out of Chancery.

Atkyns. I hope not to see it drawn in question, Whether a Sequestration out of
Chancery may be pleaded in Bar to an Action of Trespass at the Common Law, or
no. But if it were pleaded, I think we need not scruple to allow such a Plea,
by reason the Court of Chancery at Westminster prescribes to grant such a
Process. Which is a Court of such Antiquity, that we ought to take notice of
their Customs.

Sergeant Baldwin contr. He cited, F. N. B. fol. 50. M. Reg. Orig. 44. b. ibid.
48. a. the Stat. of Circumspecte agatis, 31 Edw. 1. Joh. Diathan in his
Commentary upon the legatine Constitutions of Othobone, tit. ne Praelati
fructus Ecclesiarum vacantium perciperent. Linw. 136. de aedificand. Ecclesiis.
The Reparation of the Chancel is onus reale, impositum rebus, non personis. 5th
Rep. Caudrie's Case 9. he cited the Stat. of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. Sir John Davie's
Reports 70. Vaughan. 327. Reg. Jud. 22. 26. 13 H. 4. 17. 21 H. 6. 16. b. 28 H.
8. cap. 9.

It is Objected, That these Tithes are become a Lay-fee. To which I answer,
That by the Stat. of 32 H. 8. there is a remedy given for them in the Spiritual
Court. It is Enacted indeed, That Fines and Recoveries may be suffered of them,
as of Lands and Tenemets, but they are not made Lay-fees to other purposes. No
Statute exempts them from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, nor discharges the
onus reale. The saving in the Stat. of 31 H. 8. preserves the power of
Sequestration, as well as other particulars there instanced. For all Rights of
any person or persons, their Heirs and Successors is saved, etc. the saving is
large. The Parishioners have a right in the Chancel, and to have it kept in
repair; for the Communion Table is to stand there: though they have not Jus
sepulturae there. The practice is with us. And this is is the first instance of
disobedience to such a Sequestration. Besides there are many Impropriations in
the hands of Deans and Chapters, and bodies politic, which cannot be
excommunicated: what process will you grant against them but Sequestration? I
do not mean Appropriations; to wit, such Rectories as were appropriated to them
before the dissolution of Monasteries, and have continued so to this day: for
there is no question but the Ordinary may sequester them, but I mean such
Impropriations as they have purchased of the King and his Patentees since the
dissolution.

North. The Bishop is in the nature of an Ecclesiastical Sheriff. If an Action
of Debt were brought against a Clerk, and the Sheriff had returned upon a Fieri
facias, that the Defendant was Clericus beneficiatus non habens Laicum feodum;
there issued a Fieri facias to the Bishop, upon which he used to sequester (as
they call it) the Ecclesiastical possessions of the Defendant, but that is not
properly a Sequestration; for the Ordinary must not return Sequestrari feci: he
must return Fieri feci or nulla bona, in like manner as a Sheriff of a County
must do: this I have known in experience, that a Bishop has been ordered in
such a case to amend his return. The reason of this Process was, because the
possessions of Ecclesiastical persons were so distinct from Temporal
possessions, that they could not be subject to the ordinary process of the
Temporal Law, no more than possessions of laymen could be subject to their
Jurisdiction. And therefore Rectories impropriate being now incorporated into
the Common Law, and converted into lay-fees, It should seem to me, that they
are thereby exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary. And this I take to
be within the reason of Jeffrie's Case in the 5th Rep. where temporal persons,
that are liable to contribute toward the repairs of the Church, out of their
temporal possessions, are said to be compellable thereunto by Ecclesiastical
Censures. It has been said, that the Parishioners have a right in the Chancel:
but I question that: it is called Cancellum, a cancellis: because the
Parishioners are barred from thence. It is the right of the Parson. Windham
thought, that by the saving in the Stat. of 31 H. 8. the Jurisdiction of the
Ordinary was preserved. Atkyns. The Parson was chargeable with the reparation
of the Chancel, in respect of the profits which he received. They were the
proper Debtors. Now I think it may be held that the Impropriation affects only
the Surplusage of the profits over and above all Charges and Duties issuing out
of the Parsonage, and wherewith it was originally charged. The reparation of
the Chancel is a right arising from the first donation: which shall not be
taken away but by express words. Scroggs accordant.

North. The Defendants plea is naught; for the cause of their justification is,
that what they did was in executing a Sequestration, whereby they were
authorized to take into their hands the profits of the Rectory, for the
reparation of the Chancel. Now they ought to avert, that they did not take into
their hands more than was sufficient for the reparation thereof.

North. If the Law come to be taken as my Brothers are of Opinion, it will make
a great step to the giving Ordinaries power to increase Vicarages. For the
Parishioners have a right to a Maintenance for one to preach to them.
Adjornatur.

Edwards and Weeks.
ACtion upon the case. The Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant in
consideration that the Plaintiff would deliver unto him such a Horse, promised
to deliver to the Plaintiff in lieu thereof another Horse, or five pounds upon
request: and avers, that the Plaintiff had delivered to the Defendant the said
Horse, and had requested him, etc.

The Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff, before the Action brought, discharged
him of that promise, but says not how. To which the Plaintiff demurred.

Strode. If he had pleaded a discharge before the request made, the plea had
been good, without showing how he discharged him: but after the request once
made, a verbal request is not sufficient. Cr. Car. Langden and Stokes 384. and
22 Ed. 4. 40. b.

Cur^ acc'. Et judicium pro querente, Nisi causa, etc.

Barker and Keate.
EJectione firmae of Land in Castle-acre in Com^ Norff. The Defendant pleaded
not guilty; and the issue was found as to part: and for the residue there was a
special Verdict, viz. That Edm Hudson was seized to him and the heirs males of
his body, the remainder to William Hudson his Brother, and the heirs males of
his body. That Edm. Hudson by Indenture betwixt himself and Thom. Peeps demised
to Thom. Peeps from the Feast of St. Michael then last past for six months,
rendering a Pepper-corn Rent: and that afterward by another Indenture between
himself on the one part, and Thom. Peeps and Edw. Bromley on the other part,
reciting the said Lease, he bargained and sold the Reversion to Tho. Peeps his
heirs and assigns, to the intent to make him Tenant to the Praecipe in order to
the suffering of a Common Recovery, in which Edm^ Bromley was to be the
Recoveror, and himself the said Edw. Hudson the Vouchee, and that this Recovery
was to be to the use of Edm^ Hudson and his heirs, etc. and the Jury made a
special conclusion, viz. That if the Court should adjudge that in this Recovery
there were a good Tenant to the Praecipe, then they found for the Plaintiff; if
otherwise, for the Defendant.

Sergeant Waller argued, that there was no good Tenant to the Praecipe: for
that Tho. Peeps never was in possession by virtue of the Lease for six months.
No Entry is found, nor no consideration to raise an use. All the consideration
mentioned is the reservation of a Pepper-corn; which is not sufficient: for it
is to be paid out of the profits of the Land. He compared it to Colyer's case 6
Rep. where a sum in gross appointed to be paid by the Devisee, gave him an
Estate in Fee-simple: but a sum to be paid out of the profits of the Land, not.
He cited the Lord Pagett's case, Moor. 343. Dyer 10. placito 31. Besides, the
consideration in our case is a thing of no value: being but a single
Pepper-corn. If an Infant make a Lease for years, rendering Rent, the Lease is
but voidable; but if an Infant make a Lease for years, rendering a Rose, or a
Pepper-corn, or any such like trifle, the Lease is void. He cited Fitzherb.
tit. Entry congeable 26.

North. When a Tenant for life or years assigns his Estate, there needs no
consideration, in such case the tenure and attendance, and the being subject to
the ancient forfeiture, and the payment of Rent, if there were any, is
sufficient to vest the use in the Assignee: but otherwise in case of a
Fee-simple. When a man is seized in Fee, and makes a Lease for years, unless he
give possession, and that the Lessee enter, he must raise an Use. But in our
case the reservation seems not sufficient to raise an Use, for an Use must be
raised, and the Land united to it, before a Rent can result out of it.

Wyndham. It being in the case of a common Recovery, we must support it, if it
be possible. In Sutton's Hospital's case, 10 Rep. 34. a. it is said that the
reservation of 12 d. Rent was a sufficient consideration to vest an Use in the
Hospital: and a Rent of 12 d. is as inconsiderable a matter in consideration of
a great Estate, as a Pepper-corn in our case. The case in Dyer, that has been
cited, is made a Quaere in the book. I think the reservation of a Rent would
have changed an Use at the Common Law, and will raise an Use at this day; If a
Feoffee to an Use had made a Feoffment in Fee rendering Rent, the feoffment (I
conceive) would have been to the use of the second feoffee, and the first Use
destroyed. The other two Justices delivered no Opinion.

At another day, the cause being moved again, North said, he had looked upon
the President quoted out of Sutton's Hospitals case; and that there the
reservation of a Rent was mentioned in the Deed as a consideration to raise an
Use, which, he said, would perchance make a difference betwixt that case and
this. But the Court would advise further.

Bassett and Bassett.
AN Action of Debt upon an Obligation of 600 l. penalty; the Condition was,
That if the above-bounden John Bassett, his Heirs or Assigns, shall within six
months after the death of Mary Bassett his Mother, settle upon and assure unto
Hopton Bassett, as the Council of the said Hopton Bassett, learned in the Law
shall advise, at the Costs and charges of the said Hopton Bassett, an Annuity
or Rentcharge of twenty pounds per annum, payable half-yearly by equal
portions, from the death of the said Mary, during Hopton Bassett's life, if he
the said Hopton Bassett require the same at the dwelling house of the said John
Bassett; or, if he shall not grant the same, if then the said John Bassett
shall pay unto Hopton Bassett, within the time aforementioned, 300 l. then the
Obligation to be void. The Defendant pleaded, that the Plaintiff (to wit, the
said Hopton Bassett) had not tendered any Grant of an Annuity, within the time
of six months after the death of his Mother, according to, etc. the Plaintiff
replied, and the Defendant rejoyned; But the Council of both sides and the
Court agreed, that the whole question arose upon the plea in bar.

Strode for the Defendant. The Plaintiff ought to have tendered us a grant of
Annuity, to be sealed within six months, etc. and having neglected that, he has
dispensed with the whole Condition. For 1. This is not a dis-junctive
Condition, but the payment of 300 l. is as a penalty imposed upon him, if he
refuse to make such a Grant. And if he shall not, etc. instead of the word not,
put the words refuse to, etc. and the case will be out of doubt. Besides, the
annuity to be granted, is but 20 l. per annum for a life, and 300 l. in money
is more then the value of it, so that it cannot be intended a sum to be paid in
lieu or recompense of it; but must be taken for a penalty.

But suppose it to be a dis-junctive Condition, then we ought to have an
Election whether we would do; but as this case is, the Plaintiff by his
negligence has deprived us of our Election. For Authorities he cited Gerningham
and Ewer's case, Cr. Eliz. 396. and 539. 4 H. 7. fol. 4. 5 Co. 21. b.
Laughter's case. and Warner and Whyte's case, resolved the day before in the
Kings Bench. There is a rule laid down in Morecomb's case, in Moors Reports,
645. which makes against me: but the resolution of that case is Law; and there
needed no such rule. That case goes upon the reason of Lambs case, 5 Rep. when
a man is obliged to pay such a sum as J. S. shall assess, J. S. being a mere
stranger, the Obligor takes upon him, that J. S. shall assess a sum in certain;
and he must procure him to do it, or he forfeits his Obligation. But in our
case nothing is to be done but by the Obligee himself.

Pemberton contra. He argued that the Obligors Election is not taken away; for
though no Deed were tendered him, he might have got one made, and the tender of
that would have discharged the Condition of his Bond. Indeed this will put him
to charge, but he may have an Action of Debt for what he lays out. He cited the
cases cited by Walmesley in Moor 645. betwixt Milles and Wood: 41 Eliz. and
Gowers case 38 and 39 Eliz. etc.

North. The case of Warner and White, adjudged yesterday in the Court of Kings
Bench, is according to Law; the condition there was, that J. S. should pay such
a sum upon the 25th of December, or should appear in Hillary Term after, in the
Court of Kings Bench. J. S. died after the 25th day of Dec', and before Hill.
Term; and had paid nothing upon the 25th of December. In that case the
Condition was not broken by the non-payment, and the other part is become
impossible by the act of God. But I think, that if the first part of a
Condition be rendered impossible by the act of God, that the Obligor is bound to
perform the other part: But in the case at the bar the Obligors Election is
taken away by the act of the Obligee himself. And I see no difference betwixt
this case and that of Gerningham and Ewer, in Cr. Eliz. if the Condition of an
Obligation be single, to make such assurance as shall be advised by the Council
of the Obligee; there concilium non dedit advisamentum, is a good plea; and the
Obligor is not bound to make an assurance of his own head; no more shall he be
bound to do it when the Condition is in the dis-junctive, to save his Bond. In
both cases the Condition refers to the manner of the assurance; and it must be
made in such manner as the words of the Condition import. So he said he was of
Opinion against the Plaintiff.

Wyndham. Where the Condition of an Obligation is in the disjunctive, the
Obligor must have his Election. But in this case there is no such thing as a
disjunctive, till such time as there be a request made to seal a Deed of
Annuity; and then the Obligor will have an Election, either to execute the
assurance, or to pay the 300 l. but no such request being made, it should seem
that the Obligor must pay the 300 l. at his peril.

Atkyns agreed with the Chief Justice, and so did Scroggs: wherefore Judgment
was ordered to be entered against the Plaintiff. Nisi causa, etc. within a week.

Quare impedit, The Plaintiff declared upon a grant of the Advowson to his
Ancestor; and in his Declaration says, hic in Cur^ prolat', but indeed had not
the Deed to show. Sergeant Baldwin brought an Affidavit into Court, that the
Defendant had gotten the Deed into his hands, and prayed that the Plaintiff may
take advantage of a Copy thereof, which appeared in an Inquisition found temp.
Edw. 6.

Cur^. When an Action of Debt is brought upon a Bond to perform Covenants in a
Deed, and the Defendant cannot plead Covenants performed, without the Deed,
because the Plaintiff has the original deed, and perhaps the Defendant took not
a Counterpart of it; we use to grant imparlances till the Plaintiff bring in
the deed. And upon Evidence, if it be proved that the other party has the deed,
we admit Copies to be given in Evidence. But here the Law requires that the
deed be produced; you have your remedy for the deed at Law. We cannot alter the
Law, nor ought to grant an emparlance.

Stead and Perryer.
EJectione firmae. A man has a Son called Robert. Robert has likewise a Son
called Robert. The Grandfather devises the Land in question to his Son Robert,
and his heirs. Robert the devisee dies in the devisors life time. Afterward
the devisor makes a new publication of the same Will; and declares it to be his
intention that Robert the Grandchild should take the Land in question per
eandem voluntatem, instead of his Father, and dyed. And all this was found by
special Verdict upon a Trial betwixt Robert the Grandchild, and a Daughter of
the elder Brother of Robert the first devisee.

Pemberton. The Land does not pass by this Will; the devise to Robert became
void by his death, and cannot be made good by a republication. A publication
cannot alter the words of a Will so as to put a new sense upon them. Land must
pass by Will in writing. Robert the Grandson, is not within this Will in
writing. The Grandfathers intention is not considerable in the case.

Skipwith contra. I agree the case between Brett and Rygden in the
Commentaries, to be Law: but there are two great diversities between this case
and that. 1. There was no new publication. 2. In this case Robert the Father,
and Robert the Son are cognominous. He cited Dyer 142, 143. Trevilians case.
Fuller and Fuller. Cr. Eliz. 422. and Moor 353. Cr Eliz. 493.

North and Atkyns. Without question Robert the Grandchild shall take by this
Will. If he never had had a Son called Robert, or if Robert the Son had been
dead at the time of making the Will, the Grandchild would then without dispute
have taken by these words. Now a new publication is equivolent to a new
writing. The Grandchild is not directly within the words of the Will; but they
are applicable to him. He is a Son, though he be not begotten by the body of
the devisor himself. He is a Son with a distinction. Our Savior is called the
Son of David, though there were 28 Generations betwixt David and him. And a
republication may impose another sense upon words, different from what they
had, when they were first written; as, if a man devise all his Lands in Dale,
and have but two Acres in Dale; the words now extend to no more then those two
Acres: and if he purchase more, and dye without any new publication, the new
purchased Lands will not pass. But if there were a new publication after the
purchase, they would then pass well enough. If a man has issue two Sons called
Thomas; and he makes a devise to his Son Thomas, this may be ascertained by an
averment. Now suppose that Thomas the devisee dye living the Father, and
afterward the Father publishes his Will anew, and says that he did intend that
his Son Thomas now dead, should have had his Land; but now his Will and intent
is, that Thomas his younger Son now living shall take his Land by the same
Will. In this case, to be sure the second Son Thomas shall take by the devise.
Here the import of the words is clearly altered by the republication.

Atkyns. The words of this Will would not of themselves be sufficient to carry
the Land to the Grandchild, nor would the intention of the Devisor do it
without them: but both together do the business. Quae non prosunt singula,
juncta juvant.

Wyndham and Scroggs differed in Opinion, and the cause was adjourned to be
argued the next Term.

North. A man admitted in forma pauperis is not to have a new Trial granted
him: for he has had the benefit of the Kings Justice once, and must acquiesce
in it. We do not suffer them to remove causes out of inferior Courts. They
must satisfy themselves with the Jurisdiction within which their Action
properly lies.

Farrington and Lee.
ASsumpsit. The Plaintiff declares upon 2 indebitatus Assumpsits, and a third
Assumpsit upon an insimul computasset. The Defendant pleaded non Assumpsit
infra sex annos: the Plaintiff replied, that himself is a Merchant, and the
Defendant his Factor, and recites a clause in the Statute, in which Actions of
Account between Merchants and Merchants, and Merchants and their Factors,
concerning their Trade and Merchandise, are excepted; and avers that this money
became due to the Plaintiff upon an account betwixt him and the Defendant
concerning Merchandise, etc. the Defendant makes an impertinent rejoinder, to
which the Plaintiff demurs.

Nudigate pro Querente. This Statute is in the nature of a penal Law; because
it restrains the liberty which the Plaintiff has by the Common Law, to bring
his Action when he will: and must therefore be construed beneficialy for the
Plaintiff: Pl. 54. Cr. Car. 294. Finche and Lambe's case: to this purpose. Also
this exception of Accounts between Merchants and their Factors, must be
liberally expounded for their benefit; because the Lawmakers, in making such
an exception, had an eye to the encouragement of Trade and Commerce. The words
of the exception are (other then such Accounts as concern the Trade of
Merchandise, etc.) now this Action of ours is not indeed an Action of Account;
but it is an Action grounded upon an Account. And the Plaintiff being at
liberty to bring either the one or the other upon the same cause of Action, and
one of the Actions being excepted expressly out of the limitation of the
Statute, the other by Equity is excepted also. He cited Hill. 17 Car. 1. in
Marshe's Reports, 151. and Jones 401. Sandys and Blodwell: Mich. 13 Car. 1. and
prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Sergeant Baldwin contra. He said it did not appear in the Declaration, that
this Action was betwixt a Merchant and his Factor; so that then the plea in bar
is prima facie good. And when he comes and sets it forth in his Replication, he
is too late in it: and the replication is not pursuant to his Declaration.

But all the Court was against him in this. Then he said the Statute excepted
Actions of Account only; and not Actions upon an indeb. Assumpsit.

Cur'. Whereas it has been said by Sergeant Nudigate, that the Plaintiff here
has an Election to bring an Action of account, or an Indebitat. Assumpsit, that
is false: for till the Account be stated betwixt them, an Action of Account
lies, and not an Action upon the Case. When the Account is once stated, then an
Action upon the case lies, and not an Action of Account. Et per North, if upon
an Indebitat. Assumpsit matters are offered in evidence, that lie in account, I
do not allow them to be given in evidence.

North, Wyndham and Scroggs: the exception of the Statute goes only to Actions
of Account, and not to other Actions. And we take a diversity betwixt an
account current, and an account stated. After the account stated, the certainty
of the Debt appears, and all the intricacy of account is out of doors: and the
Action must be brought within six years after the account stated. But by North,
if after an account stated, upon the balance of it a sum appear due to either
of the parties, which sum is not paid, but is afterward thrown into a new
account between the same parties, it is now slip't out of the Statute again.

Scroggs. The Statute makes a difference betwixt Actions upon Account, and
Actions upon the case. The words would else have been, All Actions of Account,
and upon the Case, other then such Actions as concern the Trade of Merchandise.
But it is otherwise penned; other then such Accounts as concern, etc. and as
this case is, there is no account betwixt the parties; the account is
determined, and the Plaintiff put to his Action upon an insimul computasset:
which is not within the benefit of the exception.

Atkyns. I think the makers of this Statute had a greater regard to the persons
of Merchants, then the causes of Action between them. And the reason was,
because they are often out of the Realm, and cannot always prosecute their
Actions in due time. The Statute makes no difference betwixt an account
current, and an account stated. I think also that no other sort of Tradesmen,
but Merchants are within the benefit of this exception: and that it does not
extend to Shopkeepers, they not being within the same mischief. Adjurnatur.

Horn versus Chandler.
COvenant upon an Indenture of an Apprentice, wherein the Defendant bound
himself to serve the Plaintiff for seven years. The Plaintiff sets forth the
custom of London, That any person above 14, and under 21, unmarried, may bind
himself Apprentice, etc. according to the custom, and that the Master thereupon
shall have tale remedium against him, as if he were 21, and alleges, that the
Defendant did go away from his Service, per quod he lost his Service for the
said term, which term is not yet expired. The Defendant pleads a frivolous
plea. To which the Plaintiff demurs. Heley. Though such a Covenant shall not
bind an Infant, neither by Common Law, nor 5 Eliz. 1. Cr. 170. yet by this
custom it shall, in Pasch. 21 Jac. B. R. Cole versus Holme, there was such an
Action against an Apprentice, the Defendant pleaded Nonage; the Plaintiff
replied the custom of London, and that the Indenture of Apprentiship was
enrolled, as it ought to be, etc. and this was certified by the Recorder,
Sergeant Finch, to be the custom: and thereupon Judgment was against the
Defendant, it is a Manuscript.

Jones. The custom ought to have been alleged, that he should have an Action
of Covenant against him, which is not done here; and customs shall be taken
strictly, not by implication. Moreover the Plaintiff declares for a loss not
yet sustained, the term not being ended.

Cur. The custom is sufficiently alleged to give and make good an Action of
Covenant. Tale remedium implies it. Those words are applicable to all things
relating to this matter, viz. That the Master may correct him, may go to a
Justice of Peace. And also may have an Action of Covenant against him, V. Hutt.
63. 4.
as against a man of full age. Winch. 63. 4.
And though by Common Law or the Statute, his Covenant shall not bind him, yet
by the custom it shall. But Twisden desired to see Offley's Report. As to the
declaring for the loss of the term, part whereof is unexpired, though it has
been adjudged to be naught after a Verdict; yet in this Case, which is upon
demurrer, it may be helped; For the Plaintiff may take damages for the
departure only, not the loss of service during the term, and then it will be
well enough. Judgment nisi, etc.

Jones versus Powel.
WOrds spoken of an Attorney, Thou can not read a Declaration per quod, etc.
Cur. The words are actionable, though there had been no special damages; For
they speak him to be ignorant in his Profession, and we shall not intend that
he had a distemper in his eyes, etc. Judic. pro querente.

Anonymus.
THe Defendant, in an Action of false Imprisonment, justified the taking and
imprisoning the Plaintiff, by virtue of an Order of Chancery, that he should be
committed to the Fleet; and the Plea judged naught, because an Order is not
sufficient. It ought to have been an Attachment, he should have pleaded,
Quoddam breve de attachamento, etc.

Osborne versus Walleeden.
REplevin. The Defendant avows in right of his Wife, for a Rentcharge, devised
to her for life, by her former Husband. But in the Will there was this Clause,
viz. If she shall marry, etc. he (the Executor) shall pay her 100 l. and the
rent shall cease, and return to the Executor. She does marry, and the Executor
does not pay the 100 l. The question was, Whether the rent should cease before
the 100 l. be paid.

Jones for the Plaintiff: the rent cease immediately upon her Marriage, and
she shall have remedy for the 100 l. in the Spiritual Court. If the words had
been, He shall pay her 100 l. and from that time the rent shall cease, It had
been otherwise; if she had died presently after the marriage, her Executor
should have had the 100 l.

Brewer and Sanders for the Defendant, she has not a present interest in the
100 l. In this very Case, the Common Pleas delivered their Opinion, That this
100 l. ought to be paid before the rent should cease. But for imperfection in
the pleading, we could not have Judgment there.

Roll. She has no present interest in the 100 l. nor can her Executors have
any, and the rent shall not cease till the payment of it. For first, It is
devised to her for life, not during her Widowhood. Secondly, The rent issues
out of the Inheritance, and by the construction of the Will it shall go to the
Executor, for by cease in the Will is meant cease as to the Wife; and the
Executor is in nature of Purchasor, and ought to pay the money before he has
the rent, and he ought to pay it out of his own Estate, if he will have the
rent. For otherwise, if it be looked upon as a Legacy, if he have no Assets, she
shall be immediately stripped of her rent, and have nothing.

Twisden. I think the Divisors meaning was to give her a present interest in
the 100 l. and if so, the rent must cease presently upon the marriage. But
since it is to be issuing out of the Inheritance, it is doubtful. And since my
Brothers are both of Opinion for the Avowant, let him have Judgment.

Then it was Objected, That the Avowry was ill; For it ought to have been in
the Wifes name as well as the Husbands, and alleged, that Roll. 1 part 318. N.
number. 2. makes a Quaere, and seems to be of opinion that Wise versus Bellent
(which is to the contrary) is not Law. V. 2 Cr. 442. 3.

Twisd. That was his Opinion, it may be, when he was a Student. You have in
that Work of his a common place, which you stand too much upon. I value him
where he reports Judgments and Resolutions. But otherwise it is nothing but a
Collection of Year-Books, and little things noted when he made his Common Place
Books. His private opinion must not warrant or control us here. It has been
adjudged, That the Husband alone may avow in right of his Wife.

Delaval versus Maschall.
DEbt upon a Bond; the Condition whereof was, That if J. S. and J. D.
Arbitrators did make an Award on, or before the 19. of February; and if the
Defendant should perform it, then the Obligation should be void, and then
follow these words, And if they do not make an Award before the 19. of
February, then I empower them to choose an Umpire, and by these Presents bind
my self to perform his Award. The Defendant pleads, That they did not make an
Award. The Plaintiff replies, and sets forth an Award made upon the said 19. of
February, by an Vmpire chosen by the Arbitrators, and alleges a breach
thereof. The Defendant demurs.

Sanders for the Defendant. Here is no breach of the Condition of the Bond. For
that, which relates to the performing the Vmpires Award, it following those
words, Then the Obligation shall be void, is no part of the Condition; and if
any Action is to be brought upon that part, it ought to be Covenant. 2. The
Award made by the Vmpire is void, because made the 19. of February, which was
within the time limited to the Arbitrators, for their power, and the Vmpire
could not make an award within that time, because their power was not then
determined, as was lately adjudged in Copping versus Hornar.

Jones for the Plaintiff. The Condition is good as to this part, It is all but
one Condition. A man may make several Defeasances or Conditions to defeat the
same Obligation, Brook. Condition 66. There is a continuance of this Condition,
It is said, I bind my self by these presents, which refers to the Lien before
in the Obligation.

I agreed with Copping versus Hornar and Bernard versus King, That where an
Vmpire is at first certainly named and appointed, he cannot exercise his
authority within the time appointed to the Arbitrators, because the same
authority cannot be given to, and continue both in the Arbitrators and Vmpire
at the same time. But when the Vmpire is named and chosen by the Arbitrators,
as in our Case, he may make his award within the time allowed to the
Arbitrators; because cause there the Arbitrators by their own action, viz. the
election of the Vmpire, determine their authority; And the authority vests and
remains in the Vmpire only, and so it was admitted in Bernard versus King.

Twisden, assentibus Rainsford and Morton. This is a good part of the
Condition. There was a Condition, That if the Obligor should, etc. then the
Bond should be void; and further, that the Obligor should release: And it was
adjudged here, That the last was a part of the Condition. I was at the Bar when
the Case betwixt Barnard and King was spoken to, and I know Roll did hold and
deliver then, That if it had been alleged, that the Arbitrators had wholly
denied and deserted their power, it had let in the Vmpire, so as that he might
account within the time allowed to the Arbitrators, and he stood upon this
then, that it was implicitly alleged, viz. Postquam denegassent, etc. But
this was a hard Opinion of his, and he himself reports his own judgment
otherwise, 1 To. 262. It may be he altered his Opinion, we inclined that the
award in the Case at the Bar is naught. For the authority of the Arbitrators
was not determined till after the 19th of February. For Justice Croke goes so
far, 1 Cr. 263. as to agree, That Arbitrators may nominate an Vmpire within the
time for their making their award. So that the choosing the Vmpire does not
extinguish their authority, and therefore the Vmpire could not make an award
upon this 19th of February. It is true the Arbitrators might choose him upon
that day, or before. But, yet still they might have made an award, and
therefore he could not. Adjournatur.

Rex versus Episcopum Worcest', Jervason and Hinkley in Communi Banco.
See the Case put at large in Vaughan's Reports.
The Arguments of Justice Wild, Archer and Tyrrel, were as follow. The Chief
Justices Argument is here omitted, because published at large in his own
Reports.
JUstice Wild. I think the King cannot take the traverse in this Case, and this
will appear by looking upon the old Books, which were not well considered by
those who did reply, 13 H. 7. 13. 14. Pl. 18. It is said the King may choose,
either to maintain his own Title, or traverse the Title of the party, who sues
him by Petition. So 13 E. 4. 8. pl. 1. It is said when one traverses an Office,
the King may either maintain the Office, or traverse the Title shown for the
party, because no man shall recover Lands against the King without having a
Title. But there it is Resolved, That if the King join issue upon his own
Title, he cannot change issue, and traverse the Title showed for the party; Now
here is the allegation of the King, that the Advowson was in gross, and the
Defendants denying it, is in nature of joining an issue, which cannot be
receded from. But the reason why in that Case the King might wave the traverse
tendered to his Title, and traverse the Title shown for the party, is, because
the Office puts the King in actual possession; for where the King is in by
Record, or possession (for possession is enough) the party must make a Title,
if he will recover against the King, Keil. 192. pl. 3. Savages Case. It was
found by Inquisition, that whereas the Turn time out of mind used to be held at
Worcester, he being Sheriff for life, held it at Pedyl and Straight, Contra
formam Statuti de magna Charta, upon a Scire fac. upon an Information hereupon,
for forfeiting the Office, He pleads that time out mind, etc. it used to be
held at Pedyl, etc. absque hoc that it used to be held at W^^^ester: Resolved,
That the King might maintain the Inquisition, that it used to be held at
Worcester absque hoc, that it used to be held at Pedyl, etc. and the reason is,
because the King was entitled to the Forfeiture by a Record. The difference
is, where the King is Actor, as here he is, being out of possession, he must
make a Title, and prove it. But where the party is Actor he cannot fix upon his
own Title, and force the King to make good his own Title, 34 H. 8. Br. Prerog.
116. Whorewood's Case is full in point. In an Information tam quam, if the
Defendant traverse, the King cannot wave the issue so tendered. One Reason
indeed given is, because the King is not sole party. But the chief reason is,
because the King is not entitled by matter of Record: For says the Book,
There is no Office found before the Information. But upon a traverse of an
Office, and hujusmodi, says the Book, the King may do it, because he is
entitled by matter of Record; therefore in our Case the King shall not wave
the issue tendered, etc. and fly upon the matter of the Defendants Title.

Archer accordant. It must be admitted, that in this Case the King must make a
Title, because by presenting of Tim. White and also of Hinkley the Defendant,
the which was nine years since, he is put to his Quare Impedit, and is out of
possession, I do not say of the Inheritance, though that has been a question
in the old Books, V. 2. Cr. 53. But it has been adjudged, That the Inheritance
cannot be gained or divested out of the King by any Usurpations, 2 Cr. 123. 3
Cr. 241. and 519. and Green's, 6 Co. 30. a. But that he may grant away the
Inheritance of the Advowsons still, etc. But it is as clear, and agreed by all
those Books, and Boswell's Case, 6 Co. 49, 50. that in such case, he must bring
a Quare Impedit to recover the Presentation, for he is put out of possession of
that. For as my Lord Hob. 322. observes, it is one of the things, whereupon
Usurpation works more violently than upon other possessions.

Now he that is thus out of possession, and put to his Quare Impedit, must
always make a Title to himself in the Declaration, Hob. 102. and this the
Defendant cannot counterplead, but by conveighing a Title to himself, and so
avoiding the Plaintiffs alleged Title, by traverse, or confessing and
avoiding, Hob 163. Now here the Defendant has done what he could do; he has
traversed the Kings Title, why then shall (...) King depart from his own Title,
and fly upon the defect^^^ Title of the Defendant? No. Actori incumbit onus; he
must recover by his own strength, not by the Defendants weakness. The
Defendant, by traversing the Kings Title, has closed up the King, so as that he
ought to take issue, and maintain his own Title. V. 2 Cr. 651. I say therefore,
That the Kings declining his own Title, and falling upon the others, is a
departure, which is matter of substance, and it would make pleading infinite,
therefore the demurrer in this Case is good, 1 Cr. 105. is in point; and so is
Hobart's Opinion in Digby versus Fitzherbert, 103. 104. and though the Judges
are two and two in that Case, as it is there reported, yet the whole Court
agreed it afterward.

So that, were this a common persons Case, I suppose it would be agreed on all
hands. But it is insisted, that this is one of the Kings Prerogatives, that
when his Title is traversed by the party, he may either maintain his own Title
against the traverse of the party, or traverse the affirmative of the party,
Pasch. pr. C. 243. a. etc.

Answer. It is true, this is there reckoned up among many other Prerogatives of
the King. But, first, with reverence, several of them are judged no Law, as
that if the King have Title by Lapse, and he suffer another to present an
Incumbent, who dies, the King shall yet present, is counter-judged, 3 Cr. 44.
and both that and the next following point too, 7 Co. 28. a. Secondly, In the
same Case, fol. 236. there is a good Rule given, which we may make use of in
our Case, viz. the Common Law does so admeasure the Kings Title and
Prerogatives, as that they shall not take away, nor prejudice any man's
Inheritance. V. 19 E. 4. 9. 11 H. 4. 37. 13 E. 4. 8. 28 H. 6. 2. 9 H. 4. 6. F.
N. B. 152. Now my Brother Wild has given the true Answer, that when the Kings
Title appears to the Court upon Record, that Record so intitles the King, that
by his Prerogative he may either defend his own, or fall upon the other's
Title. For in all Cases where the King either by traverse, as 24 E. 3. 30. pl.
27. Keil. 172. 192. or otherwise, as by special demurrer, E. 3. Fitz. monst. de
Faits 172. falls upon a Defendants Title, It must be understood, that the King
is entitled by Record, and sometimes it is remembered, and mentioned in the
Case, Fitz. 34. That the King is in as by Office, etc. But Br. Preg. 116. the
Kings Attorney does confess the Law to be so expressly, that the King has not
this Prerogative, but where he is entitled by matter of Record.

Before 21 Jac. cap. 2. when the Kings Titles was found by any Inquisition, or
Presentment by virtue of Commissions to find out concealments, defective
Titles, etc. he exercised this Prerogative of falling upon, and traversing the
parties Titles, and much to the prejudice of the Subjects, whose Titles are
often so ancient and obscure, as they could not well be made out. Now that
Statute was made to cure this defect, and took away the severity of that
Prerogative; Ordaining, that the King should not sue, or impeach any person for
his Lands, etc. unless the Kings Titles had been duly in charge to that King or
Queen Eliz. or had stood insuper of Record within 30 years before the beginning
of that Parliament, etc. Hob. 118. 9. the King takes Issue upon the Defendants
Traverse of his Title, and could the King do otherwise, the mischief would be
very great, as my Brother observed, both to the Patron and Incumbent. The Law
takes notice of this, and had a jealousy, that false Titles would be set on
foot for the King: and therefore 25 Edw. 3. St. 3. Car. 7. and 13 R. 2. Car. 1.
and 4 H. 4. Ca. 22. enables the Ordinary and Incumbent to counterplead the
Kings Title, and to defend, sue, and recover against it. But a fortiori at
Common Law the Patron, who by his Endowment had this Inheritance, might
controvert, and Traverse the Kings Title; and it is unreasonable and
mischievous, that the Crowns possessions by Lapse, or, it may be, the mere
suggesting a Title for the King, should put the Patron to show, and maintain
his Title, when perhaps his Title is very long, consisting of 20 mesne
Conveyances; and the King may Traverse any one of them: Keilway 192. b. Pl. 3.
I conclude, I think the King ought to have taken Issue, and he not doing it,
the Demurrer is good: and that the Defendant ought to have Judgment.

Tyrrell contra. I am not satisfied but here is a Discontinuance. For the
Defendant pleads the Appendency of the Church only, not the Chapel. It is
true, he traverseth, that the Queen was not seized of both.

I deny what is affirmed, that the King by his Presentation of Timothy White,
and the present Incumbent, is out of possession. By the Judgment of reversal, 2
Cr. 123. 4. the Law at this day is, that he cannot be put out of possession of
an Advowson by 20 usurpations. A Quare Impedit is an Action of Possession; and
if he were out of possession, how could he bring it? As to this Traverse, It is
a common Erudition, that a party shall not depart, and that there shall not be
a Traverse upon a Traverse. But the King is excepted: 5 Co. 104. Pl. C. 243. a
Br. Petition 22. Prerogatives 59, 60, 69. and 116. It is agreed, where the King
is in possession, and where he is entitled by matter of Record, he may take a
Traverse upon a Traverse. And there is no Book says, that where he is in by
matter of Fact, he cannot do it. Indeed there is some kind of pregnancy at
least in the last of those Authorities. But I will cite two cases, on which I
will rely: viz. 19 E. 3. Fitz monstr. de faits, 172. which is our case. The
King in a Quare Impedit makes Title by reason of Awardship, whereby he had the
custody of the Manor, to which the Advowson belonged, and that the Father dyed
seized thereof, etc. and there is not a word that his Title was by matter of
Record. The Defendant pleads, that the Father of a Ward made a Feoffment of the
Manor to him for life, and afterward released all his right, etc. so that the
Father had nothing therein at the time of his death, and that after his death,
he the Defendant enfeoffed two men, etc. and took back an Estate to himself for
10 years, which term yet continues, and so it belongs to him to present. But he
did not show the release, but demurred in Judgment upon this, that he ought not
to show the release; and the King departs from his Count, and insists upon that
which the Defendant had confessed, that he had made a Feoffme^t, which he
having not shown by the release, as he ought to make himself more then Tenant
for life, was a Forfeiture, and therefore the heir had cause to enter, and the
King in his right, and thereupon prays Judgment; and has a Writ to the Bishop.
Cook 86. 7. 1 Inst. 304. b. The other case is 24 Ed. 3. 30. Pl. 27. which is
our very case. The King brings a Quare Impedit for a Church appendant to a
Manor, as a Guardian, the Defendant makes a Title, and traverseth the Title
alleged by the King in his Count, viz. the appendancy, the King replies, and
Traverses the Defendants Title. For this cause the Defendant demurs, and
Judgment was for the King. In this case it does not appear in the pleading,
that the King was in by matter of Record, and so it is our very case. For the
King may be in by possession by virtue of a Wardship, without matter of Record
by Entry, etc. Stamf. Prerog. 54. I rely upon these two Cases. But 7 H. 8.
Keil. 175. is somewhat to the purpose; Per Fitz. In a Ravishment of Ward by the
King, if the Defendant make a Title, and traverse the Kings Title, the Kings
Attorney may maintain the Kings Title, and Traverse the Defendants Title. I
think there is no difference between the Kings being in possession by matter of
Record, and by matter of Fact.

Again, If matter of Record be necessary, here is enough; viz. The Queens
Presentation under the Great Seal of England. And here is a descent, which is
and must be Jure Coronae. It is unreasonable, that a Subject should turn the
King out of possession by him that has no Title. This is a Prerog. Case. As to
the Statutes objected by my Brother Archer, they concern not this case. The
first enables the Patron to counterplead. But, here the Patron pleads.

The rest concern the Kings Presenting En auter droit. But here it is in his
own Right. I think the King in our case may fly upon the Defendants Title, and
there is no inconvenience in it. For the Kings Title is not a bare suggestion.
For, it is confessed by the Defendant, that the Queen did Present: But, he
alleges it was by Lapse.

For another reason, I think Judgment ought to be for the King, viz. because
the Defendant has committed the first fault. For his Bar is naught, in that he
has traversed the Queens Seisin in Gross; whereas he ought to have traversed
the Queens Presentment modo and forma. For where the Title is by a Seisin in
Gross, it is repugnant to admit the Presentment, and deny the Seisin in
Gross; because the Presentment makes it a Seisin in Gross. 10 H. 7. 27. Pl.
7. in point, and so is my Lord Buckhurst's Case in 1 Leonard 154. The traverse
here is a matter of substance. But if it be but Form, it is all one. For the
King is not within the Statute 27 El. cap. 5. So he concluded that Judgment
ought to be given for the King.

Doctor Lee's Case.
A Motion was made by Raymond for a Writ of Privilege, to be discharged from
the Office of Expenditour, to which he was elected and appointed by the
Commissioners of Sewers, in some part of Kent, in respect of some Lands he had
within the Level. He insisted that the Doctor was an Ecclesiastical person,
Archdeacon of Rochester, where his constant attendance is required. Adding,
that the Office, to which he was appointed, was but a mean Office, being in the
nature of that of a Bailiff, to receive and pay some small sums of money, and
that the Lands, in respect whereof he is elected, were let to a Tenant, V. 1.
Cr. 585. Abdy's case.

It was objected against this, that this Archdeacons Predecessors did execute
this Office: and the Court ordered, that notice should be given, and cause
shown why the Doctor should not do the like.

Afterward Rainesford and Morton only being in Court, it was ruled he should be
privileged. Because he is a Clergyman, F. B. 175. r. But I think for another
reason, viz. because the Land is in Lease, and the Tenant, if any, ought to do
the Office.

Take the Writ.

Lucy Lutterell, vid. versus George Reynell, Esquire George Turbervile Esquire, John
Cory and Ann Cory.
THe Plaintiff as Administratrix to Jane Lutterell, durante minori aetate of
Alexander Lutterell, the Plaintiffs second Son, declared against the
Defendants, in an Action of Trespass, for that they simul cum John Chapel,
etc. did take away 4000 l. of the moneys numbered of the said Jane, upon the
20th day of October, 1680. and so for seven days following the like sums, ad
damnum of 32000 l.

Upon a full hearing of Witnesses on both sides, the Jury found two of the
Defendants guilty, and gave 6000 l. damages, and the others not guilty.

A new Trial was afterward moved for, and denied.

At the Trial Mr. Attorney General excepted against the Evidence, that if it
were true, it destroyed the Plaintiffs Action, inasmuch as it amounted to prove
the Defendants guilty of Felony; and that the Law will not suffer a man to
smooth a Felony, and bring Trespass for that which is a king of Robbery.
Indeed, said he, if they had been acquitted or found guilty of the Felony, the
Action would lie; and therefore it may be maintained against Mrs. Cory, who
was, as likewise was William Maynard acquitted upon an Indictment of Felony for
this matter, but not against the rest. But my Lord Chief Baron declared, and it
was agreed, that it should not lie in the mouth of the party, to say that
himself was a Thief, and therefore not guilty of the Trespass. But, perhaps if
it had appeared upon the Declaration, the Defendant ought to have been
discharged of the Trespass.

Quaere, what the Law would be, if it appeared upon the pleading, or were found
by special Verdict.

My Lord Chapter Baron did also declare, and it was agreed, that whereas W.
Maynard, one of the Witnesses for the Plaintiff, was guilty, as appeared by his
own Evidence, together with the Defendants, but was left out of the
Declaration, that he might be a Witness for the Plaintiff, that he was a good
and legal Witness; but his credit was lessened by it, for that he swore in his
own discharge. For that when these Defendants should be convicted, and have
satisfied the Condemnation, he might plead the same in Bar of an Action brought
against himself. But those in the simul cum were no Witnesses.

Several witnesses were received and allowed, to prove that William Maynard did
at several times discourse and declare the same things, and to the like
purpose, that he testified now. And my Lord Chief Baron said, though a hearsay
was not to be allowed as a direct Evidence, yet it might be made use of to this
purpose, (viz.) to prove that William Maynard was constant to himself, whereby
his Testimony was Corroborated.

One Thorn, formerly Mr. Reynell's Servant, being Subpoened by the Plaintiff
to give Evidence at this trial, did not appear. But it being sworn by the
Exeter Waggoner, that Thorn came so far on his Journey hitherward, as
Blandford, and there fell so sick, that he was not able to travel any further,
his Depositions in Chancery in a Suit there between these parties, about this
matter, were admitted to be read.

Smith versus Smith.
ASsumpsit; The Plaintiff declared, whereas himself, and the Defendant were
Executors of the last Will and Testament of J. S. and whereas the Defendant had
received so much of the money, which was the Testators, a moiety whereof
belonged to the Plaintiff; and whereas the Plaintiff Pro recuperatione inde
Sectasset the Defendant, that he the said Defendant, in consideration that the
Plaintiff abstineret a Secta praedicta prosequenda and monstraret Quoddam
computum did promise him 100 l. and avers, that he did forbear, etc. and quod
ostentavit quoddam Computum praedictum.

After a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, by
Jones for the Defendant as follows; Though I do not see how that which one
Executor claims against another, is recoverable at all, unless in Equity; yet I
shall insist only on this, that here is no good consideration alleged; for it
is only alleged in general, that the Plaintiff Sectasset. It is not said so
much as that it was legali modo, in a legal way, whereas it ought to be set
forth in what Court it was, etc. that so the Court might know, whether it were
in a Court which had Jurisdiction therein or no; and so are all the Presidents
in Actions concerning forbearance to sue. In point of Evidence the first thing
to be shown in such a case as this, is, that there was a Suit, etc.

Saunders for the Plaintiff, That being the prime thing necessary to be proved,
since the Verdict is found for us, must be intended to have been proved. But,
however, if this consideration be idle and void, yet the other maintains the
Action; and so the Court agreed, viz. that one was enough. It was agreed, that
if the Plaintiff averred only that he had showed Quoddam Computum, that unless
the consideration had been to show any account, it had been naught: for quoddam
is aliud. Die. 70. nu. 38, 39. 1 H. 7. 9. but it being Quoddam computum
praedict', it was well enough. Computum praedictum refers it to the particular
account discoursed of between them.

It was agreed, that it had been best to have said Monstravit in the averment,
that it might agree with the allegation of the consideration. But yet the word
ostentavit, though most commonly by a Metonimy, it signifies to boast, yet
signifies also to show, or to show often, as appears by all the Dictionaries:
and therefore it is well enough. Take Judgment.

Sir Francis Duncombe's Case.
IT was held, If a Writ of Error abate in Parliament, or the like, and another
Writ of Error be brought in the same Court, it is no Supersedeas. But if the
first Writ of Error be in Cam^ Scacc', etc. and then a Writ be brought in
Parliament, etc. it is a Supersedeas by the Opinion of all the Judges, against
my Lord Cook, vide Heydon versus Godsalve, 2 Cr. 342.

Brown versus London.
INdeb' Assumpsit for fifty three pounds due to the Plaintiff upon a Bill of
Exchange drawn upon the Defendant, and accepted by him, according to the custom
of the Merchants, etc. After a Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved in
arrest of Judgment, that though an Action upon the Case does well lie in such
case, upon the Merchants, yet an Indeb' Assumpsit may not be brought thereupon.

Winnington. I think it does well lie. Debt lies against a Sheriff upon levying
and receiving of money upon an Execution, Hob. 206. Now this is upon a Bill of
Exchange accepted, and also upon the Defendants having effects of the drawer in
his hands, having read the value; for so it must be intended, because otherwise
this general Verdict could not be found.

Rainesford. This is the very same with Milton's Case, lately in Scacc', where
it was adjudged, that an Indeb' Assumpsit would not lie. In this case he added,
that the Verdict would not help it; for though my Lord Chief Baron said it were
well, if the Law were otherwise, yet he and we all agreed that a Bill of
Exchange accepted, etc. was indeed a good ground for a special Action upon the
case: but that it did not make a Debt; first, because the acceptance is but
conditional on both sides. If the money be not received, it returns back upon
the drawer of the Bill. He remains liable still, and this is but collateral.
Secondly, because the word Onerabilis does not imply Debt. Thirdly, Because the
case is primae Impressionis: there was no President for it. Then Offley who was
of Council pro Defendente in the case at bar said, that he was of Council for
the Plaintiff in the Exchequer case, and that therein direction was given to
search Presidents; and that they did search in this Court, and in Guildhall,
and that there was a Certificate from the Attorneys and Prothonotaries there,
that there was no President of such an Action. Adjornatur.

Twisden. I remember an Action upon the Case was brought, for that the
Defendant had taken away his Goods, and hidden them in such secret places, that
the Plaintiff could not come at them to take them in Execution; and adjudged it
would not lie.

Watkins versus Edwards.
ACtion of Covenant brought by an Infant per Guardian' suum, for that the
Plaintiff being* bound Apprentice to the Defendant by Indenture, etc. the
Defendant did not keep, maintain, educate, and teach him in his Trade of a
Draper, as he ought; but turned him away. The Defendant pleads that he was a
Citizen and Freeman of Bristol; and that at the General Sessions of the Peace
there held, there was an Order that he should be discharged of the Plaintiff,
for his disorderly living, and beating his Master and Mistress, and that this
Order was enrolled by the Clarke of the Peace, as it ought to be, etc. To which
the Plaintiff demurred.

It was said for the Plantiff, that the Statute 5 El. cap. 4. does not give the
Justices, etc. any power to discharge a Master of his Apprentice, in case the
fault be in the Apprentice, but only to minister due Correction and Punishment
to him.

Cur^. That has been overruled here. The Justices, etc. have the same power
of discharging upon complaint of the Master, as upon complaint of the
Apprentice. Else that Master would be in a most ill case that were troubled
with a bad Apprentice: for he could by no means get rid of him. Secondly, it
was urged on the Plaintiffs behalf, that he had not, for ought that appears,
any notice or summons to come and make his defense. V. 11 Co. 99. Baggs case:
And this very Statute speaks of the appearance of the party, and the hearing
the matter before the Justices, etc.

Saunders pro Defendente. In this case the Justices are Judges, and it being
pleaded, that such a Judgment was given, that is enough, and it shall be
intended all was regular.

Twisden and Rainesford. That which we doubt is, whether the Defendant ought
not to have gone to one Justice, etc. first, as the Statute directs, that he
might take order and direction in it; and then, if he could not compound and
agree it, he might have applied himself to the Sessions. For the Statute
intended there should be, if possible, a Composure in private; and the power of
the Session is Conditional, viz. if the one Justice cannot end it. In Case of a
Bassard Child they cannot go to the Sessions per Saltum; and we doubt they
cannot in this Case. It is a new Case. And then the matter will be, whether
this ought to be set down in the Pleading. Adjornatur.

Rex versus Ledginham.
INformation setting forth, that he was Lord of the Manor of Ottery St. Mary
in the County of Devonshire, wherein there were many Copyholders and
Freeholders, and that he was a man of an unquiet mind, and did make
unreasonable Distresses upon several of his Tenants, and so was communis
oppressor and perturbator pacis. It was proved at the Trial, that he had
distrained four Oxen for three pence, and six Cows for eight pence, being
Amercements for not doing Suits of Court, and that he was Communis oppressor
and perturbator pacis. The Defendant was found guilty.

It was moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Information is ill laid; First,
It is said he disquieted his Tenants, and vexed them with unreasonable
distresses. It is true, that is a fault, but not punishable in this way. For by
the Statute of Marlebridge; cap. 4. V. 2 In. 106, 7. he shall be punished by
grievous Amercements, and where the Statute takes care for due punishment, that
method must be observed. 2. As to the matter it self, they do not set forth how
much he did take, nor from whom; so that the Court cannot judge whether it is
unreasonable or no, nor could we take Issue upon them. 3. As to the words
Communis oppressor and perturbator pacis, they are so general, that no
Indictment will lie upon them: 2 To. 79. Jones 302. Cornwalls Case; which
indeed goes to both the last points.

Twisden. Communis oppressor, etc. is not good, such general words will never
make good an Indictment, save only in that known Case of a Barretor, for
Communis Barrectator is a term which the Law takes notice of, and understands;
It is as much, as I have heard Judges say, as a common Knave, which contains
all Knavery. For the other point, an Information will not lie for taking
outrageous distresses. It is a private thing, for the which the Statute gives a
remedy, (viz.) by an Action upon the Statute tam quam.

Cur^. It is naught. Adjorn.

Roberts versus Marriot.
AN Action of Debt brought upon a Bond to submit to an award. The Defendant
pleads, Nullum fecerunt arbitrium. The Plaintiff replies, and sets forth an
award made by two Prebends of Westminster, and that it was delivered to the
party, according to the condition of the Bond, etc. The Defendant rejoyns, that
it was not delivered, etc. Et hoc paratus est verificare. The Plaintiff demurs.
Serjant Baldwynne and Winington pro defend. Jones pro querente. Cur. The
Defendant having first pleaded, Nullum fecer' arb. and then in his Rejoinder
that it was not delivered (which is a Confession that there was an award made)
has committed a departure; and so it has been judged. If he had pleaded Nullum
fec^ arbitrium, etc. absque hoc that it was tendered, etc. it had been naught:
and it is as bad now. Also when the Plaintiff replies, that the award was
delivered, and the Defendant says, It was not, he should have concluded to the
Country, and not as he does, hoc paratus est verificare; for otherwise the
party might go in infinitum; and there would be no end of pleading. Note, there
was an Exception taken to the award (viz.) that it was awarded that there
should be a release of all Specialties among other things; whereas Specialties
were not submitted.

Cur. Then the award is void as to that only. But indeed, if the breach had
been assigned in not releasing the Specialties, it had been against the
Plaintiff. But now take Judgment.

Wood versus Davies.
TRov. and conv. de tribus struibus foeni, Anglice, Ricks of Hay. Moved in
arrest of Judgment, that it was too uncertain. For no man could tell how much
was meant by strues. It was urged it should have been so many Cart loads, or
the like. For loads was adjudged uncertain in Glyn's time here. But Rainsford
and Moreton, who only were in Court, judged it well enough.

John Wooton versus Penelope Hele. Vide Mich. 21 Rot. 210.
COvenant upon a Fine. The Plaintiff declares, That whereas quidem finis se
levavit in Curia nuper pretens. Custodum libertatis Angliae authoritate
Parliamenti de Banco apud Westmonnast', etc. a die Sancti Michaelis in unum
mensem anno Domini, 1649. Coram Olivero St. John, Johanne Pulison, Petro
Warburton, and Leonard' Atkins, Justic^, etc. inter praed. Johannem Wotton,
etc. quer' and praed' Johannem Hele, and Penelopen Hele per nomina Johannis
Hele Armigeri, and Penelopes uxoris ejus deforc^ inter alia de uno Messuagio,
etc. Per quem finem praed' Johannes Hele and Penelope concesserunt praed.
tenementa praed. John. W. habendum and tenendum, etc. pro termino 99 annorum
proximorum post decessum Gulielmi Wootton, etc. si Johannes Wootton modo
querens and Gracia Wootton tamdiu vixerint, aut eorum Alter tamdiu vixerit, and
praed' J. H. and Penelope and haered. ipsius Johannis Warrant^ praed. Jo. W.
praed' tenementa, etc. Contra omnes homines pro toto termino praed. prout per
Recordum finis praed. etc. before apparet. Virtute cujus quidem finis praed.
J. W. fuit possessionat^ de interesse praed. termini, etc. and sic inde
possessionat^ existens praed' Guliel W. etc. postea, scil. sexto die, etc.
obierunt, post quorum mortem praed. J. W. in tenementa praed. etc. intravit and
fuit inde possessionat^, etc. sic inde possessionat^ existens praed. J. H.
postea, scil. etc. obiit and praed. Penelope ipsum supervixit and idem Johannes
W. in facto dicit quod quidem Hugo Stowel Armiger, post commensationem termini
praed. and durante termino illo and ante diem Impetrationis hujus Billae, scil.
etc. habens legale jus and titulum ad tenementa praed. etc. in and super
possessionem termini praed. ipsius J. W. in eisdem intravit ipsumque J. W.
contra voluntatem ipsius J. W. per debitum Legis processum a possessione and
occupatione tenementorum praed. ejecit, expulit, and amovit, ipsumque J. W. sic
inde expuls. a possessione sua inde custodivit and Extra tenuit and adhuc Extra
tenet. Contra formam and effectum finis and warrant^ praed. and sic idem praed.
J. W. dicit quod praed. Penel post mortem praed. J. W. licet sepius requisit^,
etc. Conventionem suam praed. Warrant^ praed. non tenuit sed infregit, sed J.
H. eidem J. W. tenere omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat ad dam^, etc. 600 l.
The Defendant pleads, Representando quod eadem Penelope conventionem suam
Warrant^ praed. a tempore levationis finis praed. ex part sua custodiend.
hucusque been and fideliter custodivit, representandoque quod praed. Hugo
Stowell praed. tempore intrationis ipsius Hugonis in tenementa praed. non
habuit aliquod Legale Jus aut titulum ad eadem tenementa, etc. pro placito
eadem Penel dicit, quod praed. H. Stow. ipsum Johannem a possessione and
occupatiane tenementor. non ejecit, expulit, and amovit, prout praed. Johannes
superius versus eam narravit, and hoc parat^ est verificare. Upon this issue
was taken, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff was found, and 300 l. damages. And
upon a motion in arrest of Judgment, the Cause was spoken to three or four
times.

Jones pro Defendent^. 1. It is considerable, whether an Action will lie
against a Feme upon a Covenant in a Fine levied by her, when Covert-Baron. It
would be inconvenient that Land should be unalienable, and therefore the Law
enables a Feme Covert to levy a Fine. Which Fine shall work by Estoppel, and
pass against her a good Interest. But to make her liable to a personal Action
thereupon, to answer damages, etc. it were hard, and it is Casus primae
impressionis. For the Plaintiff it was said, there is little question but an
Action of Covenant will well lie upon this warranty. The Law enables a Feme
Covert to corroborate the Estate she passes, and to do all things incident. If
she levy a Fine of her Inheritance, she may be vouched, or a Warrantia Chartae,
etc. thereupon be had against her, and so is Roll versus Osborn, Hob. 20. and
if she can thus bind her Land, a fortiori she may subject her self to a
Covenant, as in the Case at the Bar. If a Husband and Wife make a Lease for
years, and she accept the rent after his death, she shall be liable to a
Covenant.

This Point was agreed by the Council on both sides, that a Covenant in this
Case would lie against her, and so this Court agreed.

Twisd. added, That there was no question but a Covenant would lie upon a Fine.
For (says he) sealing is not always necessary to found an Action of Covenant.
Thus Covenant lies against the Kings Lessee by Patent, upon his Covenant in the
Patent, though we know there is no sealing by the said Lessee.

Secondly, It was urged on the Defendants behalf, That the breach of Covenant
is not well assigned, for it is not showed what Title Stowell had. It is not
only participially expressed, Habens Legale, etc. but what is said, is
altogether general and uncertain: Jus and Legalem titulum ad tenementa praed',
so that the breach assigned is in effect no more but that Stowell entered, and
so the Covenant was broken. If a man plead Indemn. Conservat^, he must show
how. Gyll. versus Gloss. Yelverton 227. 8. 2 Cr. 312. Debt for Rent on a
parol-Lease, the Defendant pleads, That the Plaintiff nil habuit in tenementis
praedictis, unde dimissionem praedictam facere potuit. The Defendant replies,
Quod habuit, etc. in general, without showing in special what Estate he had,
that so it might appear to the Court, that he had sufficient in the Lands
whereout to make the Lease; and therefore the Replication was adjudged naught.
It is true, it was adjudged, That after the Verdict, it was helped by the Stat.
of Jeoffails. But that I conceive was, because the issue, though not very
formal, yet was upon the main point, viz. Whether the Lessor had an Estate in
the Tenements or no. For the true reason why a Verdict does help in such a
Case, is, because it is supposed that the matter left out, was given in
Evidence, and that the Judges did direct accordingly; or else the Verdict could
not have been found. So in our Case, If the issue had been, Whether Stowell had
Right, etc. it might have been supposed and intended by his special Title and
Estate made out and proved by trial. But here the issue going off on a
Collateral point, it cannot be intended, that any such matter was given in
Evidence.

Jones and Pollexfen for the Plaintiff. This Objection is against all the
Precedents, by which it appears, that alleging generally as we do, habens
Legale Jus and Titulum is good. It is sufficient for a man to allege, that the
Covenantor had no power to demise, or was not seized, etc. without showing any
cause why, or that any other person was seized, etc. 9 Co. 61. 2 Cr. 304. 369.
70. Co. Ent. 177. a.
It it to be inquired upon Evidence, Whether the party had a good Title or no,
and so the Court agreed.

Thirdly, Saunders for the Defendant said, Though the Plaintiff was very wary,
bringing in the Right of Stowell with a Participle only, so that we could not
take issue upon it; we could only protest: yet I agreed, that having taken
issue upon one Point, we must admit, and do admit the rest of the matter in the
Declaration. But that is only as it is alleged. Now here therefore we must
admit, that Stowell had Right and Title, etc. But we do not admit that he had a
Title precedent to this Fine, or had right otherwise than from and under the
Plaintiff himself; for that is not alleged. And it shall never be intended, no
not after Verdict, that Stowell had good and Eigne Right and Title, before the
Lease granted by the Fine, but the contrary shall be intended. And for that I
rely upon Kirby versus Hansaker, 2 Cr. 315. By all Judges of C. B. and Scacc^
in Came. Scacc^ in Point. Nay that is a stronger Case than ours is. For there
the issue which was found for the Plaintiff, was, that the Recovery by Essex,
who answers to Stowell in our Case, was not by Covin, but by lawful Title. And
yet, because it was not alleged, that he had a good and Eigne Title, it was
held to be ill, and not helped, and the Judgment was reversed. The saying that
Stowell ejected him, etc. Contra formam and effectum Finis and Warrant^ praed',
or if it had been Contra formam and effectum Conventionis praed', is absurd,
and helps nothing. For Stowell could not do so, because he is not party to the
Fine.

Jones for the Plaintiff. It can never be intended that Stowell entered, etc. by
a Title under us, because it is alleged to be Contra formam, and effectum
Finis and Warrant' praed', and Contra voluntatem ipsius J. W. and eum a
possessione sua Custodivit, etc. had it been by Lease under us, the Defendant
should have pleaded it. I doubt whether the Defendant could have demurred. But
certainly, now the Jury have found all this, it can never be intended as they
would have it: as to the Case, that has been cited, between Kirby and Hansaker;
I say it is not so clearly alleged there, as here: It is not said there, that
the Lessee was possessed, and that the Recoveror entered into, and upon his
Possessions; and ejected him. 2. These words Contra formam, etc. are not in
that Case. 3. In that Case the Court of Kings Bench was of Opinion, That the
Verdict had made it good. 4. The Roll of that Case is not to be found, here is
a man will make Oath that he has searched four years before and after the time
when that Case is supposed to have been and cannot find it.

Rainsford and Moreton were at first of Opinion, That the Verdict had helped
it. For says Rainsford, If Stowell had Title under the Plaintiff, it could not
have been found, that there was a breach of Covenant. But afterward they said,
that Kirby and Hansaker's Case came so close to it, that it was not to be
avoided, and they were unwilling to make new Presidents.

Twisden. That Book is so expressed, that it is not an ordinary authority, it
is not to be waved. But I was of the same Opinion, before that Book was cited.
For here it is possible Stowell might have a Lease from Wootton since the Fine.
Now the warranty does not extend to Puisne Titles. The Defendant should have
said that Stowell had Priorem Titulum, etc. when a good Title is not set forth
in the Declaration to entitle the Plaintiff to his Action, it shall never be
helped. There was an Action upon the Stat. of Monopolies, for that the
Defendant entered, I suppose, by pretext of some Monopoly-Commission, etc. and
detinuit certain goods. But it was not said, they were his the Plaintiffs, and
though we had a Verdict, yet we could never have Judgment. In 3 Car. there was
an Action brought upon a Promise to give so much with a Child, quantum daret to
any other Child; and it was alleged, that dedit so much, and because that that
it might be before the time of the promise, it was held naught after Verdict.

It may be the Roll of Kirby versus Hansaker is not to be found, no more than
the Roll of Middleton versus Clesman, reported, Yelv. 65. But certainly Justice
Crook and Yelverton were men of that Integrity, they would never have reported
such Cases, unless there had been such. There are many losses, miscarriages and
mistakes of this kind. Pray, where will you find the Roll of the Decree for
Titles in London, yet I have heard the Judges say, They verily believe it is
upon a wrong Roll.

Nil Capiat per Bill.

Rex versus Neville.
INdictment for erecting a Cottage for habitation contra Stat. quasht, because
it was not said, That any inhabited it. For else it is no offense, per
Rainsford and Moreton, qui soli aderant.

Jemy versus Norrice.
A Writ of Error was brought of a Judgment given in the Common Pleas, in an
Action upon a quantum meruit, for Wares sold. First, One of them is unum par
Chirothecarum; But it is not said of what sort. Twisden. It is good enough
however, so it has been held de Coriis, without saying Bovinis, etc. de Libris,
without saying what Books they were. Secondly, Another is parcella fili: which,
it was said, was uncertain; unless it had been made certain by an Anglice. For
though it was agreed it had been good in an Indeb. assumpsit, yet in this Case
there must us a certainty of the debt. Such a general word cannot be good, no
more than in a Trover. Twisden. If an Indeb. assumpsit should be brought for 20
l. for Wares sold, and no Evidence should be given of an agreement for the
certain price. I should direct it to be found especially. But parcella fili
seems to be as uncertain, as paires of Hangings, Cur. It is doubtful. But
however, affirmetur nisi, etc.

Foxwist and al. versus Tremayneaut, Trin. 21 Rot. 1512. V. Super. --
FOr the Plaintiff. The two parties, who are Infants, may well sue by Attorney,
as they do. The Authorities are clear, 2 Cr. 441. 1 To. 288. Weld versus Rumney
in 1650. Styles 318. We beg leave to mention especially what you Mr. Justice
Twisden said there; though indeed we do not know, nor can be very confident
that it is reported right. Twisden. I do protest not one word of it true they
went about. But 3 Cr. 541. V. 5 Co. 29. 6 Co. 67. 6.
and especially 378. is express in our Point. In Rot. 288. number. 2. Indeed there
is a Quaere made, because an Infant might by this means be amerced. But that
reason is a mistake, for an Infant shall not be amerced, Dyer 338. 1 Inst. 127.
a. 1 To. 214.

Moreton. I take the Law to be, that where an Infant sues with others in auter
droit, as here, he shall sue by Attorney; for all of them together represent
the Testator. I ground my self upon the Authorities, which have been cited, and
Yelv. 130. Also it is for the Infants advantage to sue by Attorney. But if he
be a Defendant he may appear by Guardian, Popham 112.

I think the parties may all join in this suit, though perhaps in Hatton versus
Maskew they could not: For in that Case it appeared that the wife only, who was
Plaintiff, was Executrix. So he concluded, that Judgment ought to be given for
the Plaintiffs.

Rainsford accordant. This Case is stronger than where a single person is made
Executor or Administrator. For though To. 288. number. 2. makes a Quaere of that,
yet Number. 3. which is our Case, he agrees clearly with the Countess of Rutlands
Case, in 3 Cr. 377. 8. That the Infant as well as the other Executors shall sue
by Attorney. The Reasons objected on the contrary are, That an Infant cannot
make an Attorney, and that he may be prejudiced hereby. I answer, That the
Executors of full age have influence upon the Infants, and they are entrusted
to order and manage the whole business. V. 1 Leon 74.
And therefore Administration durante minoritate shall not be granted, so in
this Case, he shall have privilege to sue by Attorney, because he is
accompanied with those which are of full age. I conclude, I have not heard of
any Authority against my Opinion: and how we can go over all the Authorities
cited for it, I do not know.

Twisden contra. This is an Action upon the Case, for that the Defendant was
indebted for damages clear received to the Testator's Use. And indeed, I do not
see otherwise, how it would lie. Two questions have been made: First, Whether
all the Executors may, or must join? I confess I have heard nothing against
this, viz. but that they may join. But I cannot so easily as my Brothers
slubber over all the Authorities cited (viz.) Hatton versus Maskew, which, I
confess, is a full authority for this that they need not join. The Case was
thus; The Testator recovers a Judgment, and dies, making his Will thus. Also, I
devise the residue of my Estate to my two Daughters, and my Wife, whom I make
my Executrix. I confess I cannot tell why, but the Spiritual Court did judge
them all, both the two Daughters, as well as the Wife, to be Executrices; and
therefore we the Judges must take them to be so. The Wife alone proves the Will
with a reservata potestate to the Daughters, when they should come in. But this
makes nothing at all in this Case; I think this is according to their usual
form. The Wife alone sues a Scire facias upon this Judgment, and therein sets
forth this whole matter, viz. that there were two other Executrices, which were
under seventeen, etc. It was adjudged for the Plaintiff, and affirmed in a Writ
of Error in Came. Scacc^, that the Scire facias was well brought by her alone.
But first, I cannot see how a Writ of Error should lie in that Case in Came.
Scacc^; For it is not a Cause within 27 Eliz. 2. What reason is there for
Judgment? a reason may be given, that before an Executor comes to seventeen, he
is no Executor. But I say he is quoad esse, though not quoad Excecutionem. A
Wife Administratrix under seventeen shall join with her Husband in an Action;
and why shall not the Infants as well in our Case? Yelv. 130. is express that
the Infant must join, and be named. It is clear, that no Administration durante
minore aetate can be committed in this Case. For all the Executors make but one
person, and therefore why may not all join? 2. Admitting they may join, whether
the Infants may sue by Attorney? I hold that in no Case an Infant shall sue or
be sued either in his own, or auter droit, by Attorney. There are but four ways
by which any man can sue; In propria persona, per Attornatum, per Guardianum,
and per Prochein amy. 1 To. 747. aut. 340. 400. post. 747.
An Infant cannot sue in propria persona; That was adjudged in Dawkes versus
Peyton. It was an excellent Case, and there were many notable Points in it.
First, It was Resolved, That a Writ of Error might be brought in this Court
upon an Error in Fact in the Petty Bagg. 2. That the Entry being general
(venit such a one) it shall he intended to be in propia persona. 3. That it was
Error for the Infant in that Case, to appear otherwise than by a Guardian. 4.
That the Error was not helped by the Statute of Jeoffails. In a Case between
Colt and Sherwood, Mich. 1649. an Infant Administrator sued and appeared per
Guardianum; and it appeared upon the Record that he was above seventeen years
of age. I was of Council in it, and we insisted it was Error, but it was
adjudged, That he appeared as he ought to appear; and that he ought not to
appear by Attorney. And the Reasons given were; First, Because an Infant cannot
make an Attorney by reason of his inability. Secondly, Because by this means an
Infant might be amerced pro falso Clamore. For when he appears by Attorney non
constat; unless it happen to be specially set forth, that he is an Infant, and
so he is amerced at all adventures; and to relieve himself against this he has
no remedy, but by a Writ of Error. For Error in Fact cannot be assignd ore
tenus. And it were well worth the Cost to bring a Writ of Error to take off an
amercement.

But it is said, That the Infants may appear by Attorney in this Case, because
they are coupled and joined in company with those of full age. I think that
makes no difference, for that reason would make such appearance good, in case
that they were all Defendants. But it is agreed, That if an Infant be Defendant
with others who are of full age, he cannot appear by Attorney. The reason is
the same in both Cases. If an Infant and two men of full age join in a
Feoffment, and make a Letter of Attorney, etc. this is not good, nor can in any
sort take away the imbecility which the Law makes in an Infant.

I conclude, I think the Plaintiffs ought to join; but the Infants ought to
appear by Guardian. But since my two Brothers are of another mind, as to the
last Point, there must be Judgment that the Defendant respondeat ouster.

Nota, Coleman argued for the Defendant; his Argument, which ought to have been
inserted above, was to this effect: First, These five cannot join; had there
been but one Executor, and he under seventeen years, the Administrator durant^
minor^, etc. ought to have brought the Action, 5 Co. 29. a. But since there are
several Executors, and some of them of full age, there can be no Administration
durant' minor^. Those of full age must Administer for themselves, and the
Infants to. But the course is, that Executors of full age prove the Will, and
the other, that is under age, shall not come in till his age of seventeen
years. But now the question is, How this Action should have been brought? I say
according to the President of Hatton versus Maskew, which was in Came. Scacc^,
Mich. 15 Car. 2. Rot. 703. wherein the Executor who was of full age brougt the
Scire fac^, but set forth that there were other two Executors who were under
age, and therefore they which were of full age pray Judgment. It was resolved
the Scire fac^ was well brought, and they agreed, That the Cases in Yelverton
130. was good Law; because in that Case it was not set forth specially in the
Declaration, that there was another Executor under age. So that they Resolved,
That the Executor of full age could not bring the Action without naming the
others. 2. However the Infants ought to sue by Guardian, and where Rolls and
other Books say, that where some are of age, and some under, they may all sue
by Artorney: It is to be understood of such as are indeed under 21, but above
17. Respondeas ouster.

After this the Suit was Compounded.

Term. Pasch. 22 Car. II. Regis.
The great Case in Cancellaria, between Charles Fry and Ann his Wife, against
George Porter.
Resolved,

That there is no Relief in Equity against the Forfeiture of Land limited over
by Devise in Marrying, without consent, etc. Many particulars concerning
Equity.

THe Case was; Montjoy Earl of Newport was seized of an house called
Newport-house, etc. in the County of Middlesex, and had three Sons, who were
then living, and two Daughters, Isabel married to the Earl of Banbury with her
Fathers consent (who had issue A. the Plaintiff) and Ann married to Mr. Porter,
without her Fathers Consent (who had issue D.) both these Daughters dyed. The
Earl of Newport made his Will in this manner: I give and bequeath to my dear
wife the Lady Ann Countess of Newport, all that my House called Newport-house
and all other my Lands, etc. in the County of Middlesex, for her life. And
after her death I give and bequeath the premises to my Grandchild Ann
Knollis, viz. the Plaintiff, and to the heirs of her body. Provided always, and
upon condition that she marry with the consent of my said Wife, and the Earl of
Warwick, and the Earl of Manchester, or of the major part of them. And in case
she marry without such consent, or happen to dye without Issue, Then I give and
bequeath it to George Porter, viz. the Defendant. The Earl dyed. Ann the
Plaintiff married Charles the Plaintiff, she being then about fourteen or
fifteen years old, without the consent of either of the Trustees. And thereupon
now a Bill was preferred to be relieved against this Condition and Forfeiture,
because she had no notice of this Condition and Limitation made to her, etc. To
this the Defendant had demurred, but that was overruled. Afterward there were
several Depositions, etc. made and testified on each side, the effect of which
was this. On the Plaintiffs part it was proved by several, that it was always
the Earls intention, that the Plaintiff should have this Estate, and that they
never heard of this purpose to put any Condition upon her; and believed that he
did not intend to give away the Inheritance from her. But that this Clause in
the Will was only in terrorem, and Cautionary, to make her the more obsequious
to her Grandmother. The two Earls swore that they had no notice of this Clause
in the Will; but if they had, they think it possible such reasons might have
been offered, as might have induced them to give their consents to the
Marriage; and that now they do consent to, and approve of the same. Some proof
was made, that the Countess of Newport had some design that the Plaintiff
should not have this Estate, but that the Defendant should have it. But at last
even she, (viz. the Countess) was reconciled, and did declare that she forgave
the Plaintiffs Marriage, and that she showed great affection to a Child which
the Plaintiff had, and directed, that when she was dead, the Plaintiff and her
Child should be let into the possession of the premises, and should enjoy
them, etc. It was proved also, that when there had been a Treaty concerning the
Marriage between my Lord Morpeth and the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff would not
marry him, her Grandmother said she should marry where she would; she would
take no further care about her, (the Countess was dead at the time of this
Suit:) It was proved that Mr. Fry was of a good Family, and that the Defendant
had 5000 l. appointed and provided for him, by his Grandfather, by the same
Will.

On the Defendants part, It was sworn by the said late Countess of Newport,
viz. In an answer made formerly to a Bill brought against her by the now
Defendant for preferring of Testimony (which was ordered to be read) that the
Marriage was private, and without her consent and approbation, and that she did
not conceive it to be a fit and proportionable Marriage, he being a younger
Brother, and having no Estate.

The like was sworn by the Earl of Portland, the said Countesses then Husband,
and that it appeared she leapt over a Wall (by means of a Wheel-Barrow set up
against it) to go to be married, and that as soon as the Trustees did know of
the Marriage, they did disavow and dislike it, and so declared themselves
several times, and said, That had they had any hint of it, they would have
prevented it.

Others swore that the Earl of Portland declared upon the day of her going
away, That he never consented thereto, and that the Countess desired then, that
he would not do any thing like it, and that the Earl of Warwick said, He would
have lost one of his Arms rather then have consented to the said Marriage.

On hearing of this Cause before the Master of the Rolls, viz. Sir Harbottle
Grimstone, Baronet, the Plaintiff obtained a decretal Order, (viz.) That Anne
the Plaintiff and her Heirs should hold the Premises quietly against the
Defendant and his Heirs, and that there should be an Injunction perpetual
against the Defendant, and all claiming under him.

And now there was an Appeal thereupon, and re-hearing before Sir Orlando
Bridgman, Knight, then Lord Keeper, assisted by the two Lord Chief Justices,
and the Chief Baron, before whom it was argued thus:

Sergeant Maynard. The Plaintiff ought not to have relief in this Case. The
Plaintiffs Mother had a sufficient provision by the Earl of Newport's Care. And
therefore there is less reason that this Estate should be added to the
Daughter. The noble Lords, the Trustees, when the thing was fresh, did
disapprove the Marriage, however they may consent thereunto now. The Devise was
to the Plaintiff, but in tail, and afterward to the Defendant. We disparage
not Mr. Fry in blood, nor Family; But people do not marry for that only, but
for Recompense and like Fortune.

There was a public Fame or Report (it is to be presumed) of this Will in the
house; and were there not, yet it was against her Duty, and against Nature,
that she should decline, asking her Grand-Mothers consent; and Mr. Fry in
Honor and Conscience ought to have asked it; And therefore this practice ought
not to receive the least encouragement in Equity. It Is true, when there was a
Demurrer, it was overruled, because the Bill prayed to be relieved against a
Forfeiture, for which there might be good cause in Equity. But now it does not
appear there is any in the Case. The Estate is now in the Defendant, and that
not by any act of his own, but by the Devisor and the Plaintiff, this is a
Limitation, not a Condition. For my Lord Newport had Sons; It is somewhat of
the same effect with a Condition, though it is not so. We have a Title by the
Will of the dead, and the act of the other party, without fraud or other act of
us, and therefore it ought not to be defeated.

I take a difference between a devise of Land and money. For Land is not
originally devisable, though Money is. By the Civil Law, and amongst civil
Lawyers, it has been made a question, Whether there shall be Relief against
such a Limitation in a Devise. But be that how it will, Chattels are small
things, but a Freehold settled ought not to be divested thus. No man can make a
Limitation in his Will better and stronger to disappoint his Devise,
conditionally than this is made. If my Lord Newport had been alive, would he
have liked such a practice upon his Grand-daughters as want of Notice? In
Organ's Case and Sir Julius Caesar's Case, there was a Grant to an Infant, on
condition to pay 10 s. and no Notice given thereof before 'twas payable; yet
because no body was bound to give notice, it was adjudged against the Infant.

Sir Heneage Finch Solicitor General. The Witnesses who swear that the Earl
said, He would give the Estate to her, prove nothing to the purpose. For he did
so, but upon a condition, That they did not hear. The after-consent of the
Earls or the Countess ought not to make it good; which consent at last perhaps
was extorted by importunity or compassion. For at first they disapproved the
Marriage. Marrying without consent, and dying without issue, are coupled in the
same Line, and the Estate shall as effectually pass over to the Defendant upon
the one Limitation as the other.

For such consent is matter ex post facto, and suspitiously to be scanned; For
we ought in this Case by Law to proceed strictly, and not derogate from my Lord
Newport's intent, which plainly appears by the letter of his Will, that his
Grandchild should ask consent of such, he had thereby appointed to consent
before her Marriage were solemnized, the actual solemnization of which was an
act so permanent, that it would admit of no alteration or dissolution: An act
of such force and efficacy, tending clearly and immediately to the ruin of
their Right and Title to the Estate in question, and rendering it wholly
incapable of Reviver by any other means than what the Common and Civil Laws of
this Realm do permit. The post-consent therefore will not avail the Plaintiffs
in this Court. Otherwise the Defendant claiming by this Limitation, should have
indeed advantage, but such as is inconsiderable, being liable to alteration by
the pleasure of this Court. And for a strict observation of the Testators
words, the same ought to be in Equity as well as at Law. What great respect the
old Heathens paid to the Wills of deceased persons may appear in these
following Verses.

Sed Legum Servanda fides, suprema voluntas,
Quod mandat, fierique jubet, parere necesse est.
The Countess saying likely in passion, That she might marry whom she would,
etc. did not amount to a dormant Warrant to her to marry without consent. I am
upon Conjecture still, that the Plaintiff will insist upon these particulars,
for it looks as if they would, because they read them. Doubtless the primary
intention of the Clause was in terrorem. But the Secondary was, that if she
offended, she should undergo the penalty. His intention is to be gathered out
of the words only, and what ever they say the Earl intended, does not press the
Question. Our Freehold is settled in us by virtue of an Act of Parliament. I
lay it down for a Foundation. That a Father may settle his Estate; so as that
the Issue shall be deprived of it for Disobedience, and not be relievable in
Equity. And now it is not possible that any Council could advise a man to do it
stronger than it is done in this Case. And shall a Child break these Bonds, and
look Disobedience in the face here? V. 1 Cr. 476. post 694. 696.
If it had been only provided that she should marry with the consent, etc. and
no further, it might have been somewhat: But since he goes on, and makes a
Limitation over, etc. he becomes his own Chancellor, and upon this difference
are all the Presidents, and even those of devising portions, (viz.) devising
them over or not, as I have understood. Infancy can be no excuse in case of the
breach of a condition of an Estate, in which the Infant is a Purchasor. So that
nothing rests now in this Case but the point of Notice. And why should not the
Infant be bound to take notice in this Case, as he is to take notice in case of
a Remainder, wherein he is a Purchasor? But if notice be necessary, it is not
to be tried here now. If we had brought an Ejectment, and (supposing notice had
been necessary) we had failed in the proof thereof, should we have been har'd
for ever as by this perpetual Injunction we should be? and shall it be done now
without proof? If we are not bound to prove Notice at Law, much less are we
bound to prove it here. This Case is Epidemical, and concerns all the Parents
of England that have or shall have Children, that the Obligations which they
lay upon their Children may not be cancelled wholly, and this Court (under
color of Equity) protect them in it, and be a City of Refuge for relief of
such; the foulness of whose actions deny them a Sanctuary.

Pecke. If Infancy would excuse, such a Clause would signify nothing. For most
persons especially, of that Sex, marry before full age. The Lords give no
reason why they changed their Opinions.

Sergeant Fountain. Yelverton's Case in 36 Eliz. is a President in the Point
for us, and Shipdam's Case is much like it. This being of a devise Land, and
that of Money, which if it were paid, the Land was to go over. The grand
Objection is, That here is an Estate vested by a settlement, which is not to be
avoided or defeated. But I doubt whether a man can lay such a Restraint, that
there shall not be Relief in any case of Emergency and Contingency. Part 712.
3. V. in Leo. 37.
It is a part of the fundamental Justice of the Nation, that men should not
make Limitations wholly unalterable; as by the Common Law men cannot make a Fee
unalienable. You give relief every day where there are express Clauses, that
there shall be no relief in Law or Equity, where a thing is appointed to be,
etc. without relief in Law or Equity, you relieve against them, and look upon
them to be void. In our Case, suppose she had married a great Lord, or suppose
a person had brought notice of the Trustees consent? would you not have given
relief? But secondly, I deny the Assumption. This Case is not so. I agree it
had been well done if they had asked my Lady Newports consent. But is there a
word in the Will, that if the Plaintiff did not, he should have no relief in
Equity? The Estate was devised to my Lady Newport during her life (so that the
Plaintiff could not be in possession) and she might have lived till the
Plaintiff was 21 years old. Could not my Lady Newport have said, Have a care
how you marry, for you forfeit the Estate, if you marry without the consent of
two of us three? All Ingredients and Circumstances must be taken in a matter of
Equity. Is it an argument to say, He has no Estate? therefore take away his
Wifes Estate, then there will be nothing to maintain her.

It is agreed, That if the Approbation had been precedent, it had been well.
Now she had no notice before the Marriage, that it was necessary, and when she
had that notice, she got the approbation, and that though subsequent, is good
enough, because it was asked (and gotten) as soon as she had Notice, that she
ought to have it. The Will is hereby sufficiently observed, for the intent of
the Will was, that she should have such an Husband as those persons should
approve, and this marriage is so approved. I rely upon this matter, but
especially upon the word of Notice.

Sergeant Ellis. There was a Case of a Proviso not to marry, but with the
consent of certain persons first had in writing. Consent was had, but not in
writing, and yet you ruled it good. Had this been a Condition in Law (as it is
in fact) the Law would have helped her. If the Estate had been in her, there
might have been some reason that she should have (...) taken notice how it came
to her (and of the Limitation, etc.) Had the Earl been alive and consented to
the Marriage, after it was solemnized, he would have continued his affection,
and the Plaintiffs have had the Estate still. Why now, the consent of the Lords
and Countess, is as much as his consent: he had tranferred his consent to them.
This is a Ratihabitio, you cannot have a Case of more Circumstances of Equity:
1. An Infant. 2. No notice. 3. Consent after. 4. Their Declaration that they
thought my Lord meant it in terrorem, etc. What if two of the Trustees had
died, should she never have married? surely you would have relieved her.

Sergeant Baldwin. Here is as full a consent to the Marriage, as could well be
in this Case. For since the Plaintiff had no notice of the necessity of the
Earls consent before the Marriage, it had been the strangest and unexpectedest
thing in the world, that she should have gone about to have asked it. The Heir
should not have taken notice of such a Forfeiture; and why should a man that is
named by way of remainder? In case of a personal Legacy, this were a void
Proviso by the Civil Law. For I have informed my self of it. It is a Maxim with
them, Matrimonium esse Liberum. This amounts to as much as the Condition, that
the person should not marry at all. For when it is in the Trustees power they
may propose the unagreeablest person in the World; it is a most unreasonable
power, and not to be favored. Sir Thomas Grimes settled his Land so, that his
Son should pay portions; and if he did not, he demised the Lands over, and it
was adjudged relieveable.

If I limit that my Daughter shall marry with the consent of two, etc. if each
of them have a design for a different Friend, if you will not relieve, she can
never marry.

Is it not more probable, that if the Earl had lived he would rather have given
her a Maintenance, than have concluded her under perpetual misfortune and
disherison?

Keeling Chief Justice. I do not see how an averment or proof can be received
to make out a man's intention against the words of the Will. 4 Co. 4. a. 5 Co.
68. Plo. 345.
In Vernon's Case, though it were a Case of as much Equity as could be, it was
denied to be received; and so in my Lord Cheney's Case. Here was a Case of Sir
Thomas Hatton somewhat like this Case, wherein no Relief could be had.

Vaughan Chief Justice. I wonder to hear of citing of Presidents in matter of
Equity. For if there be equity in a Case, that Equity is an universal Truth,
Vi. 1 In. 216.
and there can be no President in it. So that in any President that can be
produced, if it be the same with this Case, the reason and equity is the same
in it self. And if the President be not the same Case with this, it is not to
be cited, being not to that purpose.

Bridgman Lord Keeper. Certainly Presidents are very necessary and useful to
us, for in them we may find the reasons of the Equity to guide us, and beside
the authority of those who made them, is much to be regarded. We shall suppose
they did it upon great Consideration, and weighing of the matter, and it would
be very strange and very ill, if we should disturb and set aside what has been
the course for a long Series of time and ages.

Thereupon it was Ordered, That they should be attended with Presidents, and
then they said they would give their Opinions.

Three weeks after they came into Chancery again, and delivered their Opinions
Seriatim, in this manner, viz.

Hale Chief Baron. The general question is, whether this Decree shall pass. I
shall divide what I have to say into these three questions or particulars.
First, I shall consider whether this be a good Condition or Limitation, or
conditional Limitation. For so I had rather call it. It being a Condition to
determine the Estate of the Plaintiff, and a Limitation to let in the
Defendant. I think it is good both in Law and Equity, and my reasons are;
first, because it is a collateral Condition to the Land, and not against the
nature of the Estate, and she is not thereby bound from Marriage.

Secondly, it obliged her to no more then her duty; she had no Mother; and in
case of Marriage she ought to make application to her Grandmother, who was in
loco Parentis; and since the Estate moved from the Grandfather, she was Mistress
of the disposition and manner of it. It Is true by the Civil Ecclesiastical Law,
regularly such a Condition were void. And therefore, if the question were of a
Legacy, there might be a great deal of reason to question the validity of it,
because in those Courts wherein Legacies are properly handled, it would have
been void. But this is a case of Land. (Devise) Indeed it is agreed, that this
is a good Condition, and not to be avoided in it self.

Secondly. This being a good Condition and Limitation over. The Question is,
whether there be relief against it in Equity, admitting it were a wilful
breach? I think there ought not to be any. I differ from the reasons pressed at
the Bar; as first, That it was a devise by Will, by virtue of the Statute, etc.
but that does not stick with me. For if there may not be a relief against a
breach of a Condition in a Will, there would be a great shatter and confusion
in men's Estates, and some of those settled by great advice, and there have been
Presidents of relief in such cases, 2 Car. Fitz versus Seymour. And 10 Car.
Salmon versus Bernard. Secondly, It has been urged, there should be no relief,
because there is a Limitation over. But that I shall not go upon neither. There
have been many reliefs in such Cases: I will decline the latitude of the
Objection, for that would go a great deal further then we are aware. But yet I
think there ought to be no relief in this Case: It is not like the case of
payment of money, because there the party may be answered his debt with damages
at another day; and so may be fully satisfied of all that is intended him. But
here my first reason is, That it is a Condition to contain the party in that
due Obedience, which Law and nature require.

(2) It Is a voluntary settlement to the Grandaughter in tail, and the remainder
over is so too; and both these parties are in aequali gradu to the Devisor; and
therefore their being both in a parity it would be hard to take the Estate from
him, to whom, and in whose Scale the Law has thrown the advantage.

(3) It appears by the body of the Will, that the Earl did as really intend it
should go over, if she married without consent, as if she died without Issue:
for they are both in the same clause. There may be as much reason to turn it
into a Fee-simple, in case as she had died without Issue, as in this case. For
so I doubt the penning of this decretal Order does.

And (4) I rest upon this, It is a Case without a President. I remember after
that Lanyett's Case had been adjudged that 6 Car. there was a Case, I suppose
Saunders versus Cornish, of a Limitation in Tail; Cro 3 part, fo. 230 it was of
a Lease for years, and so was adjudged void.
and then a devise over, and it was adjudged void. And the Judges said, so far
it is gone, and we will go no further, because we do not know where it will
rest. I know there is no intrinsical difference in Cases by Presidents. But
there is a great difference in a Case, wherein a man is to make, and where a
man sees, (and is to follow) a President; in the one Case a man is more
strictly bound up, but in the other he may take a greater liberty and Latitude.
For if a man be in doubt in aequilibrio concerning a Case, whether it be
equitable or no, in prudence he will determine according as the Presidents have
been, especially if they have been made by men of good authority for Learning,
etc. and have been continued and pursued. Here must be some boundary, or we
shall go we know not whither. It were hard a Court of Equity should do that
that is not fit to be done in any Court below a Parliament. The Presidents do
not come home to the Case. Most of them are in case of money Legacies; and in
some of those Cases we may give allowance, in respect of the Law of another
forum, to which they belong. But this is in case of Land only, vid' Swynborne
4. Co. 12. chap. indeed he is no authority, but there is a very good
Exemplification of this matter.

(5) I shall consider the allays and circumstances which are observed, and
offered to qualify this Case, and induce relief. (1) It Is said that this
clause was only in terrorem, and some Witnesses have been examined to prove it.
But I am not satisfied how collateral averments can be admitted in this case.
For then how can there be any certainty? 2 Cro 145.
A Will will be any thing, every thing, nothing. The Statute appointed the Will
should be in writing to make a certainty, and shall we admit collateral
averments and proofs, and make it utterly uncertain?

(2) It Is said in this Case, the effect of the Proviso has been obtained, for
the Trustees have now declared their consent.

I must say it is not full, for they do not say they would have consented; but
that possibly such reasons might have been offered as they should have done it.
And possibly I say not. They, like good men, have only declined the showing an
ineffectual contradicting of a thing which is done, and cannot now be recalled,
undone or altered. Besides, if there had been but a circumstantial variation,
the consent afterward might have been somewhat. But here it is in the very
substance. In the Case before cited at the Bar by Mr. Sergeant Ellis, where the
consent was to be had in writing, and it was had only by Paroll, there was
great Equity that it should be relieved, because it was only a provident
circumstance, and wisdom of the Devisor, viz. for the more firm obliging the
party to ask consent, which the Devisor considered might be pretended to be had
by slight words, in ordinary and not solemn Communication, or else in passion
and heat, (as in this case when the Plaintiff would not consent to the approved
Marriage with the Lord Morpeth, the Countess said she might marry where she
would. Which words imported a neglect of care for the future over the
Plaintiff, because she would not be ruled by the Countess in accepting the
tender of so commendable a Marriage;) as also for the benefit of the Devisee
(in the Case aforesaid) That in case the Devisee did marry with the consent of
the Trustee, he might not after (through prejudice, etc.) avoid it by denial of
such consent, and so defeat or perplex the Devisee for want of proof of such
his consent.

(3) It Is said the party is an Infant. Why, an Infant is bound by a Condition
in Fact, by Law: it is true, we are now in Equity; But in Equity, since this
refers to an Act which she, though an Infant, is capable of doing, viz. to
marry; it were unreasonable that she should be able to do the Act, and not be
obliged by Equity to observe the Conditions and Terms which concern and relate
to that Act. So that it is all one, as if she had been of full age. The Statute
of Merton cap. 5. provides, that Usury shall not run against Infants, and yet
the same Statute cap. 6. appoints, That if an Infant marry without the License
of his Lord, etc. he shall forfeit double the value of his Marriage: and it is
reasonable, because Marriage is an Act which he may do by Law while he is under
age.

(4) As to the point of Notice: (1) Whether Notice be requisite or no, in point
of Law, I will not determine. But I must needs say, that it must be referred to
Law. But (2) If it be not requisite in Law, how far a Court of Equity might
relieve for want of it, I will not now take upon me to determine. I will not
trench upon matters Gratis, of which I know not what will be the consequence.
But I conceive in this case, the Fact is not yet settled, whether there were
(notice) or not; and it were a hard matter, That because no Notice is here
proved, it should be taken for granted there was none. For here are several
circumstances that seem to show there might be Notice: and a public voice in
the House, or an accidental Intimation, etc. may possibly be sufficient Notice.
I shall therefore leave it as a fit thing to be tried, and till that, the case
in my understanding is not ripe. And therefore I will add no more. I think this
Decree ought to be altered, if not set aside. But as this Case is, there ought
to be no relief.

Vaughan Chief Justice. I shall conclude as my Lord Chief Baron did, That as
this case is, there ought to be no relief. I will single out this case from
several things not material to it, as my Lord Chief Baron did, etc. I think, if
Land be devised on Condition to pay Legacies, and that the Devisee has paid
almost all, and fails in one or so, there may be good cause of relief, because
he has paid much, and is somewhat in the nature of a purchasor. This is not
like a Legacy, This is upon the Statute. Where it is said a man may Devise at
his Will and pleasure, i.e. absolutely, upon Condition, upon Limitation, or any
way that the Law warrants. Suppose there had been a special Act of Parliament
disposing as the Earl has done, in this case could there be any color in
Equity, to alter or vary this Law? And here it is equally as concluding as that,
since the Statute gives a man power to dispose as expressly, and otherwise
Equity would alter and dispose of all property, and all things that came in
question. But let Notice or Consent, etc. be requisite, or not, it is Triable at
Law. But I stand upon this, that there ought to be no relief in Equity. It was
insisted, that her Grandmother gave a kind of consent: but I take that for
nothing; For though the Grandmother would not have offered or proposed a
Marriage, yet she ought not to marry without her consent. Nor is the Lords
Post-Consent any thing, for consent cannot be had for things which cannot be
otherwise, as a man cannot be said to consent to his Stature, or the color of
his hair, etc. A man may know of what Opinion he is, or was; but it is
impossible for a man to know of what Opinion he would have been in the
circumstances of Action, which he never tried. I conclude, the Plaintiff ought
not to have relief in Equity. But if any matter in Law will help them, they are
not excluded from it.

Keling Chief Justice. I think there ought to be no relief in this Case; I have
considered it as well as I can, and I think nothing is more fit to be observed
then thief Customary Rules for Children, they are very good restraints for
Children, and ought to be made good here, to encourage obedience and discourage
those who would make a Prey of them; and if there were not hope for men, to
hasten their fortunes by this means, there would be few adventures of this
nature; I have looked upon the Presidents, etc. and I find they come not to this
Case, except only one and that is but seven years old, and the other are for
money, for which there is reason, because the party may be substantially
relieved and satisfied otherways. If there had been no limitation over there
may be some reason why it may be intented, that it was only in terrorem.

I do not think all Cases upon Wills are irremediable here (because of the
Statute.) If the breach of the Condition be in a circumstance only, as in the
Case, where the consent was given, but not in writing, as it ought, it may be
relieved, for that was a caution to the Consentor, that he should not give
consent before strangers, and trust to the swearing of a parol-consent. I never
yet saw any devise obliging to have any such consent after the parties age of
21 years, so that there is no great hardship in it. And if there should be any
ill design in those who have the trust and power to consent in withholding
their consent, it might be relieved here. I think none would make a decree,
that if she died without issue, the Defendant should have it, and this is the
same: But equity can never go against the substantial part of a Conveyance or
Will, but that must be governed by the parties agreement or appointment. Equity
ought to arise upon some collateral or accidental emergent. It Is not in
Terrorem indeed without a penalty. There can be no collateral Averment. Being
an Infant is nothing: for this is only a provision while she is an Infant.
Besides, the case of the Forfeiture of the double value is a very good instance
for the Notice. If she had notice of this Will, yet they that came to steal her
knew it not: for they did not come to take a shorn sheep, and therefore no
relief is deserved by the Plaintiff. In Honesty and Conscience those Bonds
ought to be kept strict. I confess, I would not have the Plaintiff tempted to a
further Suit, but indeed in saying that I go further then I need.

Bridgeman Lord Keeper. If I were of another Opinion, yet I would be bound by
my Lords; for I did not send for them, not to be bound by them. But I was of
their Opinion from the beginning. And I am glad now that we are delivered from
a common Error, and that men may make such provisions as may bind their
Children. But to justify the Decree a little: (1) Here is 5000 l. appointed to
George Porter, (so that the ample provision was made for him, and it may the
rather be intended that this Estate was wholly designed for the Plaintiff.) (2)
Here was a Post-consent, and those persons were in loco parentum. Now if the
Earl had, as possibly he might have, thus pardoned and been reconciled to the
Marriage, he would probably have given the Plaintiff the Estate, and that is a
reason to induce us to the same. For I think it clear, that an Estate by Act of
Parliament is liable to the same Relief, Regulation, etc. as any other Estate.
An Estate Tail, though that be by Statute, yet is liable to be cut off, etc. If
there had been a time limited, then there had been more reason to bind her up
to have consent.

But there ought to be a restraint put in these Cases: That of the double
forfeiture was truly and well observed: Where no body is bound to give Notice,
it is to be taken; but besides she is not heir, for that might have made a
great difference. This I thought not to say. Upon the whole I am of my Opinion
with my Lords, and I am glad I have their assistance.

Let the Bill be dismissed.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Principal Matters contained in the foregoing REPORTS.
A.
Abatement.
A Plea may be good in abatement, though it contain also matter, that goes in
bar. 214
Accord.
Accord with satisfaction. 69
Account.
Prayed that the Court would give further day for giving in the Account. 42
Plea in bar, and Plea before Auditors. 65
Action for words.
Words spoken of a Watchmaker. 19 Of a Justice of Peace. 22, 23 You are a Pimp
and a Bawd, and fetch young Gentlewomen to young Gentlemen. 31, 32 Action for
words spoken of an Attorney. 172
Action upon the Case.
For suing the Plaintiff in placito debiti for 600 li. and affirming that he
owed him 600 li. whereby he was held to extraordinary Bail. 4 Action upon a
Promise, in consideration that the Plaintiff mitteret prosequi such a Suit,
etc. held good, 43 For a false Return. V. Tit. Return. For a Libel. V. Libel.
V. Market. Against a Master of a Ship, for keeping Goods so negligently, that
they were stolen away whilst the Ship lay in the River, whether it lies or
not? 85 Action upon the Case upon a Promise, on consideration to bring two men,
to make Oath before two men, not authorized by Law to administer an Oath. 166
Action against the Coronors of a County Palatine for a false Return: the Action
laid in Middlesex. 198, 199 V. Attorney. Action upon the Case lies not for
suing an Attorney in an inferior Court. 209 Action upon the Case, for that the
Defendant had taken away his Goods, and hidden them in such secret places, that
the Plaintiff could not come at them to take them in Execution, adjudged that
it does not lie. 286
Administrators.
An Administrator recovers Damages in an Action of Trover and Conversion, for
Goods of the Intestate, taken out of his own possession; then his
Administration is revoked; whether can he now have Execution? 62, 63
Administrators plead fully administered, to an Action of Debt for Rent incurred
in their own time. Which was held to be an ill plea. 185, 186 The Action lies
against them in the debet and detinet, for Rent incurred in their own time.
ibid. They cannot waive a term for years. ibid. Debt upon an Obligation against
an Administrator. The Defendant pleads a Statute acknowledged by the Intestate
to the Plaintiff, which Statute is yet in force; the Plaintiff replies, That it
is burnt. The Defendant demurs. 186, 187 A Stranger takes out Administration to
a Feme Covert, and puts a Bond in Suit; the Defendant pleads, That the Husband
is de jure Administrator to the Wife, and is yet alive. 231 V. Distribution.
Annuity.
An Action lies for an Annuity against the Rector of a Church, though the
Church be drowned. 200, 201
Appearance.
In an Action brought by Executors, some of whom are under age, all the
Plaintiffs appear by Attorney: whether well, or no? 47, 72, 276, 277, etc.
Apprentices.
Vide p. 2. Enditement for exercising a Trade in a Village, not having served
seven years as an Apprentice. 26 An Action of Covenant lies against an Infant
Apprentice, upon his Indenture of Apprenticeship, etc. by the custom of London.
271 Concerning the Power of the Justices in discharging Masters of their
Apprentices. Vide 286, 287 Whether may a Difference between a Master and an
Apprentice be brought originally before the Sessions, or not? V. 287
Arbitrament and Arbitrators.
An Award that one of the Parties shall discharge the other from his
undertaking to pay a Debt to a third person, a good Award. 9 The Power of the
Arbitrators and of the Umpire cannot concur. 15, 274, 275 The staying of a
Cause is implied in referring it to Arbitrators. 24 Inter alia arbitratum fuit,
naught. 36
Arrest.
Attachment for arresting a man upon a Sunday, or as he is going to Church. 56
Assault and Battery.
What makes an Assault? 3 Justification in an Action of Assault and Battery.
168, 169 For striking a Horse, whereon the Plaintiff rode, whereby that Horse
ran away with him, so that he was thrown down, and another Horse ran over him.
24 Pleading in an Action of Assault and Battery. 36
Assets.
Assets in equity. V. 115.
Attachment.
Against a man for not performing an Award, submitted to by Rule of Court. 21
V. Arrest.
Attorney.
Whether are Attorneys within the Statute against Extortion, or not? 5, 6 If an
Attorney be sued time enough to give him two Rules to plead within the Term,
Judgment may be given. 8 Not compellable to put in special Bail. 10 Whether can
an Attorney of the Kings Bench be debarred from appearing for his Client in the
Court at Stepney? 23, 24 Ill practices of Attorneys. 41 An Attorney ought not
to waive his Court. 118 An Action lies not against an Attorney for suing in a
Cause as Attorney, knowing that the Plaintiff has no Cause of Action. 209
Audita Querela
Can be brought before Judgment entered. 111 V. 170 Outlawry pleaded in
disability. 224
Avowry.
Whether needs he that distrains Cattle for a Rentcharge, set forth in his
Avowry, that they were Levant and Couchant? 63 Exceptions to an Avowry for a
Heriot. 216, 217 The Husband alone may avow for a Rent due to him in right of
his Wife. 273
B.
Bail.
THree men bring an Action, and the Defendant puts in bail at the Suit of four.
5 V. Baron and Feme. The course of the Court in taking bail. 16 The reason of
the Law in requiring bail. 236 Special bail denied in Battery. 2 V. Attorney.
V. p. 25.
Bankrupt.
A Plaintiff has Judgment, and before Execution becomes Bankrupt, moved that
the money may be brought into Court. 93 Accounts between two Merchants, and one
of them becomes Bankrupt; how far shall the other be a Debtor or Creditor? 215
Baron and Feme.
Baron and Feme are sued in Trover and Conversion, and the Wife arrested; she
shall be discharged upon common Bail. 8 The Husband must pay for the Wives
Apparel, unless she elope, and he give not order to trust her. 9 Whether or
no, and in what cases the Husband is bound by the Contract of the Wife, and in
what cases not? 124, etc. Husband and Wife recover in Action of Debt and have
Judgment; the Wife dies, the Hushand shall have Execution. 179, 180 V. Tit.
Avowry.
Bar.
Judgment in a former Action pleaded in Bar of a second. 207
Bastard-Children.
Orders of Sessions made upon the 18th of Eliz. for the keeping of them by the
reputed Fathers. 20
Bill of Exchange.
Needs not be protested on the very day that it becomes due. 27 V. Tit.
Indebitat. assumpsit.
Borough-English.
Copyhold Land of the tenure of Borough-English surrendered to the use of
another person and his heirs, who dies before admittance: the Right shall
descend to the youngest Son. 102
C.
Cap. Excommunicatum.
MIsnosmer cannot be pleaded to a Cap. Excomm. for the party has no day in
Court. 70
Certiorari.
To remove an Enditement of Robbery, whether it removes the Recognizances to
appear? 41 To remove an Enditement of Murder out of Wales. 64, 68
Cinque Ports.
Hab. Corp. to remove one out of the Cinque Ports. 20
Citation.
Citation ex officio not according to Law. 185
Common.
Whether may a Corporation prescribe for a common sans number in gross? 6, 7
Condition.
That if the Obligor bring in Alice and John Coats, when they come to their
ages of 21 years, etc. to give Releases, etc. these words must be taken
respectively. 33 The Condition of a Bond for the parties appearance at a
certain day; and concludes, If the party appear, then the Condition to be void.
35, 36 Condition precedent or not. 64 An Estate is given by Will, upon
Condition, that if the Devisee marry without the consent of, etc. then a
stranger to enter, etc. whether is this a Condition or a Limitation? 86, etc.
300, etc. Condition of a Bond, is to seal and execute a Release: is the Obligor
bound to do it without a tender? 104 A Bond is dated in March, the Condition is
to pay money super 28 diem Martij prox. sequentem: the money is payable the
same month. 112 V. Tit. Survivor. The Condition of a Bond runs thus, viz. That
if the Obligee shall within six months after his Mothers death, settle upon the
Obligor an Annuity of 20 l. per annum during life, if he require the same; or
if he shall not grant the same, if then he shall pay to the Obligor 300 l.
within the time aforementioned, then the Obligation to be void: is this a
disjunctive Condition, or not? 264, 265, etc. Words allowed to be part of the
Condition of a Bond, though following these words, then the Obligation to be
void. 274, 275
Consideration.
V. Action upon the Case. V. Etiam. 284
Constable.
Moved to quash an Order made by the Justices of Peace, for one to serve as
Constable. 13
Contingent remainder.
Supported by a Right of Entry. 92
Conventicles.
To meet in a Conventicle, whether a breach of the Peace or no? 13
Conusance.
V. Tit. University.
Copy.
Copy of a Deed given in Evidence, because the Original was burnt. 4 Copies
allowed in evidence. 266
Copyhold.
Tenant for life of a Copyhold. He in the remainder enters upon the Tenant for
life, and makes a Surrender, nothing passes. 199 Tenant for life of a Copyhold
suffers a Recovery as Tenant in Fee-simple; this is no forfeiture. 199, 200 Of
all Forfeitures committed by Copyholders the Lord only is to take advantage.
200
Coroner.
V. Enquest.
Corporation.
What things can a Corporation do without Deed, and what not? 18
Costs.
An Executor is not within the Statute to pay Costs, occasion dilationis
executionis, etc. 77
Cottage.
An Enditement for erecting a Cottage, contra formam Statuti, quasht; because
it is not said, That it was inhabited. 295
Covenant.
Action of Covenant upon the Warranty in a Fine: the Plaintiff assigns his
Breach, that a stranger, habens legale jus and titulum, did enter, etc. but
does not not say, that it was by virtue of an Eigne Title. 66, 67, 101, 292,
293 Covenant to make such an Assurance as Council shall advise. 67 Covenant for
quiet Enjoyment. 101 A man does assignare and transponere all the money that
shall be allowed by any Order, of a Foreign State; does an Action of Covenant
lie upon these words or not? 113 An Action of Covenant lies against a Woman
upon a Covenant in a Fine levied by her, when she was a Feme Covert. 230, 231
V. Ibidem, exceptions to the pleading in such Action.
Covenant to stand seized.
A man Covenants to stand seized to the use of the Heirs of his own body. 98,
121, 159 V. Limitation d' Estates. V. Uses.
County-Courts.
V. 171, 172, 215, 249.
County-Palatine.
V. 2.
Counterplea of Voucher.
V. 8.
Court of Kings Bench.
Its Jurisdiction is not ousted without particular words in an Act of
Parliament. 45 V. Habeas Corpus.
Cure of Souls.
What Ecclesiastical Persons have Cure of Souls, and what not? 11, 12
Cur' advisare vult.
During a Cur' adv. vult one of the parties dies, how must Judgment be entered?
37
Custom.
Custom of a Manor for the Homage to choose every year two Surveyors, to
destroy corrupt Victuals exposed to sale: a good Custom. 202 A Custom to be
discharged of Tithes of Sheep all the year after, in consideration of the
payment of full Tithes of all the Sheep they have on Candlemasday. 229
D.
Damages.
EXcessive Damages no good Cause for a new Writ of Enquiry. 2
Demand.
Requisite or not requisite? 89
Departure in Pleading.
V. 43, 44, 227, 289.
Depositions.
V. Tit. Evidence.
Debt.
For Rent upon a Lease for years. 3 Debt upon a Bond against two Executors;
they pleaded a Statute acknowledged by the Testator of 1200 li. and no assets
ultra, etc. the Plaintiff replies, That one of the Executors was bound together
with the Plaintiff in that Statute. 165
Devise.
Of a term for years. V. Limitation of Estates. By a Devise of all a man's
Estate, what passes? 100 I give Rees-Farm to my Wife during her natural life,
and by her to be disposed of to such of my Children as she shall think fit.
What Estate passes hereby. 189 A man has a Son called Robert. Robert has
likewise a Son called Robert. The Grandfather devises Land to his Son called
Robert, and his heirs. Robert the Devisee dies, living the Father. The Devisor
makes a new publication of the same Will, and declares it to be his intention,
that Robert the Grandchild should take the Land per eandem voluntat. Does the
Grandchild take or no? 267, 268 A man devises a Rentcharge to his Wife for
her life, but that if she marry, that then his Executor shall pay her 100 l.
and the rent shall cease and return to the Executor, she does marry, and the
Executor does not pay the 100 l. The question is, Whether the Rent shall cease
before the 100 l. be paid or not? 272, 273
Distribution.
Administrators must make Distribution to those of the half-blood, as well as
to those of the whole. 209
Donative.
V. 11, 12, 22, 90.
Double Plea.
V. 18, 227.
E.
Ecclesiastical persons.
A Chapter of which there is no Dean, is restrained by the Statute of 13 Eliz.
204 A Grant of next avoidance, restrained. ibid. Such Grant void ab initio.
ibid.
Ejectione firmae.
De quatuor molendinis; good. Of so many Acres jampnor' and bruere, without
saying how many of each; good. 90 The Plaintiff in Ejectment dies before
Judgment. 252 Entry to deliver a Declaration in Ejectione firmae shall not work
to avoid a Fine. 10
Error.
A Writ of Error will lie in the Exchequer-Chamber upon a Judgment in a Scire
facias, grounded upon a Judgment in one of the Actions mentioned in 27 Eliz. 79
It shall not be assigned for Error of Judgment in an inferior Court, that the
matter arose out the Jurisdiction, but it must be pleaded. 81
Escape.
V. 116. A Trial at Bar upon an Escape. In an Action for an Escape, the
Defendant pleads, That he let the Prisoner to bail according to the Stat. of 23
H. 6. cap. 10. and that he had taken reasonable Sureties of persons having
sufficicient, etc. The Plaintiff replies, and traverseth the sufficiency of the
Sureties. 227
Estoppel.
By the condition of a Bond. 113
Exchange of Lands.
Two women seized, one of one Acre, and another of another; and they make an
exchange; then one of them marries before entry; shall that defeat the
exchange? 91
Excise.
The Statute for Excise prohibits the bringing of a Certiorari, but not Habeas
Corpus. 103
Executors.
V. Costs. V. Appearance. In what order Executors are to pay Debts, etc. 174,
175 Executor dur' minor' aetate. 174, 175 An Executor must entitle himself to
the Executorship, to enable him to retain for his own debt. 208 An Executors
refusal before the Ordinary, after Administration, is a void act. 213 Action of
Debt against an Executor; the Defendant pleads, That the Testator made a Will,
but did not make him Executor therein; that he had bona notab. in diverse
Diocesses, and the Archbishop of Canterbury committed Administration to the
Defendant, and concludes in Bar. V. Diverse exceptions taken to the Plea. 239 V.
Administrators.
Evidence.
V. Copy. A suspension of a rent may be given in Evidence upon nil debet
pleaded. 35, 118 Evidence of a Deed. 94 An Action of Debt brought upon an
Escape. May a fresh Suit be given in Evidence upon nil debet pleaded? 116
Copies and Exemplifications allowed to be given in Evidence, when the Originals
are burnt. 117 Pleinment administer pleaded. Payment of some Debts, etc. and
delivering over the residue of the personal Estate to the Infant Executor, when
he comes of age, may be given in Evidence. 174 In an Action of Assumpsit,
grounded upon a Promise in Law, payment may be given in Evidence; not where the
Action is grounded upon an express Promise. 210 Hear-says, how far allowable in
Evidence? 283 Depositions in Chancery allowed to be read. 283, 284
F.
False Imprisonment.
IN an Action of false Imprisonment, the Defendant Justifies by virtue of a
Warrant out of a Court, within the County Palatine of Durham. V. 170, 171, 172.
several exceptions to the pleading. The Defendant in false Imprisonment
justifies by virtue of an Order of the Court of Chancery; naught. 272
Felony.
To cut down Corn and carry it away at the same time is no Felony. But to cut
it down, and lay it by, and carry it away afterward, is Felony. 89
Feme sole Merchant.
V. 26.
Fieri facias.
The Sheriff may execute a Writ of Fieri facias upon the Goods of the
Defendant, in the hands of his Administrator, he dying after the Test of the
Writ, and before Execution. 188
Fine.
V. Ejectione firmae. An interest for years in what Cases barred by a Fine, and
in what not. 217
Fishing.
Common and several Pischary, and fishing in public and in private Rivers.
105, 106
Forcible Entry.
Enditement of forcible Entry. 73
Forfeiture.
A man settles a term in trust for himself during his life, and afterward in
trust for several of his Friends; provided, that if he have any issue of his
body at the time of his death, the trust shall cease, and the assignment be to
the use of such issue; provided also, that if he be minded to change the Uses,
that he may have power so to do, by writing in the presence of two or more
Witnesses, or by his last Will. Then he commits Treason, and is attainted by
Act of Parliament, and dies, having issue Male at the time of his death, but
without making any revocation of the Uses of this settlement; no more of this
term is forfeited than during his own life only. 16, 17, 38, 39, 40
Forma Pauperis.
A man that is admitted in Forma pauperis, is not to have a new Trial, nor is
suffered to remove an Action out of an inferior Court. 268
Formedon in Descender.
Exceptions to the Count. 219, 220
Foreign Attachment.
Whether or no is a Debt due to a Corporation, within the Custom of Foreign
Attachment. 212
Fraudulent Conveyance.
A Deed may be voluntary, and yet not fraudulent. V. 119
G.
Gager de Ley.
A Man cannot wage his Law in an Action brought upon a Prescription for a duty.
121
Guardian.
Infant Tenant in a Common Recovery, is admitted by Guardian ad sequendum;
whether that be Error, or not? 48, 49
Gavelkind.
A Rent de novo granted out of Gavelkind-land, shall descend according to the
descent of the Land. 96, 97, etc.
Grant le Roy.
V. 195, 196, etc.
H.
Habeas Corpus.
WHat time to plead has the party, that comes in upon a Habeas Corpus. 1 Habeas
Corpus to remove one out of the Cinque Ports. 20 V. Excise. Though the Return
be filed, the Court of Kings Bench may remand, or commit the Prisoner to the
Marshalsey, at their Election. 144 A Member of the House of Lords, committed by
the House for a Contempt, cannot be set at liberty the Court of Kings Bench,
upon a Habeas Corpus, be the Cause of his Commitment what it will. 144, 145,
146, etc. Habeas Corpus though returnable two days after the end of the Term,
yet ties up the inferior Court. 195 Whether does a Habeas corpus ad
subjiciendum lie in Court of Common Pleas? 235
Heir.
Two Actions of Debt against an Heir upon two several Obligations of his
Ancestor. The Plaintiff in the second Action, obtains Judgment first: and
whether shall be first satisfied? 253
I.
Jeoffails.
WAnt of an averment helped after Verdict. 14 V. 199
Enclosures.
Inquisition upon the Statute against pulling down Enclosures. 66
Indebitatus assumpsit.
Indebitat. assumpsit pro opere facto lies well enough. 8 For money received of
the Plaintiff by one Thomas Buckner, by the appointment, and to the use of the
Defendant. Good after a Verdict. 42 Lies not against the Executors of a
Treasurer of Sub-Treasurer of a Church, or the like. 163 An Action is brought
upon an indebitat. assumpsit, and quantum meruit; the Defendant pleads, That
the Plaintiff and himself accounted together; and that the Plaintiff in
consideration that the Defendant promised to pay him what was found due to him
upon the foot of the Account, discharged him of all former Contracts. 205, 206.
and held to be a good Plea. Indebitat. assumpsit will not lie upon a Bill of
Exchange accepted. 285, 286 Indebit. assumpsit for Wares sold, and no Evidence
given of an agreement for the price. 295
Indictment.
An Act of Parliament creates a new Offense, and appoints other ways of
proceeding than by Endictment, yet if there are no negative words, an
Indictment lies. 34 Indictment for these words, viz. When ever a Burgess of
Hull puts on his Gown, Satan enters into him. 35 Moved to quash an Indictment,
because the year of our Lord in the caption was in figures. 78
Infant.
A man declares, That the Defendant in consideration, that the Plaintiff would
let him take so much of his Grass, promised, etc. held to be good
Consideration, though the Plaintiff were an Infant. 25 V. tit. Appearance. V.
tit. Apprentice. V. tit. Recovery. V. tit. Notice.
Information.
An Information does not lie against a Lord, for taking unreasonable Distresses
of several of his Tenants. 71, 288 V. tit. Recusants.
Intendments.
V. 67.
Issue.
V. 72.
Judge.
No Action upon the Case lies against a Judge upon a wrongful commitment. 184,
185
Juries.
If a Knight be but returned on a Jury, when a Peer is concerned, it is not
material whether he appear and give his Verdict or no? 226
L.
Laborers.
AN Enditement for retaining a Servant without a Testimonial from his last
Master, quasht for imperfection. 78
Lease.
A License to enjoy till such a time, whether it be a Lease or no, and how to
be pleaded? 14, 15 Uncertain limitations and impossible limitations of
commencements of Leases. 180 A Bishops Lease good, upon which the whole rent is
reserved upon part of what was accustomably demised. 203, 204
Libel.
V. 58.
Limitation V. Condition. Limitation of Estates.
A man devises a term to one for life, the remainder to another for life, and
if the remainder man for life, die, without issue of his body begotten, then to
a stranger; whether is this a good Limitation or not? 50, 51, etc. V. A term
settled in trust, with remainders to persons not in being. 114, 115 V. Covenant
to stand seized. A man Covenants to stand seized to the use of his eldest Son,
and the Heirs-males of his body, remainder to the use of the Heirs-males of his
own body, remainder to his own right Heirs. 226, 237, 238
Limitation of Actions.
What Actions between Merchants are within the Statute of Limitations, and what
not? 70, 71, 268, 269 The Statute of Limitations how to be pleaded? 89 Action
upon the Case against a Sheriff, for that he levied such a sum of money at the
Plaintiffs Suit, and did not bring the money into Court at the day of the
return of the Writ. Whether is this Action within the Statute of Limitations,
or not? 245
Livery.
A man chosen by a Company in London to be of the Livery, and refusing to
serve, cannot be committed. 10
Livery deins le view.
A woman makes a Feoffment, and gives Livery within the View; then she marries
with the Feoffee before he enters; whether has this entermarriage destroyed the
operation of the Livery within the view. 91
M.
Mandamus.
A Writ of Mandamus to the Master and Fellows of a College in Oxford, to
restore a Fellow; whether it lies, or not? 82, 83, etc.
Market.
Action upon the Case for keeping a Market in prejudice of the Plaintiffs
Market, does well lie, although the Defendant does not keep his Market on the
same day that the Plaintiff keep his. 69
Melius inquirendum.
V. 82
Misericordia.
Whether ought a Misericordia or a Capiatur to be entered upon a relicta
verificatione? 73
Misnosmer.
V. Cap. Excommunic.
Monopoly.
Whether is the Patent of Incorporation to the Canary-Company a Monopoly or
not? 18
Monstrans de faits.
The Plaintiff in Quare Impedit declared upon a Grant of an Advowson to his
Ancestor, and says in his Declaration, Hic in cur' prolat. but has it not to
show; moved, That forasmuch as the Defendant had gotten the Deed into his
hands, the Plaintiff might take advantage of a Copy thereof, which appeared in
an Inquisition found temp-Edw. sexti. and denied. 266
N.
Non-claim
DOes not bar a Title to enter for a Condition broken. 4
Non-conformists.
A Case upon the Oxford-Act against Non-conformist-Ministers. V. 68
Non-tenure.
Non-tenure, pleaded in abatement. 281 Non-tenure, when a Plea in Bar, and when
only in abatement. 249, 250
Notice.
When requisite, and when not; and whether Infancy be any excuse in such case
or not? 86, 87, etc. 300, 301, 302, 303, etc.
Novel-assignment in Trespass.
V. 89.
Nuisance.
It is no Nuisance to stop a Prospect, so the light be not darkened. 55 Whether
is it a Nuisance for a Ropedancer to erect a Stage in a Town or City? 76 V. 168,
169 V. 202
O.
Oath.
EXtra- Judicial Oath. V. Action upon the Case.
Obligation.
Whether or no may a second Bond be given is satisfaction of a former. 221, 225
Officer.
Investiture does not make an Officer, when he is created by Patent. 123
Orphan.
A man brought to the Bar by Habeas Corpus, being committed by the Court of
Aldermen, for marrying a City-Orphan. 77, 79, 80
Outlawry.
V. 90.
Oyer.
Of Letters Patents. V. 69
P.
Pardon.
WHat is pardoned by a Pardon of all Offenses? 102
Parliament.
V. Habeas Corpus.
Partners in Trade.
One of them becomes Bankrupt: the other shall not be charged with the whole;
otherwise, if one of them die. 45
Pasture.
Whether is a Custom to have a several Pasture, excluding the Lord, a good
Custom or not? 74
Pension.
A Parson has a Pension by Prescription. How may he recover it. 218
Perjury.
In a Court Baron, indictable. 55
Physicians.
The calling of a Physician does not Privilege a person, that is chosen
Constable. 22
Pleading.
An Executor pleads several Judgments in Bar; but for the last he does not
mention, when it was entered, nor when obtained, and the Plea was held to be
naught, upon a general Demurrer. 50 A Surrender into the hands of two Tenants
of the Manor, out of Court, secundum consuetudinem, etc. without saying, that
there was a Custom in the Manor, to warrant such a Surrender. 61, 62 V. A
customary way of Pleading in Bristow to an Action of Debt upon a Bond. 96
Pleading to an Indictment for not repairing the Highways. 112 Pleading in an
Action upon the Case upon a promise to pay money in consideration of
forbearance. 169 V. Tit. Prerog. Possessio fratris. V. 120
Praemunire.
An Action upon the Statute of Praemunire, for impeaching in the Chancery a
Judgment given in the Kings Bench; whether it lies or not? 59, 60
Prerogative.
Whether may the King relinquish his own, and traverse the Title shown for the
party, or not? and in what Cases? 276, 277, 278
Prescription.
A Prescription for Toll. 104, 105, 231, 232 A. prescribes for a way over B's
ground to Black-acre, and drives his Beasts over B's ground to Black-acre, and
then to a place beyond Black-acre; adjudged upon a Demurrer, That he could not
lawfully do so. 190, 191
Presentment.
Quasht, because it does not express before whom the Sessions were held. 24
Printing.
Whether are the Letters Patents good in Law, whereby the sole-Printing of
Almanacks is granted to the Company of Stationers. 256, 257
Privilege.
An Archdeacon privileged from the Office of Expenditor to the Commissioners
of Sewers. 282 V. Tit. Physician.
Prohibition.
To stay proceedings upon a Libel against one for teaching School; denied. 3 To
stay a Suit for calling a woman Whore, denied. 21, 22 Incumbent of a Donative
cited into the Spiritual Court, for marrying without License, prays a
Prohibition, denied. 22 Whether shall a Prohibition go to an Inferior Court,
for holding Plea, when the cause of Action arises out of their Jurisdiction,
till after such time as the Defendant has pleaded to the Jurisdiction, and that
his Plea be disallowed? 63, 64, 81 A Prohibition prayed for, that in the
Spiritual Court they cited the Minister of a Donative to take a faculty to
Preach from the Bishop. 90 Moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court,
because they proceeded to the Probate of a Will, that contained devises of
Lands, as well as bequests of personal things. 90 Prohibition to stay a Suit by
a Proctor for his Fees; denied. 167
Promise.
How a Promise may be discharged. 205, 206, 262
Q.
Quare Impedit.
WHen in a Declaration in Quare Impedit the Plaintiff must allege his
Presentation tempore pacis, and when he needs not. 230 Process in Quare Impedit
upon nonappearance of the Defendant by the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 12.
248, 249 Two Judgments in a Quare Impedit. 254, 255
Que estate.
A thing that lies in grant, may be claimed as appurtenant to a Manor, by a
Que estate in the Manor. 232
R.
Recovery, sc. Common Recovery.
VIde Guardian. Whether can an Infant, that suffers a Common Recovery, reverse
it when he comes of age? 49 What shall be barred by a Common Recovery, and what
not? 108, 109, etc. A Common Recovery suffered of Lands in Shrewsbury, and the
Liberties thereof; good to pass Lands in the Liberties of Shrewsbury, though
lying out of the Town of Shrewsbury. 206 The pleading of a Common Recovery. V.
218, 219 There are two Parishes adjoining, Rippon and Kirby-Marstone: and
within those two Parishes are two Towns of the same names: A man has Lands
within the Parishes, but not within those Towns: and suffers a recovery of
Lands in Rippon and Kirby-Marstone generally: but the Deed to lead the Uses,
mentions the Lands as lying in the Parishes of Rippon and Kirby-Marstone. 250,
etc.
Recusance and Recusancy.
An Information for not coming to Church, may be brought upon the Stat. of 23
Eliz. reciting the clause in it, that refers to 1 Eliz. 191 To an Endictment
for Recusancy, Conformity is a good Plea, but not to an Action of Debt. 213
Reddendo singula singulis.
V. 33.
Release.
A man makes a Release of all Demands and Titles, quid operatur? 99, 100
Reparations of Churches.
Parishioners how compellable to repair their Parish Church? 194, 236, 237 The
greater part of the Parish shall conclude the Lesser for enlarging the Church,
as well as repairing it. 236, 237 The Chancel of a Parish Church, whereof the
Rectory is Impropriate, is out of repair. Whether can the Ordinary sequester
the Tithes? 258, 259, etc.
Request.
An Action for keeping a passage stopped up, so that the Plaintiff could not come
to cleanse his gutter; ought the Plaintiff to lay a Request? 27
Reservation.
A Heriot or 40 s. reserved to the Lessor and his Assigns, at the Election of
the Lessor, his Heirs and Assigns; yet cannot the Devisee of the Lessor have
either the Heriot or 40 s. 216, 217
Return, false Return.
Action upon the Case against a Sheriff, for that he arrested such a one at the
Plaintiffs Suit, and suffered him to go at large, and at the day of the return
of the Writ, returned that he had his body ready. The Defendant demurs
generally. 57 In a like Action the Defendant pleads the Stat. of 23 H. 6. cap.
10. and adjudged against the Plaintiff. 239, 240 V. Action upon the Case.
Robbery.
An Action lies against the Hundred upon the Statute of Winchester, though the
Robbery were not committed in the Highway. 221
S.
Scandalum Magnatum.
MY Lord (...) is an unworthy person, and does things against Law and Reason.
Actionable. 232, 233, etc.
Scire Facias.
Scire facias upon a Recognizance in Chancery: there is a demurrer to part, and
issue upon part. Judgment must be given in the Court of Kings Bench upon the
whole Record. 29 Scias facias against Executors to have execution of a Judgment
obtained against their Testator; they plead, That a Ca. Sa. issued against him,
upon which he was taken, and that he paid the money to the Warden of the Fleet,
who suffered him to go at large. This held to be no plea. 194
Seal.
Whether does the Seals being broken off, invalidate a Deed, etc. given in
Evidence? 11
Seisin of an Office.
What shall be a Seisin of an Office and what not? 122, 123
Sergeants at Law.
What Sergeants Rings ought to weigh. 9 Privilege of Sergeants. 226
Statute-Merchant and Staple. V. Administrators.
Summons.
V. 197.
Supersedeas.
The very sealing a Writ of Error is a Supersedeas to the Execution. 28 The
Stat. of 13 Eliz. cap. 9. where it is said there shall be no Supersedeas, etc.
has no reference to the Court of Kings Bench, but only to the Chancery. 45 A
Writ of Error in Parliament in what Cases is it a Supersedeas, and in what
Cases not? 106, 285 V. 112 Whether is a Sheriff obliged at his years end to
deliver a Writ of Supersedeas over to the new Sheriff? 222
Survivor.
The Condition of a Bond is, That if the Obligor shall pay yearly a sum of
money to two strangers, during their two lives, that then, etc. Resolved that
the payment is to cease upon the death of either of them. 187
T.
Tenant in Common.
TEnant in Common sues without his Companion. 102
Tender and Refusal.
Where ever Payment will do, Tender and Refusal will do. 77, 78
Toll.
Toll-thorough. 47, 48 V. Prescription. Toll-thorough and Toll-traverse. 231,
232
Trespass.
Justification in Trespass. 75 Whether does an Action of Trespass lie for
immoderately riding a lent Mare? 210 In an Action of Trespass it appears upon
Evidence, that the Fact, if true, was Felony; yet does not this Evidence
destroy the Plaintiffs Action. Otherwise, if it had appeared upon the
Declaration. 282, 283
Trover and Conversion.
A Sheriff may have an Action of Trover and Conversion for Goods taken by
himself in Execution upon a Fieri facias. 30, 31 Trover and Conversion december
paririum tegularum and valorum, Angl. of ten pair of Curtains and Vallance:
held good. 46, 47 V. 135, 136, etc. many Cases of Trover and Conversion, and of
pleading in that Action. Trover and Conversion de tribus struibus foeni. 289,
290
Trial.
Motion for a new Trial. 2 An Action of Covenant is laid at York: issue is
joined upon a matter in Barwick; where shall the Trial be? 36, 37, etc.
Tithes.
Turfe, Gravel, and Chalk, not tythable. 35 If the Endowment of the Vicarage be
lost, small Tithes must be paid according to Prescription. 50 Tithes of Cattle
feeding in a Common, where the Parish is not certainly known. 216 A modus to
the Rector is a good Discharge against the Vicar. ibid. A Parson shall not have
Tithe both of Corn and of Sheep taken in pro melioratione agriculturae infra
terras arabiles, etc. ibid. V. tit. Custom.
V.
Venire Facias.
A Venire Facias returnable coram nobis apud Westminster. held good. 81
Venue.
A Venue refused to be changed, because the Plaintiff was a Counselor at Law.
64
Verdict.
When a Declaration will bear two Constructions, and one will make it good and
the other bad; the Court, after a Verdict will take it in the better sense. 42,
43 Matters helped after Verdict. 70, 74, 75 V. tit. Jeofails.
View.
A Jury never ordered to View before their appearance, but in an Assize. 41
Ville.
What makes a Ville in Law? 78, 117, 118
Visitation of Churches.
What Ecclesiastical Persons are visitable, and what not. 11, 12
University.
Indebitat. assumpsit against a College in Oxford, the Chancellor of the
University demands Conusance; whether is his Cause within the Privilege of the
University or not? 163, 164
Voluntary Conveyance.
What shall be said to be a Voluntary Conveyance within the Statute of
Bankrupts, and what not. 76
Voucher.
A Tenant in an Assize avoucheth out of the line, is it peremptory or not? 7, 8
Uses.
V. Covenant to stand seized. V. 175, 176, etc. A man granted a Rent to one to
the use of another, and Covenants with the Grantee to pay the Rent to him, to
the use of the Cestuy que use. The Grantee brings an Action of Covenant. 223
Whether is the reservation of a Pepper-Corn a sufficient Consideration to raise
an Use, or not? 262, 263
Usury.
V. 69.
W.
Wages.
IF a Mariner or Ship-Carpenter run away, he loses his Wages due. 93
Warrant of Attorney.
Judgment entered of another Term than is expressed in the Warrant of Attorney.
1
Warranty.
Feme Tenant in tail, remainder to her Sisters in Fee: the Tenant in tail and
her Husband levy a Fine, to the use of them two and the Heirs of the body of
the Wife, the remainder to the right Heirs of the Husband; with Warranty
against them and the Heirs of the Wife. The Wife dies without issue. 181 He
that comes to Land by the limitation of an Use may rebut. 192, 193
Waste.
What is Waste and what not? 94, 95
Will.
A Will drawn in the form of a Deed. 117 Whether must the Will of a Feme Covert
be proved? 211 The pleading of a Will of Land. 217
Witnesses.
Who are good Witnesses and who are not? 21, 73, 74, 107, 283
FINIS.

