A Complete NARRATIVE OF THE TRIAL OF Elizabeth Lillyman Found Guilty of Petty
Treason AND Condemned at the Sessions at the Old Bailey the 10 th. of this
Instant July.

To be Burned to Death, For the Barbarous and Bloody Murder of William
Lillyman her late Husband. With Her Confession and Penitent Behavior, since
such her Condemnation.

With Allowance.

London, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, at the Golden-ball, in
West-smith's-field, near the Hospital-gate. 1675.

She desired leave to say something to the people, which being granted her, she
began in a low voice as follows.

Good people you are come to see the sad end of a miserable woman. I have been
a scandalous liver ever since I was fifteen years old, and now God almighty has
taken this time to punish me for all my wickedness; I cannot but acknowledge
the murder of my dear Husband, though I must needs say, I never intended it,
but did it in my passion, and it is well known among my Neighbors how dearly I
loved him, I pray God I may be an example to you all, and that though I suffer
this cruel Death here, I may be delivered from the pains of hell fire for ever.

And after some private prayer by the Minister, she kneeled down her self and
prayed very earnestly, which much affected the standers by, and after went
cheerfully to the Stake where she suffered.

A True and Perfect Relation of the Trial, Condemnation, and Confession of
Elizabeth Lillyman, etc.
WHereas several Imperfect Relations and hearsay Reports may have been spread
abroad concerning this unhappy woman, and that Barbarous and Wicked Fact by her
committed, in Murdering her Husband: for the full discovery of the Truth
thereof in all Circumstances, it is thought convenient to publish this complete
and Impartial Narraaive and Account of the same.

THis woman's dwelling was lately, and for some Years had been, near the
Minories, between that and Goodman's-fields in the sad time of Londons
Calamity, by the terrible Sickness, 1665. She was very busy a Nurse-keeping,
or tending persons Visited with the Plague, and as it is supposed, got then
enough to help maintain her since: for though she were from thence-forwards
generally called Nurse, and pretended sometimes to take in Clothes to Wash, yet
she did not do any considerable matter of work, but lived a life somewhat
extravagant and expensive for one of her condition; This man, on whom she
committed this horrid murder, being the sixth that she had had.

She was Married to him somewhat above a year last past, who was a civil honest
laborious person, by name William Lilly-man, and by profession a Cooper
belonging to a Brew House, a lusty comely man, and not above thirty years of
age or thereabouts, which made her at first extremely dote upon him, but being
her self near threescore she was not a little tainted with the poison of
jealousy, which often is the disturber of the discreetest marriages, and
therefore might without matter of wonder prove the bane of this lascivious
heart.

Baiting her controversies sometimes on that account (for which it is generally
believed by their Neighbors she had indeed no occasion) till Satan taking the
advantage of her being in one of these Jealous moods (in which she used often
to threaten she would do him a mischief) prevailed on her barbarously to imbrue
her hands in his blood, and bring her self by taking away his life to a
shameful and untimely yet most just and deserved death. The manner and
circum^^ances of which bloody Fact were as follows, and so appeared to the
court by the Evidence on the trial, viz:

On Tuesday the -- of June last, the said William Lilly-man comeing home in the
afternoon from work to the house where they lodged in Swan-All^y, leading out
of the Minories into Goodmans Fields, and finding his wife absent, understood
she was at an Alehouse hard by in Glass-house-Yard at Nine-pins; VVhereupon
having occasion to have his shoes mended he carried them to a cobbler a friend
and countryman of his whose stall was just by that house where his Wife was,
and took with him a piece of cold mutton, and a dried Mackerel, intending to
eat his supp^r there, when he came to the Cobbler and had given him directions
he asked him to go drink; which he consented to, promising to come very
quickly, as soon as he had dispatched a little jobb he was about; before
Lillyman went into the Alehouse he asked the Cobbler for a knife to cut his
victuals, he having left his own at home, who lent him a very sharp long one,
which their trade commonly use to pair heels with; as soon as he was come
into the alehouse he sent into the yard for his wife, very lovingly d^siring
her to come and sup and drink with him; as she was coming in a Servant-maid
(unluckily as it proved in the consequence, but very innocently intending it
only for j^st and merriment) said to her: Ah Mistress Lillyman, little do you
think that your Husband and I have been together and that he gave me a bottle
of Ale at your house, or words to that effect, and indeed there was little
reason for her to think so, for in truth there was no such thing done, nor any
thing like it.

However the woman according to the nature of jealousy, taking it in the
worst sense, fell into an angry passion, possibly the sooner raised for that
she was before elevated with drink, so that coming into the room where her
Husband was, she was heard to say, Do you send for me to supper, you Rascal;
(or some other ill name) I will give you a Supper; and presently afterward
being all alone with him (the Woman of the house being gone for a pot of drink,
and the Maid for a Loaf for him) the said Elizabeth his Wife took up the
aforesaid long knife which he had borrowed of the Cobbler, and therewith stabbed
him under the lest papp, so that as the Surgeons afterward testified, it
pierced his very heart, and the Maid immediately returning he told her his Wife
had stabbed him, and desired her to call in his countryman the Cobbler; she
hearing him talk of being stabbed, thought at first he had been but in jest, but
seeing him look ill, with his hand fast on his breast began to be afraid, and
called the Cobbler, but before he could get in, the wounded man was got up from
his seat, and coming out met him, saying, Ah Countryman! this wicked Woman my
Wife has stabbed me with the knife which I borrowed of thee; all this while his
Wife stood by, and hearing this came up to him, and said, I stab thee Love? why
will thou say so? I have not touched thee? and thereupon proffered to kiss him,
but he with his hand putting her back said again: Ah wicked woman thou have
killed me: By this time, he fainting, the Cobbler taking him in his arms had put
him into one of the drinking rooms, and asked him where his hurt was, for as yet
they saw it not; Whereupon he pointed to his left, and said, Here, here my Wife
has killed me; which was the last Words he was heard to utter in this world,
for presently after he fainted quite away, and in short time dyed; his Wife
when she saw him so very bad would have made her escape and gone out at the
back door, but neighbors stopped her and sent for a constable, who carried her
before a justice of peace.

At her Examinati^on there, she behaved her self very strangely, seeming
altogether unconcerned at what she had done, and laughing at it: amongst many
other her silly answers, this was one, I wish my hands may never see my eyes,
if I killed my husband; the Magistrate gravely admonished her to be serious in
so sad a case, but she took little notice of it, but stiffly denied that she
murdered him, however the person being then quite dead, she was committed to
Newgate in order to her Trial.

And accordingly at the last sessions held at the Old Bailey beginning on the 7
th. of this instant July, 1675. She was Arraigned for Petty Treason, for
Killing her Husband: After the Endictment was read, and she required to plead
to it, she fell into a kind of raveing, crying out, she must see her Husband,
and she would not plead till she had him there: But this was but a feigned
Artifice or piece of Dissimulation, and she was at last brought to plead in
form: which she did, by saying, Not Guilty: The VVitnesses against her, were
the beforementioned Cobbler, the Woman of the house, and the Maid, at the
sight of which last she fell into another passionate fit, calling her, many
base, scurrilous names in open Court; The Evidence was plain, as you have
heard in all Circumstances, and the Prisoner had nothing to say for her self,
but impudent Denials of the Fact, and yet confessed that she had a wicked
intention to have done the said Maid a Mischief at the same time when her
Husband was Killed. So that the matter being evident, the Jury brought her in,
Guilty of the Endictment: And accordingly she received the usual Sentence for
persons of her Sex, in Cases of petty Treason, that is to say, To be Burned
until she be Dead.

The first night after her Condemnation, she seemed scarce at all sensible of
her condition, but on the next day, being the Lords day, she began to have some
remorse, confessing then to some friends that came to visit her, that she had
been a grievous sinner for many years, naming several particular sins that she
had been guilty of; yet still denied her self to have ever been guilty of
Murder or Theft; nor would confess the killing of her husband; since that
several Ministers have visited her, and have at last brought her to acknowledge
the Fact, and now she seems exceeding Penitent for the same, being come to the
place appointed for her execution on Towerhill, on M^nday the 19 th. of July,
instant.

FINIS.

