A Complete HISTORY Of the Pretended PRINCE OF WALES, FROM His supposed
Conception by the Late Abdicated Qeen, to the Fatal Exit of his True Mother
Mrs. MARY GRAY. WHEREIN All the Depositions of the Witnesses procured by King
James, are fairly stated and examined, and all that has been writ upon that
Subject consulted, in order to set the whole Intrigue in its true Light.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1696.

Price 6 d.

A Complete HISTORY Of the Pretended PRINCE OF WALES, etc.
BEfore we come to relate the manner of this Imposture, it will not be amiss to
take notice of the State of affairs at the time when it was set on foot, which
we find to have been thus. The late K. thought himself established on the
Throne by his success against the Duke of Monmouth and the Earl of Argile, and
having a standing Army on Foot; and being in good Terms with the Pope and the
French King, the Juncture seemed as proper as heart could wish to fall upon
Methods for securing the Roman Catholics against all future Enquiries into
former Misdemeanors, and to Introduce their Religion to be that of the Nation.
They knew the King to be growing old and infirm, and Experience had taught them
by Queen Elizabeth's Reign, that a Protestant Successor could easily destroy
the Romish Babel, which a Popish Predecessor had Rebuilt, and therefore the
only way to prevent such an afterclap was to entail the Crown on a Popish Heir;
these were the true Causes that gave Birth to this horrid Imposture, which
being once resolved on was managed thus.

The Earl of Castlomain was sent on a splendid Embassy to Rome, where though some
might put Satirical Taunts upon him by placing horns on the Gates at his
public Entrance, yet he brought matters to a good understanding betwixt the
King and the Pope, in Testimony whereof Count D' Ada was sent bither as Nuncio,
during whose stay at Whitehall the matter was concerted, and as necessary
praludiums to such a Religious Cheat, the Queens Mother must make presents to
the Lady of Lorretto, the King undertook a pilgrimage to St. Winefred's Well;
and the Queen to further her Conception makes a Journey to the Bath.

Such infallible means were enough to possess the Papists with an Invincible
Faith, that they must needs attain their end, and therefore they gave it out
with mighty assurance that the Queen would certainly have a Boy, and Mrs.
Celier in particular, who was very well known to be an Incomparable Widwife,
for ushering Popish shams into the world, in her printed Answer to the Queries
of a certain Physician, Vpbraided him and some others for Laughing at her
because she said her Majesty was full of Children; but it now proved so true
that she hoped we should have a Prince of Wales.

Then just about the time of this pretended Conception, Father Peter's was made
a Privy Councellor, to prevent its being contested by any of the Members of
that Honorable board; and to stir them up to make Orders concerning the Queen
and the Child, that so it might be spread through the Nation on the Credit of the
Privy Council. And the K. himself being Conscious of his own and the Queens
Imperfections, yet being willing to carry on the Imposture, was pleased to say
that her pregnancy was a very odd thing, Insinuating as if Heaven had wrought a
Miracle in favor of his Religion.

And to River the belief of her pregnancy in the minds of the people, he takes
a Journey to Chattam, and in the mean time a feigned report of the Duke of
Modena's death was ounningly conveyed to his Sister the Queen, who pretended a
danger of Miscarriage by the fright, and on this occasion the King was sent for
back in all haste.

Then about 22 Weeks after the supposed Conception, it is given out that her
Majesty had Milk in her Breasts, but tho several Protestants desired it, they
could never be permitted to View them, nay nor the Princess of Denmark, who was
at that time going to the Bath; and whose Testimony of its truth if the matter
had been really so, would have satisfied all those who entertained any doubt
concerning it; certainly had the thing been real it was so much the Interest of
the Court to have had the Princesses attestation of that affair, that they
would without all doubt have solicited her to see and Witness it; especially
seeing they knew that a fallacy was suspected.

The same circumstances of an Imposture are to be offered concerning her belly,
which was never shown to, nor suffered to be felt by any Protestant Lady, and
it was particularly observed by those who did make it their business that the
Circumference thereof was not large enough for a Child so lusty; nor was it
natural like other Women's, she did neither bend in the back, nor had she the
Extension and Protention of the Hips that is usual in Women with Child, and
that was particularly taken Notice of on this occasion in another Lady standing
by her.

Another Evidence of the Imposture was, the Parties immediately employed about
her, such as Mrs. Wilks, Delabadie Turini, etc. a busy rigid bigoted
Villainous people, who had cunning enough to manage such a Wickedness, and a
Conscience well enough prepared to digest it.

In was observed in the next place that no other Nurse was provided to be about
her but this Mrs. Delabadie, whereas every Person of Quality, nay, most rich
Citizens Wives, use to be better prepared; neither was there any Wet Nurse, nor
men Midwives bespoke, tho she used to be well provided in all those respects at
her other Deliveries.

Nay, her Doctors of Physic were not so much as ordered to attend against the
2d. Reclioning, and tho their Majesty's Respective Drs. have Chambers appointed
about their Lodgings, at all their Courts and at all times, whether there be
occasion or none, and do attend at such Chambers, yet her Doctors attended not,
though the occasion was so great, so that of four or five, there was but one so
near as to be there till after the pretended dedelivery, the reason of which is
plain, lest they should have been so deligent as to follow the Court, and by
being too near about her discover the Cheat.

Another mighty evidence of the Imposture was this, that the Queen for
preventing all octjcteions ought to have given notice of the House and Room
where she intended to lie in, that the Princesses, or any for them, might have
searched such Room to see whether there was no false door, traps or other
Conveniences for Juggling; or if there were to nail 'em up, and to have
suffered no more but one door, and to have likewise Guards kept at that door
for some days before the delivery, according to the direction of the Civil Law
in such Cases: and which if the pregnancy had been real the King and Queen
would certainly have not only agreed to but solicited that it might have been
done, when they knew that a Cheat was suspected; but instead of this, it was
sometimes given out that she intended to lie in at Windsor, at other times at
Richmond, sometimes at St. James's, and anon at Windsor again.

The Law before mentioned does also provide that the present Heir shall not
only have Liberty to search such Women's belly before hand (which was always
denied in this Case) but likewise tho they be satisfied of the pregnancy to
make use of after Circumspection lest a dead Child should be changed for a
living one, or a Girl changed for a Boy. And for the better prevention of an
Imposture, this Law does moreover direct that the Heir, or those deputed by
them might keep the pregnant Woman from going out of their sight so many days
before the pretended delivery; and unless such directions be followed, it
presumes that an Heir is not truly born, how much more then in this Case when
they were wilfully omitted and refused?

For instead of due notice beforehand as Law and reason does require, the Bed
was set up at St. James's but one day before the pretended delivery, and the
Queen was not at the place above 12 hours before the time, having neither Linen
Nurse nor Midwife about her; and that also in the night time when people were
asleep and could not know of her going thither, so that there was no time
allowed to make due Observation of passages as the above mentioned Law requires
in such cases.

We shall next Consider the place, to which one would think she should have had
the greatest A version imaginable, because all her other Children born there
died; but however Inconvenient it might be upon that account it was the most
Convenient place in the World for an Imposture, by reason of the situation of
the adjoining Convent, and at the same time the Park Gates were kept Locked for
their farther security.

It must also be observed that the Queen gave out she would come in July and
accordingly most of the Irish Nobility prepared to be here against that time
but the Countess of Tyrconnel was here in June at the delivery, because she was
one of the principal Persons concerned in the Intrigue; and therefore had
better Intelligence of the time than the rest.

Another thing which diverted the thoughts of those who were observant and
watchful enough to enquire into all the proceedings of this affair, was the
unexpected Imprisonment of the Bishops, which put all people into an amazement
and consternation; and prevented the attendance of those Prelates at the
pretended Delivery: Whose concern for the Protestant Religion, and that Justice
should be done the Princesses of Orange and Denmark, would have put them upon
demanding such satisfaction in the matter as should not have been consistent
with an Imposture, which could not have been reasonably denied to Persons of
their Character, and seeing their Testimony would have fully satisfied the
Nation, their being shut up in the Tower at that time gives strong ground of
suspicion, that their presence at the pretended Delivery could by no means have
been admitted, because then the Intrigue had been discovered, and their being
Prisoners in the Tower was the best pretense which could be made use of why
they should not be present.

But there is yet a much stronger ground of suspicion than any of those
hitherto mentioned, viz. That tho we had an Ambassador residing in Holland, yet
the Princess of Orange was not invited till almost the 10th of June, though her
Royal Highness was the Party who by the Law abovementioned should have had
notice of the Queens bigness; when she intended to lie in and where, and whom
it was their Interest to have present, for avoiding of all Objections, and the
Inconveniences which might otherwise accrue; but so it was, that she had no
Invitation till it was impossible for her to be here at the time of the
Delivery; whereas the Duchess of Portsmouth was sent for in April and came in
May. Nor is there any reason to be given why the Princess of Denmark should not
have been urged to be present if the pregnancy had been real, seeing her
presence might have been had much more easily, and would have every whitt been
as satisfactory to the people as that of the Princess of Orange; but so far
were they from such a Just and fair procedure, that it was so managed as the
two Ladies who ought to have been at the labor, for the Princess of Denmark
did not come till the Child was dress't.

Then as to those Protestant Ladies who were present in the room at the time of
the pretended Birth, it was so ordered by the Kings Introducing men, that there
was a necessity of covering the Queen, so that the said Ladies could not be
Witnesses to every thing that they ought to have seen, which gave, the Midwife
an opportunity of managing the Cheat as she pleased; and thus instead of being
able to depose that they saw the Child taken out of the Queens body, they could
only say that they saw it taken out of the Bed, and that such things may be
consistent with a Cheat is evident from the Instance in Siderfin's Reports
Temp. Car. II; where we have an account of a Woman who pretended to be
delivered in bed by a Midwife, but the Imposture was discovered afterward by
the said Midwife, and the true Mother.

Then quickly after the pretended Birth, the Child is sent to Richmond,
separate from the Queen, that she might be eased of the trouble of a forced
fondness, which being continually to have been acted must needs at last have
grown so Nauseous that it would have been Observed, whereas if the Child had
been really her own her fondness would certainly never have admitted of such a
separation, considering that he was her only Child, and one upon whose life the
restitution of the Popish Religion did so much depend.

The next thing that occurs is the time and manner of taking the depositions to
prove the reality of this pretended Prince's Birth. The time was after they had
been charged with the Imposture all over Europe, and when the Prince of Orange
was just ready to make his descent, whereas if the thing had been fair they had
it in their Choice to have avoided that trouble by having impartial Eye
Witnesses present viz. such as either or both of the Princesses or their
deputies, whose Testimony would have satisfied the World.

Then as to the manner whereas Law and Reason require that when any thing is
controverted the Opponent ought also to have Liberty to bring Witnesses, and to
put Cross Interrogatories to the Defendants Evidence, here was no such thing
practicable, most of the Witnesses were of the party tho of different
Religions, many of them had their dependence on the Court and none of them
durst swear any thing contrary to their humor without a manifest hazard of
Life and Estate, especially when the K. was present to overawe them.

Then as to the Depositions themselves they are all of 'em such as may be
consistent with a sham except that of the Midwife, who being a bigoted Papist
and a tool fitted to the purpose, her depositions will neither hold good in Law
nor Equity. But to come to particulars.

Q. D. was the first who gave her attestation but had no Oath administered to
her, and all that she said was, that she was sent for to the Queens labor and
stirred not from her till she was delivered of the Prince of Wales, but does
not say that she was there all the time of the Labor, nor that she saw the
said Prince really born of the Queens body.

Sir C -- S -- hs Affidavit relates to the Queens Conception, and he tells us
of two Reckonings one from the 6th. of September and the other from the 6th. of
October following, which was plainly a design to correspond with other Women's
reckonings, whose Children she intended to make use of, that if one missed the
other might hit, and accordingly it happened as appears by Mr. Fuller's
Relation, for one of them was brought to bed at St. Albans in her way from
Ireland and the other was delivered at St. James's, at the very time when the
Queen pretended to be in Labor.

M. T -- ni an Italian who carried on the Cheat of the Big-belly, swears that
on the 10th. of June in the Morning, the Queen being in Pain bid her send for
the Midwife, Ladies, and Servants, after which she staid with the Queen till
she was delivered of the Prince of Wales: This deponent does not say neither
that she saw the Prince come from the Queens body, and gives strong
presumptions of a Cheat; it being very strange that within an hour of the
pretended Labor the Queen should have the Midwife, Ladies, and Servants all
absent, so that it is plain they were sent from about her on purpose, that there
might not be too many Witnesses of the Imposture, and then when all things were
prepared, they were sent for.

Madam D -- n. Being one of those sent for from St. James's Chapel, swears that
when she came she found the Queen all alone, who bid her get ready the Pallet
Bed which stood in the next room, but it having never been Aired, she dissuaded
the Queen from making use of it; she deposes farther that she saw fire carried
into the Queens room in a Warming pan to Warm the bed, and that Mrs. Wilks
Warmed it. Its plain from this deposition that the Queen was left alone which
is wholly incredible had her Labor been real, and therefore must have been
contrived on purpose for the secrecy of the Cheat. The story of the Warming-pan
which was also covered, confirms the truth of the Assertion that the Child was
brought in the same from the true Mother: Nor is it supposeable, if the Queen
had been in such hard Labor as they give out (and as is evident the true
Mother had certainly been, seeing the Child was stunned) that she could have
been in a Condition to rise and have her bed Warmed; and then from Mrs. Wilks
Warming the Bed it appears plain enough that the taking the Child out of the
pan and putting it into the Bed was her province, which might easily be done,
the Curtains being drawn and none about the Bed but the Conspirators. Then as
to the Pallet bed. which had been most proper for the Queen if the pregnancy
had been real, here is a Cunningly contrived excuse why it should not be made
use of. And as to the fire in the Warming-pan there is none of the other
Deponents who swears that they saw it, which its probable they would have done
had it been to be seen, but as we noted before, the pan was covered so that she
could not well see it.

S -- d Another of the Deponents says that the Queen after some Lingering Pains
said she feared she should not be brought to bed a great while, and the Midwife
answered that she only wanted one thorough Pain to bring the Child into the
world. -- to which the Queen answered, 'twas impossible the Child lies so high,
and commanded the Deponent to lay her hand on her Belly. -- She adds that a
great Pain came at past nine of the Clock and the Queen was delivered, which
she knew because Mrs. Wilks plucked her by the Coat which was the Sign agreed on
that the Queen was delivered and of a Boy. This Dialogue betwixt the Queen and
the Midwife might be contrived on purpose to cover the Imposture, and the
Deponent does not say whether she laid her hand upon the Queens naked belly, so
that we are to suppose she laid her hand upon it no otherwise than through the
Bedcloaths, or if she did she gives us no account what posture she found it in,
and whereas she says that a great Pain came at past nine a Clock and the Queen
was delivered; it must be observed that after Eight of the Clock the Queen was
so well that the King and all her Servants left her alone, so that after her
beginning to feel pain and calling the people etc. It was not above three
Quarters of an hour ere she was brought to bed and yet she Skreems and they
talk of Pains as one that had long and hard labor, tho nothing is so
inconsistent with her being delivered abed covered, none assisting or helping,
though many standing by as in the most easy Labors, and the Child stunned as in
the hardest. Then by the Midwife's plucking the Deponent by the Coat which was
a Sign of the Queens being delivered of a Boy, it is apparent that the Deponent
no nor other saw the Child born, but only taken out of the Bed where it was
laid, Neither can any Midwife see of what Sex the Child is before the Burden
is drawn out, without detriment to the Woman brought to bed, which it is not
supposeable the Queen would hazard to satisfy the Midwife's Curiosity and
therefore this Item must be by a foreknowledge. The C. of R -- deposes no more
than that she saw the Prince of Wales when he was taken out of the bed which is
consistent enough with a Cheat as has been said already.

The Depositions of the C. of T --, Hen. Lady W --. and Mrs. A. C -- y are much
the same.

The C. of L -- d Deposes that she was not at the Labor, but was almost
constantly with the Queen while she was with child, has put on her Smock; seen
the Milk run out of her Breast and felt her Belly, so that she is sure she
could not be deceived. It is to be observed that this Lady does not swear she
saw the Milk run out of the Queens Nipple, and its easy enough by applying a
Sponge with milk to the Queens Breast to make milk drop through her Shift in that
part: or if she did really see milk drop from the Breast. its known that there
are Women who have milk in their Breasts that have not been pregnant for many
years. Then as to the feeling of her Belly, she does not say when, or whether
it was since the Jealousy of the Cheat became public, and it appears by her
being in Childbed her self at the very time when the Queen pretended to be so,
that she could not for a considerable time before put on the Queen's Smock as
she lay in Bed, without great inconveniency to her self: and the Queen might
easily Counterfeit such a Bigness as was necessary to deceive the Deponent,
considering the time she pretended to be gone with Child. Madam B -- y's
Deposition being of the same nature needs no other answer. Dame J -- a W -- e
deposes that she put the after burden in a Basin of Water, which being done
before the Drs. viewed it, gives just cause of suspicion that it was in order
to prevent a discovery of its not having the natural warmth it should have had,
if the Drs. had been minded to examine it.

Mrs. D -- die Swears that Mrs. W. the Midwife told her that immediately on the
next pain the Queen would be delivered which accordingly she was, but says
nothing of her having seen her delivered.

The Mar. of P -- s Swears in the same manner as to the milk, and that she saw
the Child taken out of the Bed; which as has been said already is consistent
enough with a Cheat.

The Lady B -- deposes that when she came, she found Mrs. Wilks sitting by the
Bedside with her hands in the Bed, which is the principal Evidence of a great
many, and was certainly done to keep the Child from smoothering. She deposes
also as to the Midwives saying that the next great pain the Child would be
born, whereupon the King called the Privy Counselors in, and immediately the
Queen shreeks, and the Prince was born: so that here is still nothing but what
may be consistent with a Cheat, for neither she nor any of the Privy
Counselors saw him born, nor had they the liberty of looking in that place
where the Child lay hid. Nor were there any of the Drs. that came time enough
to be at the Labor.

It is also to be observed that there is a Contradiction betwixt the Evidence of
Mrs. W -- s, and that of this Deponent Mrs. W. would intimate that as soon as
she cut the Navel string the Child cried: The Navel string was cut in bed, and
therefore it must by this reason cry in bed. But this Deponent B. says that she
opened the Receiver (so that the Child was out of Bed) and not hearing the
Child cry and seeing it lie black, she was afraid it was in a Convulsion fit.

Mrs. C -- e deposes that she saw all that was to be seen after the Birth of a
Child, that is an After-burthen and bloody Clouts, which were no doubt all of
'em conveyed into the Bed as the Child was, for she does not Swear that she saw
the After-burthen taken from the Queen's Body.

The Earl of M -- on, Says he found the Lord Craven waiting at the Queen's
Bedchamber-door which was then shut; and that just after the King opened it,
and called the Deponent and the Lord Craven in. The Deponent asked his Majesty
how the Queen was, who answered the Deponent, you are a Married-man and may
know these matters, the Water is broke, or come away. Its observable that there
was no body in the Room when this is said to be, but Mrs. W. so that it depends
wholly between the Queen, Mrs. W's and the King's saying so. He adds that all
the Company were called into the Queen's Chamber, where he heard the Queen
Groan, and presently after several loud Shreeks; and heard them say the Queen
was delivered. This is all nothing but hearsay; he does not swear that he saw
any thing: And as for the Shreeks and Groans it follows naturally, that seeing
they counterfeited a Birth, they must also counterfeit the Pains. All that he
says further to the point is that he saw the Midwife put her Hands and Arms in
the Bed and fetch out a Child, whence it is evident that he did not see the
Child born.

The E. of H -- n says nothing material, but that the King said the Queen came
according to her first reckoning; and yet we find she was very ill prepared for
it.

S -- er deposes no more but that she was at such a Labor, and went with the
Child into the little Bedchamber and took a warm Napkin and laid on its
Breast, believing the Child was not well; which was the very consequent effect
of not cutting the Navel.

The E -- s of M -- fort and M -- y Swear only that they heard the Ladies say
the Queen was brought to Bed, and that they verily believed it was the Queen's
Child, which is so superficial that there is no need of any Answer.

La -- y, So -- a, Bu -- y, say she came not till after Nine, and being told
the Child was born run to the Queen's Bedside, and heard the Queen say to the
Midwife, pray Mrs. W -- s, don't part the Child, which is nothing at all
material.

The next thing to be considered is the not cutting the Navel string, which
kept the Child from crying in the Bed or Warming-pan; for the Navel-string by a
natural ordination of Nature keeps the Child from opening the mouth, nor so
long as the Navel-string is uncut has the Child any occasion of the mouth,
considering that he receives nourishment by that as we do by the Mouth, and
till he was deprived of that he could not do any office that the mouth is
Instrumental to, so that notwithstanding it is an impracticable thing not to
cut the Navel string, yet they passed over that as being indeed obliged to do
it to keep the Child quiet, and by this means also they showed the afterburden
in a more identified manner of a late Birth (which they were obliged to) than
had the Burden been parted and not left fastened to the Child, for had they cut
it before, the Blood would either have run out, or retired and made that part
from whence it went cold, and much unlike the other.

The D. of Le -- x, Mrs. Ma -- l, Dame Is. Woe -- chapter and Lady P -- w do all of
them Depose that they saw milk often on her Majesty's Smock, etc. which has
been answered already -- And the latter Swears that she felt the Child stir in
the Queens Belly; but does not tell us whether she did really feel the Queens
naked Belly or only through the Cloths.

Mrs. P -- se Swears she heard the Q. Cry out, saw the afterburden and by the
washing of the Linen knew the Q. was in the same Condition that other Women use
to be in on the like occasion; which as has been said already might all of them
easily be counterfeited, and there is no doubt but the Linen made use of by the
real Mother might be pretended to come from the Queen.

The Lord G -- n deposes that he was called into the Bed Chamber and stood near
the Chimney where he heard the Queen Cry. Coll. G -- n deposes that the King
called them into the Bed Chamber after that he and several Lords of the Council
had waited about half an hour, whence it appears that they dared not to
approach till the King called. And Immediately after the Queen cried out
Extremely and said, Oh I die, I die, you kill me, you kill me, then presently
Mrs. D -- n made this Deponent the sign that the Child was born. The Lord F --
m waited on the Queen Dowager to Saint James's and led her into the Q.
Consort's Bed Chamber then went into the next room and heard the Queen Cry out
several times, and afterward saw the Prince as a Child newly born. Sir St. F
-- x's the Earl of M -- ves's E. of Pet -- h's A -- l's E. Su -- d's and Lord
Geff -- y's depositions all of 'em lay the stress on hearing the Queen cry out
and seeing the Child foul, and as the latter says reeking, all which is
consistent enough with a Cheat, for the Child might be brought in that
Condition from the true Mother's Apartments and yet appear as they have
deposed, Dr. W -- ly deposes he was present when the Prince was born, but does
not say he saw him born, he says likewise he saw him foul and the
after-burthen, and that he and other Physicians took two drops of blood from
the Navel string and gave it the Child in a spoonful of Black-Cherry water by
the Queens Command. Dr. Sc -- h says he found the Q. in good Condition, but
weary and panting (which it was easy for her to counterfeit.) And that the
above said Medicine of giving the Child some drops of Blood from its own
Navel-string being mentioned among the Ladies, he consulted Sir T. W -- ly and
the other Physicians, who allowed it as conceiving it no way dangerous, which
proves the falsehood of Mrs. W -- s and D -- e's Assertion, who said that it
was administered at the desire and advice of the Physicians.

Sir W. W -- ve deposes that her Majesty took astringent Medicines during the
time of her being with Child to prevent miscarriage, but does not swear that he
saw her take them. The like is to be said as to Mr. St -- lt -- d's preparing
Restringent Medicines for the Queen; seeing he does not Swear that he saw her
take them.

Dr. B -- is Deposition is only that he saw the Child in Mrs. Labady's lap, and
the Navel-string hanging down toward the Virile parts, which is nothing at all
to the purpose: And now having gone through all the Depositions, I shall conclude
with this Observation upon the whole, viz. That those that gave them in were
for the most part partial, unfit or illegal persons; and their Examination
managed with apparent design and partiality, so that if they had been really
more positive and particular than they are, it could not have been sustained as
Lawful Evidence.

Then if all this be compared with Mr. Fuller's Discovery, the Imposture can no
longer remain a doubt.

The Substance of his Discovery is thus, That in May 1688, the Countess of
Tyrconel, brought over with her from Ireland in the Monmouth Yacht, Captain
Wright Commander, two Gentlewomen bigg with Child, the first was brought to Bed
at St. Albans in her way to London, but the 2d whose name was Mrs. Gray, was
conveyed to the Palace of St. James's, and Lodged in two private Rooms over or
within the Lady Strickland's Lodgings in the narrow Gallery, between the
Queen's Apartment and the Great Chapel: In these Lodgings this Mrs. Gray was
delivered on Sunday Morning the 10th of June, the same day and but a little
time before the Queen pretended to be delivered. About the latter end of June,
this young Gentlewoman was removed to the Marchioness of Powis's Apartments, in
the same Gallery, the Marchioness being then Governess to the pretended Prince,
and Mrs. Gray was at the same time committed also to her Charge and Care.

At that very time Mr. Fuller being Page to the Marchioness, he did by her
command attend Mrs. Gray constantly, and supplied her with all necessaries; she
was very little visited by any but the Marchioness, and some of her Women on
proper occasions; she very seldom desired to stir over the threshold of her own
Lodgings, except sometimes to visit the pretended Prince, which she did with a
particular Zeal and Delight. Mr. Fuller constantly attending her thither and
back again he observed that nothing was so warmly fond of the Infant as her
self, and when as a peculiar favor she was permitted to take him in her Arms,
her Kisses and Embraces were more than usually tender and Passionate.

About the middle of July following when her strength was improved, it was
thought fit by some authority from Court she should be transported into France,
and accordingly Mr. Fuller, one Father Sabran and one Mrs. Jones attended her
to Dover; she expressed a great deal of trouble before she went, and the like on
her way, as being compelled to visit France against her Inclination; and when
she took her farewell of the pretended young Prince she betrayed an
extraordinary Concern, and burst forth into Tears. She was met at Dover by one
Father Gray a Priest, who pretended to be her Brother and Embarkt for Calis, in
order to be conveyed to the Convent of Benedictin Nuns at Paris, she having
been in a Nunnery in Ireland before.

Mr. Fuller being after this preferred to the Queen's Service, he went over to
France with her Majesty and the supposed Prince at the Revolution; and the
Queen putting great trust in him upon the Marchioness of Powis's
Recommendation, in February 1689, her Majesty sent for him to St. Germains one
Sunday night to her Chamber, where she kept being as 'twas reported indisposed,
by some Fright, her Majesty told him that he must prepare immediately to go for
England with Letters to the Lord Montgomery and others about extraordinary
business. She did accordingly give him her Letters, telling him that it was a
matter that nearly concerned the K. and her self, and if he should happen by a
strict search to be obliged to throw his Letters into the Sea or otherwise she
gave him a Ring, which he was to deliver to the Lord Montgomery, by way of
Credentials for what he had to say to him by word of Mouth, which was to tell
him that the same Woman which came from Ireland with the Lady Tyrconnel in May
1688, was stolen out of the Nunnery in Paris, where she was kept (there having
been a breach in the Garden-walls) and that it was the opinion of the French
Court that she had been assisted by some of the Prince of Orange's Friends in
Paris, to make her escape from thence, in order to come for England. She
Commanded him also to tell the Lord Montgomery that the French King had taken
all possible care to prevent her going off, but least his Endeavors might
prove ineffectual it was her desire that immediately after Mr. Fuller's Arrival
in England the Ld. Montgomery and others should take care to place people on
the Coast of England that might inform them when she Landed, and then they were
positively commanded to use all Endeavors to get her dispatched to prevent
whatever designs she might pretend to. Mr. Fuller having received his orders
set forward for England and came as far as Abbeville where he delivered a
Letter to Father Peter's requiring him to go to St. Omers to observe whether or
no the Woman might come that way in order to her embarquing for England, but
Mr. Crane Gentleman Usher to the late Q. arriving in the mean time with a
Counter order commanding him to return to St. Germans, the Q. told him that the
lost sheep was found at a private house in Paris, and was now under the care of
the Countess of Sussex.

The next day Mr. Fuller and Father Sabran went in one of the Queens Coaches to
bring the Countess and Mrs. Gray to St. Germains, where the latter was conveyed
privately to the Queen by Mr. Fuller, and she staid in her Majesty's Chamber,
together with the Marchioness of Powis, the Countess of Sussex and others above
an hour, and was afterward conveyed to a private Appartment belonging to the
Lady Powis where she continued a day or two, after which the late Queen and the
whole Court went to visit the French King at Marli three miles from St.
Germains, and that same Evening Mr. Fuller, Father Sabran, the Countess of
Sussex and Mrs. Gray went thither in the Prince's Coach with six Horses and
were conveyed to a room belonging to the Archbishop of Paris, while the
Countess went publicly to wait upon the French King and the late Queen; after
which Mr. Fuller, Father Sabran, and Mrs. Gray were conducted privately to the
French King's Backstairs, the poor Woman Lamenting her hard fate mean while,
which she said was occasioned by her last being in England, she grieved so
excessively that she fainted several times before they could get her to the
French Kings apartment, whither she was conducted by a Jesuit, and where she
continued about half an hour with the French King and the late Queen: being
brought down again by that same Jesuit, she wept bitterly and told Father
Sabran and Mr. Fuller, that now she must take her everlasting farewell of them,
and so she was carried away by the said Jesuit, and never more seen nor heard
of by Mr. Fuller though he made most diligent Enquiry after her at all the
English, Scots and Irish Nunneries in Paris and other places where he had great
acquaintance, and Father Sabran who was Chaplain to the pretended Prince and is
now his Tutor, did frankly tell Mr. Fuller that he believed she would not be
alive the day following, nor was it fit she should live.

He adds that besides his own knowledge in this affair there have been several
Letters and Papers found in Mrs. Labadie's Fathers Trunk relating to Mrs. Gray
and the whole Intrigue, besides several Corroborating proofs from diverse
persons of quality in Ireland, and others; as also the Captain that brought her
over from Ireland, and him that carried her over to France.

As to his not publishing his Narrative sooner, he answers, that it was laid
before the King and Queen in 1690. that many others have been examined in this
matter, whose depositions agree with his, and that the Lord Preston's and Mr.
Crone's Confessions upon Oath corroborate his, but that the Lord N -- would not
suffer him to Print his own defense, and did also prevent the printing of Madam
Labadies Letters, notwithstanding the Queens Command, pretending they were
misllaid.

To Conclude then, it is evident that all these things being laid together they
amount to as full and Concluding a demonstration of the Imposture of the
pretended Prince of Wales as the thing is capable of, except the parties
concerned should actually confess it. The bringing of this Mrs. Gray bigg with
Child from Ireland and her being brought to bed in St. James's at the very time
when the Queen pretended to be brought to be confirms all the Exceptions made
against the Evidence in the foregoing sheets, and seeing there is none of the
depositions but what may consist with a Cheat except Mr. Wilks's who was a tool
fitted to their purpose, it is the strongest Confirmation Imaginable that all
the steps of the Imposture here related are certainly true.

But the Imposture appears still in more lively Colors when we compare the
former part of this History with Mr. Fuller's Narrative, for it Mrs. Gray was
not the Mother of the pretended Prince, why should she above all others have
the Privilege of hugging him, why should she have discovered so much concern at
leaving him, why should the late Queen be in such a Mortal fright at her
escaping out of the Nunnery at Paris, why should she Imagine that the Prince of
Orange's friends contributed to that Escape, why should such bloody and
positive orders have been given for her destruction, and such care taken to
prevent her arrival in England or at Whitehall, and why when found again,
should the French King have been so much concerned in the matter as to Examine
her, and why should such bloody Expressions have dropped from Father Sabran's
mouth as that he believed she would not be alive next day, and that it was not
fit she should live, if they were not Conscious to themselves that she was the
true Mother and that therefore it was their Interest to prevent any possibility
of her making a discovery, the fear of which had put them into such disorder,
and the Consequences of which might have been so dangerous to them so that upon
the whole there is no man who is not possess't with invincible prejudice but
must needs be convinced of the imposture designed to be put upon the Nation in
this affair.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THe Character of Charles II. King of England. With a short account of his
being Poisoned. Written by a Person of Honor. With an Introduction exhibiting
the Different Characters given him by the several different Parties of Roman
Catholics, Churchmen, and Dissenters, etc. By another hand. London Printed,
and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms-Inn in
Warwick Lane, 1696. Price 6d.

The Art of Assassinating Kings, taught Lewis XIV. and James II. By the
Jesuits. Wherein is Discovered, the Secret of the last Conspiracy, formed at
Versailles in Sep. 1695. against the Life of William III. King of Great
Britain. And discovered at White Hall, Feb. 1691. Done out of French. Price 1s.

The State of Vtopia: Or a Dialogue betwixt Jack. and Will. concerning the
Times. Both sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall.


