THE Representation and Petition OF THE COVNCIL-GENERAL OF THE Indian and
African COMPANY TO THE PARLIAMENT

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year 1700.

To His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament.
The humble Representation and Petition of the Council-General of the Company
of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies.
May it please your Grace, and Right Honorable Estates,
IT is evident by the whole Strain of Three several Acts of Parliament,
together with His Majesty's Letters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kngdom,
in favors of the said Company, That the Wisdom of the King and Right
Honorable Estates did intend, that all such Advantages as might arise by the
establishing of such a Company, should be of as universally a National Concern
as possible; And in order thereunto, were pleased to endow it with large
Privileges and Immunities, suitable to the Circumstances of an Infant-Company,
and the Greatness of its Designs: And lest that it should fail in the
Execution, for want of a sufficient Stock to carry on such an Undertaking, all
imaginable Parliamentary Encouragement was given to Persons of all Ranks, Ages
and Sexes, both within and without the Kingdom, whether Natives or Foreigners,
to become Partners and Adventurers in the Joint Stock of the said Company, as
is singularly manifest by the 42d. Act of the 5th Session of this current
Parliament, specially calculated for that end only.

Upon the public Faith of having due Protection in the enjoyment of these
unquestionable Privileges and Immunities, as having received their Sanction
from His Majesty, and the unanimous Suffrage of the Great Council of the Nation
as aforesaid, many Persons of all Ranks and Degrees were thereby induced to
become Adventurers in the Joint Stock of our said Company, in so much that in a
very short time, a much more considerable Stock was subscribed for within this
Kingdom, than was ever before so much as proposed here upon any Project
whatsoever, since we were a Nation.

Being thus entered into a Society, We and our Constituents have pursuant to the
intentions of the Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent abovementioned, with
much care and trouble, and a great Expense of Treasure, after having struggled
with many unexpected Obstructions and Difficulties, settled a Plantation, by the
Name of Caledonia, in one of the most Healthful, Fruitful, naturally
impregnable, and every way valuable Places in all America, as is universally
acknowledged by all Persons of Experience in such Matters, as well as by the
General Consent of such as have been there: And as a manifest proof thereof
though our said Plantation be settled most strictly in the terms of the Acts of
Parliament and Letters patent abovementioned, yet it has raised the Jealousy
of some, and Envy of others, of the most knowing and considerable Trading
Nations in Europe.

But to our and the Nations great Surprise, and inestimable Loss, while we were
using all ordinary means, and big with the hopes of riveting that Settlement
upon a lasting Foundation, such was the further continued Chain of unexpected
Obstructions and most unaccountable Mal treatments that we met with, by
Proclamations of a very strange Nature, and otherwise, that the repeated
Misfortunes following thereupon, put us under an indispensible Necessity of
humbly petitioning His Majesty for allowing the Parliament to meet at the day
appointed in November last; in full confidence and Expectation of having the
most natural and cordial Assistance from those who first established our
Company* and promised it Protection; especially since all our other
Applications have hitherto proved ineffectual: But a meeting of the Estates in
Parliament at that time not quadrating (it would seem) with His Majesty's other
Affairs, a very considerable Body of the Nobility, Gentry, and Burgesses of
this Kingdom, thought fit, in a most dutiful and humble manner, by their late
Address, to represent to His Majesty, how deeply they were affected with the
Nations concern in our Company's repeated Misfortunes, and therefore humbly
Petitioned for the sitting of this Parliament as soon as conveniently might be.
And the King having been most graciously pleased to order the Meeting of the
Right Honorable Estates now in Parliament, We think our selves in all duty
bound to give His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner and the Right
Honorable the Estates, a short and naked Narrative of the several
Obstructions, and Misfortunes that we have been all along forced to grapple
with in the prosecution of our Company's Designs, to the end that the great
Council of the Nation, having a perfect View and full Knowledge of these
Difficulties which we now Labor under, may be the better able to to judge how
to apply a Remedy.

The first attempt for strengthening our Company's Interest and Stock was at
London, where a Subscription of 300000 sterling. was procured in Nine days time,
without so much as a public Advertisement, and many knowing Merchants were so
far convinced of the many Advantages that might probably arise from such a
Constitution, that they signified their willingness to be concerned for Triple
the Sum, if allowed: But not only did the Parliament of England by their
Address to His Majesty of the 13th of December 1695. and otherways, render that
Subscription ineffectual, but the House of Commons did also appoint a
Committee, to examine what Methods were taken for obtaining the Act of
Parliament, by which our said Company is established, who were the Promoters
and Advisers thereof; and did afterward impeach the Nominees in the said Act
of Parliament; notwithstanding the absolute Independency of this Kingdom:

Yet after all this Discouragement, we went on with our Subscriptions at home,
and made our next Effort for strengthening thereof beyond Sea, both in Holland
and Hamburgh: In the first of which places many eminent Merchants declared
their positive inclinations to be very considerably interested with us, and
gave some signal Proofs thereof, till they were made to understand by
Threatenings and other Insinuations, that a Higher Power would make them at
least very uneasy, if they persisted any further in their Resolutions of being
concerned with our Company.

And at Hamburgh, where we had the most promising Hopes of foreign Assistance,
the Commercii or Merchant-Company, entered into Contract with our Company's
Deputees, to join at least 200000 l. Sterling: to our Company's Stock; but to our
great Astonishment. His Majesty of Great Britains Ministers there, did, under
pretense of special Warrant from the King, put a full stop thereto, by giving
in A Memorial to the Burgo-Masters and Gentlemen-Councellours of that City,
wholly dis-owning the Authority of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent
above mentioned, and intimating that His Majesty would regard their entering
into Treaties with our Company as an Affront to His Royal Authority, and that
he would not fail to resent it, as having neither Credential Letters nor being
any otherways Authorized by His Majesty.

Upon notice whereof, we did in all humble Duty Address His Majesty in June
1697, for Redress of that open and bold Encroachment, upon not only our, but
also the Nations Rights, in its most fundamental Constitution, by endeavoring
to subvert the Independency of its Parliamentary Laws, expressly contrary to the
Law of Nations: All which His Majesty by His Royal Letter from Flanders in July
1697, Promised to take into Consideration, as soon as he would return into
England, and that in the mean time, His Majesty would give Orders to His
Ministers at Hamburgh, not to obstruct our Company in the prosecution of its
Trade with the Inhabitants of that City.

In the full Confidence of His Majesty's Royal Promise, we thought our selves
secure, and took our Measures accordingly, till to our further surprise, we
found by several Instances, that His Majesty's said Ministers were as wickedly
bent against us as ever, and still denying that they had got any such Orders
from His Majesty: whereupon the Directors of our Company, did, by their Letter
of the 28 of September 1697, expostulate in the first place, with both the then
Secretaries of State, about that further Dis-appointment, but having still no
Redress the rein, we did in most humble and dutiful Manner, by our second
Address of the 22d. day of December 1697. lay the whole Matter again before His
Majesty; And did likewise, at the same time, not only humbly Represent the
Premises to His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, together with the
train of ill Consequences that must necessarly attend such Treatment, if not
prevented by an early Redress; but wrote also separatly to both the Secretaries
of State, and such other Noble Persons of the Government, as happened to be
then at London, To use their Joint-Interest, for procuring Justice, in a Matter
of such Universal Concern to the Honor, Interest, and Independency of the
whole Kingdom.

All the Answer we obtained, was by a Letter of the 17th. of January School, from
both the Secretaries of State: That the King said, He had already given Orders
to His Resident at Hamburgh in that Matter, conform to His Royal Letter from
Flanders, in July 1697, which was then communicated to the Company.

By which Answer, together with what repeated Advices we had at the same time
from Hamburgh, that the English Ministers there, had still positively disowned
their having got any such Orders, we were put out of all Hopes of having any
Redress, until we should have an Oppertunity of laying the whole Matter before
a Meeting of the Estates of Parliament.

But in the mean time we proceeded, with all the Strength we had (though
extremely weakened by the Treatment above-narrated) to make the best
Preparations we could (considering the Scarcity of these Years) for fitting out
an Equipage of Ships, Men, Provisions, and other Necessaries, for settling a
Plantation in America, in the Terms of the Acts of Parliament, and Letters
Patent abovementioned: And its evident by the very Constitutions of the
Colony, that they were calculated more for the general Advantage of the Nation
and Posterity, than for the particular and immediate Benefit of the Adventurers.

And the Parliament happening to meet the very next Day after our Ships had
sailed, we did, by our Humble Petition of the 22d. of July School, Represent to
his Grace, His Majesty's then High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable
Estates then assembled in Parliament, the Treatment which our Company met with
at London and Hamburgh as aforesaid, the great Prejudices which we had
sustained thereby, and the many further Inconveniences and evil Consequences
that must necessarly have followed thereupon, if, upon any Account whatsoever,
the Parliament should happen to neglect the taking immediate Cognizance of such
Usage.

And the Parliament having thereupon, by their Unanimous Address of the 5th. of
August School, to His Majesty, thought fit to manifest their own, and the whole
Nations Concern in that Matter, earnestly entreating, and most assuredly
expecting, That His Majesty would, in His Royal Wisdom, take such Measures, as
might effectually vindicat the Undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said
Company, and support the Credit and Interest thereof; And the Parliament
likewise, by the same Address, recommending the Concerns of the said Company to
some special Marks of His Majesty's Royal Favor, as that Branch of the Trade
of this Kingdom, in which they, and the Nation they represented, had a more
peculiar Interest; The Court of Directors of our Company were thereby
encouraged to renew their Application to His Majesty, with relation to the
Memorial given in by His Ministers to the Senate of Hamburgh, (the same being
specially mentioned in the Parliaments Address:) And in Consideration of the
Damnages sustained by the Company, through Means of that Memorial, the
Directors humbly Petitioned, That His Majesty would be pleased, for their
Encouragement at that time, as a Gracious Mark of His Royal Favor, to bestow
upon them the two smallest of the Frigots, then (and to this Hour) lying
useless in Bruntisland Harbor.

But our Company having no manner of Answer to either of these, and being
assured by several Letters from Hamburgh, That both the English Ministers
there, had positively denied their having received any such Orders, as were
long before promised, and declared to have been given, with relation to that
Memorial, the Court of Directors of our Company did, by their Letter of the
29th. of November School, transmit Copies of the said Letters to the Viscount of
Seafield, then sole Secretary of State, and entreated his Lordship, to procure
some speedy and effectual Answer from His Majesty to the Contents of both that
Letter, and their former Petition.

The Secretary, by his Letter of the 13th. of December School, returned for
Answer, That he would take the first convenient Opportunity he could have, to
represent that Matter to the King, but that he could not expect to have it for
some time, because His Majesty was then very much employed in the Affairs of
His English Parliament.

We thereupon waited a full Month, in expectation of some further Answer, but
getting none, our Court of Directors did, by a Letter of the 13th. of January
1699, put the Secretary again in mind of our said Petition of the preceding
August, and Letter of the 29th. of November.

The Secretary, by his Letter of the 7th. of February 1699, signified, That he
had presented our Company's Petition to His Majesty, and was commanded to let
us know, that there being Accounts, that the Ships belonging to the Company
were arrived upon the Coast of America, and the particular Design not being
communicated to His Majesty, He therefore delayed to give any Answer, until he
should receive certain Information of their Settlement.

Though we could not but be surpised, to find all our former Addresses and
Petitions, about Matters of such weighty Concern, as are above-narrated,
Answered, after so long Delay, only with a seeming Charge, for not having
communicated to His Majesty a thing that was never in the least demanded of us,
by either the King, Parliament, Privy Council, or Ministers of State, we being
limited to settle in the Terms of the Acts of Parliament, as we should be
Answerable: Yet upon the very first Advice we had of our Colony's Settlement in
Caledonia, we, by our Letters of the 31st. of March, and 1st. of April 1699,
gave a very full and dutiful Account thereof to His Majesty, and to both the
Secretaries of State, together with an Account of the French Designs
thereabouts, and of what Import our said Settlement (if duly protected) might
prove to the Interest and Security of all His Majesty's Dominions, and referred
the same, together with the Contents of our former Petitions, to His Majesty's
Royal Consideration.

About this time it was, That His Majesty was pleased to call the President of
the Session, and the Advocat to Court, to the end (as we understood) that they,
jointly with both the Secretaries of State, might, in a Conference with several
of the English Ministers, satisfy His Majesty, as to the Legality of our
Company's Settlement: Which (by all that ever we could learn) was then (and
otherways since that time) made clear beyond all manner of Dispute.

But while, in the mean time, we were pawning even our own particular Credits,
for sending the needful Supplies of Ships, Men, Provisions, Arms, Ammunition,
and other Necessaries, for securing so valuable a Settlement to this Nation, we
were astonished to have Advice, That, by Orders from England, in January 1699,
Proclamations had been emitted, in the Months of April and May, over all His
Majesty's Plantations and Territories in America, strictly Intercommuning our
Colony, under very severe Penalties to be inflicted on the Contraveeners of
these Proclamations, in regard that His Majesty (as these Proclamations
narrate) was unacquainted with the Intentions and Designs of the Scots settling
at Darien.

As we humbly considered these Proclamations to be such, as were never before
published in those parts, against any other People upon Earth, and of so
Barbarous a Nature, as we thought, no Good Christians would put in Execution,
even against Infidels; So finding our selves unquestionably warranted by all
Laws Humane and Divine, we persisted in our Endeavors for maintaining that
Settlement, as hoping, that, through means thereof, this Nation might, in time,
have an Opportunity of raising it self above the open Contempt, Reproach and
Insults of its unkind Neighbors, and of propagating the Gospel amongst the
Ignorant good Natured Indians of those parts.

But before our Recruits could possibly arrive at Caledonia, our Colony got
certain Accounts of these Proclamations; and finding at the same time, the sad
Effects thereof, by being denied any the least Help, either for Goods or Money,
at Jamaica, from whence they had formerly Supplies; And that in the
Proclamation issued by Sir William Beston, Governor of that Island, he had
positively declared, That by their Settlement in Darien, they had actually
broken the Peace entered into with His Majesty's Allies (which they believed he
durst not venture to have done without a sufficient Warrant) And finding
themselves thereby to be of consequence declared Pirates, without any previous
Summons or Hearing, contrary to the Customs and common Usage of all Nations,
even in the case of real Piracy, and founding a Belief, at the same time, on
the Treatment which they knew our Company had formerly met with in Europe,
without being Redressed therein, that we were not in a Condition either to
supply or protect them, they unhappily took the Alarm, under such a General
Consternation, as divested them not only of all manner of patience to struggle
with any Inconveniences they lay under at the time, but also of all manner of
prudence, in taking any reasonable Measures either for their own Security, or
for our Company's interest. In the midst of which Confusion those of them who
had any bad Designs (as we could not well suppose such a Number to be free of
some) made use of these Proclamations as handles, by which to perpetrate their
own several ends, and easily persuaded all the rest to leave the Settlement:
Which they unadvisedly did the 20th of June last; And by that means not only
have the Ships, Men and Goods, which were there at that time, been exposed to
the Arbitrary will of those to whom the Execution of those Proclamations was
given in Charge, but even all our subsequent Measures brought into inevitable
disorder.

Upon Information of all which, we did, by our humble Petition to His Majesty
of the 19th of October 1699, in all humility and earnestness, beg, That His
Majesty would in His Fatherly care for the good of our Company in particular,
and of the Nation in General, be graciously pleased to give special Testimonies
of his Majestys Royal Protection to our Company at that Juncture, and
particularly to take off the Force and effect of those Proclamations which have
been so prejudicial to us, and to signify his Royal pleasure to the Governors
of his Plantations in America, that our Colony might besupplied in the common
and ordinary way of Commerce as those of other Nations are; And that in the
mean time His Majesty would be graciously pleased to allow the Estates of
Parliament to meet at the day appointed in November last, or as soon as
conveniently could be, to the end that their Advice and Assistance might be had
in such a weighty and General Concern.

We likewise, by our humble Address to His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council of the 20th of October 1699, Represented what we thought in duty and
prudence necessary, with relation to the Contents of our said Petition to his
Majesty, Humbly referring the whole to their Lordships most serious
consideration, and praying that they would be pleased to do us all the good
Offices with His Majesty that they would think most expedient for supporting our
Company and Colonys Interest; and to give him an account of our Company's hard
Circumstances, and how much the Honor and Interest of the Nation stood
concerned therein.

His Majesty was graciously pleased, by His Royal Letter to us of the 2d. of
November 1699, to declare that. He did very much regret the Loss which the
Kingdom and the Company had lately sustained, That he would upon all occasions
protect and encourage the Trade of the Nation. That he would take care that His
Subjects of this Kingdom should have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce
with his English Plantations that ever they had formerly, and that he would
order the Parliament to meet, when he would judge that the Good of the Nation would
require it.

But, in some short time thereafter, while we were solacing ourselves with the
Hopes of having His Majesty's protection, not only as a Company established, by
His Royal Authority, with the Advice and Consent of Parliament, but also as
Subjects, making all the Preparations we could, to send the needful Supplies
and Advices to those who were last sent for Repossessing the same Settlement:
We were further astonished to have Advices that, by second Orders from England,
another Fleece of Proclamations had been emitted over all the English
Plantations in America, particularly on the 5th. of September last in Barbados,
etc. And that in compliance with the intent of these Proclamations, Our People
that went along with the Rising-Sun, were in November last, positively denied
Wood and Water at Monserat, a Privilege never before denied to any other
Nation: And by a Letter of the 29th. of January last from the Commander of
another of our Company's Ships, we are assured that they were positively denied
Anchoring at St. Christophers by the Governor Colonel Norton, who out of his
own Mouth declared to the Commander of our said Ship, That he did it by new
Orders which he had received about a Month before; although at the same time two
Dutch Ships were then Watering there; which we have since confirmed to us by
Letters from Mr. Daniel Mackay, one of the Councillors of our Colony, dated at
Port Royal in Jamaica the 13th. February last: By which Letters, he informs us
likewise, That when he waited upon the Governor of that Island, concerning our
Company's Ship the St. Andrew lying in that Harbor, The Governor declared to
him, That though the said Ship were fitted for going to Sea, he would not suffer
her to go, without a special Order from England for that Effect.

We likewise humbly beg leave to inform Your Grace, and Right Honorable
Estates, That amongst our Company's many other Losses and Misfortunes, a Ship
called the Dolphin, ladned with a valuable Cargo, belonging to our Company,
struck Unfortunatly on a Rock, by which she sprung a Lake, and being forced to
run ashore under the Walls of Carthagena, to escape Shipwreck, the said Ship
and Goods were by the Spaniards (His Majesty's Allies) violently seized and
disposed of as Prize, and the Men also to the Number of 30 and a Boy, detained,
and made close Prisoners, not only contrary to the Law of Nations, (we being
then in profound Peace with them) but also contrary to the express Terms of the
10. and 11. Articles of the Treaty concluded at Madrid the 8/18 Day of July
1670, between the Crowns of Great Britain and Spain.

By our dutiful Address of the 4th. of December 1699, we humbly Petitioned His
Majesty, That He would be graciously pleased to take these Proceedings of the
Spaniards into His Royal Consideration, so as that speedy and effectual
Measures might be taken for the Redress of these Damages, and the freedom of
these distressed Prisoners.

In Answer to which, His Majesty was graciously pleased, by His Royal Letter of
the 10th. of January last, to signify, That He was resolved in the Terms of the
Treaties to demand from the King of Spain, that these Prisoners should be set
at Liberty.

Yet some of the most considerable of these Prisoners being transported above
half a Year ago to Old Spain; We have frequent Advices from them by Letters,
dated in Cadiz-Prison, That they and all the Crew have been most Barbarously
used, and that they themselves are still kept close Prisoners, under very
severe Treatment, Copies of which Letters we have some Months ago transmitted
to the Secretaries of State.

By all which, it cannot but evidently appear to Your Grace and Right
Honorable Estates, that though we have all along used our best Endeayours to
wrestle through these almost unsurmountable Difficulties, and exerted even our
utmost efforts for retrieving our Losses, as much as possible, by endeavoring
to repossess and mantain so valuable a Settlement; And though we have certain
Advice of its being Repossess'd by our People, and that we have taken all
imaginable Measures for their present Supply: Yet we have too just ground to be
fully persuaded, That unless the King and High Court of Parliament, do speedily
Support, Protect, and Assist us, in the Prosecution of our Company's lawful
Designs, that all our Past, Present, and Future Endeavors must, to the Nations
indelible Reproach and Dishonor; as well as to its and the Company's
unspeakable and irreparable Loss, prove unavoidably abortive.

May it therefore please Your Grace and Right Honorable Estates, to take the
several Matters of Fact abovementioned, into your most serious Consideration;
To Vindicat, Support, and Protect us in the Enjoyment of our lawful
Privileges, both as a Company, and as Subjects of this free and independent
Kingdom, to take such Measures, as You (in Your profound Wisdom) may judge most
Effectual, for repairing the many Damages we have already sustained, and for
assisting us in the further Prosecution of our Company's lawful Designs; but
more especially, for the mantainance of our just Right and Title to the
Settlement of CALEDONIA, and the Enjoyment of such Advantages as (if duly
Protected) may probably arise thereby.

Signed at Edinburgh the 16th. Day of May, 1700. In Name, Presence, and by
Warrant of the said Council-General by, MARISCHALL I.P.C.G.


