Lately Printed for J. Walthoe.
THe Pleadings and Arguments of Mr. Finch and Sir Robert Sawyer, the Kings
Solicitor and Attorney General; and Sir George Treby, the Recorder of London,
and now Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and the late Chief Justice
Pollexfen, for the City of London; with the Judgment Entered thereupon. The
whole Proceedings faithfully taken from the Records. Wherein is comprised all
the Learning of Corporations, whether Forfeitable, how, and for what; and
whether a Corporation can be surrendered. Which Points do not only concern the
City of London; but all other Corporations in England. In Folio, price 6 s.

Lex Custumaria; Or, A Treatise of Copyhold Estates, in respect of the Lord
and Copyholder. Wherein the Nature of Customs in general, and of particular
Customs, Grants and Surrenders, and their Constructions and Expositions in
reference to the thing granted or surrendered, and the Uses of Limitations of
Estates, are clearly Illustrated. Admittances, Presentiments, Fines and
Forfeitures are fully handled, and many Quaeries and Difficulties by late
Resolutions settled. Leases, Licenses, Extinguishments of Copyhold Estates, and
what Statutes extend to Copyhold Estates are explained. And also of Actions by
Lord or Tenant, and the manner of declaring and pleading, either generally, or
as to particular Customs, with Trials and Evidence of Custom, and of Special
Verdict. Together with a Collection of many Cases, wherein a Copyholder may
receive relief in the Court of Chancery. To which are annexed Presidents of
Conveyances, etc. In Octavo, price 5 s.

THE Complete Sheriff: Wherein is set forth, His OFFICE and AUTHORITY; With
Directions, how and in what manner to Execute the same, according to the Common
and Statute Laws of this Kingdom, which are now in force and use: And the
Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges in diverse late Cases, in the several
Courts of Westminster, relating thereunto.

Likewise of Undersheriffs and Their Deputies; and where the High Sheriff
shall be Answerable for their Defaults, and where not, etc.

Together with the Learning of

Bail Bonds; with an Explication of Stat. 23 H. 6. cap. 10. and Pleadings
thereon. Retorns of Writs, Remedies against Non Retorn and Faux Retorn, Habeas
corpus, Venires, Challenges and Enquiry of Damages. Prisoners and Prisons.
Execution by Fieri fac', Elegit, etc. Escapes, Actions and Pleadings therein.
Fresh Pursuit, and other Pleas. Attachment, Amerciament: Actions, Declarations
and Pleadings on the Sheriffs Nonfesance or Male-fesance. Customs of London, as
to Prisons, Courts, Process, Sheriffs Fees, Extortion, Sheriffs Accounts, etc.
To which is added, The Office and Duty of Coroners.

-- Deus nobis haec otia fecit. London, Printed by the Assigns of R. and E:
Atkyns, Esquires; for John Walthoe, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Vine-Court, Middle Temple. MDCXCVI.

The PREFACE.
WHEN Sir Edward Coke in his first Institutes, fo. 168. tells us, That the
Sheriff has Triplicem Custodiam: (1) Vitae Justitiae. (2) Vitae Legis. (3)
Vitae Reipublicae, he thereby gives us a short, but pithy Description of this
Important Office. And if Execution be the Life of the Law (as without doubt it
is) it seems to be seated in the Sheriff, as in the Heart, which is primum
vivens, and ultimum moriens. Original Process moves and is directed to him;
Subsequent Proceedings are Circulated in him, and at last are Finished and
completed by him.

This gives us to Understand, not only the Importance, but the Extensiveness of
the Sheriffs Office. Especially when we Consider how many Thousands of Families
have Suffered irreparable Ruin by the Ignorance or Carelessness (not to say
worse) of Sheriffs and their Officers; Nay, they themselves failing in the due
discharg of their Duty, have oftentimes rendered themselves Obnoxious to
chargable Payments and difficult Defenses.

Certainly then, to understand well the Law about Sheriffs, and their fit
Management and Demeanor in all the Branches and Circumstances relating to their
Office, is a thing of as great Consideration as any that can be propounded to
us, as Members of a Body Politic.

We have indeed many that have Treated of some Parts thereof ( inter alia) as
Crompton, Kitchen, Greenwood etc. But I know but two that have designedly
Undertaken this Title.

Mr. Dalton (a Person of Great Learning and Industry) has discovered much
Reading in our Old Books, and is also of very great use to direct us in CASES
that may seldom and rarely happen; and yet there is much of him now Antiquated,
and diverted into other Channels. The Receiving Fee-farm Rents, Waifs, Estrays,
Deodands, Wards bona Felonum, etc. seldom or never troubling the Sheriff,
having been Extinct or Aliened by Act of Parliament, or granted to Lords of
Manors, or other Persons.

Besides, some things are there delivered for Law, and so might pass in his
time, which have received quite contrary Resolutions; and Thousands of Cases
have happened since, which are not to be found in him, nor in the least mentioned
by him. Neither has he been so happy as we could wish, to Treat Methodically of
Rescousers, Escapes, etc. which make a great Figure in our Books; and he has
totally omitted (unless it be sparsim) the proper Remedies against the
Nonseasance or Male-feasance of the Sheriffs and their Officers. I have, in
many Titles, directed you to refer almost wholly to him, as not being willing
to Transcribe them; but they are such as are Common, and known of course, or
else seldom or never practicable.

Mr. Wilkinson is (for so much as he has Undertaken) Neatly and Judiciously
done: But as to the Office of SHERIFFS, though the Book bears that Title; yet it
is the least part thereof, not exceeding above Four printed Sheets; so that we
cannot think that sufficient Direction to us. Nor have either of them given any
Directions as to the Laying of Actions, Declarations, Pleadings, and Trials or
Evidence; and therefore I have been the more careful to place them under their
proper Titles.

Upon these Reflections, it seems not Unreasonable to imagine, That a Treatise
of this Nature may find some Acceptance, and meet with a favorable Reception,
as well from Gentlemen (who are, or may be capable for this weighty Office, and
thereby be better enabled to Serve their King and Country, and also Themselves)
as from the Students and Practisers of our Common Law.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF Counties. When the Realm was divided into Counties. Vicecomit.
notatio nominis. Sheriffs how made in former times, how at this day, the
Sheriffs honor Power and Privilege. His Office not apportionable. What he may
do as Conservator pacis. How favored in the Execution of his Office. Of his
Assistance. In what Things and Cases he is restrained. Not to Let County or
Hundred to Farm, etc.

CHAP. II. What the Sheriff must do at the entrance into his Office. The Form
of the Writ of Discharge of the Old Sheriff. The Form of bis Oath. How and
before whom he is to be Sworn and the Retorn. The Cities and Towns in England
which have Sheriffs, and how many each has. Of Delivery of Writs and Prisoners
by the Old Sheriff to the New. Till what time the Old Sheriff or his Officers
may Act. What Is to be done in Case of the Kings Death. What shall be said a
good delivery of Prisoners, and how to be made. The Form of the Indenture of
setting over the Prisoners and the Writs. The Form of the Retorn of those that
have been executed by the Old Sheriff. What Acts may and must the Old Sheriff
do after his Discharge, and what remedy against him for a Misdemeanor in his
Office. When and where the New Sheriff must Read his Patent, and make his
Deputies in the County and Courts above. How and in what Cases or not, his
Office is determined before his Year be out.

CHAP. III. Of Undersheriff. His Nature and Oath. In what Cases the Sheriff
might execute the Office in person. He cannot abridge the Under-sheriffs Power
Of the Sheriffs Deputy in the County and Courts above. Pleading by the Deputy.
Of Rescue from him. What Bonds or Covenants between the High Sheriff and the
Undersheriff, Bailiff, Gaole^^, the High Sheriff shall be answerable for or
not, and what Action shall be brought against the High sheriff, Under sheriff
or Gaolers, Cases and Resolutions about the Rule Respondeat Superior. Where and
in what Cases the Lord of a Franchise shall be answerable. Of Trials, by the
Sheriff, or Sheriffs Certificate, or by the Record.

CHAP. IV. Of Bailiffs. Of Bailiffs of Hundreds, their Nature, Office and Oath.
Of Special Bailiffs, and of Premises on making of Special Bailiffs to save
harmless from Escapes. Of Bailiffs of Franchises, their Nature, Power, Office.
And of Retorns by them, the manner of Pleading by Bailiff of Franchises. In
what Cases the Sheriff may enter into the Liberty of Bailiffs of Fees or
Guildable.

CHAP. V. Of the County Court. The Nature, Style: the Jurisdiction as to the
Summons it holds. Plea of time and place. The Process, the Forms of the
Original Process. Of Execution of County Clerk. Adjournment of Court. Of
Replevin. The Sheriffs Office and Demeanor therein, and the Retorns, and what
are good or not. Pone Withernam, the manner of Replevying. The Retorno habendo.
Second Deliverance. Property. Recordare. Privileges in Replevin. The Form of
the Bond for Security, of Accedas ad Curiam and Resalo. Of the Writ of
Justicies of the Sheriffs Town. The Jurisdiction and Pleadings.

CHAP. VI. Of the Original Process in real Actions, and in personal Actions,
with the Retorns. Summons and Attachment of Mean Process. What Arrest by the
Sheriff or Bailiff shall be good or not. Of the Bailiffs showing his Warrant,
as to the time of the Arrest before or after the Retorn, in respect of the
persoons Arrested of Non omittas, who are Privileged or Protected from
Arrests, or not in regard of Person or Courts. Where Arrest shall be lawful or
not, in respect of the Warrant. Of Warrants to Special Bailiff, and to known
Bailiffs. Of Pledges de prosequendo.

CHAP. VII. Of Bail. Of Special Bail. Who shall take Bail or not. Of Bail
Bondss. Explication of the Statute 23 H. 6 c. 10. the design of the Statute.
The Form to be observed according to the Statute. What Obligations and
Conditions are within this Statute or not, in respect of the Persons and
Officers to whom they are made, in the respect of the Form, of the Courts and
of the Sureties. The meaning of the words Color Officij. Of the Statute 23 H.
6. being pleaded, and when and how to be pleaded. What appearance to a Sheriffs
Bond is good or not. Of the Sheriffs Retorn on taking Bail. Of Insufficient
Bail. Of refusing sufficient Bail, and the Remedy against the Sheriff for so
doing. The Sheriff pleading this Statute in Actions brought against him. Of
Bail Bonds being discharged or assigned. Of other Bonds besides Bail Bonds
entered into the Sheriff as for being a true Prisoner, saving harmless of
Escapes, Fees, etc. and the Pleadings thereto, with all the late Cases and
Resolutions relating thereunto. In what other Cases the Sheriff may Bail or not.

CHAP. VIII. Of Retorns of Writs. When they may be returned. General Cases and
Maxims of Retorns. What Writs must be returned, and what need not. What shall
be a good Retorn of Writs, or how Retorns shall be made, in respect of the
person that makes the Retorn, as Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Franchises, etc. in
respect of the Forms, and wherein sufficient Retorns are aided, where Retorns
shall be void, for the uncertainty or repugnancy. What shall be a good Retorn
against the admittance of the Party or not. What shall be a sufficient excuse
for the Sheriffs Non retorn of a Writ and what not. What Acts, Process or
Appearance shall be good before the Retorn. The Penalty on the Sheriff by the
Court for Non Retorns. Where Sheriffs Retorns shall be amended and where not.

CHAP. IX. Remedy against the Sheriff for a false Retorn. Where and in what
Cases, and what Action lies against him for false Retorn. Where such Actions
are to be brought, how to be laid, and the manner of declaring therein. Of the
Reason of the Retorn of a Cepi Corpus on Bail taken; Where Action lies against
the Sheriff or Bailiff of a Franchise, and which of them upon a false Retorn.
Remedy against the Sheriff for not retorning the Writ, or against his Bailiff,
or against the Bailiff of Franchise. Of laying the Action and declaring
thereupon. Where and in what Cases a Man may Traverse the Sheriffs Retorn or
not.

CHAP. X. Of Venire facias, Habeas Corpus, Jurat' Distringas. What Retornes
shall be good on a Venire or not. Of Amendments of Venires etc. Of Tales.

CHAP. XI. Of Habeas Corpus. The several sorts, and the consequence thereof. Of
the Retorns of Habeas Corpus, by the Sheriff, etc. and in respect of the
Courts. Rules on Habeas Corpus. Who to pay the Charges. The Forms of the
Retorns. Retorns of Certiorari.

CHAP. XII. Two sorts of Juries. Of Retorns of Jurors. And by whom to be
returned. What manner of persons shall not be returned on. Juries, and how such
persons shall be discharged; where, when and how Persons Exempt shall have
Action against the Sheriff for Impannelling them. Of retorning trop petit
Issues, of levying the Issues. Of other Erroneous Proceedings and Misdemeanors
of Sheriffs about and concerning Jurors. What Estate every Juror must have by
the late Statute of 4 and 5 of William and Mary. Of Challenges, and the several
Sorts and Causes of Challeng, and what are good or not, and when to be taken.

CHAP. XIII. Of a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, and the Sheriffs Demeanor
therein, in what Cases a new Writ shall be granted or not. By whom to be
executed or not. The time of Executing it. The Form of the Retorn of a Writ of
Enquiry of Damages.

CHAP. XIV. Where and in what Cases the Sheriffs Retorn of a Devastavit shall
be good or not. When such Retorn to be made. How the Party may Discharge
himself of a Devastavit by Plea. And the late practice, and not by Inquisition.

CHAP. XV. Of Prisons; To whom they belong, and the place where to be kept. Who
may be Keepers of Gaols, etc. and how Forfeitable. Of the Sheriff of Londons
Prison, and of the Marshalsea. Of the Sheriffs Demeanor toward Prisoners. Of
the Prisoners Misbehaviour. What payment of a Debt to a Jailer shall be good.
And of those that break Prison.

CHAP. XVI. Of Executions. When one may be said to be in Execution, or not; and
when without Prayer, or not. To what Sheriff, and of what Place or County shall
Execution be awarded of a Capias ad satisfaciendum. For what, and against whom
(...) lies; and the Sheriffs Demeanor therein, and Retorns thereupon.

CHAP. XVII. Of Fieri facias. What Goods, and of whom, shall be taken in
Execution by Fieri fac', or not. After the Sheriff has seized the Goods, how he
stands in the Eye of the Law, either to bring Actions for the Tortious taking
them away from him, or to make satisfaction to the party who Recovered. What
Remedy against the Sheriff for the Money, to the value of the Goods taken in
Execution, or not; and how to be pursued. The Sheriffs Office and Demeanor in
Executing a Fieri facias. Of the Sheriffs selling Goods on the Fieri fac', and
of the Venditioni exponas and the Retorn. What shall be a good Retorn of the
Sheriff on a Fieri facias, or not Of Restitution to Lands or Goods, seized by
the Sheriff after Reversal of the Judgment, and after Sale. Of the Sheriffs
selling a Term for Years, taken in Execution, and when such Sale shall be good,
or not. Difference between the extent of a Term on Elegit, and sale by Fieri
facias. Whether a Fieri facias, on a Judgment in the Kings Bench, shall go into
Wales.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Sheriff is to Demean himself in giving Possession and
Seisin upon the Writs of Habere fac' possession', or Seisinam, as to the manner
of Executuing, and the Retorn. Of a Supersedeas. Where it shall stay the Sale
of Lands or Goods, or not. What amounts to a Supersedeas. Where and when a Writ
of Error is a Supersedeas. Of Audita Querela.

CHAP. XIX. Of Elegit. The Sheriffs Office therein. The difference of it as to
Lands and Goods, how to be managed by the Sheriff that it may be well Executed,
and what things may be Extended, or not. Of the Inquisition. Retorns of Elegit,
how to be made. Where New Elegit shall be had. Of Extent by the Bailiff of a
Liberty. The Sheriffs Office about Execution for the King's Debt. Of Statute
Merchant, Staple, Recognizance, Liberate. The differences of the Retorns.
Retorns of Scire fac. The Sheriffs demeanor as to Outlawries and Capias
Utlegatum; and the Retorns.

CHAP. XX. Of Rescous. Where and in what Cases Action lies against a Sheriff
for a Rescous; and what Action. Diversity between Mean Process and Execution.
Where the Sheriff makes himself chargable by his Retorn. Where, and what Remedy
against the Rescouser by Action, or Indictment. Of Retorns of Rescous, what is
good, or not. Of Laying the Action, and how to Declare. Of Rescous, and
Pleadings in it. The Venue in this Action for a Rescue.

CHAP. XXI. Of Escapes. Some Maxims and Diversities premised. Escapes as to
Mean Process and Execution. What shall be or amount to an Escape of a Prisoner
out of Execution, or not. Of Escapes in respect of the Old and New Sheriffs,
and of the Prisoners being delivered over. What thing or act shall excuse an
Escape; or in what Cases the Sheriff or Jailer shall not be Answerable for an
Escape; and of Erroneous Process Excucusing, and how far and in what Cases.
Where the Escape of one shall not be a Discharge of the other; or where the
other shall have Audita Querela or not. Of Actions of Debt, or on the Case. by
the party against the Sheriff for an Escape. Who shall have such Action, and to
whom it shall be said an Escape, or not, at Election.

CHAP. XXII. Action for Escape by Executors and Administrators, where it lies,
or not. Against whom Action of Escape lies. Where Execution shall be after
Execution on Escape, or not; and where it shall not be a Discharge of
Execution, but that he may be retaken again. Of laying the Action, and manner
of Declaration in this Action: Where the Sheriff shall have his Acti^n against
the Prisoner that Escapes, and how to Declare against him.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Pleadings by the Sheriff to Actions for Escape. What shall be
said a sufficient Fresh Pursuit, and where upon Fresh Pursuit he may retake the
Prisoner, or not; and where the Prisoner, upon his being retaken, shall have
his Audita Querela, or not. Fresh Pursuit, how to be pleaded. Pleading the
Statute of Limitations: Pleading acknowledgment of Satisfaction on Record by
the Plaintiff, or Accord with Satisfaction. Nultiel Record pleaded, and how.
Escape by Consent of the Plaintiff, and by the Sheriffs License. Traverse in
the Pleadings. Supersedeas, Protection, Privilege. Bar by Voluntary Escape.
Venue, Issue, Evidence, Special Verdict in Actions for Escapes. Of the Escape
of Felons.

CHAP. XXIV. What Acts of the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. shall amount to a False
Imprisonment, or not. Pleading by Sheriffs to Actions of Trespass, False
Imprisonment. The Rules of Pleading in such Case. Justification by Mean
Process, as to the Warrant, Time, Place. Quae est ad eadem Transgressio, what
it refers to. Traverse of the Time, Place. Pleadings and Justification by
Execution: By Process out of an Inferior Court of Record, and how to be pleaded.

CHAP. XXV. Of Attachments against the Sheriff, where and in what Cases it
lies, or not: And where against him for a thing done out of his Office.
Attachment of Money in the Sheriffs hand. Of Attachment against others, and
against the Goods and the Retorn. Of Amerciaments: Where, and in what cases the
Sheriff is to be Amerced.

CHAP. XXVI. Remedy against the Sheriffs Bailiffs, etc. for Male-fesance, as
imbezelling an Exigent. For entering into a Corporation which had Retorna
Brevium. For not delivering a Supersedeas to the New Sheriff, for concealing or
substracting a Writ. (Bailiff of a Liberty chargable for his Servant, not for
the Jailer.) For refusing sufficient Bail, and forcing to find extraordinary
Bail. For taking Insuffient Bail. For not bringing Money levied by Fieri fac'
into Court, and the Statute of Limitations pleaded.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sheriffs Demeanor in Assignment of Dower, and the Retorn.
The Proclamations. The Sheriffs Office about Partition. His Demeanor in the
Writ De Ventre inspiciendo. About Retorning a Force. About a Vi Laica
removenda. How the Sheriff shall demean himself in a Writ of Enquiry of Waste,
and of the Retorns thereof. Of the Writ of Estrepement, and the Retorn of it.
The Sheriffs Office in an Excommunicato capiendo.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Retorn of Clericus beneficiatus, and of other Retorns as
to Clerks. The Sheriffs Office in a Quare Impedit. The Sheriffs Duty at the
Assizes; and at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace. The Sheriffs Office
as to Election, and Retorning of Burgesses and Knights to the Parliament. The
Form of the Indenture for the Knights of the Parliament, and for the Burgesses.
The Sheriffs Retorn of the Writ for Electing Parliament Men.

CHAP. XXIX. Customs of London, as to Officers, Prisons, Courts, Process. Of
the Sheriffs Court. How to Lay the Custom of the Sheriffs Court. The difference
between the Mayors Court and the Sheriffs Court. Sheriffs Court, when kept. The
manner of Entering Actions in the Compters.

CHAP. XXX. The Sheriffs Duty as to the Assizes: And as to the Sessions of the
Peace.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Sheriffs and Officers Fees. Of Security and Remedy for Fees.
What Security the Sheriff may take for Fees, or not. What Remedy the Sheriff
shell have for his Fees. Where the Sheriff shall not take Fees. What shall be
said Extortion in Sheriffs and Gaolers, and how punishable. What shall be a
good Consideration in Assumpsit.

CHAP. XXXII. Bonds or Covenant between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff, or
other Officers. What shall be good in Law, or not: And when said to be
Forfeited, or not.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Sheriffs Accounts.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Coroners. How the Coroners must be Chosen, and the Credit the
Law gives to them; and how and when they shall be discharged. The Coronors
Demeanor as to Outlawries. Coroners Inquest.

THE OFFICE AND DUTY OF SHERIFFS, etc.
CHAP. 1.
Of Counties. When the Realm was divided into Counties. Vicecomites. Notatio
nominis. Sheriffs eligible in former Times; How made at this Day. The Sheriffs
Honor, Power and Privilege. His Office not apportionable. What he may do as
Conservator Pacis. How favored in the Execution of his Office. Of his
Assistance. In what Things and Cases he is restrained.

THE Sheriff and the County being Correlata, I shall first give a few
Observations about Counties, what they were Originally.

Counties (a word taken from the French,) or Counties.
Shires (a word taken from the Saxons,) are certain Circuits and Parts of the
Kingdom, into which the whole Realm was divided for the more convenient
Government thereof, and is Governed by a yearly Officer, which we call SHERIFF,
which is compounded of two Saxon words, Shine and Reeve, Reeve signifying
Praepositus, or Governor.

As for the Time when and by whom this When this Realm was divided into
Counties. 1 Inst. 168.
Realm was divided into Counties, Authors seem to differ. Coke on Littleton,
fo. 168. holds, that they were divided by the Britains; but it is generally
held (as Ingulph, etc.) that they were divided by King Egbert or Aelfred: But
though Egbert united the Heptarchy, yet he was not the first that divided the
Kingdom into Counties, nor Aelfred neither, as some imagine. For as Mr. Seldom
observes, about the Year 700 (an hundred years before Egbert) one of Ina's Laws
was; If any (...)man, i. e. Sheriff were guilty of an Escape, perdat Comitatum
suum. Therefore Ingulphus meant that King Elfred did divide it into Hundreds,
or else made a more punctual Division than was before. Now it appears that the
Earls of the Counties, had the custody and guard of the Counties long before
the Conquest; and when the Earls left their Custodies, then was the Custodies
of Counties committed to Viscounts, and they are thereupon called Vicecomites,
Comites, Vicecomites.
quia vices Comitis supplent. And we seem to derive all this from the Romans;
for what we call Comitatus, was by them called Consulatus, and what the Saxons
afterward called Sh^ieve, or Earl, the Romans called Consul; and the Sheriff
was Deputy of the Consul or Earl, and the Romans called him Viceconsul. 1 Inst.
168. Dugdale Antiq. War. Pref.

In 2 Bulstr. Chune and Pyots Case, Coke arguendo, seems to be of Opinion, that
there were no Earls before the Conquest. But the meaning is, there was no
Hereditary Earl; but he that had the Office, had it at the pleasure of the
King. For in the Preface to his Reports, the Third Part, he is of Opinion,
there were Sheriffs 3 Rep. Pref.
time out of mind before the Conquest; and if so, then Earls were. He gives an
undeniable Argument, for that the Trials per Juries, which were always Returned
by the Sheriffs, were before the Conquest, even as appears by Doomsday-Book.
Now we know that Viscounts were not Created Viscounts Original.
till the Time of H. 6. Sed distinguendum, etc. Viscount signifies a Title of
Honor, or an Office of Trust. As a Title of Honor it is of late standing; but
as an Office of Trust, ( viz.) for the Government of the County, it was time
out of mind. And this difference I ground upon Cambden in his Britannia:
Viscount (says he) haec vetus Officii, sed nova Dignitatis appellatio. 9 Rep.
in fine de Lewes's Case.

The Sheriff at Common Law was Eligible by Sheriffs in Ancient times Eligible
by the County.
the County, as the Coroner is at this day; and then by the Death of the King
his Office was not determined, no more than the Coroners are now. 2 Brownl.
282. Chamberlain and Goldsmith.

But by Stat. 14 Ed. 3. c. 7. and 21 H. 8. c. 20. the Judges are to nominate
Three persons of every How Chosen at this day, and when.
County to be presented to the King, that he may prick one of them, which by
the Statute is to be done 3 November. being Crastin. Animarum; and yet An. 16
Car. 1. because the 3d of November was the first day of the Parliament, and the
Lords were to attend upon the King, it was Resolved by the Judges, that it
might be well put off till another day; and the Lord Keeper deferred it till
the 6th of November. Cro. Car. 595.

But the Statute of 9 Ed. 2. restrains not the King's Power at Common Law; but
the King may constitute a Sheriff without Election, or grant it in Fee; and he
may still make Sheriffs without the Judges, Dyer 225. for all Acts of Dyer 225.
Acts of Grace, how to be construed.
Grace flow from him. As Dyer 211. the Commission of Trial of Piracy upon the
Statute of 28 H. 8. is good, though the Chancellor does not nominate the
Commissioners as the Statute appoints, etc. And the Reason is given by my Lord
Hobart. Hob. 14. b. Colt and Glover's Case, and 214.

These Statutes, and the like, were made to put things in ordinary Form; and to
ease the Sovereign of Labor, and not to deprive him of Power. The Election
being merely in the King, and the Office Ministerial only.

I will now set down some General Observations The Honor, Power and Privilege
of Sheriffs.
of the great Honor, Power and Privilege of Sheriffs, and wherein and by what
Acts he is restrained.

One calls it Judiciaria dignitas. Fortescue says, that Vicecomes is Nobilis
Officiarius. In Savill's Savil p. 43.
Rep. p. 43. he is called a Royal Officer: For (says the Book) Charters of
Liberties granted to the Barons of Cinque Ports and other Inhabitants, shall
discharge them for Inferior Offices, as Constable, etc. but not of Offices
Royal, as Sheriff. 1 Roll. Rep. 274. Phelp's Case.

The Sheriff takes place of every Nobleman Takes place of Noblemen.
in the County, during the time that he is Sheriff. And though the Sheriff be not
a Justice of Peace, yet he is a Conservator of the Peace, and by this he may
well imprison a man upon good Cause. 2 Roll. Rep. 237.

Fitzherbert N. B. 81. b. at Common Law the Sheriff may Commit any one for the
Breach of the Peace.

Such Persons as he shall apprehend upon suspicion of Treason, or Felony, upon
fresh Suit or Hue and Cry, he may commit to the Gaol. He may commit all
Affrayers or Breakers of the Peace in his presence.

Upon any Foreign Invasion he may raise the County; so upon Rebellions and
Insurrections; and may command any Number he thinks fit to aid him.

But of his own Authority he shall not Arrest any man upon suspicion of Felony;
except there be a Felony committed in Fact, and he himself have suspicion of
him.

By Stat. 17 R. 2. c. 8. the Sheriff may raise the Posse Comitatus to suppress
Rioters and commit them to Prison, 13 H. 4. c. 7. and if the Rioters resist,
the Sheriff and his Assistants may justify the killing them. Vide the Stat. 13
H. 4. c. 7. and the Stat. of Northampt. 2 Ed. 3. c. 3. for this purpose, and 13
Ed. 1. c. 39.

Wheresoever the Sheriff, or any other of the Kings Officers may take Posse
Comitatus, or have Authority either to execute the Kings Process, or apprehend
Felons, Rioters, etc. if they shall find Resistance, they may arrest and
imprison all such Offenders.

He has Custodiam Comitatus, and therefore What the Sheriff may do as
Conservator Pacis. Though not to act as Justice of the Peace for that year.
for Cause he may commit: He is Conservator Pacis. Stat. 1 Mar. c. 8. does not
take away Power from the Sheriff; only, if he was in Commission of Peace
before, he was to forbear the execution of his Commission for the Peace so long
as he is Sheriff; but he is not to forbear the execution of that which is
committed to him for the County.

The Sheriff, if he see a person carry Weapons in the Highway in terrorem
populi, he may commit him, though he do not break the Peace in his presence. The
Lord Coke cited the Mayor of Barstaple's Case, in Chune and Piott's Case, 2
Bulstr. The Sheriff favored in the Execution of his Office.
Now the Case of Chune and Piott was this: One Clare was committed to the
Compter of Woodstreet, and made his Escape; the Defendant being one of the
Sheriffs pursued him, and in his pursuit met with the Plaintiff in the Night
time vagrantem, who pursued him indecently, and gave him uncivil words, and
detrusit ad murum; Justificat' en faux Imprisonment.
whereupon he Imprisoned him, and Justifies in faux Imprisonment. He does not
say, he did it violenter, or contra pacem, or sciens, knowing him to be
Sheriff: But per Cur', it shall be intended he did it malitiose, and the Law
implies it was done vi and armis. It Is a good Justification. Had the Defendant
done it by chance and unwillingly, he might have pleaded it, and his not
pleading it shows it to be otherwise, 2 Bulstr. 329. But the Mayor of Barstaple
Justified the committing a man, for that he did misbehave himself against him
by ill Words, etc. Had this been laid to be done in the execution of his
Office, it had been good; but he was then playing at Tables.

Anciently the Bishop, with the Sheriff, went Bishops and Sheriffs went
Circuits. The Office of Sheriff entire, and not to be apportion'd
in Circuit twice every year, through every Hundred within the County, 2 Inst.
70.

The King cannot restrain any part of the Sheriff's Power, neither can the King
choose a Sheriff contrary to the Statute of Lincoln. The Office of Sheriff is
entire and cannot be apportioned. Though the King constitute a Sheriff durante
beneplacito, and may determine it at Will; yet he may not determine it in part,
nor abridge him of any thing incident to his Office. Hob. p. 13. 2 Inst. 501. 4
Rep. 32. Milton's Case.

The Sheriff is an Officer of that Eminence, Sheriffs favored in Law.
Confidence and Charge, that he ought to have all Right pertaining to his
Office, and ought to be favored in Law before any Private person. I shall give
you some Instances. 4 Rep. 33. b. Mitton's Case.

Inasmuch as Escapes are so Penal to Officers, Escape, not to be judged
strictly.
the Judges have always made as benign Construction as the Law will permit in
favor of them, and to the intent that every one may ^ear his own burden, they
will never judge an Escape by strict Construction. As if one in Execution
escape and fly into another County, and the Sheriff retake him on Fresh
pursuit, its no Escape, if ^t be before Action brought. So if the Sheriff by
Habeas Corpus be commanded to bring the Body at the day, he shall not be
compelled to take the most direct way, but the safest. Vide infra.

The Sheriff is not punished for executing the The Sheriff not punishable for
executing erroneous Process. Killing of the Sheriff in doing his Duty, is
Murder.
Process of the Court, though it were erroneous. Vid. postea.

If any Sheriff, Undersheriff, Sergeant or Officer, who has execution of
Process, be slain in doing his Duty, its Murder in him who kills him, although
there were not any former Malice between them; and if there were Error in
awarding of Process, or in the mistake of one Process for another; as a Capias
in Debt against a Peer; and an Officer be slain in the execution thereof, the
Offender shall not have advantage Cro. Jac. 279. Mackally's Case.
of such Error, no more than a Sheriff who suffers a Prisoner to escape, shall
take any advantage of Error thereby. And in this case there needs not a Special
Indictment to be drawn; but a General Indictment, that such a party ex malitia
sua praecogitata percussit, etc. for the Law presumes Malice, though none be
proved; so it is if any shall come in aid of them; and an Officer, 9 Rep.
Mackally's Case.
if he be resisted, is not bound to fly to the Wall, as other Subjects are.

Several Persons were informed against, for Severe Fines for assaulting the
Sheriff.
assaulting the Sheriff in serving Execution, and fined Sir J. Wingfield the
Prisoner at 500 l. and Brady 500 Marks, because it appeared upon the Evidence
he drew his Sword and wounded the Cro. Car. 251. B. R. Le Roy versus Sir J.
Wingfield and Others.
Sheriff, and by that means the Prisoner escaped into Neale's House, and 180 l.
against Neale, because he kept out the Sheriff, and shut the Door against him,
and 500 l. against Sir T. B. because he was the means of conveying away the
said Prisoner to Lincolns Inn; and per Cur' such Fines assessed in Court by
Judgment on Information, cannot be afterward qualified or mitigated.

The Sheriffs Bailiffs lawfully arrested a man, if Assistants to the Sheriff,
or his Bailiffs.
the persons which stood by refuse to assist them, (in case of Opposition) they
shall be fined. Winch. p. 72. Foster's Case.

Every man is bound by the Common Law to assist, not only the Sheriff in his
Office, for the execution of the Kings Writs, according to Law; but also his
Bailiff that has the Sheriffs Warrant in that behalf, has the same Authority
which his 2 Inst. 193. sur Stat. W. 1. c. 17. Fine for Non-resistance.
Master has: For the Sheriff cannot do all himself, and if they do it not,
being required, they shall be sined and imprisoned; but in the case of
Replevin, out of a Castle, House, etc. before the Sheriff uses any Force, he
ought to demand (according to Law) the Goods to be delivered, so as Replevy may
be made thereof; for sequi debet potentia mandatum Legis, non praecedere.

Now besides the Warrant of the Common Law, the Sheriff has his Letters Patents
of Assistance, The Sheriffs Letters Patents of Assistance. Id. ibid.
whereby the King commands, that all Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, Knights, Freemen, and all other of that County, be to the Sheriff
thereof in omnibus quae ad Officium illud pertinent, intendentes, auxiliantes
and respondentes.

As to the Sheriffs power in breaking up Houses, Sheriffs power to break up
Houses. Moore 66.
vid. infra Tit. Execution. Only I shall observe on Process for the Good
Behavior, the Sheriff may break an House to take the Party, as if the Sheriff
have a Cap' against one, to find Surties of the Good Behavior.

The Sheriff or his Ministers in the Execution May carry Weapons.
of Justice, may carry a Dag or Hand-gun, and its no offense against the
Statute. Cro. El. 822. Gardne's case, and 5 Rep. 71.

The Sheriff in some Cases shall not be a Disseisor In what Cases the Sheriffs
Officers excused from doing wrong. 6 Rep. 52. in fine Boswells case.
for executing the Kings Writ, though he does wrong, for Officers in such Cases
are excused by their Warrant. As it was found ex officio, that the Church was
full of B. who was a stranger to the Quaere Impedit, and it appears no that he
had better Title; yet the Plaintiff ought to have a Writ to the Bishop
generally. So it is of a Sheriff on Habere fac' seisinam of Land, for it cannot
come in Issue between the Demandant and him, for he had no day in Court; and
though a third person had Right, they are excused by their Warrant.

If the Sheriff be resisted in executing the Posse Comitatus. 3 Inst. 161.
Kings Writs or Process of Law, he may take the Posse Comitatus; so he may to
suppress Rioters. Vid. Supra.

As for other Judicial Office of the Sheriff, as Enquiry of Wast, Redissesin,
etc. vide under their proper Titles. By the Statute 21 Jac. c. 13. the Life 1
Keb. 176.
of the Party absent, during whose Life the Defendant had a Lease, is to be
enquired by the Sheriff.

Per Sat. 23 Eliz. A Recusant Convict shall 2 Keb. 108. Le Roy and Webb.
after Proclamation at the Assizes or Gaol Delivery render his Body to the
Sheriff, before the next Assizes.

But notwithstanding the Dignity and Favor The Sheriff in what things
restrained.
the Law casts on Sheriffs, yet in many places they are restained, and have
limited qualifications, which would further contribute to the explicating the
nature of the Sheriffs Office.

The Sheriff of the County is not to be chosen Not to be chosen a Parliament
Man. Lit. rep. 326 Walt. Longs Case.
a Parliament Man. A. 12 Jac. 1. Sir George Selby was made Sheriff of Durham,
and Elected Knight for Northumberland; it was resolved in Parliament, that the
Election was void.

Mr. Walter Longs Case was warmly argued, he was informed against first, That
he being made Sheriff of the County of W. and having taken the Oath to be
dwelling in his County all the year, unless he had License of the King, had
committed Perjury, in as much as he was absent out of the County three Months
together. He said he was Elected Burgess for Bath, and by virtue of a Writ of
Summons under the Great Seal, which he conceived amounted to a License. The
Statute is 4 H. 4. cap. 5. every Sheriff shall dwell in his proper person in
his Bayliffwick for the time that he shall be Officer; the words are Demurrant,
not Abiding. The King by Will may Elect one of the House to be Sheriff, for
this is a Dispensation; but it appeared Mr. Long sought to be Elected
Parliament Man. Quaere how it was resolved in the Star Chamber.

By the Stat. of 23 H. 6. no Man shall serve the Shall not serve above one
year. Non obstante. 1 H. 7. 7 Rep. 14. Calvin's Case. 12 Ed. 4. c. 1.
King as Sheriff of any County above one year, and that notwithstanding any
Clause of Non obstante to the contrary; that is, notwithstanding the King
should expressly dispense with that Stat. And yet it is agreed, that against the
express purview in the Act, the King may by a Special Non obstante dispense
with that Act, (except such as are Inheritable to the Office of Sheriff or
other Offices in London.) Yet they may execute their Office during Mich. and
Hillary Term, if no Writ of Discharge come.

Every Sheriff is to be resident in his own person, within his County during
the time he is Sheriff, (except he be otherwise Licensed by the King.) p. 4 H.
4. c. 5.

A Sheriff of one County has no Authority, One Sheriff has no power in
another County:
or Power within another County; yet the Sheriff by force of the Kings Writ may
carry the Prisoner through several Counties, or make fresh persuit into other
Counties, and the Prisoner shall be said to be in the Custody of the first
Sheriff, in every County.

The Sheriff is not to Let his County to Farm Not to Let his County to Farm.
per Stat. 23 H. 6. c. 10. By the Sheriff's Letting his County to Farm, is
understood of the proficua Comitatus, which was considerable, when most Law
Suits were transacted in the Counties, and in Hundred Courts, Fines Issues and
Amercements being considerable. And in the time of H. 3. the Bayliffwick of one
County was Let at 100 l. per annum, a great Sum in those days. There was a Bond
for Rent, on a Lease of the Bayliffwcik of the Savoy. Now the Stat. 27 H. 8. c.
24. being a general Statute, and the conclusion 3 Keb. 678. Ellis and Nelson.
general contra formam Statuti, will avoid this Contract, per Stat. 23 H. 6.
The Security is void, though it has no express words to avoid it; but per
Curiam, 23 H. 6. being a particular Law should have been pleaded, and the Stat.
27 H. 8. is but a Relative Statute. Per Stat. 4 Ed. 3. c. 9. The Nor hundred.
More W. 1021. Stockwith and North.
Sheriff shall not Let Hundreds to Farm. It was resolved in Stockwith and
North's Case, that the setting to Farm Offices was malum prohibitum, against
the Stat. of 4. H. 4. c. 5. and also malum se. And therefore, because the
Sheriff of Nottingham took Money for the Gaolership, and the Bayliffwick of the
County for one year, he was fined in the Star Chamber. The penalty for
offending these Laws are 40 l.

Though the Sheriff be so much favored and respected Guilty of Homicide if he
put a Condemned man to death contrary to order of Law.
in the Law, and in the very Execution of Criminals; yet he shall be Guilty of
Homicide, for not observing the Order of Law, in putting a Condemned man to
death. 7 Rep. 13. 1 Jac.

What prescription by a Sheriff good or not.
A Sheriff may not prescribe, that he and all those who have been Sheriffs have
been seized of a certain Gift at every Turn held, etc. for the Sheriff is put
in by the King every year, and removeable at pleasure. But in 21 H. 7. 17. b.
an Undersheriff prescribes, that he and all Under-Sheriffs of the County, have
used to have so 42 Ed. 3. 5. 21 H. 7. 17. 6.
much for Bar Fees, and admitted good.

CHAP. II.
What the Sheriff must do at the Entrance into his Office. The Form of the Writ
of Discharge of the Old Sheriff. The Form of his Oath, how and before whom to
be taken, and the Return. The Cities and Towns in England which have Sheriffs,
and how many each. Of delivery of Writs and Prisoners by the Old Sheriff to the
New. Till what time the Old Sheriff, or his Officers may Act. What Is to be done
in the Case of the Kings Death. What shall be said a good delivery of
Prisoners, and how to be made. The Form of the Indenture setting over the
Prisoners, and the Writs. The Form of the Return of those that have been
Executed by the Old Sheriff. What Acts may or must the Old Sheriff do after his
Discharge, and what remedy against him for a Misdemeanor in his Office. When
and where the New Sheriff must Read his Patent, and make his Deputies in the
County and Courts above. How and in what Cases his Office is determined before
the year be out.

HE must go into the Remembrancer's Office in the Exchequer, to Enter the
Recogniance with Sureties, (or some for him) with Condition for payment of his
Proffers or Accounts which is twice in the year, ( viz.) at or before Mense
Pasch' and Mense Michaelis then next following. Then his Attorney or some other
will write him a Note, signifying that he is Sheriff of such a County, and has
entered into Recognizance; the which Note the Sheriff must deliver to one of the
six Clarks in Chancery to make his Patent by, with a Writ of Assistance, and a
Writ of Discharge to be delivered to his Predecessor, who should be Delivered
with all speed to his Predecessor, for the benefit of his Undersheriff;
because till it be livered, the Precedent Sheriff may do Execution of all
Process.

As to the Forms of these two Patents, ( viz.) the Patent of his Office, and
the Patent of Asstance, Vid. Dalton.

But the Form of the Writ of Discharge directed to the Old Sheriff is this.

WIllielmus, etc. dilect' sib. J. S. Armig' nuper Vic' Warr' salutem. Cum
concesserimus Dilecto, etc. nobis A. B. Armig' Comitatum nostrum praedict'
custodiend', quamdiu nobis placuerit, prout in Literis nostris patentibus ei
inde concess' before continetur, Tibi praecipi mus qd' eid. A. B. Com'nostr'
praed' cum pertinentiis una cum Rotulis Brevib' Memorand' and omnibus aliis ad
officium Vicecom' praed' spectan' quae in custodia tua existunt per Indenturas
inde inter te and prefat' A. B. debite conficiend' liberes Test meipso apud'
West' quinto die, etc.

In the next place, he may go to a Master of the Chancery, or to one of the
Judges of Assize of that County whereof he is Sheriff, and take the Oath of
Supremacy by the Stat. of 1 El. c. 1. 5. Eliz. c. 1. And also an Oath for the
due Execution of his Office, which is as follows.

The Sheriffs Oath.
YE shall Swear, that you shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of
Sheriff of A. and do the Kings Profit in all that belongs to you to do by way
of your Office, as far forth as you can or may. Ye shall truly keep the Kings
Rights, and all that belongs to the Crown. Ye shall not assent to Decrease,
to Lessenings or to Concealments of the Kings Right, or of his Franchises; and
whenever ye shall have knowledge, that the Kings Rights, or the Rights of his
Crown be concealed or withdrawn, be it in Land, Rent, Franchise or Suits, or
any other things, Ye shall do your true Power to make them be restored to the
King again; and if ye may not do it, ye shall certify the King, or some of his
Counsel thereof, such as ye hold for certain will say it to the King. Ye shall
not Respite the Kings Debts for any Gifts or Favor, where you may raise them
without great grievance of the Debtors. Ye shall truly and righteously treat
the People of your Sheriffwick, and do right as well to Poor as to Rich, in all
that belongs to your Office. Ye shall do no wrong to any Man for any Gift or
Behest, or Promise of Goods for favor, nor hate. Ye shall disturb no Man's
Right. Ye shall truly acquit at the Exchequer, all those of whom ye shall any
thing receive of the Kings Debts. Ye shall nothing take whereby the King may
lose, or whereby that Right may be disturbed, let, or the Kings Debt
delayed. Ye shall truly return, and truly serve all the Kings Writs, as far
forth as shall be within your cunning. Ye shall not have to be your Under
Sheriff, or any of the Sheriffs Clarks, of the last year past. Ye shall take no
Bailiff into your Service, but such as ye shall answer for. Ye shall make each
of your Bailiffs to make such Oath, as ye make your self in that, that
belongs to their Occupation. Ye shall receive no Writ by any of you or yours
unsealed, or any sealed under any Seal of any Justice save of Justice in Air,
or Justice assigned in the same Shire where ye be Sheriff in, or other Justice
having Power, or Authority to make any Writs unto you by the Law of the Land,
or any Justice of Newgate. Ye shall make your Bailiffs of the true and
sufficient Men in the County. Ye shall be dwelling in your proper person within
your Baliffwick, for the time ye shall be in the same Office, except ye be
otherwise Licensed of the King. Ye shall not Let your Sheriffwick, nor any
Bayliffwick thereof to Farm to any Man. Ye shall truly set and return
reasonable and due Issues of them that be within your Bayliffwick after their
Estate and their Honor; and make your Pannells your self of such persons, as
be most next, most sufficient, and not suspected or procured, as it is ordained
by the Statutes, and over this in eschewing and restrainder of the
Mans-slaughters, Roberies, and other manifold grievous Offenses, that have been
done daily, namely of such as name themselves Soldiers, and by other Vagrants,
the which continually increase in number, and multiply, so that the Kings true
Subjects may not be safe; yea, Ride, nor go to do such things as they have to
do, to their intolerable hurt and hindrance: Ye shall truly and effectually,
with all diligence possible to your Power execute the Statutes, as the Statutes
of Winchester, and of Vagabonds. These things all ye shall truly keep, as God
ye help.

Note, That there was an Addition in this Crok. Car. p. 25, 26. Sir Ed. Coke's
Case.
Oath by the Statute of 5 R. 2. and 2 H. 4. c. 15. (viz.) That he should seek
to repress all Errors and Heresies commonly called Lollards, and should be
assistant to the Commissaries, and Ordinaries in Church matters. And this was
objected by Sir Ed. Coke, after he had been Lord Chief Justice of both Benches,
and made Sheriff of the County of Buckingham, when he had a dedimus potestatem
annexed to a Schedule, in the first year of Charles the first: And ever since
they have been left out, because Lollardism then was the true Antipapal
Religion as is now professed. And he made other Objections, one whereof was,
that some parts of the Oath are not by any Statute, and its a Maxim, That none
but the Parliament can appoint None but the Parliament can appoint an Oath.
an Oath. But it was resolved by the Judges, that this Oath being appointed,
and continued diverse years by direction of the Statute, although without the
express Authority of any Statute Law; yet may well be continued for the public
benefit.

Note, As to the Statute of Winchester, the Justices of Peace have eased the
Sheriff of much trouble. And by the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 4. all former
Statues for the punishment of Vagabonds are Repealed

The Oath of the Sheriff of Oxford and Berks, and also of Cambridge and
Huntington.
YOU shall Swear, That well and truly ye shall Serve the King in the Office of
Sheriff of Oxford and Berks. And the Kings Profit, etc. ut supra usque So help
ye God. And also ye shall Swear, That the Masters and Scholars of the
University of Oxford, and their Servants from injuries and violences Ye shall
keep and defend by all your Strength and Power; and the Peace in the said
University as much as in you is, ye shall keep. And that you shall give your
Council and Help to the Chancellor, and Scholars of the same University, for to
punish the disturbers and breakers of the Peace there, after the Privileges
and Statutes of the said University, at all times when it shall be needful. And
also, ye shall put your help withal your Strength to defend the Privileges,
Liberties and Customs of the said University. And that ye shall receive all
such Oaths of your Undersheriffs, and other your said Ministers of your said
County of Oxford, as soon and anon as ye shall be at the the Castle, or at the
Town of Oxford, in presence of any that shall be thereto deputed by the said
University; to the which things the King will, that your said Ministers be by
you acted and compelled. As God you help.

The like Addition to the Oath of the Sheriff of Cambridge and Huntington,
mutatis mutandis.

If the New Sheriff be not in London, he may take his Oath by dedimus
potestatem, directed to any two Justices of Peace of the same County, one to be
of the Quorum, or to any other Commissioners.

The Cities and Towns in England, which have Sheriffs are as follow.
The City of Bristol 2 Coventry 2 Canterbury 1 York 2 Exon 2 Gloucester 2
Leichfeild 1 Lincoln 2 London 2 Norwich 2 Worcester 1
The Town of Kingston upon Hull 1 Southampton 1 Nottingham 2 Poole 1 Newcasle
on Tine 1

The Return of the Dedimus by the Commissioners is thus.
VIrtute istius Brevis nobis direct' (tali die and Anno) recepimus Sacrament'
infranominat' A. B. Vicecom' Warr' tam de offic' Vicecom' in dict' Com' Warr'
been and fidelit' faciend' juxt' formam cujusdam Schedulae praesentibus ann'
quam Sacramentum specificat' in Actu Parliament' Anno Regni Dominae Elizabethae
nuper Reginae Angliae etc. primo fact' secundum tenorem Brevis and Schedulae
Brevis proed' similit' annex' prout Breve istud in se exigit and requirit.

The Sheriff must take the Oath and Sacrament, as is now usual for all Officers
and Ministers of Justice. Stat. Car. 2. and the Oaths appointed by the Statute
of William and Mary.

In the general Case of the Sheriffs of England, when the King makes a new
Patent, though the Ancient Sheriff had his Office but durante ^eneplacito,
presently a Writ of de Comitatu Commisso Writ of Discharge.
(which is commonly called a Writ of Discharge, or a Writ de exoneratione
officij,) shall issue; the form Vide supra.

And then another Writ is directed to the Ancient Sheriff for the delivery of
his County and Rolls, Writs, etc. to the New Sheriff. These were two Writs
formerly, but now they are included in one. Vide supra.

The next thing is, the New Sheriff at or before his first County Court, must
take over from his Predecessor all his Prisoners and Writs precisely by view,
and by Indenture to be made between them, wherein all the Causes which he has
against every Prisoner, must be set forth and delivered, or else the New
Sheriff is not charged with them, as in Westbies Case.

Now before I say more as to the Delivery, I I shall show you what Actions of
the Old Sheriff, or his Officers shall be good, and to what time.

Now the Old Sheriff of a County is Sheriff, until the New be Sworn, although he
be Chosen; for it is the taking of his Oath that does complete Till what time
the old Sheriff, or the new Sheriff may Act. Crok El. 12 Fitz Case. More 186.
More 364. St. John's Case. Cro. El. 440. Boucher and Wiseman.
him in his Office. And the Arrest is good by the Old Sheriff, till a new
Patent be showed to him, or other sufficient notice, Cro. El. Fitzs Case. The
Acts of the Old Sheriff are good, till a Writ of Discharge received, More 186.
And a Bailiff Errant may Execute a Warrant of an Old Sheriff made before a Writ
of Discharge; although a New Sheriff be Chosen, More 364.

And therefore in Cro. El. 440. Action on the Case was brought against the
Sheriff, and the Plaintiff declared, whereas he had recovered an 100 l. and had
a Fieri facias, and Defendant by virtue thereof levied 28 l. and had not
Returned the Writ, nor paid the Money to the Plaintiff. On Not guilty pleaded,
in Evidence it was proved, that the Writ was delivered to C. the Defendants
Undersheriff, 9 No. 34. El. and the same day he made Execution; and he proved,
that the same day a Writ of Discharge was delivered to him, 6 No. 35 El. but he
did not prove he had notice of this Writ of Discharge, before the Execution
served, Per Cur'. he was yet Sheriff, and Chargable to the Plaintiffs Action.
The Ancient Sheriffs ought to give notice of all Executions, against any in
their Custody to the New Sheriff, although the Executions are of Record; or
otherwise, the New Sheriff shall not be chargable with them. But if the Old
Sheriff dye, the New Sheriff at his Peril, shall take Notice of Executions to
the new Sheriff. 3 Rep. Westbies Case.
notice of all Executions, which are against any that he finds in the Gaol; and
this is of necessity, for there is none to deliver over the Prisoners to him:
And in such case the New Sheriff is to take notice of all the Writs. Dalt. 17.
Moore 688. Pop. 85. Mesme Case.

The Delivery over of the Prisoners must be by Indenture, and every several
Execution must Delivery of Prisoners 3 Rep. Westbi^ Case.
be mentioned that is against any one. And therefore in the great Case to this
purpose, viz. Westbies Case, The Sheriff of London by Indenture Deliver over J.
S. (who was in Execution at the Suit of A. and B. severally,) and only mentions
the Execution against A. and J. S. Escapes, B. brought Debt against the Old
Sheriffs, and adjudged that the Action well lies; for he cannot be in Custody
of the New Sheriff for this Execution, because they were not charged with this
Execution, and the fault was in the Old Sheriffs, in omitting it on their
Indenture; and the Escape commenceth e^ Instanti that the Ancient Sheriffs
deliver their Prisoner to the New, for then they cease to have the Custody of
him, and though he remains in the Walls of the Gates, it is an Escape in Law.

And until the Prisoners are delivered to the New Sheriff, they remain in the
Custody of the Ancient Sheriff, notwithstanding the New Patent, the Writ of
Discharge, and the Writ of Delivery.

As to the Prisoners in Execution, in case of the death of the Sheriff. Vid.
infra tit. Execution.

Now by the Death of the King the Sheriffs What is to be done in case of the
Kings death. Dalt. 17.
Office cease, and therefore in the next King's time, a new Patent is
immediately sued out; and if a Prisoner escape between the Death of the King
and the new Patent, the Sheriff shall be charged, for he ought to have made his
Gaol safe. Vide supra, Westbies Case.

In Smallman and Lanes Case, It was the Opinion What shall be said a good
delivery, and how to be made. 2 Leon 54. Smallman and Lane.
of all the Justices, That by the Law the Old Sheriff ought to deliver the Body
of him, who is in his Custody, by view to the new Sheriff, and such Prisoners
ought to be brought to him to view; and from that time, the Law shall judge the
Prisoners in the Possession of the new Sheriff, and not before.

D. Sheriff of Warwick had one in Execution whom he kept in a private Prison by
himself, for all his Executions in the Town of Warwick; and when he was
discharged of his Office, and a New Sheriff made, D. said to the New Sheriff,
that he had such an one in Execution in his Custody, and offered to the said
Sheriff to put him in the Indenture amongst his other Prisoners The New Sheriff
not bound to receive Prisoners from the Old Sheriff, but at the Gaol; yet if
the other will receive them out of the Gaol, the old one is discharged.
Dabridgcourts Case, largely cited in Wes^b^es Case, Pop. 85.
delivered to the New Sheriff; but the new Sheriff refused to receive him,
unless D. would deliver him into the Common Gaol of the County, which was in
the Town of Warwick, and then the Prisoner escaped. D. was charged with this
Escape, for the New Sheriff is not compellable to take the Prisoners of the
delivery Crompt. 204.
of the Old Sheriff, but in the Common Gaol of the County. And if the Sheriff
dies, the Party shall be rather at a prejudice, than the New Sheriff without
cause charged with him: And in such a Case, the Party who sued Execution may
help himself, (to wit) by a remanding of the Body, by a Corpus cum causa,
whereby he may be brought to be duly in Execution, and this under a due Officer.

There was an Habeas Corpus ad recipiend', etc. How Prisoners shall be turned
over by Indenture.
for W. W. to H. Sheriff of Glouc' and he moved the Court for their Advice,
because W. was in Execution when B. was Sheriff, and was left in the Gaol when
C. was Sheriff; but he was not turned over by Indenture to C. not to H. but was
yet in the Gaol, and had been charged with a new Execution, which they were
ready to Retorn, but pray that he shall not be enforced to Return the other
Execution; because he was not in Custody to him for this. Per Cur', He shall
not If a Prisoner is not turned over to the next Sheriff and yet remains in the
Gaol, he is Prisoner of the ancient Sheriff, and may be turned over.
be compelled to make other Retorn, but that for the first Execution, he shall
yet remain in the Custody of B. the ancient Sheriff, though his Body be in the
Custody of the New, because he was not turned over by Indenture; and the
difference between this and Westby's Case is, that there the Prisoner was
turned over for one Debt, and not for the other, and therefore an Escape for
that. And per Cur', B. the ancient Sheriff may turn him over by Indenture to H.
the present Sheriff (for it ought not to be to C. for he never was in his
Custody) and then he will make Retorn of all the Executions. Siderfin p. 335.
Hanmer and Wicomer. The Old Sheriff may make Indenture to one who is Sheriff
several years after.
Vide 2 Keb. 224.

Note, It was said by Hobart, Winch 51. in Empson and Bathurst's Case. If the
Sheriff make an Extent, and before a Liberate a new Sheriff is chosen, in this
case the new Sheriff shall have the Fees appointed by the Statute.

Upon Delivery of the old Sheriff to the new Sheriff, and Escape thereupon,
Vide tit. Declaration in Escape.

The Form of an Indenture for setting over Prisoners and Writs between the Old
and New Sheriff.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. Esquire; late Sheriff of the County of
Warr' of the one part, and C. D. Knight, now Sheriff of the said County, of the
other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. by virtue of his Majesty's Writ of
Discharge (of his late Office) to him directed, has delivered and set over
unto the said C. D. these Writs following, (That is to say) a Capias against W.
H. Ret' Octab' Hill. ad sect. Johannis Smith, etc. together with the Bodies of
J. N. in Execution at the Suit of G. H. for a Debt of 22 l. and J. H. at the
Suit of C. D. in Execution for 10 l. and R. G. in Execution as well at the Suit
of O. D. for a Debt of 100 l. as also at the Suit of N. W. for a Debt of 40 l.
in, etc. In witness, etc.

All the Writs which are set over in the Indenture between the Sheriffs, if
they have been executed by the Old Sheriff, then they must be Returned by him,
or in his Name, and Indorsed under by the New Sheriff thus:

Breve prout Indorsat' mihi deliberat' fuit per A. P* Armig', Vic', prox'
praedecessor' meum in exitu ab Officio suo.

Per C. D. M^', Vicecom'

What Acts may or must the Old Sheriff do after he is discharged, and what
remdy against him for a Misdemeanor in his Office.
Process in some Cases may be to the Old In what case Process shall be to the
Old Sheriff. In case of Retorn of Cepi corpus.
Sheriff, to bring in the Body of a Prisoner; and that is, where before he has
made a Retorn of Cepi corpus and parat' habeo, and afterward he is removed and
a New Sheriff made; on Nonappearance of the Prisoner Process shall go to the
Old Sheriff, as Distringas, 1 Bulstr. 82. Egerton and Morgan.

The difference is, if the Sheriff at the day Retorn Cepi corpus and have not
the Body ready, he shall be amerced, and a Distringas shall be awarded to the
Coroners. But if the old Sheriff at the day Retorn Cepi corpus, and before the
day of the Retorn he is removed, and a new one is made, the Distringas here
shall be awarded to the new Sheriff, if it appear on the Record that he has
taken the Body.

A Sheriff on a Fieri fac' seized Goods in his hands to the value of the Debt,
and paid part of the Debt, and the Goods not being sold nor the Writ Returned,
the Sheriff was discharged, and afterward sold the residue of the Goods Sale
of Goods after Discharge.
without any Vendition' exponas. And per Cur', the sale is good; for the Writ
of Fieri fac' gave Authority to him to sell without any other Writ, 2 Cro. 73.
Air and Aden. Therefore Mo. 757. the same Case is Misreported, which says, If
the Sheriff takes Goods by Fieri fac' and then is discharged; he may not sell
them, but ought to deliver them to the new Sheriff, and Return quod non invenit
emptores. And Yelverton in the same Case agreed with Crook on Fieri fac', sed
non inveni emptores, a Distringas to sell shall go to the old Sheriff, and not
to deliver the Goods to the new one, Mo. 757. Yelv. 44. Cro. Jac. 73. Aden and
Air. 2 Keb. 821. Mildmay and Smith.

If Money be paid to the old Sheriff, and he is discharged before the Retorn of
the Writ, the Party pays the Money to the Old Sheriff, he shall not pay it
again.
party shall not be compelled to pay it again; and the Plaintiff may have his
remedy against the ancient Sheriff, if he will, Cro. El. 209. Rook and Wilmott.

The old Sheriff returned the Proclamation upon an Exigent, after that he was
discharged of his Office; and by the Judgment of the Court the Outlawry was
void, and the party was discharged, Dyer 41.

Note this for a Rule, That that which comes Regula. Pleading.
after the Nuper is not traversable, unless the party be charged by reason of
his Office, as if he be called in pleading Nuper Vicecomes, nuper Escheator,
etc. 38 H. 6. 18.

If Attachment may be granted against a Sheriff, out of his Office, not to be
fined for a Contempt during his Office.
Sheriff for Contempt, after he is removed out of his Office. The Justices
said, they could not do it; for now he is no Officer and cannot now be fined,
and without Fine they do not use to Imprison, 2 Brownl. 144.

So Styles: A Sheriff out of his Office cannot be fined by the Court; but a
Tipstaff may be sent for, to bring him in to answer the Misdemeanor committed
by him when he was in his Office, Pract. Reg. 304. p. 18. Or a Distringas nuper
Vicecomiti may Issue out against him, 2 Sand. 88.

The Form of Pleading, Removal of one Sheriff and the Election of another, vide
2 Sand. 88.

The new High Sheriff at the first County Court, next after his Election and
the discharge of the old Sheriff, must read his Patent and Writ The Sheriffs
Letters Patents, when and where to be read.
of Assistance, and nominate his Undersheriff, and depute and proclaim four
Deputies to make Replevins in the Sheriffs name, who ought not to dwell above
twelve miles distant one from the other, in every quarter of the County one,
and to make deliverance of Distresses, when need shall require; per Stat. 1 and
2 Ph. and Mar. c. 12.

The new Sheriff, before he shall Return any Writs into the Chancery,
King's Bench, Common Pleas His Deputies.
or Exchequer, ought to make an Attorney or Deputy on Record in every of these
Courts, there to receive all manner of Writs and Warrants as shall be directed
to the Sheriffs respectively, and this upon pain of 40 l. and that per Stat. 23
H. 6. c. 10. And such Deputies are to be made by Warrant of Attorney from the
High Sheriff. The like Law is of Sheriffs of Wales, and Lancaster, and Chester,
and all Writs of Proclamation shall be delivered to every such Deputy. The
Bishop of Durham, and (during the Vacancy) the Chancellor of Durham, shall
likewise have a Deputy to receive all Writs of Proclamation.

Vid. plus of Deputies infra.

How the Sheriffs Office may be determined, or not, before the year be out.
The King may determine his Office when he pleases, though he cannot (during the
Continuance of his Office) abridge his Power.

The Office of Sheriff determines by the death 2 Siderfin, p. 49. Cro. El. 12.
Lord Mordants Case.
of the King, vid. supra.

The Sheriff being made a Baron of Parliament, or becoming a Baron by descent,
this does not determine his Office.

By the Death or Resignation of the King, the Authority of the Sheriffs, and
all his Officers, does determine; therefore it is used presently, in the next
Kings time, to sue out new Patents of his Office, and of Assistance.

CHAP. III.
Of Under-sheriffs, etc. His Nature and Office, and Oath. In what cases the
High Sheriff must execute the Office in person: He cannot abrige the
Undersheriffs Power. Of the Sheriffs Deputies in the County, and in the Courts
above. Pleadings by the Deputies, and of Rescues from him. What Bonds and
Covenants between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff are good or not, and the
pleadings to such Bonds. What acts or defaults of the Undersheriff, Bailiffs,
Gaolers, the High Sheriff shall be answerable for, or not: And what Actions
shall be brought against the High Sheriff, Under-sheriffs and Gaolers. Cases
and Resolutions about the Rule Respondeat Superior. Where the Lords of a
Franchise shall be answerable. Of Trial by the Sheriffs Certificate or by the
Record.

WE have seen before how that an Earl had the Jurisdiction of the Counties, and
their Commission ran thus, Commisimus vobis custodiam Comitatus nostri ad
voluntatem, and the Sheriff comes in his place; and all Sheriffs likewise have
their Commissions ad voluntatem nostram; and though Deputy. 3 Bulstr. 77, 78.
Phelps and Winchcomb.
there is no mention in his Patent of any Deputy to be made by him, yet he
makes one. And as in the first Government the Earl made his Deputy, so the
Sheriff made his Deputy, (viz.) the Undersheriffs and Bailiffs Errants within
the County, called the Sergeants of the County, and there is no Warrant for him
to do so; but yet the same has been still done.

A Ministerial Officer, as the Sheriff is, may Ministerial Officers may make
Deputies.
make a Deputy; but a Judicial Officer cannot, because he is to do Justice. Sed
distinguendum est. All Retorns made by him, ought to be made in the name of the
Principal Officer. For the High Sheriff only is sworn as to the execution of
the Office of Sheriff, and he is to answer all.

Sub-Vicecomes is a person that our Law takes The Antiquity of Undersheriff.
The Nature of an Undersheriff.
notice of, and an Undersheriff has been in use before the Conquest.

Now an Undersheriff being in effect but the Sheriffs Deputy, according to the
nature of a Deputation, he is removable as an Attorney is; and if the Sheriff
make him irrevokable, yet he may revoke him. He is but in the nature of a
general Bailiff Errant to the Sheriff, and the whole Shire, as others are over
the Hundred. So that the High Sheriff may grant this Office at The Highsheriff
may execute the Office of Undersheriff himself.
Will; or he need not make an Undersheriff at all, but may exercise it himself.

The Under-sheriffs Oath.
Every Undersheriff, before he meddles with Stat, 27 E^. c. 12.
his Office, shall before one of the Justices of Assize, or the Custos
Rotulorum of the County, or two Justices of the Peace there, one whereof to be
of the Quorum, take the Oath of Supremacy, and also the Oath hereafter written,
on pain to forfeit treble Damages to the party grieved, if he commit any act
contrary to the said Oaths, or either of them. The Form of the Oath is as
follows:

I A. B. shall not use nor exercise the Office of Undersheriff corruptly,
during the time that I shall remain therein; neithe shall or will accept,
receive or take, by any color, means or device whatsoever, or consent to the
taking of any manner of Fee or Reward of any person or persons for the
Impannelling or Returning of any Inquest, Jury, or Tales, in any Court of
Record for the King, or betwixt party and party above Two shillings, or the
value thereof, or such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm: But will, according to my Power, truly and
indifferently, with convenient speed, Impannel all Jurors, and Retorn all such
Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appertain to be done by my Duty or
Office, during the time that I shall remain in the same Office.

So help me God.

No Bailiff of Franchise, Deputy, or Clerk of Bailiffs of Franchises, and
Sheriffs Deputies to take the same Oath.
a Sheriff or Undersheriff, shall intermeddle with their several Offices,
before they have taken the said Oaths, as aforesaid, (before the Persons
appointed by this Act to administer the same) or before the Head Officer of the
place, if it be a Town Corporate, altering only the Terms of the Office, and
the Office of Undersheriff, to such words as are convenient for the
Deputation, Office, or Place respectively: And this on pain to forfeit 40 l.
between the King and the Prosecutor.

The Forfeitures may be sued by Debt, Bill, Forfeitures, how to be recovered.
Plaint or Information, in any the Kings Courts of Record: And Justices of
Assize and of the Peace in their open Sessions, shall hear and determine the
default done contrary to this Act, and on Conviction to award Execution by
Fieri fac', Attachm', Capias, or Exigent.

The Sheriff in making an Undersheriff, does implicitly give him power to
execute all the ordinary Offices of the Sheriff himself, that be transferred by
Law; as serving Process, Exetion, and the like.

But in some Cases the High Sheriff must exercise the Office himself in person,
and the Undersheriff may not do it. As,

On a Writ of Partition.

On a Writ of Redisseisin; for in that the Sheriff is Judge.

In a Writ of Waste; for there the Sheriff is commanded to go to the place
wasted. Vide infra.

In Justicies, the Sheriff himself is Judge, or else all is coram non Judice,
and the Undersheriff cannot hold Plea in it.

In all Cases where the words of the Writ are, That the Sheriff shall go in his
own person; as in an Accedas ad Curiam, Waste, Redisseisin; there the
Undersheriff cannot do it. And one may be Judge and Officer in diversis
respectibus. As the One person may be Judge and Officer in diversis respectibus.
Sheriffs in Redisseisin, Waste, etc. so Bailiffs in many ancient Corporations
are Judges and Officers too, and the Custom is good, Cro. Car. 138. Crane's
Case.

A Writ of Partition was awarded, and upon the Examination of the
Undersheriff, he confessed the High Sheriff was not there, as he ought to have
been, and a new Writ was awarded.

Now in the Writs aforesaid, where the Sheriff must do Execution in his own
person, if He be not there in person; if Exception be taken at the Bar before
the Retorn of them be received, If the Waste be returned and filed, the Court
cannot Examine, whether he were there in proper person. But Exception may be
taken at the Bar, before the Retorn be received.
the Writ shall not be received: But if the Sheriff in such Writs Retorneth,
That he was there in proper person, and this Retorn be received, and the Writ
filed, then the Court cannot Examine it; for the Retorn is good, and the party
can have no Averment against the Retorn nor can have any Error. Cro. El. Clay's
Case, Hob. p. 13.

But all the ordinary Offices of the Sheriff are transferred to the
Undersheriff: And therefore Highsheriff abridge the Undersheriffs Power. Hob.
p. 13. Norton and Sims.
if a Sheriff will make an Undersheriff, provided that he shall not serve
Executions above 20 l. without his special Warrant, this Proviso is void. For
though the High Sheriff may choose, not to make an Undersheriff at all, or may
make him at Will, and so remove him wholly; yet he cannot leave him an
Undersheriff and yet abridge his Power, no more than the King can in the case
of the Sheriff himself. Nor can the Undersheriff restrain himself by Covenant;
as he being Undersheriff, is liable to execute all Process, and he has power
to do all that the Sheriff can Transfer. And so was the Case of Boucher and
Wiseman. In the Indenture between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff was an
Exception, That the Undersheriff shall not intermeddle with the Execution Cro.
El. 440 Boucher and Wiseman.
of any Writ above the Sum of 40 l. And per Cur' this Exception was repugnant
and void.

Sheriffs Deputy.
The Undersheriff ought always to have a Deputy attendant in every of the
Courts of Westminster Hall, to receive and execute their Commands, and to give
account of Businesses which may fall out about the Sheriff. Vide supra.

In case the Plaintiff declares, he sued J. S. on Pleading by Deputy his
Deputation without Deed.
a Latitat directed to the Sheriff of D. and J. S. was arrested; and the
Defendant pretending to be Deputy to the Sheriff, took Bond of him and let him
at large. The Defendant pleads, the Sheriff made him his Deputy, to bail all
Prisoners bailable in the County, and thereupon he took Bond of J. S. and
delivered it to the Sheriff, etc The Plaintiff demurrs, because he pleads his
Deputation without Deed; per Gaudy, it is good without Deed; for a Deputy does
things only as a Servant, and in right of his Master, and so may be without
Deed, Cro. El. Clecock and Dennis.

In Rescue the Bailiff of a Liberty arrested the Rescue from the Sheriffs
Deputy.
party, and delivered him to the Sheriffs Deputy, and says, not from the
Sheriff; yet its good: For in an Action on the Case he shall show the Truth, as
it is in rei veritate Cro. Jac. 242. Kent and Ellicot.

The Deputy shall plead the General Issue, as the Officer himself, by the Stat.
7 Jac. Mo. p. 894 n. 1141.

What Bonds and Covenants between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff are good.
Covenant by the Undersheriff, That he will execute any Extent, Liberate,
Elegit, or other Execution Hob. p. 13.
not above the Sum of 40 l. is void. Vide supra.

Covenants between the High Sheriff, some are Where some Covenants are good,
and where not.
good and some are void; for those that are good, the Bond for performance of
Covenants shall stand good. Aliter upon a Statute, as 23 H. 6. c. 10. If the
Sheriff will take a Bond for a Point against that Law, and also for a due Debt,
the whole Bond is void, Hob. p. 13. Norton and Sims, 14 H. 8. c. 5.

A Bond made by the Undersheriff to the Bond for discharge of all Escapes.
Sheriff, for discharge of all Escapes, is good: For since he transfers his
Authority to him, its reasonable he should take Security of him to perform, 1
Brownl. 83.

Undersheriff brought Debt against one of Pleading.
his Bailiffs on Bond to save harmless in executing Process, etc. and assigns
the Breach, That the Bailiff had not executed such his Warrant sent to him,
upon a Process directed to him out of the Exchequer, to levy Issues upon
certain Lands. Defendant dem^urrs, (1) because the Warrant directed to him was
made out of the County: (2) Its not alleged, that the Manor of A. where he
was by the Warrant to levy the Issues is within the Hundred where the Bailiff
had Jurisdiction; per Cu^', its a good Exception, and the Breach is not showed
to be within the Condition of the Obligation; because a Bailiff cannot execute
a Precept out of the Hundred where he is Bailiff, Styles p. 18. Slaughter and
Day.

High Sheriff brought Action of Covenant against Escape though after the year, a
breach of Covenant.
the Undersheriff, and alleges, he was a Sheriff An. 1658. and that one W.
was then taken, and suffered to Escape out of his Custody; whereupon J. S.
recovered against him, and therein it was alleged, That the Plaintiff 12 Car.
2. suffered him to Escape out of his Custody; its well enough: And any Escape,
though after the year, would be a breach of Covenant, 2 Keb. 352. Cremer and
Humberston.

If any Sheriff take Hire, Gift or Bribe of any Sheriff taking Bribes, or
buying the Place of Undersheriff etc.
Undersheriff, Bailiff, Keeper of the Gaol, etc. for his Place or Office, he
may be indicted, sined or imprisoned, Art. super Chart. c. 13. 2 Inst. 566

In Debt on an Obligation to perform Covenants, on Oyer it appeared that the
Plaintiff was Undersheriff by purchase, and so void, per 5 Ed. 6. c.

Vide plus infra, sub hic Titulo. What acts of the Undersheriff, Bailiffs,
Jailer, etc. the High Sheriff shall be answerable for, or not; or what Actions
shall be brought against the Undersheriff or High Sheriff.
Upon every default in the Execution of his Neglect or Fraud. Latch. 187
Laycock's Case.
Office, be it by Neglect or Fraud of the Undersheriff, he shall answer and be
amerced in the Exchequer; but the Sheriff shall not be imprisoned for the act
of the Undersheriff, nor be Indicted.

Per Stat. 14 Ed. 3. c. 10. the Sheriffs shall have the 14 Ed. 3. c. 10. 4 Rep.
34. Mitton's Case.
Custody of the Gaols of the Counties, and shall put in such Gaolers as they
will answer for. The Sheriff is an immediate Officer to the Courts of the King,
and shall answer for Escapes; and shall be subject to Amerciaments, if he has
not the Body ready in Court.

Sir Richard Dyer's Case, Sheriff of Huntington, Escape brought against the
Undersheriff.
and his Undersheriff, in Marsh and Astry's Case. The Undersheriff suffered
one to Escape, and the Action was brought against the Undersheriff: As if the
Clerk in an Office Misenter any thing, he himself shall be punished for it, and
not the Master of the Office: because he takes a Fee for it. But if a Retorn
made by Sheriff to answer for insufficient Retorns.
the Bailiff be insufficient, then the Sheriff himself shall be amerced, 1
Leon. p. 146. Marsh and Astry.

An Action of Faux Imprisonment, or other Actions against the Undersheriff.
Action may be brought against the Undersheriff in the Exchequer, although the
High Sheriff be Officer of the Court; for the Court takes notice of the
Undersheriff also.

Faux Imprisonment against the Undersheriff; Faux Imprisonment.
for detaining a Prisoner after a Release made, 1 Roll. Abr. 539. Doyley and
Jolliff, 3 Bulstr. 96, 97. Withers and Henly.

If the Demandant in a Writ of Entry or Not Retorning a Writ of Summons.
Disseisin deliver a Writ of Summons to the Undersheriff of the County, and
after he summons a Tenant upon the Land accordingly, and notwithstanding does
not Retorn the Writ, Action on the Case may be brought against the
Undersheriff, if the Plaintiff will: For peradventure the Sheriff had not
Notice of it, and the Undersheriff took Fees to execute the Writ; and its said
falso and malitiose for delay of the Plaintiff, which is imbezelling it, Hill.
32 El. B. R. Marsh and Astry.

Servant of the Bailiff of a Franchise, sworn Where the Bailiff of a Franchise
is chargable.
on Deputation to serve Process but of such a sum, and he serves Process of a
greater sum sans Warrant, and after levied the Money, and parts with it; the
Bailiff shall be chargable, Hetley p. 12.

Latitat issues to the Sheriff of N. who makes his Warrant to the Bailiff of a
Liberty to arrest J. S. the Bailiff makes his Warrant to his Deputies: The
Deputies Arrest him at VV. out of Sir Tho. Jones Rep. p. 215. Olliet and Bissey.
the Liberty, and after bring him into the Liberty, and delivered by them to
the Jailer of the Liberty. Per Cur', The Action of Faux Imprisonment lies not
against the Jailer, for he had done but what belonged to his Office, and is not
bound to enquire whether the first Arrest be Tortious, or not; and if he had
been informed of it, yet if he had not been privy to the Practice, yet he ought
to detain the Prisoner, being delivered to him by a good Warrant: For if such
Information had been False, the Jailer had been liable to an Escape; and the
Prisoner is not without his Remedy, for he had a good Action against the
Tortfesors; and it seemed to Maynard, the Action lies against the Jailer,
because he is as a Servant to the Bailiff of the Liberty. But no such thing
appeared in the Record; and in truth he was a Patent Officer by Grant of the
Lord of the Liberty. But per Cur', if it had been so, this alters not the Case;
for the Bailiff had made his Warrant lawful, and the sole Offense was in the
Bailiffs, who execute the said Lawful Warrant illegally.

If the Undersheriff make a Retorn amerciable, Retorn amerciable.
there the High Sheriff shall be amerced; for the Retorn is made expressly in
his Name: But if it be a False Retorn whereupon an Action of False Retorn.
Desceit lies, in that case it may be brought against the Undersheriff, Dr.
and Stud. c. 42.

The Sheriff shall answer for the Misdemeanors Misdemeanors of Bailiffs.
Concealment of a Writ.
of his Bailiff. Ibid.

If a Warrant on a Fieri fac' be directed to an Under-bayliff of a Liberty, and
he levies the Debt, but conceals the Writ, nor makes any Certificate of it,
Action on the Case lies against him; for it is a Personal wrong, Mich. 12 Jac.
B. R. Bell and Catesby.

Fieri fac' is to levy the Goods of Dawson, and The difference between the
mistake of one person for another, and the Goods of one for another.
the Bailiff by virtue thereof took the Goods of Luttrel as the Goods of
Dawson, Trespass well lies against the High Sheriff. For albeit had the
Undersheriff taken another Person, he had done wrong and without Warrant, and
the Action well lies against him; yet as to Goods, this may be done by color
of the Warrant, and the High Sheriff is chargable in Trespass; and the Retorn
of Nulla bona will not alter the case, having no influence on Lutterels Goods.
By Windham, the High Sheriff and Undersheriff are one Officer: And if an
Undersheriff deliver Hab' fac' ^possess^ of White-acre for Black-acre.
White-acre on Hab' fac' possession' of Black-acre, the High Sheriff is
chargable, aliter of a Common Servant, who is a Trespasser, if he takes one
man's Goods as another, for which I sent. Also, here is no Special Warrant set
forth, therefore all is the act of the Sheriff; and the High sheriff may well
bring his Action of Covenant against the Undersheriff, Pasch. 20 Car. 2. B. R.
Cremer and Humberston.

If a Bayliff-Errant, or Special Bailiff, Arrest Action is for Rescous against
the Sheriff, not against the Bailiff.
a man upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and after the Prisoner rescues himself,
he at whose Suit he was arrested may not have an Action on the Case upon the
Escape against the Bailiff, but he ought to have it against the Sheriff; for
the Bailiff is but a Servant to the Sheriff, Mich. 32 El. B. R. Atterton and
Harwood.

The Jailer shall answer for his Servant, who Jailer to to answer for his
Servant. Bayliff-Errant. Dr. and Stnd. lib. 2. 127.
permits Escapes.

The False Retorn of the Sheriff shall not make the Bailiff punishable in an
Action; for he is Bayliff-Errant, and a mere Servant. As the Bailiff Justifies
per Sheriffs Warrant; Plaintiff Replies, the Sheriff Returned upon the Writ,
Tarde, Cr^. El. 181. Parks and Moss.

Respondeat Superior.
In all Cases of Escape, the Jailer who has the 9 Rep 98.
actual possession of the Gaol shall answer for all Escapes; but if he have not
sufficient wherewithal to answer Respondeat Superior, i. e. He that committed
the Custody of the Gaol to him.

Yet quaere de hoc. There is no Process directed to a Jailer, but an Habeas
Corpus, and the Prisoners are in the Eye of the Law, in the Custody of the
Sheriff only; and when our Books say, Actions of Escape lie against Gaolers,
such absolute Gaolers are intended, as Writs are directed to: Though I conceive
an Action lies against the Sheriff or Jailer at Election; and if the Jailer is
not sufficient, then against the Sheriff. Vid. Hardress p. 29. Wainright and
Griffith, a Case Argued, but not Resolved.

How the Superior, and in what Cases, shall answer for the Inferior, or not.
If a man be sent to Prison on a Statute Merchant Dr. and Stud. lib. 2 p. 136
by the Mayor, before whom the Recognizance was taken; and if the Jailer will
not receive him, he shall answer for the Debt, if he have wherewith; if he have
not, then he shall answer that committed him to the Gaol, as appears by the
Statute called Statute Merchant.

23 H. 6. c. 10. The Superior shall put in such for whom they will answer.

The Comminalty of London that have the Fee, shall answer for the Sheriffs.

But in such Action against the Superior it must Averment.
be averred, that the Inferior was Insufficient: As in Debt against the Dean
and Chapter of Paul's, for the Escape of the Bailiff of a Liberty lies not,
because it is not averred that the Bailiff was insufficient, 2 Roll. 155 Dyer
278.

Debt was brought on Escape of Holt, Committed How to De^l^^e.
to the Fleet on Judgment. Declaration is, That the Defendant, Sir Jeremy
Whitchc^^t, was seized, and granted the Office of Ward^n of the Fleet for three
Lives to Duckenfield, who was seized, and by Habeas Corpus Holt was removed,
and by Chancery Committed to the Fleet in Execution; and Duckenfield suffered
the Escape, the Defendant being Superior, and Duckenfield insufficient. The
Court inclined, That the Superior in this case was chargable: But the
Declaration being, That at the time of the Lease and Commitment of the
Prisoner, and at the time of the Action, the Lessee Duckenfield was
insufficient; and the Verdict is only, That he was at the time of the Lease,
and of the Escape and Commitment; but not that he Verdict not pursuant.
was Insufficient at the time of the Action, which is the Gist of the Action;
and if he was Insufficient at the time of the Action, no Action lies. And this
is necessary to be found on Westminster. 2. c. 11. and this being not found, nor nec
unquam postea 25 Car. 2. Plummer and Whitchcot vid. Sir Tho. Jones Rep. p. 60.
Mesme Case. Dyer 278. Gawd^es Case.
the Escape, the conclusion being so super totam materiam, and the tota materia
is not found, etc. a Venire fac' de novo was awarded.

The Duke of Norfolk was adjudged to answer for his Deputy. Dyer 278.

The Duke of Norfolks Case was this, He being Marshal of England, and having
Authority to make a Deputy, made Gaudy his Deputy, who was sworn in open Court;
afterward Gaudy Licensed a Prisoner, who was in Execution to go into Norfolk
with a Keeper, and Debt was brought against Gaudy for the Escape. It was
adjudged, though he was but under Marshal, and the Action brought in Middlesex,
supposing the Escape in Shorditch, and not in the County of Surry where the
Marshalsea is, that the Action did well lie.

Debt was brought against the Dean and Chapter Noy 67. Dean and Chapter of
Paul's Case.
of Paul's, for an Escape suffered by their Bailiff of a Franchise, where they
had Retorn of Writs. Per Cur. It lies not against them, but against the
Bailiff, for the Writ is directed to him, scilicet, Ballivo Libertatis, and for
an ill Retorn the Bailiff always is fined.

The County answers for the Coroners.

The Jailer of the County shall not answer Where the Rule Resp. Superior hold
or not.
Escape on Execution, but the Sheriff, and some hold that Respondeat Superior,
is only where the inferior Officer is removeable, as Jailer to the Sheriff.

By Wild and others on VV. 2. chap. 11. It was never intended, that Superior
should answer in any other Case than Account.

This as some say is grounded on 13 Ed. 1. c. 11. on 1 R. 2. c. 12. and
Respondeat Superior was only in the Kings Case at Common Law. Marshal of the B.
R. is but a Branch of the Earl Marshal.

If Execution be directed to a Sheriff to make 2 Brownl. Rep. 50.
Execution within a City, and the Sheriff directs his Warrant to the Bailiff,
who does it, and after is a fugitive and not able to answer for it; the Lord of
the Franchise shall answer for it, Where Lord of a Franchise to answer.
and shall be liable to answer for his Bailiff.

He which has the keeping of the Gaol by right or wrong, shall be charged for
the Escape of Prisoners. And if he which has the Custody of the Gaol in Fee,
substitutes another under him at Will, or for Life, he which has the actual 9
Rep. 98.
Possession of the Office shall be charged (by Action) for the Escape. But if
they be not sufficient Respondeat Superior.

Having treated of Sheriffs and Under-Sheriffs, I shall add some few
Resolutions, where Trials shall be by the Sheriff or by the Record.

Of Trials.
Trial may be by the Certificate of the Sheriff, By Sheriffs Certificate.
Trial^ per pais. 9.
upon a Writ directed to him in the Case of Privilege, whether one be a Citizen
or Foreigner. Trials per Pais. 9.

Whether one was Sheriff such a day or not, Cro. Car. 421.
shall be tried per Pais.

If it be a Question, whether the Sheriff made By the Sheriff.
such a Retorn or not, it shall be tried by the Sheriff, If whether the
Undersheriff made such a Retorn or not, it shall be tried by the Undersheriff.
Cro. Car. 421. By the Record.
If the Question be, whether such an one be Sheriff or not, he being made by
Letters Patents of Record, shall be tried by the Record. As was Smiths Case.
Error assigned, because the Venire fac' was returned by Sir R. S. Sheriff of
Essex, and in Crastino Martini 9 Car. and then the said Sir R. S. was not
Sheriff, but H. S. the Defendant in the Writ of Error says, that Sir R. S. was
Sheriff of Essex before the Retorn of the said Writ, ( viz.) 10 No. 9 Car. by
the Kings Patent, prout patet de Recordo. Upon Null tiel Record pleaded, at the
day he produced the Letters Patents in Court, whereby he was made Cro. Car.
421. Smith Case.
Sheriff. It was moved, that it ought to be tried per Pais, whether he were
Sheriff such a day, and not by the Record of the Patent, for he might be
discharged before the day. But per Cur. that shall not be intended, unless it
were by pleading shown to the Court, and so Judgment was affirmed.

If it come in Issue, whether he that made the 8 H. 410, 20. Br. Officer 33.
Array be Undersheriff or not; this shall be tried by the County and not by
the Officer.

CHAP. IV.
Of Bailiffs of Hundreds; their Nature, Office and Oath. Of Special Bailiffs,
and of Promises on making Special Bailiffs, to save harmless from Escapes. Of
Bailiffs of Franchises, their Nature, Power, Office; and of Retorns by them.
The manner of Pleading by Bailiffs of Franchises. In what Cases the Sheriff may
Enter into their Liberties. Of Baliffs of Fees, or Guildable.

HAving treated of Under-sheriffs, I come now to speak of Bailiffs to the
Sheriff, ( viz.) Bailiffs Errant, or Ballivi Intinerantes, or Bailiffs of
Hundreds, and Special Bailiffs.

The making of the Bailiffs of Hundreds belongs to the Sheriff.

By the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. Hundreds (as to the Bayliffwicks of the same) are
rejoyned to the Counties, and all Grants made of the Bayliffwicks of Hundreds
since that Statute are void, and the making the Bailiffs thereof belongs to 4
Instit. 267. Fortescues Casae. Hundreds cannot be granted from the Sheriff.
the Sheriff; as in Fortescues Case of Buckingham Shire, 2 Car. 1. Fortescue
had of late diverse Hundreds granted to him for Life, in Com' Bucks, reserving a
Rent, which the Sheriff disallowed, and put in Bailiffs of his own; and per
Curiam, this was against Law, and they belonged to the Office of Sheriff. And
so,

A Patent to Execute all Process within an Hundred is void.

There was a Case in 34 Car. 2. B. R. Cle and Ireland, which confirms this
resolution. The Sheriff of the County of Leicest' against the Grantee of the
Hundred of G. in an Action on the Case, the Grant was by the King of an Hundred
pur Ans, and on Special Verdict the Question Sir Th. Jones Rep. 194.
was, If the Defendant had good Title by such Grant to the said Hundred to hold
a Court, and constitute a Bailiff against the Will of the Sheriff, and the
Contingent, and incident Fees of Leets, and Courts Barons of the Hundred. And
per Cur' all the Hundreds which were not before the Statute of 2 Ed. 3. c. 12.
and 18 Ed. 3. c. 9. in Fee by the Crown were joined to the Office of the
Sheriff. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff against the Patentee.

A Sheriffs Bailiff is not an Officer of the Pract. Reg. 49, 50.
Court, that the Court takes notice of.

A Bailiff of an Hundred may Execute a Writ The extent. Pract. 49.
out of the Hundred where he his Bailiff, for he is Bailiff all the County over.

Sheriffs Bailiffs shall not be prejudiced by Sheriffs, Bailiffs, not to be
prejudiced by the Nonretorn, or the misreturn of the Sheriff.
the Non-retorn, or Mis-retorn of the Sheriff. The Defendant (as Bailiff of an
Hundred) took Goods in Execution on Fieri fac', and sold them, and delivered
the Money to the Sheriff; its good, and no Trover lies against the Bailiff, for
they did Execute Secundum Exigentiam Brevis. 1 Leon. 144. Parkes and Hows.

Sheriffs Bailiffs are to take the Oath of Allegiance To take the Oath of
Allegiance. 3 Keb. 561, 552.
according to the Statute, 27 Eliz. c. 12. Subpaena 40 l. (viz.) Bailiffs of
Hundreds, for they should Execute all Writs, and must attend Assizes and
Sessions; and the Statute requires, that Le Roy versus Bents.
they have sufficient within the Hundred, (but the ordinary Bailiffs or
Bum-bayliffs need not.) And the words, (that no other Person or Persons shall
intermedle till Sworn) refer to the subject matter, (viz.) such persons as
ought usually to swear as Sheriffs Officers.

The Form of the Deputation of the Bailiff of the Hundred. Vid. Greenwood 53.

The Execution of all Writs, which come to 9 Ed. 2. de vicecom.
the Sheriff, shall be done by the Bailiffs of Hundreds, such as are sworn,
though now the use is to put in Special Bailiffs.

Bailiffs of Hundreds shall attend Justices of 27 H. 8. 24.
Assize, Jail-deliver, and Justices of Peace in every of their Courts and
Sessions.

Of Special Bailiffs; what they are, and how they stand in the Eye of the Law.
A Special Bailiff to a Sheriff for the time being, Jones Rep. 65. Bath and
Salter.
he is his Officer, and his Arrest is the Arrest of the Sheriff; and if he
suffer a Prisoner to Escape, an Action lies against the Sheriff; and if the
Prisoner makes Rescous, the Retorn of the Retorn of Rescous.
Rescous shall be, that it was done to the Sheriff himself.

The Statute of 27 El. c. 12. about taking the Jones Rep. 249.
Oath that the Undersheriff takes, extends not to Special Bailiffs.

Inconsideration, the Bailiff will make such an Promise to save harmless from
Escapes. Crok. El. 178. 271. Dabridgcourt and Smalbroke. 1 Roll. Ab. 16. Palmer
and Smalbroke.
one his Special Bailiff, a promise to save harmless from Escapes is good; for
he is an Officer appointed by the Plaintiff, and its no reason the Sheriff
should be at a loss by his appointment. And this Assumpsit is not within the
Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. for as the Party may Discharge a Prisoner in
Execution, so he may foreclose himself from the benefit, if the Prisoner Escape
and this Action lies, if he brings Escape against the Sheriff. Note, The
Delivery of the Writ, and the Promise made, was to the Undersheriff, and not
to the Sheriff himself.

Of Bailiffs of Franchises, and their Power, and Retorns.
Bailiffs of Franchises, or Liberties, are such as are appointed by Lords
within their Liberties, to do such Offices within the Precincts of such
Lordships or Liberties, as the Bailiff Errant do at large in their County,
Hundred, that have Retorna brevium or Franchises.

Note, Bailiffs of Franchises, before they execute The Oaths. Insufficient
retorns by them.
their Office must take two Oaths, one concerning the Supremacy, the other
concerning the executing their Office. Vide Supra. Tit. Undersheriff.

Fines and Amerciaments for insufficient Retorn Where the Sheriff may enter the
Franchise or not.
of Writs, or other Process made by the Stewards, or Bailiffs of Liberties
shall be set upon the Heads of such Stewards or Bailiffs, and not upon the
Sheriff. per Stat. 27 H. 8. c. 24.

Hundred by Grant, that has a Bailiff by 3 Keb. 71. 125.
particular Lord, is but his Servant, and the Sheriff Monday and Frogat.
Bailiffs of Franchises cannot as such, take Bonds for appearance in the
Sheriffs name must retorn his Precept.
usually makes another Bailiff to execute there: But a Bailiff of a Franchise
Hundred, may wave his Franchise, and Arrest as a Sheriffs Bailiff; and then he
may take Obligation in the name of the Sheriff, for properly a Bailiff of a
Franchise cannot take a Bond for appearance in the Sheriffs name; but Bailiff
of Hundreds may, Dalt. 544. cont.

2 Keb. 838. Grene and Jones.
The Baliff of a Liberty must Retorn his Precept and set his name to it; and a
Bailiff Itinerant need not.

Keb. 86. 87.
They cannot Arrest a Man without a Warrant to them by the Sheriff, and if they
Retorn not the Warrant to the Sheriff, the Party Arrested may have his Action
of false Imprisonment against the Bailiff.

A Bailiff of a Liberty cannot execute a Cap. Cannot execute a Cap. Utlag 3
Jac. 1. per Cur' in B. R.
Utlag. and if the Party be in the Hands of the Bailiff, the Sheriff may take
him, for it is a non omittas in it self.

In all Cases where the King is Party, the Process must be with a non omittas
propter aliquam Libertatem, and there the Sheriff shall not send his Precept to
the Bailiff of a Liberty, but shall enter himself ex officio, as for
apprehending of Felons, or any act at the Suit of the King, always Dalt. 456.
extant on Stat. Merchant, vid. Stat. de Mercatoribus.

But in other Cases where the King is no Party, there if without a non omittas
the Sheriff shall enter a Franchise to execute the Kings Process, the Execution
of the Process shall be good; but the Lord of the Liberty shall have an Action
against him, and the Party Arrested shall have no remedy.

If Goods are Distrained and Impounded in a Liberty, the Bailiff is to make
Replevin and Deliver them, but if the Bailiff will not, or did not Deliver
them, after the Sheriff has made Retorn of the Kings Writ to him, then the
Sheriff shall enter and Deliver them. per Stat. 52 H. 3. 21 Ed. 1. 17. and in
such cases the Sheriffs Retorn will not serve.

A Writ of Enquiry of Damages directed to the Sheriff, cannot be executed by a
Bailiff of He cannot execute a Writ of Enquiry of Damag^s directed to the
Sheriff.
a Liberty, but by the Sheriff himself; so in Redisseisin, for he is both Judge
and Officer there. Hob. p. 83. Vizey and Gunstone.

Bailiff of Westminster fined because the Jailer of the Gatehouse, refused to
charge a Prisoner with the Sheriff of Middlesex his Warrant 3 Keb. 479. Briton
and Griffith.
One was in Prison in the Gatehouse, by a Warrant from Secretary Coventry for
Mi^demeanors, and the Jailer refused to charge him with a Warrant of the
Sheriff of Middlesex at the Plaintiff Suit. Per Cur' the Jailer cannot dispute
it, though the Court may give leave or refuse it; and the Bailiff of Westminster
on pain of 20 l. was ordered to Return the Writ.

Of Retorns by them.
A Bailiff who Executes a Writ, and is removed Of their Retorn of Writs to the
Sheriff. More 431. Palmer and Porter. More 402. Atkinson.
before the Retorn, may make the Retorn to the Sheriff, and he over to the
Court, but if he Executes it not, he shall not make the Retorn, but the Retorn
of Nihil or non est inventus it is to be made by the New Bailiffs.

The Sheriff Retorns, Mandavi Ballivo qui mihi dedit responsum qd' cepit
corpus, and A. fecit Rescous. Its a good Retorn. But Mandavi Ballivo qui cepit
carpus, and A. fecit Rescous is not good in Redisseisin, and that he cannot
Retorn Mandavi Ballivo, etc. Vide pluis tit. Retorn.

A Man may aver against the false Retorns Averment against the Retorn. Dalt.
545.
of Bailiffs of Liberties, and shall recover as well against them, as against
the Sheriff too of several Issues returned. Dalt. 545.

Where the Precept is made to the Sheriff by Force within a Liberty. Dalt. 545.
the Justices of Peace, to retorn a Jury to enquire of a Forceable Entry, and
the Force is within a Liberty, the Sheriff shall direct his Precept to the
Bailiff of the Liberty to Retorn the Jury, the Bailiff must make a due Retorn
as to Issues on Jurors, etc.

Note, The Bailiff shall never take benefit of 5 Rep. 92.
his Liberty. If Capias or fieri fac' comes against the Bailiff, the Sheriff
shall execute the Process on him, or his Goods, within the Liberty; and where
the Bailiff of the Liberty is party to the Suit, he shall not Retorn the Jury,
but the Sheriff.

Where and in what Cases the Sheriff may Enter into a Franchise.
Wheresoever the King is a Party, as in every Felony or suspicion of Felony, or
otherwise in 5 Rep. 92.
any Action, the Sheriff ex officio is to enter the Franchise, and to execute
the Process himself.

In a Writ of Wast and Redisseisin, the Sheriff must enter the Franchise, to
make enquiry, etc.

So where the Bailiff nullum dedit responsum.

So to Deliver a Distress.

But it is safest for the Sheriff in default of the Bailiff, to have a Writ of
non omittas propter Libertatem.

On extent upon Stat. Merchant, the Sheriff is to enter the Franchise.

If the Sheriff enter on non emittas, by reason Terms Ley.
of the Bailiffs default, and Execute the Writ, the Sheriff shall warn the
Bailiff of the Franchise, that he be before the Justices at the day contained
in the Writ, and if he come not, and excuse himself, then all Writs judicial in
the same Plea, shall be Writs de non omittas.

The Sheriff in his Retorn is to set down the name of Baliff of the Liberty.

Pleadings by Bailiffs of Franchises.
Trespass for taking away a Mare; the Defendant He must show the Jurisdiction
of the Court.
says, That before the Taking the Defendant (being the King's Bailiff) by
Precept out of the Court of Pomfret, to make Execution, etc. on Levari, etc.
Per Cur', Its ill, because he does not show the Jurisdiction of the Court; and
that is necessary by the Bailiff of an Inferior Court, especially because he
Justifies by 1 Keb. 53. Crofts and Wilkinson.
reason thereof, as in the Countess of Rutlands Case; and it must appear that
the Court has Cognizance of the Cause, aliter he cannot execute there Precept.

Action on Escape, and declares he delivered a Writ to the Sheriff of
Nottingham, who made a Warrant to the Bailiff of the King's Liberty Plead,
Rescue from the Deputy of the Bailiff of a Liberty.
of Newark to execute it; which Warrant was delivered to one L. Deputy of the
Lord Burleigh, Ballivo Libertatis Dom' Regis Wapentagii sui de Newark, who
Arrests him, and the Defendant Rescued him out of the Custody of the said
Deputy. He says, he was Rescued from the Deputy of the Bailiff of the
Franchise; and does not say, from the Bailiff himself, or the Sheriff. Per
Cur', its good: For in this Action on the Case he shall show the Truth, as it
is rei veritate, and its not like the Retorns of Rescues or Indictments, which
say, it was done to the Sheriff or Bailiff himself. It was moved for Error,
Secondly, because it is alleged, the Lord Burleigh was Ballivo Libertatis Dom'
Regis de Newark, and the King cannot have any Liberties; for they are extinct
when they are come to his hands. Sed non allocatur: For the King may have such
Liberties by the suppression of Abbeys, (which are not extinct, but revived per
Stat. 32 H. 8.) or by some other ways, and it shall not be intended to extinct
unless it be showed.

And the Bailiff of a Liberty may well have Bailiff of a Liberty may have
Deputy.
a Deputy, Cro. Jac. 241. Kent and Ellwis.

Power of Bailiff of Franchises and Pleadings.
The Bailiff of a Franchise cannot take a Difference between Bailiffs of a
Franchise and Sheriffs Bailiffs.
Bond for Appearance in the Sheriffs Name; but Bailiffs of Hundreds may. Vid. 3
Keb. 552. Ellis's Case.

Hundreds that have Retorn' Brevium are Franchises.

Hundred by Grant, that has Bailiff by particular Lord, is but his Servant,
and the Sheriffs usually makes another Bailiff to execute there. But a Bailiff
of an Hundred may waive his Franchise, and Arrest as Sheriffs Bailiff, and then
he may take Obligat' in the Name of the Sheriff also, 3 Kcb. 71. Monday and
Frogate.

The Bailiff of a Liberty must Retorn his Precept, and a Bailiff Itinerant
needs not, 2 Keb. 838. Green and Jones.

A Plaint being before the Bailiffs of Bury, they directed a Warrant to the
Under-Bayliffs to take the party, Ita quod habeant Corpus ejus coram Ballivis
ad prox' Cur' tenend', (tal' die.) The Under-Bayliffs arrested him, and
committd him to Prison, sub Custod' Def. S. T. The Action on the Case lies not
against the Defendant; for the Prisoner was not Committed to him by any Lawful
Authority; it was Ita qd', but not to Commit him: And the Action lies against
them, if they have him not at the Day, Cro. El. 743. Baldry and Johnson.

If Execution be directed to a Sheriff, to make Lord of the Franchise to answer
for his Baylif^
Execution within a Liberty, and the Sheriff directs his Warrant to the
Bailiff, who does it, and after is a Fugitive and not able to answer for it,
the Lord of the Franchise shall answer for it, and shall be liable to answer
for his Bailiff, 2 Brownl. 50.

There are other sorts of Bailiffs, which are Bailiffs of Fee, and are Officers
of Fee within their Jurisdiction and Precinct. And for the Execution of Process
there, the Sheriff shall not write or send his Precept to these Bailiffs, as to
a Bailiff of a Franchise, but as to the Bailiff of Gildable; and the Sheriff
shall return his Answer, Dalt. 543.
and make his Retorn as if the Sheriff himself had served the Process; and the
Retorn thereof shall be in the Name of the Sheriff, and shall not make mention
of the Bailiff of Fee: But if such a Bailiff will not Execute the Process, a
Non omittas shall go out to the Sheriff.

The Mirror of Justices says thus: If the Mirror of Just. lib. 4.
Bailiff of a Franchise does not make Execution of a Retorn of the Sheriff, the
Sheriff may enter into the Franchise, and the King shall recover the Seisin,
and so that shall become Guildable which before was Enfranchised.

CHAP. V.
Of the County Court. The Nature of it. Its Jurisdiction, as to the Sum it
holds Plea of. Of the time and place. The Forms of the Original Process. Of
Execution there. Of the County Clerk. Of Replevin. The Sheriffs Office, and
demeanor therein, and the Retorns thereof, what are good, or not. Pone.
Withernam. The manner of Replevying. The Retorno habendo. Second Deliverance.
Property. Pledges in Replevin. The Form of the Entry of the Plaint. The Form of
the Precept in Replevin. The Form of the Bond for Security. Of Accedas ad
Curiam. Recordari fac' Loquelam. Of the Writ of Justicies. Of the Sheriff
Tourn, Jurisdiction and Pleadings.

Of the County Court, etc.
THis Court is no Court of Record, but only a Court Baron, and the Suitors are
Judges. But in a Redisseisin the Sheriff is Judge, by the Statute of Merton,
cap. 3. and a Writ of Error lies of his Judgment.

The County Court is incident to the Office Incident to the Office of Sheriff.
of Sheriff, and so is the Entry of all Proceedings there; and therefore if the
King grant the Office of Clerkship of the County Court to M. and constitute J.
S. Sheriff of the same County, its a void Patent, though it be granted when the
Sheriffwick is vacant, yet the new Sheriff shall have it. And in all Writs
directed to the Sheriff concerning the County Court, the King says, In
Comitatu tuo, and in Retorns of Exigents made by him he says, Ad Comitatum
meum tent'. In False Judgment it is said, In pleno Comitatu tuo 4 Rep. Mitton's
Case. 4 Inst. 266.
Recordari facias Loquelam, etc. Sub sigillo tuo, etc. Also in a Precept of
Tolt, to remove a Plea out of the Court Baron into the County Court, it is,
Summoneas, etc. qd' sit ad Comitatum meum. And it is the Sheriffs Court, though
the Suitors are Judges.

The Style of the Court is,

Buck's. Curia prima Comitatus E. L. Mil', Vicecomitis Comitat' praedict' tent'
apud B. etc.

And the next Court, Curia secunda, and so forth.

Though it be said commonly, that the Suitors By Prescription the Sheriff may be
Judge.
are Judges; yet by Prescription the Sheriff may be Judge, as it was in Car. 2.
There is a Court called Curia Comitatus, in the County Palatine of Durham, and
the Sheriff is Judge: And though in the County Court the Suitors are Judges; yet
by Prescription it may be held before the Sheriff, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c. 25. Vid.
Stat. Mod. Rep. 172.

As a Court Baron by Special Prescription may be held Coram Seneschallo: So in
Norton's Case, Indictment was brought of Perjury in a Plea depending in the
County Court, in Action on the Case for 3 l. Errors assigned were, First, It is
not said how the Plea was depending, as by Justicies or Plaint Entered: And,
Secondly, It is said, in the County Court held coram the Sheriff and
Sectatoribus, and says not per Consuetudinem, quae Curia concessit, 3 Keb.
370. Dom' Rex and Norton.

The Jurisdiction of the County Court.
This Court holds no Suits of Charters for Lands, or for Inheritance, or to
make several Plaints upon one entire Debt; nor any Action to compel one to
render an Account, though it be under 40 s. because the Sheriff cannot assign 2
Inst. 380.
Auditors, who are Judges of the Record, and the County Court is no Court of
Record.

And they cannot hold Plea of any Debt due by Record.

In Action of Trespass there holden, no Force shall be supposed.

It holds no Plea of Debt or Damages to the value of 40 s. or above; but by
Justicies he may. Vid. infra.

Nor of any Trespass Vi and armis; because a Fine is due therein to the King,
and no Court 2 Inst. 311.
can assess a Fine, but a Court of Record.

Yet if the Debt be 40 s. or above, and the Plaintiff will acknowledge in his
Declaration the receipt of so much as to bring it within 40 s. in this case the
Plaint is good: But he cannot Id. ibid.
split a Debt into several Actions, and if he do, the Defendant may plead the
same to the Jurisdiction of the Court; or may have a Prohibition to stay that
Indirect Suit, or move for Attachment against the Steward.

It is holden once every Month, upon a Day Time.
certain, the Month being computed according to 28 Days; and the Reason is,
because of the Writs of Exigents, which must be Proclaimed there, 9 H. 3 c. 3.
2 Ed. 6. c. 25.

Vide tit. Outlawries.

The County Court is kept once a Month at a Day certain; because the Kings
Writs of Exigents are to be Proclaimed there, and the Exigent is to be directed
to the Sheriff in this Court, and he upon the Exigent does proclaim, or call
the parties (Sued in Courts above) to render their Bodies, etc. or else to be
out of the King's Protection. And the Coroners are to sit with the Sheriff at
every County Court, there to give Judgment upon Outlawries. And as to these
Matters, the County Court is a Court of Record. But in London, the Judgment
upon Utlaries is given by the Recorder, Co. Litt. 288.

This Court may be kept at any place within Place.
the County, at the Sheriffs pleasure; but not out of it.

But by Stat. the Sheriff of Northumberland is to hold his County Court in the
Town or Castle of Alnwick, and in no other place.

The Sheriff of Sussex is to hold his County Dalton 157, 158.
Court one time at Chichester, and another time time at Lewis; and so alternis
vicibus.

The Process.
The Original Process of this Court, (viz.) Summon, Attachment and Distress
Infinite. A Distringas or County Warrant, is a Precept issuing out for a Debt
under 40 s. And its Form is thus:

Praecept' est Ballivo ibid', Qd' Distringat F. D. per omnia bona and catalla
sua, qd' sit ad prox' Comitat' meum ad respond' A. B. de placito debit', etc.
Test, etc.

If on Trespass;

Praecept' est ibid', Qd' Attachiat' C. D. per omnia bona and catalla sua, qd'
sit ad prox' Comitat' meum de placito Debiti, or Transgressionis, etc.

And the Goods or Chattels, whereby the Defendant is so Attached or Distrained,
the Bailiff shall keep them till the next County Court, except the Defendant
replevy the same by two Pledges distrainable within the County; which Pledges
shall become Sureties, that the Defendant shall appear at the next Court, to
answer the Plaintiff in his Plaint: But if he do not replevy the Goods, and
that the Defendant makes default at the next Court (at the Day given him by the
Attachment) the Court shall award the Goods so Attached to be forfeited, and
shall keep the Goods so forfeited.

So in Distress, which must be plevied by four Mainpernors.

If the Distress be mainprized, and the Defendant makes default of Appearance,
the Court shall amerce the Defendant and his Mainpernors. And in both Cases the
Defendant shall be Distrained again to be at the next County Court. And the
Entry is thus:

J. S. opp' se versus C. D. de placito debiti, etc. and The Entry of an Alias
Distringas.
ipse non venit; and Ballivus retornavit, qd' distrinxit eum per unum bovem
pretii 5 s. Et manucapt' per E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. ideo in misericordia Et
sicut prius Distringatur, etc.

And so Process shall be made by Distress Infinite.

Note, For every default of Appearance the Dalt. 503, 504.
Defendant is Distrainable, till he come into Court.

Note, That the Goods attached or distrained in the County Court (whether upon
a Justicies, or otherwise) shall be forfeited on default of Appearance, by the
Defendant, at the Day given him by the Process.

It has been a Question, How Execution shall be after Recovery in County Court?
Not by Of Execution in Court Baron.
Capias is agreed, except in Wales.

But by Fitzherbert 20. b. and Finch 68. the safest way (in this Court, and so
in Hundred Court, or Court Baron) is to have an Executione Judicii directed to
the Sheriff, etc. and then the Sheriff may make Execution, as in a Court of
Record, by Fieri fac', or Levari.

If the Defendant does not appear the next Duces tecum for Nonappearance.
Court after the Distringas executed, then there issues out a Duces tecum to
cause him to Appear; and then an Alias, and a Pluries duces tecum, and so ad
infinitum.

The Sheriff may before any County Court Summons.
award a Summons to his Bailiff, Retornable within two or three days, at his
discretion, to summon the Defendant by his Goods, to Answer, etc. And If the
Bailiff Retorn Nihil, and the Plaintiff removes the same by Pone into Pone.
the Common Pleas, the Court shall not grant a Capias, 4 Inst. 266.

The Sheriff before the next Court day after his Election, must depute and
constitute a County Clerk to keep the Court; and the Stat. County Clerk.
1 H. 5. cap. 4. prohibits such a County Clerk to practice as an Attorney in
the same year. And this County Clerk ought to Retorn no Plaints (except in case
of Replevins) out of Court; but in full County sedente Curia; yet its now done
otherwise.

And at the Adjorning of every Court he must Adjornment of the Court to a Day
certain.
appoint a Day certain for the next Court, to the intent the Country may know
at what time to resort thither, to hear the Kings Writs of Exigents, and
Proclamations Read.

Of Replevin, and the Sheriffs Office and Demeanor therein, and of the Retorns.
This being a main Branch of the Sheriffs Duty as to the County Court, I shall
treat of it, so much as concerns the Sheriff and his Office.

Replevin is a Writ, and lies where any man distrains another for Rent, etc.
Then he who is distrained, shall have this Writ to the Sheriff (called
Replegiari Facias) to deliver to him the Distress, and shall find Sureties to
pursue his Action; or if he pursue it not, or it be found and adjudged against
him, then he that took the Distress, shall have again the Distress; and this is
called the Retorn of the Beasts; and in such a Case lies the Writ de Retorn'
Habend'. This is when Goods are replevied by Writ, and is at the Common Law.

This Writ is Vicountiel, and in nature of a By Writ.
Justicies, in which the Viscount shall hold Plea in any value, and is not
Retornable; but it may be removed into the King's Bench or Common Pleas by Pone:
By the Plaintiff without Cause, Pone.
and by the Defendant with Cause shown in the Writ. Co. Mag. Chart. 339,340.

If a Replevin be sued by Writ, and the Sheriff retorn that the Cattle are not
to be found, then a Witherman shall be awarded against the Defendant; and if a
Nihil be returned, then an Alias and a Pluries Withernam, and thereupon
Withernam
an Exigent.

If the Defendant upon the Retorn' Habend' adjudged for him, cannot have retorn
of the Beasts; and upon the Retorn' Habend' the Sheriff retorn that the Cattle,
first taken, are dead, he may have a Scire Fac' against the Pledges; and upon
Scire fac.
a Nihil returned on that, he may have a Scire fac' against the Sheriff; for
insufficient Pledges are no Pledges, 1 Brownl. rep. 168. Replevy by Plaint.


Replevin by Plaint, and that is by the Stat. of Marlbridg, c. 21.

The Sheriff by Plaint made without Writ, may either by Parol or by Precept
command his Bailiff to deliver them, i. e. to make Replevin of them, Col 2
Inst. 139, 140.

When the Distress is taken and impounded infra Libertates, which have retorn
of Writs, the Sheriff must make a Warrant to the Bailiff of the Liberty to make
deliverance; and if he will not, the Sheriff may enter and do it. If the
Distress be taken extra Libertates, and impounded within, the Sheriff upon
Plaint made, may presently enter and make deliverance, Co. Mag. Chart. 139.

If they are impounded in a Castle or House, Sheriff may break Castle, House or
Close to make Replevin.
the Sheriff may break it, and make Replevin, and he cannot retorn he was
resisted, for he may take the Posse Comitat', Cok. 2 Instit. 105, 194.

If the Beasts be imparked in a place enclosed which had a Gate open, and the
Writ comes to make Replevin, and the owner stands at the Gate to shoot him, he
may break the Close to make Replevin, 2 Roll. Abr. 565. b.

For necessity the Sheriff may enter a Plaint Replevin made presently.
before himself, and after retorn it in the County Court, that so the Cattle
may not perish, 1 Keb. 205.

He may take a Plaint out of the County Court, and make Replevin presently, and
not stay till the next County Court, which is holden from Month to Month.

Cattle being distrained for Rent or Damage The manner of Replevying.
Fesant, etc. The Owner of the Cattle must go to the County Clerk (or some
Deputies in the County, for the granting out of Replevins) for a Replevy to be
directed to the Bailiffs to replevy them; and the Party must be bound in an
Obligation to the Viscount to prosecute his Action against him, or them that
did take the Cattle, or to make retorn of the same Cattle to the Distrainer, if
he by Justification or Avowry do recover. And if he pursue it not, or be found
against him, then he that ook the Distress, shall again have the Distress, and
shall have a Writ from above, de Retorn' Habend' in such Retorn' Habend'.
case.

If the Goods cannot be taken by the first Replevin, then issues forth an
Alias, then a Pluries, then a Toties, then a Withernam. If the Sheriff retorn
that he cannot replevy the Cattle because Retorn.
that they are Eloyned (or he cannot have the view of them) for the Sheriff
must make enquiry if the Retorn be true; and if so, then he must make a Precept
to the Bailiff in Withernam, i. e. to take as many other Cattle, and he may
have an alias and a Pluries Withernam, and Withernam
so in infinitum, but has no other remedy in the County.

This sort of Replevin may be returned out of the County into the Court of
Common Pleas by Re. fa. lo.
Recordare fac' Loquelam.

The Sheriff upon a Retorn' Habend' may enquire the Kinds of the Cattle, if the
Count or Avowry be uncertain, 1 Leon. 193. Rigden and Palmer.

In a Replevin, no such Beast, is not a good What is a good Retorn in Replevin
or nor.
Retorn; but Averia Elongata, or Null' Venit ex Part Querentis ad monstranda
Averia. 2 Leon. 67. Sheriff on Replevin of Goods says, that none came to show
him the Goods, its a good Retorn, 1 Keb. 184. for he cannot know the Goods
without showing of the Party.

If J. S. sue a Replevin to the Sheriff, and Sheriff makes Replevin of a
Stranger, he is a Trespasser.
shows him the Cattle of J. N. and says they are his Cattle, and he makes
Replevin of the Cattle, he is a Trespasser to J. N. and the Sheriff may have an
Action of Trespass against J. S. for his false Information: For the Sheriff at
his Peril must take notice whose Cattle they be; but if there be any fraud in
the matter, he may aver that, 3 H. 7. 14 H. 4. 1 Brownl. 211. Buckwood and Beal.

If a man have Judgment to have a Retorn upon a Nonsuit in a Replevin, and the
Plaintiff brings a second Deliverance, this is a Supersedeas of the Retorn; yet
the Defendant in the Replevin shall have a Writ to enquire of Damages; but if
he have Judgment in the second Deliverance, then it shall be returned
Irreplevisable, and he shall recover Damages, Hill. 43 Eliz. D. C. Goldsborough
p. 185.

If the Sheriff does not his Office in such Cases, an Attachment to the
Coroners lies against him, Reg. Orig. 81. a.

As to the Sheriffs taking Pledges, vid. sab titulo Pledges, and infra.

If the Sheriff retorn fugavit in another County, or that the Bailiff of the
Liberty retorns elongata, or that he cannot have the view, in all these Cases a
Withernam shall be awarded, 1 Rep. Withernam
145. b. Ann Mayowes Case.

The Writ of Withernam ought to rehearse the Retorn of the Sheriff.

At Common Law a man might have been nonsuited in Replevin, and have had new
ones in infinitum. But West. 2. c. 2. restrains the Plaintiff for having any
more Replevin after No more Replevin after Nonsuit, but Second Deliverance.
Nonsuit, but gives the Writ of Second Deliverance, Cok. 2 Inst. 240. This
Writ is a Supersedeas in Law to the Sheriff, that he make no Retorn to the
Defendant on the former Nonsuit, Cok. 2 Inst. 341. This is taken away as to
Avowry for Rents, by 2 Stat. K. Charles 2.

In a Replevin if the Process continue until a Pluries issue out of Chancery,
and the Sheriff retorn Retorn that the Defendant claims Property.
upon this in B. that the Defendant claims property; although no day is expressly
given by this Writ to the Parties, but to the Sheriff only to excuse his
Contempt for not serving the Process before; yet upon the retorn of this Writ
the Parties may appear and Plead ( viz.) The Plaintiff may declare, and the
Defendant may plead to it, and it shall not be erroneous; for there, is no
other Writ to be served after this Writ; therefore if the Parties might not
plead upon this, it would be a great mischief. So if the Pluries be returned
Tres Michaelis, and nothing is done till Paschoe afterward, yet at this Term
the Parties may appear and plead if they will, 1 Roll. Abr. 581. Gawen and
Ludlow.

Where the Defendant, when the Sheriff comes Where in a Replevin the claim of
Property by the Defendnat shall hinder the delivery of the Goods by the Sheriff.
to make Replevin, claims Property, the Sheriff cannot proceed; for it is a
Rule in Law, the Property ought to be tried by Writ; therefore in that Case,
where the Trial is by Plaint, the Plaintiff may have a Writ de Proprietate
Probanda directed to the Sheriff to try the Property; and if it be found for
the Plaintiff, the Sheriff is to make deliverance; if for the Defendant, then
he can no further proceed, Cok. Litt. 145. b.

And to try the Propersy, the Sheriff ought to take with him Custod' Placit'
Coron'. Dier. 173.

In Replevin the Plaintiff claims Property, and thereupon a Writ issues to the
Sheriff to try the value, 2 Keb. 550. Wetherlyes Case.

Where one sues a Replevin, but has not the delivery of the Goods, and the
other Avoweth, and the Plaintiff shows the Defendant is yet possessed of the
Goods, etc. and prays that the Defendant may gage Deliverance; then he shall
Gage-deliverance.
put in Sureties and Pledges for the deliverance, and a Writ shall go forth for
the Sheriff to deliver them.

Where the Replevin is by Plaint, there it may be removed out of the County
into the Common Pleas by Recordare, and the Sheriff hereupon is Recordare.
to summons the other Party to be in the Common-Bench or B. R. at a day
Certain; and of all this he is to make Certificate under his own Seal, and the
Seals of four Suitors of the same Court.

In Replevin the Sheriff ought to take two Two sorts of Pledges in Replevin.
sorts of Pledges by the Common Law, Pledges de Prosequendo; and by the
Statute, Pledges de Retorn' Habend', Cok. Com' 145. b.

And Note, The Sheriff must take Sureties and not a Pawn.

Therefore where one brought Replevin, and the value of the Goods taken was 20
s. and the Bailiff took 3 l. 10 s. for Pledges, and not Sureties, and the Party
brought an Action on the Stat. W. 2. and resoved that the Action lies, Jones p.
378. Cro. Car. 446. Moyser and Gray.

If Pledges de Prosequendo are not found, and Judgment given, the Process is
erroneous, 9 Rep. Husseys Case.

But these Pledges may be found to the Sheriff, May be found at any time before
Judgment. Scire fac. against the Sheriff upon retorn of nihil as to the Pledges.
or in Court, at any time before Judgment, but not after.

If upon the Writ to have retorn of the Beasts of the Pledges, the Sheriff
retorn nihil, then may the Plaintiff have a Scire fac' against the Sheriff, qd'
reddat ei tot Averia, or tot Catalla; and so of a Bailiff of a Franchise, Cok.
Mag. Chart. 340.

But as to the Pledges de Retorno Habendo, they are given by the Statute of W.
2. c. 2. and an Action is given against the Sheriff if they are not found; but
this does not make the Proceedings erroneous. Per totam Curiam. Jones p. 439.
Gross and Boscawen. So is Tregooose and Winnell's Case.

Pledges in Replevin on Retorno habendo were not taken by the Sheriff,
according to the Statute of W. 2. c. 2. after the Plaint was removed into the
Common-Bench by Recordare; yet Pledges may be found by the Court. For the
Pledges given by the Statute of W. 2. are only to give Remedy against the
sheriff for his neglect, and the Pledges may be found at any time before
Judgment, Cro. Car. 594. Tregoose and Winnell.

If a Withernam be awarded for the Plaintiff Withernam. Retron.
of the Beasts of the Desendant, and the Sheriff Retorns he had taken the
Beasts of the Defendant in Withernam; but none comes from the Plaintiff to have
them. And now the Plaintiff prays a Writ to the Sheriff; to deliver the
Withernam to him; and the Defendant prays, that the Plaintiff gage Deliverance;
and says, that part of the Beasts which he took are dead by the default of the
Plaintiff, and the remnant he is ready to deliver. In this Case the Plaintiff
shall In what case the Plaintiff shall not have deliverance of the Withernam to
him.
not have Deliverance of the Withernam to him; but it shall remain in the
custody of the Sheriff, until a Writ issue to the Sheriff, for the Plaintiff to
have Deliverance of his Beasts; and then shall come in debate in whose default
the Beasts are dead, 44. Ass. 15.

Note, If J. S. be Sheriff, and the Distress be taken by him, there the Writ or
Plaint shall be in Common Form, naming the Sheriff by his Christian name and
Surname -- quae J. S. cepit, and not -- quae tu ipse cepists; and the Sheriff
in that case ought to make Deliverance, C. Magna Charta 139. Reg. Orig. 81. b.

A Declaration in Replevin was for 100 Ewes Delivery by the Sheriff must be
according to the Writ.
and Weathers, and it does not appear how many there be of Ewes, and how many
there be of Weathers, and the Sheriff is bound to make delivery of the one sort
and of the other: For the Delivery of the Sheriff must be according to the
Writ, etc. and the Declaration was held ill. But Ewes without addition had been
good enough, and the Sheriff must have delivered the one sort and the other, if
the Writ be for Oves matrices the Sheriff cannot deliver Weathers: So if for
black Horses the Sheriff cannot deliver white, but is subject to Action on the
Case. Allen p. 33. Moor and Clypsam.

Of Retorns.
De Pone. The Sheriff Retorns, He had attached the Goods per plegios, and the
Form of such Retorn, vide 2 Sanders 333.

De Recordare fac' Loquelam, Dalt. c. 72.

Retorn' sur Replevin de retorn' habend', Ibid. c. 73.

Retorn' averia clongata, vid. le Form ibid.

Retorn', quod accessi ad locum, and visum habere non potui, Ibid.

Where the Plaint is in the County Court, of the taking and withholding Cattle
and Goods; the Entry is thus:

JS. queritur versus J. D. de pl' ito Captionis and injustae detentionis
averiorum ipsius J. S. contra vad' and pleg'. Et invenit plegios tam de clamore
suo prosequendo, quam de averiis suis retornand', si retorn' inde adjudicetur,
(viz.) J. D. and R. H.

And the Precept of Replevin is thus:

War'ss. A. B. Miles, Vic' Comitat' praedict' Ballivo Handred' de H. nec non J.
S. Ballivo mec hac vice; Et eorum ulterius conjunctim and divisim, salutem.
Quia W. P. invenit mihi sufficien' securitatem tam de clamore suo prosequendo,
quam de averiis suis, videlicet, bove uno quem J. C. cepit and injuste detinet,
ut dicitur retorn', si retorn' inde adjudicetur. Ideo ex part Dom' Regis vobis
and utrique vestrum conjunctim and divisim mando, qd' repleg' and delib' fac'
praefat' W. P. bovem suum praedict', (or, averia sua praedict', if several;) Et
quod ponat' seu, etc. per vad' and salvos plegios praefat' J. C. ita qd' sit ad
prox' Comitat' meum apud, etc. tenend' ad respondend' praefat' W. de pl'ito
captionis and injustae detentionis bovis sui praedict'. Et qualit', etc. mihi
ad prox' Comitat' meum certificetur seu, etc. sub periculo incumbente;

Dat' sub sigillo Officii mei die, etc. Per me A. B. Mil', Vicecom'.

If this Replevin be granted by the Deputy, then the must set his Name to the
Replevin thus: Per me J. A. unum Deput' dict' Vicecom', secundum formam
Statliti.

The Sheriff, or his Deputy, before this Precept made, ought to take (a Bond or
Pledge) sufficient Security De prosequen', or Retorno habendo. The Form of it
is thus:

NOverint Universt per presents me Wilt' P. de C. etc. teneri and firmit'
obligari A. B. Mic Dic', Com' pred' in december libris bone, etc. solvend' eidem
Dicecomiti, etc. Ad quam quidem soluc^onem, etc.

THe Condition, etc. is such, That if the abovebounden W. P. do appear at the
next County Court to be holden at, etc. and then and there do prosecute his
Action with effect against J. C. for wrongful taking and detaining of his
Cattle, ( viz. one Gelding, etc.) as is alleged, and do also made Retorn
thereof, if Retorn thereof shall be adjudged by Law, and also do save and keep
harmless and indemnified the above named sheriff, Undersheriff, and Bailiffs,
for, touching and concerning the delivery of the said Cattle, That then, etc.

If the Sheriff delivered Goods, and the Plaintiff becomes Nonsuit, if the
Defendant be ready in Court to avow the Taking, then there shall be awarded to
the Defendants Retorn of the Beasts in this manner.

A. B. Mil', Com' praedict' Ballivo Hundred' de H. etc.

Vide Dalt. 523.

Accedas ad Curiam, Recordar' fac' Loquelam.

If False Judgment be given in any other Court Baron than in the Sheriffs
County Court, then the Writ of Faux Judgment is called Accedas ad Curiam.

By this Writ the Sheriff must make a Record of the Plea, or Suit, in the
presence of the Suitors', and annex the Record so made to the back of the Writ,
and Retorn and certify the same under Seal, and the Seals of the four Suitors.

Note, Nothing but the Plaint shall be removed, if they be at Issue.

The Form of the Retorn of the Accedas, vid. Wilk. and Dalton 200.

Vide Greenwood of Courts, and Dalt. c. 60.

And vid. Greenwood of Recordar' fac' Loquelam, and Dalt. 201, 242.

It Is a good Retorn, that after the receipt of Retorn.
the Writ, and before the retorn thereof, no Court was holden, or that the Lord
would not hold the Court, or that the Suitors would not deliver him the Record.

The Form of the Retorn of a Pone in Replevin, vid. Dalt. c. 70.

The Form of a Recordar' fac' Lequelam, Id. c. 72.

The Sheriff must openly read this Writ in Court, and retorn the same under his
own Seal, and the Seals of four Suitors, and to summon the Defendant to appear
at the Day of the Retorn. Idem.

The Retorn must be, Recordari feci Loquelam, quae est in eodem Comitat' coram
Sectatoribus Curiae; (and not, coram me,) Id. ibid.

On this Writ he may retorn Trade.

The Sheriff may send an Accedas ad Curiam by a Servant, and need not deliver
it in person; as Co. Burwell's Case, 3 Keb. 249. Reg. Orig. 96.

Of the Writ of Justicies.
This Writ issues out of Chancery directed to the Sheriff, giving him Power to
hold Plea in this Court for Actions of 40 s. or above, in Debt, Detinue, Case,
etc. and other Actions personals. It is so called, because its a Commission
(and not an Original) to the Sheriff to do a man Right aad Justice; it is
Vicountiel, and not Retornable. And though it be directed to the Sheriff, yet the
Suitors are Judges, and the Writ of Faux Judgment Retorn.
lies on their Erroneous Judgment; and it requires no Retorn, unless the Action
be removed by a Writ of Recordare, and then the Writ must be Returned, together
with the Record, Fitzh. N. B.

The Form is thus in Debt:

REx Vic' Surr', salutem. Praecipimus tibi qd' Justicies A. quod just and sine
dilatione redd' B. 40 s. quos ei debet ut dicitur, sicut rationabiliter
monstrare poterit, qd' ei redd' debet ne amplius inde clamorem audiamus pro
defectu justitiae, etc.

And several other Forms. Vid. Fitzh. N. B. pertotum.

In a Justicies; the Justicies may be holden of Account; so of Admeasurement of
Dower, Admeasurement of Pasture, when a Commoner puts in more Cattle than he
ought; so of a Writ of Covenant, Dalt. 504.

So Justicies de Curia claudenda, that is, where a man ought to Enclose his
Ground against his Neighbor's Ground; so of Debt, for Money, or other Goods,
and Detinue: So a Justicies of Nuisance; of Trespass; by Justicies of Trespass
the Sheriff may hear and determine of the Trespass by an Enquest of Twelve Men,
according to the Order of Common Law: And the Plaintiff may Count to his Damage
of 20 l. or more.

But if it be vi and armis, or contra pacem, the Sheriff cannot determe it,
therefore that is usually omitted.

The Sheriff may hold Plea of a Bond of 1000 Marks, etc.

Justicies for 40 l. was held and determined before the Undersheriff, in the
absence of the Sheriff; and a Writ of Faux Judgment lies, and not a Writ of
Error, 2 Leon. p. 34.

Sheriffs Tourn.
The Torun is a Court of Record, holden before the Sheriff, Magn. Chart. c. 17.

Leet is derived out of the Sheriffs Tourn, and The Nature of it.
after the grant of this derivative Leet, the Sheriff in his Tourn is not to
meddle in the reach of this Leet; except in case of Negligence of the Leet, and
unless it be where the Leet is forfeited into the King's hands.

If one be under no particular Leet, he is within the Sheriffs Tourn.

And 2 Roll. Rep. 74. the Sheriffs Tourn is the supreme Leet of the County.

The Style is,

Vic' France-pleg' Dom' Regis tent' apud L. coram Style.
Vicecom' in Torno suo, etc. and not Torn' Vic' tent' die apud L.

Or, Cur' visus Franc' Dom' Regis apud B. coram Vicecom' in Torno suo, and not
Tornum Vicecomitis Tent', etc. for Tornum est nisi perambulatio.

The Tourn is inciden tot the Office of Sheriff, 4 Rep. 33. Mitton's Case.

The Jurisdiction in respect of the things Presentable. place where.

What things are Inquirable in the Sheriffs Tourn, and what not.
Nothing shall be Inquired before the Sheriff in the Tourn, but Actions
Popular, Common Nusances, Affrays and Bloodshed, 4 H. 6. 10.

Assault made on a man is not Inquirable there, it being but a Tort to a
particular person, for which Trespass lies, 4 H. 6. 10.

The stopping of Water; which is a Nuisance to the Country People, may be
Inquired there; for it is popular: So of a Bridge, 4 H. 6. 10.

They may amerce for Common Nusances; and so may Stewards of Leets,
notwithstanding the Stat. of Marlbr. c. 18.

He may Inquire de Assisa panis, and Cervitia non observata, by Stat. Walliae
in Magn. Charta 46. Coke.

If he find in his Tourn, that a person has erected a Purpresture in the
King's Highway, he may abate it, 29. Ed. 3. 21. b.

What is Presentable in a Franchise; as default In what cases what is
presentable in a Franchise, is presentable in a Tourn, or not.
in Repairing a Cawsey is not presentable in the Tourn, because out of his
Jurisdiction being in the Franchise: But if the default be in the Lord for not
Repairing it, this may be presented in the Tourn; because the Franchise was
first derived out of the Tourn, 10 H. 4. 4. 17 Jac. B. R. Loader and Samuel.

Where and what Inquisitions or Presentiments taken in the Sheriffs Tourn, shall
be presented to the Justices of Peace, and how they shall proceed upon them.
By the Statute of 1 Ed. 4. c. 2. the Presentiments shall be by the Sheriff at
the next Quarter Sessions, and there shall be Enrolled; and upon this they
assess the Fines and Amerciaments, and shall make Process to levy it to the use
of the Sheriff, Jones 300. Griffith and Bedle.

Sheriffs Tourn, when and where to be kept.
By the Statute of 21 Ed. 3. c. 15. the Tourn ought to be kept infra mensem
post Festum Paschae, and post Festum Sancti Michaelis, 31 Ed. 3. c. 13.

Who shall be amerced for not coming to the Sheriffs Tourn, or not.
Not a Baron; not Tenants in Ancient Demesne.

I shall cite a Case or two as to Pleading in Actions about Americaments, for
further Explication.

Trespass for taking a Bullock. Defendant Justifies, because at the Sheriffs
Tourn, held infra mensem Paschae, ( viz.) 18 Apr. the Plaintiff was presented
for not appearing at the said Tourn, being debito modo summonitus, and Amerced
by the Jury, which was affeered by four of the Jury at 40 s. And after at the
next Sessions of the Peace, ( viz.) 22 Apr. it was certified and ratified by
such Justices of the Peace; whereupon the Steward made a Warrant to him to levy
it, and so sold it.

The Plaintiff demurrs:

1. Because the Defendant does not allege, that the Tourn was kept infra
mensom post Festum Paschae; but infra mensem Paschae, which may as well be
before Easter as after, 21 Ed. 3. 15.

2. Because the Americament is alleged to be made by the Jury, and affeered by
four of the Jurors, where it always ought to beassessed by the Court; for its a
Judicial Act, and shall be affeered by the Affeerers appointed, Lib. Intr. 119.
Affeerment.


3. That the Amerciament was levied by the Defendant, as Bailiff by Warrant
from the Steward of the Court, where (by the Statute of 1 Ed. 4) it is
appointed, that no Fine or Americament in the Tourn shall be levied, unless it
be certified at the next Sessions of the Peace by Indenture, and Enrolled, and
by Process made from the Justices to the Sheriff, etc. Griffith and Bedle, Cro.
Car. 275.

Judgment for the Plaintiff.

In Trespass, the Defendant Justifies for an Amerciament set in the Sheriffs
Tourn, and Exceptions were taken to it:

1. Because he Justified by Praecipe to him lawfully granted, and says not at
what place.

2. He prescribes for a Tourn to be held, and does not show any, or what Estate.

And by Hutton, a Prescription for a Tourn, Prescription by a Que Estate.
or an Hundred Court, by a que Estate is naught, because it lies in Grant, and
is not manureable; but he ought to have said, That the King, and all they that
were seized of the said Hundred have had, and from the time, etc.

And per Cur. Except he showed before whom the Tourn was held, it was naught;
and it ought to be holden before the Sheriff, 1 Brownl. 198. Darney and
Hardington.

Oath of Allegiance to be taken every Sheriffs Tourn, C. Magna Charta 73, 147,
148.

Hundred Courts.
Vid. supra tit. Bailiffs.

It is derived out of the County Court, for the Ease of the People, as the Leet
was out of the Tourn.

The Style is thus:

Curia E. C. Mil', Hundredi sui de B. in Comitat' B. tent', etc. coram A. B.
Seneschallo ibid'.

Vide pluis 4 Inst. 267.

And the Forms of proceedings in this Court.

Vide Wilkinson.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Original Process in Real Actions and Personal Actions, with the
Retorns, as Summons, Attachment, etc. Of Mean Process, what Arrest by the
Sheriff or Bailiff shall be good or not: Of the Bailiffs showing his Warrant:
What Arrest is good as to the time of the Arrest, before or after the Retorn,
in respect of the persons Arrested, who are privileged or protected from
Arrests or not, in regard of Persons or Courts: where Arrest shall be Lawful or
not, in respect of the Warrant. Of Warrants to Special Bailiffs or known
Bailiffs: of Pledges de Prosequendo.

Of Original Process.
LET it be observed that regularly Writsare directed to the Sheriffs or
Coroners, but in special Cases to the Plaintiff himself or to others; to the
Party, as a Prohibition, ne exeat Regnum; to others as to Judges Temporal and
Ecclesiastical or Civil, to Sergeant at Arms, to Mayor and Bailiffs; and where
the Sheriff is Judge of the Court, a Writ which should have been directed to
him, shall be directed to the Sergeants of the Mace, i. e. where there are such
Sergeants, Pract. Reg. 345.

The Original Process in Real Actions is a Summons, so in all Personal Actions
except in Trespass, and in that there is no Summons; but Attachment and
Distress in a Real Action, the Sheriff shall summons the Tenant upon the Land
in demand; but in Personal Actions the Sheriff must summons the Defendant by
his Person: And in a Praecipe there ought to be two Summoners, i. e. two good
substantial Neighbors.

If the Tenant be sufficient, he must retorn two common Pledges for the
Plaintiff, and then the names of the Summoners thus,

Respons' A. B. Vic' Comit' infra scripi' plegij de prosequendo. John Do.
Rich. Roe.
Summonitores infra nominati, J. S. the Defendant. VV. Brown. J. Cook.

But if the Tenant (or Defendant) be insufficient, then the Retorn must be thus.

Respons' A. B. Vic' Com' infra script' plegij de prosequend'. J. Do. R. Roe.

Infra nominatus J. S. nihil habet in Balliva mea per quod ( or unde) summoniri
potest, nec est invent'. in eadem.

(If it be in any Real Action, or in any Action of Annuity, Debt, Covenant, or
other Writ where Summons lies.)

If in Trespass, it is thus,

Infra nominatus C. D. nihil habet in Balliva mea, per qd' Attachiari possit,
nec est invent' in Balliva mea.

If two Defendants, name them; if more, name the two and caeteri Defendantes
infra nominati nihil habent.

If upon Distress, then thus,

Infra nominat' A. B. nihil habet in Terris, Tenementis and Hereditamentis
infra scriptis per quod ipsum distringere possum.

If the Sheriff will delay the execution of the Writ he may return it in two
manners.

1. Infra nominat' J. S. non invenit mihi pleg' de prosequendo; for in all si
fecerit te securum.

The Sheriff is to take Sureties or Pledges of the Plaintiff, or else he need
not execute the Writ.

2. Istud Breve mihi deliberat' fuit, ( or mihi venit) adeo tarde, qd' illud
exequi non potui propter Brevitatem temporis.

And the Sheriff may retorn tarde in every Writ, except in an Attachment and in
a Capias.

But these Retorns must be true, or else the Sheriff is punishable.

Attachment is by goods and differs from an Arrest which is only of the Body of
a Man.

The Form of the Attachment is,

Pone per vadios and salvos plegios B. qd' sit coram, etc. ad respond' A. de
placito, etc.

Attachment may be made by Pledges as well as by Goods ( scilioet) by finding
Pledges or Sureties to appear. The Pledges shall not be bound in any sum, as
Mainpernors are, and they shall be amerced, if he appears not.

Where the Writ is, Pone per vadios and salvos plegios, there if the Sheriff
find the Party, he may attach him by hhis Pledges; if he find him not, he may
attach him by his Goods. Fitzh. Retde Vic. 57.

For Offenses against the Crown which touch Life and Member, the Attachment
shall be by the Body.

If the Defendant be attached by his Goods, the Retorn must be

J. D. infra nominatus, Attachiatus est per unam patellam pretij 10 d. If od
dead things, ad valentiam, etc.

The Form of the Retorn of Distringas, Vide Dalton, 223.

In Debt or Trespass upon the Distringas, the Sheriff returned but 6 d. Issues,
and was amerced for it.

Though the words of the Distringas be qd' distring' per omnes Terras and Catalla
sua in Balliva tua, yet the Sheriff ought to distrain him but reasonably, and
not according to the words of the Writ, Kiel. 117.

Mean Process. What Arrest by the Sheriff or Bailiff shall be good and lawful
or not, either as to the manner of Doing, the Time, or in respect of the
Warrant or the Persons Arrested.
As to the Manner,

It Is commonly said, a known Bailiff need not Showing the Warrant.
show his Warrant although it be demanded, nor a special Bailiff without demand:
As to London, in Mackallys Case its said, the Sergeant need not to show his
Mace, because he is sworn and known, although not to the Party, 9 Rep. Mackallys
Case.

And yet in the Countess of Rutlands Case its held a General Arrest by a
Sergeant by showing his Mace and touching his Body with it, by saying Sir I
Arrest you, is insufficient, for he ought to show at whose Suit, out of what
Court, for what, and of what Retorn, that the Party may know what to do, 6 Rep.
52.

Where the Sheriff doubting a Rescue, causes the Sergeant of the Mace to
arrest one first on an Action of 100 l. entered in London according to Custom,
and after the Sheriff arrests him by Cap' ad Satisfac', this is unlawful, and
the Sergeant was severely punished, and the Court disliked such feigned Actions
against Law. 6 Rep. 52.

The Sheriff must not dispute the Authority of the Court, though the Process be
erroneous, Vid. infra, and Dalt. 106, 107.

If the Officer comes to Arrest a man, and he flies, the Officer may pursue
him and take him in another County, but he cannot beat him, etc. because he was
not arrested. If the Arrest of Bailiff he flies or draws Weapon, he may.

If a Special Bailiff by force of a Warrant on Arresting J. D. in a Stangers
House.
a Capias in Process, enters into the House of J. S. the Door being open, and
there takes J. D. against whom the Writ is, the Process is well served as to J.
D. and all Strangers: And if any Stranger rescue him, he at whose Suit he is
arrested shall have Action against him. 2 Rolls Abr. 277. Hodges and Marks Case.

A Capias was retornable on All Souls Day, which is non dies Juridicus, which
the Sheriff returned, and so let the Party go, it is a bad Retorn; the Writ was
good, and the detaining of the Party on it Lawful, and he was commanded to
bring him into Court. Pop. 205.

As to the Time.

If the Sheriff arrest a man before a Writ to Of Arrest before the Writ
delivered.
him delivered, it is a Trespass; yet in the pleading he need not say that the
Writ was delivered. It shall be intended that the Bill of Middlesex was
delivered to the Sheriff before the Arrest, and before the Warrant made: For
the Arrest being after the prosecution of the said Bill of Middlesex, and it
being said in the Plea, that the Bill was prosecuted per qd' the Sheriff makes
Intendment in Pleading.
his Warrant, it shall be intended to be delivered to the Sheriff before the
Warrnat made: And if it were not so, the Plaintiff ought to have showed it in
his Special Replication; but he having demurred to it has lost the advantage.

If a Latitat retornable die Lunae prox' post cras' Arrest on the day of
Retorn, good.
Sanctae Trinit' (which is the 10th of July) comes to the Sheriff to arrest J.
S. he may arrest him on the said 10 day of July. 2 Roll. Abr. 378. May and
Hoper. So a Capias in Process may be executed the day of the Retorn. So a
Capias ad satisfaciend'. But

The Sheriff upon a Capias in Process, may not But not after the day of the
Retorn, and before the quarto die post.
arrest the Party after the day of the Retorn and before the quarto die post;
as if the Writ be retornable Octab' Pur', which is the 9th day of February, and
the Sheriff arrests him on the 10th day, the Arrest is ill; for the quarto die
post is but a day of grace, and the party may appear before that day if he
will. 33 H. 6. Siderfin 229. Ellis and Jackson. And though the Sheriff may return
His Office quoad arresting is determined on the Essoyn day.
his Writ after, yet his Office quoad arresting is determined on the Essoyn
day, so that Dalton p. 116. is not Law. 1 Keb. 718. mesme Case.

An Arrest in the House, the Door being open at six of the Clock at Night is
good enough.

By the late Act of Parliament none can be Arrested on Sunday, except for
Treason, Felony or breach of Peace.

In respect of the Persons Arrested. As if he Arrest one person for another,
and one that ought not to be Arrested on the account of Protection or
Privilege.
The Sheriff had Process against one Adderley, and he took one Adderby; if he
were known by one Name or the other, it is good, alit' not. More 407. n. 548.

If the sheriff executes a Capias, and there is He ought at his peril to take
notice of the Person and Goods, but whether Original be sued out.
no Original to warrant it, he is excusable, but he must take notice at his
peril of the Person and Goods that he Arrests, for he is not to examine whether
the Original be sued out or not: But if he arrest J. S. instead of J. N. he
does it without Warrant.

Capias against G. and E. B. affirms himself to be E. and is taken, yet this
shall not excuse in false Imprisonment; the same Law of a Commission of
Rebellion. Hardress 323. Thurbane Case.

As concerning privileged or protected Persons, let us see who are privileged
from arrests or not
Here I shall briefly say something of a Nonomittas; of the Office and
Authority of the Sheriff on it.

Stat. W. 2. c. 39. gives it: For when Bailiffs of Liberties had retorn of
Writs, upon a Mandate to them, they would do nothing. Now a Remedy is given by
this Stat. commanding the Sheriff qd' non omittat propter aliquam Libertatem,
quin exequatur Praeceptum Dom' Regis. 2 Inst. 451. And

If a Bailiff make an insufficient Retorn, a Non omittas shall be granted. 2
Roll. Rep. 336.

Attachment is a Non omittas in it self, ergo the Sheriff may break the House
to take the Person. 1 Rep. 18, 33. 5. Rep. 92.

Form of pleading Non omittas, Cap' ad Satisifaciend', and on Mandavi Ballivo,
Retorn, Arrest, and Escape. Vid. 2 Sand. 98.

Pleading Non Omittas, Fieri fac' upon Mandavi Ballivo returned. 1 Sand. 304.

Peers of the Realm are Privileged; so Dutcllesses Peers.
and Countesses by Descent or Marriage, as in the Countess of Rutlands Case,
There the Sheriff was excused by the Writ, though it appears in that she was a
Countess, Coke 6 Rep. for the Officer ought not to dispute the Authority of the
Court; But Cap' upon Contempt, as Rescous, etc. lies against a Peer. Dalt. 104.

The Body of a Peer may be taken in Execution upon a Statute, if he had not
Goods nor Lands extendible. Dalt. 105.

Ministers in the Church are privileged from Clergy.
Arrest. Artic' Cler' c. 3. 1 R. 2. c. 15. 1 Mariae. c. 3.

Wiltshire, Undersheriff, was imprisoned by the Kings Servant.
Lord Chamberlain for arresting Sir George Hastings, Servant to the King, upon
a Cap' Utlagat'. Litt. Rep. 65. Wiltshires Case.

Per Cur' He may well arrest him, for it is at the Suit of the King himself,
and he is sworn to serve it. And by all the Judges of England, he who procured
the Commitment of the Undersheriff ought to pay all the Charges and Expenses.
And it is adjudged in 1 Keb. 40. The Kings Servant is not so Privileged from
arrests; but that the Sheriff ought to retorn his Writ unless he shows his
privilege on the Arrest.

The Queen, or Queen Dowagers Servants are not privileged.

In the King and Moultons Case, the Court declared their Opinion to be, That
none of the Kings Servants in Ordinary can be arrested without notice first
given to my Lord Chamberlain, who cannot privilege any perpetually, but in
convenient time must either remove such, or make them pay their debts; but if
the Bailiffs, without notice, do arrest any such, the Messengers of my Lord
Chambelain cannot rescue the Prisoner by Letter (the Arrest being lawful) nor
by Warrant, but the Party is punishable for his contempt, for no man can know
the Kings Servant by his Face, but he may show his Privilege on the Arrest.

They also conceived the Warrant of my Lord Rescue.
Chamberlain to the Messenger to take all persons that detain such Prisoner, is
a Rescue and against Law, and is to be only against the Plaintiff that sued,
for the Bailiffs had the Kings Warrant to arrest, and had no notice before the
Arrest, that he was the Kings Servant. This was Sir George Hamiltons Case one
of the Privy Chamber. 2 Keb. 3.

If a Parliament man be arrested on Mean Parliament may.
Process, or taken in execution, it is proper for the Parliament when they meet,
to discharge him, for in Sir Rich. Temples Case, the Justices doubted whether
they could do it or not. Twisden demanded why he did not sue his. Writ of
Privilege out of Chancery upon the retorn of his Election. Siderfin 42. 2 Keb.
3. Sir R. Temples Case.

Clergymen called to the Convocation have the same privilege a Parliament Men
have. Dier fo. 60.

By the Court of Chancery one was discharged Chancery Privilege.
from an Arrest, being done as he came to put in his Answer. 1 Rep. in Chapter 92.
and p. 22. There is a Chancery-priviledge from Arrest, and privilege in other
Courts for Officers and Attorneys.

As to Protections the 2d Instit. p. 56. upon Protections
Stat. is very full. All Protections that are not Legal, which appear not in
the Register, or warranted by our Books, are expressly against the branch of
Magna Charta 1 Inst. 131. Nulli differemus justitiam. As a Protection under the
Great Seal granted to any man, directed to the Sheriff, etc. commanding him
that they shall not arrest him during a certain Time, at such a man's Suit,
which has words in it, per Prarogativam quam nolumus esse arguendam. 2 Inst.
56. This Protection was adjudged to be void.

In respect of the Warrant, what is good or not to justify Arrest: Or where
Arrest shall be lawful or justifiable by force of a Warrant or not, and where
its good without showing the VVarrant.
A Warrant made to three conjunctions and divisim; this being a Warrant for
execution of justice may be sufficiently executed by two. 2 Roll. Rep. 137.
White and VV. Usher.

So a Sheriff makes a Warrant to four and cuilibet eroum, qd' ipsi caperent:
Two of the four take him, it is good. Yelv. p. 25. King and Hobbs.

For Warrants of this kind are not to be resembled Diversity between Warrants.
to Warrants or Authority to make or take Livery.

A Warrant to two men jointly to Arrest another, either of them may do it. Cok.
Litt. 181. Vide Crok. El. 913. Mesme Case.

The Sheriff upon a Bill of Middlesex makes his Precept to the Bailiff of
Westminster to arrest J. Ferrers Knight. ubi revera he was not Knight but Baronet;
this was not a good Warrant, and Warrant false as to Misnomer.
the Deputy Bailiff being killed by Sir John's Servant, it was not found murder
in the Servant, because his Warrant was not good, and upon the Trial he was
acquitted. Jones p. 346. the King and Ferrers.

The Sheriffs Bailiffs cannot execute a Writ directed to the Sheriff without
the Sheriffs Warrant, and if he do he is liable to an Action.

If the Writ comes out of the Kings Bench, then the Warrant must be, Ita qd'
habeam Corpus ejus coram Dom' Rege, etc.

If out of the Common Pleas, then it must be Ita qd' habeam Corpus ejus coram
Justiciariis Dom' Regis, etc.

Where the VVarrant ought to be showed or not.
If three Writs of Capias in Process at the suit A General Arrest upon three
Special Warrants.
of J. S. against J. D. are directed to the Sheriff, and the Sheriff makes
three Special Warrants to one Special Bailiff; and he comes to J. D. and
arrests him generally, without showing him in what Action, neither is it
demanded of him; but presently upon the Arrest, a Stranger Rescues him, Action
on the Case lies against the Stranger for all the three, for this was an Arrest
in Law upon all. Tr. 16. Jac. Hodges and Marks.

So if the Writs and Warrants were at the Rescue.
suit of three several persons, and the Bailiff arrests him generally as
before, for this is a good Arrest for all, and all shall have Actions for the
Rescue. Id. ibid.

He is not bound to show his Warrant at first, or to show at whose Suit it is,
before he had peaceably submitted to the Arrest. Cro. Jac. 15. Hodges's Case.

But in the Countess of Rutlands Case it is holden, when the Sheriff or other
person by his Authority arrests another, he ought upon the Arrest to show at
whose Suit, out of what Court, for what Cause, and when the Process is
retornable, to the intent that if it be upon Execution, he may pay it, and free
his Body, or agree with the Party, or put in Bayl according to the Law, and to
know when he should appear. This is meant after a peaceable submission, Cro.
Reports, the Case of Hodges and Marks thus, which is a Leading Case in the
Point. But when the Party makes resistance or flies, be need not make such
Declaration.

The Bailiff who had two Warrants against one, at the Suit of J. S. laid his
hands on him, and having both the Warrants in his Pocket, he said I arrest, you
by force of a Warrant I have, but did not show it him, nor had it in his hands,
nor told him at whose Suit. (This was not a Bailiff conus.)

The Court resolved, 1. This Arrest without showing the Warrant and telling at
whose Suit till the other demanded, is legal.

2. This Arrest without having the Warrant in his hand, and having both
Warrants about him, is well enough, though he did not show by which of the
Warrants he arrested him. For he being under the Bailiffs Arrest, is in custody
there for all Causes, for which the Sheriff had made his Warrant against him,
though the Sheriff or Bailiff do not mention any specially.

And Rolls C. J. in another Case, took this Special Bailiff.
difference; a Special Bailiff is bound to show his Warrant to the Party whom
he is to arrest, otherwise the Party arrested is not tied to obey him, but he
is not bound to show his Warrant to a Stranger.

But a known Bailiff, i. e. one that is commonly A known Bailiff.
known, is not bound to show his Warrant to any.

A sworn and known Officer (be he Sheriff, Undersheriff, Bailiff or Sergeant)
need not show his Warrant, yet upon the Arrest the Officer ought to declare the
Contents of the Warrant, ut supra.

If Officer arrest a man before he has a Warrant, and afterward procures a
Warrant, yet the first Arrest was unlawful.

So if the Officer do make a Warrant for Summons or Arrest, not having the
Original Writ or Process warranting the same, if it appear to the Judges, they
shall commit the Offender to the Gaol till he has paid 10 l. to the Party
grieved, and 20 l. to the King. But a Capias without Original, is sufficient
Warrant to the Sheriff. 43 Eliz. c. 6. 1 Jac. c. 25.

Of Pledges de Prosequendo.
The reason of Pledges in Actions is, 1. Security The reason of Pledges.
for the Kings Fine. 2. For the benefit of the Defendant, if Judgment be given
against he Plaintiff. Taking of Pledges is to the intent that the Party
Plaintiff, shall prosecute his Suit.

The Sheriff was at election (formerly) whether he would serve the Writ or not
if Pledges were not found, but now its held they may be found hanging the Writ:
Formerly if the Plaintiff sued one unjustly, the Judges would amerce the
Plaintiff grievously till the Statute of Moderata Misericordia was made. 3
Bulst. 277. Dr. Hussy and More.

Now if no Pledges be returned, it is not aided by Jeofayle.
Stat. 18 Eliz. which aids insufficient Retorns, but not no Retorns, and
therefore the Person against whom to have Judgment is not returned, for the
Judgment ought to be against the Plaintiff and his Pledges, and so this is no
Retorn. 1 Roll. Rep. 447.

If upon the Original Writ, Pledges be not returned (because the Writ commands
that if Pledges be found, that then, etc. and it is to the Kings disadvantage
if Pledges be not found at the loss of his Fine) it is error. But the Sheriff
may make Replevin without Pledges finding, and it is at the Sheriffs peril if
he does not take Pledges, Vid, supra tit. Replevin. Cro. Car. 594. Tregoose and
Winnele.

In B. C. Pledges must be endorsed on the Original, though they may be filed at
any time after the Retorn thereof. 2 Keb. 299. Hedges Case.

Vide pluris sub titulo Replevin. Vide supra sub titulo sur Summons and
Attachment.

Neither the King nor Infant shall find Pledges, King or Infant not to find
Pledges.
for no Americament shall be upon their default, therefore it were in vain for
them to find Pledges. 2 Leon. p. 4.

Scire fac' against the Sheriff for taking insufficient President.
Pledges. The Form of the Sheriffs retorning that he had attached the Defendant
by Pledges. Hutt. p. 77. Trevor and Michelborn.2 Sand. 333.

CHAP. VII.
Of Bail. of Special Bail. Who shall take Bail, or not. Of Bail Bonds.
Explication of 23 H. 6. c. 10. The design of the Statute. The Form to be
observed according to the Statute. What Obligations and Conditions are within
the Statute, or not. In respect of the Persons and Officers to whom they are
made. In respect of the Form; Of the Courts, and of the Sureties. The meaning
of the words color Officii. Of the pleading the Statute of 23 H. 6. And when
and how to be pleaded. What Appearance to a Sheriffs Bond is good, or not. Of
the Sheriffs Retorn on taking Bail. Of Insufficient Bail. Of refusing
Sufficient Bail; and the Remedy against the Sheriff for so doing. The Sheriffs
pleading this Statute in Actions brought against him. Of Bail Bonds, being
discharged or assigned. Of other Bonds, besides Bail Bonds, entered into to the
Sheriff; As for being a true Prisoner; Saving harmless from Escapes; For Fees,
etc. And the Pleadings thereunto, with all the late Cases and Resolutions
relating thereunto.

Of Bail.
BAil is so called, because the Party bailed is delivered by Law into the
Custody of those that are his Bail, and who are to answer the party if they do
not produce the Principal to do it.

The cause of Marking the Roll for special Special Bail in B. R. on Latitat,
and in B. C. on Original.
Bail in the King's Bench is, because the Cause of Action does not appear upon
the Latitat, by which the party is Arrested, but it is made appear by the
Declaration; but in the Common Pleas, where they proceed upon Original, the
cause of Action does appear.

Now one that is in Execution in Custody of One in Execution in Custody of the
Marshal, not compellalable to find Bail if another Action be brought against
him. Aliter in the Fleet. Who shall take Bail. In London.
the Marshal of the King's Bench, is not compellable to find Bail, if another
Action be brought against him; but if he be in the Fleet on Execution, and an
Action be brought against him in the King's Bench, he must either be Removed and
Committed to the Custody of the Marshal, or else he must put in Bail to the
Action.

It is the Common Course of London, upon Plaint before the Sheriffs, and a
Precept to the Sergeant to Arrest one, the Sureties shall be found and offered
to the Sheriffs, not the Sergeants. So in Inferior Mayor's Courts, Widow and
Clark's Case.

Therefore in False Imprisonment the Defendant pleads the Custom of London,
That on Entry of a Plaint in London, a Sergeant may by Parol, or otherwise,
Arrest the Defendant to answer the Plaintiff, and shows, That J. S. entered a
Plaint in the Compter against the Plaintiff, and that he was a Sergeant, and
Arrested him and carried him to the Compter till he found sufficient Bail. The
Defendant confesses the Custom, the Entry of the Pleint and Arrest, and that
he offered Security to the Sheriff; and of this he gave Notice to the
Defendant, and yet he carried him to the Compter. The Defendant demurrs. Per
Cur', The Sergeant, upon tender of Bail to the Sheriff, is not bound to set the
party at Large, unless the Sheriff send a Warrant testifying this to him,
Joue's Rep. 226. Percivall and Salmon.

If a Capias for the Good Behavior be directed Capias for the Good Behavior.
to the Sheriff by the Justices of Assize, and upon this the Sheriff makes a
Warrant to J. S. to take him, who took him accordingly, and the party tenders
J. S. sufficent Bail for his Appearance; and J. S. refuses it and keeps him in
Custody. This makes him not a Trespasser ab initio; for it is not his Office to
take Bail, but the Sheriffs, 2 Roll. Abridg. 562. Adam's Case.

Neither the Sheriff, nor any Justice of the Bail for one taken by Cap' Excom'.
Peace, cannot Bail one taken by a Writ of Cap' Excommunicat'. But he is
Bailable by the King's Bench, 1 Bulstr. 122. Hall and King.

Capias must be taken out, and sealed and delivered to the Sheriff against the
Bail, before he can be taken by a Testatum in another Testatum.
County and because in Robinson's Case it was never deliverd to the Sheriff,
but all Returned in one Term, the Execution was set aside, 2 Keb. 424.
Robinson's Case.

The Scire facias against the Bail, usually is left Scire fac' against the
Bail. Retorn.
four days with the Sheriff before the Retorn of it; but if it be not it is
well enough, 2 Keb. 229. Barle and Potter.

Judgment in a Scire facias against Manucaptors, Retorn of Scire fac' against
the Manucaptors.
the Bail is liable by the Judgment; and if they be Freeholders in the same
County where the Recognizance is made, then they must have notice and time;
because the Scire facias may be Returned: But if they be Strangers, the Sheriff
is not bound to warn them or give notice, Notice.
but Retorn Nihil on both together; for this is but of favor to the Bail, who
at their peril ought to bring in the Principal.

In Action brought against the Baron and Where the Husband must put in Special
Bail for his Wife, or not.
Feme, and the Husband is only Arrested, yet the Husband must put in Bail for
his Wife, if the Name of the Wife be in the Writ, else he is not bound to put
in Bail for her; for it is the Writ that warrants the Bail, Pract. Reg. 43.

Yet in 1 Keb. 241. the Husband is not bound to put in Special Bail for his
Wife, if she be not Arrested; but he must appear for himself and his Wife, and
must find Special Bail for himself, 1 Keb. 241. Nevill and Cage.

Note, Where Bail is put in De been esse (as in a Judges Chamber) the Plaintiff
cannot Sue the Sheriffs Bond till it be refused or set aside; but he ought to
except against it in the Judges Chamber, 2 Keb. 478.

But I think he may except against it after, within a certain time. According
to an Old Rule, it was within 20 days.

Of Bail Bonds. The Explication of the Statute of 23 H. 6.
This Statute is frequently pleaded in our Books, and many Cases about the
Nature of this Statute; and the Retorns and Pleadings thereupon we meet with,
which if methodically digested, would be the better and more clearly explained.

Let us see how the Law was at Common Law, and before the making of this
Statute.

At Common Law, if the Sheriff had taken any man by the Kings Writ, he must not
be Breve de homine Repleg'.
delivered but by Breve de homine replegiando, and he was not compellable to
take Bail of any, 2 Sand. 60.

But this Statute compels him to take Bail, and the design of the Statute is,
to provide against the Extortion of Sheriffs, who would not deliver them
without great sums, Cro. El. 808. Sir George Clifton.

Now the Statute prescribes the Form, and that Design of this Stat'.
the Sheriff under color of his Office should not oppress the party to make
him any other Obligation, for the Statute makes the Obligation void for not
pursuing the Form; but not in the Matter thereof. This Statute was made for the
Prisoners benefit; for the mischief before was, That the Sheriff not being
compellable to bail him, would extort Money to bail him, Mod. Rep. 228.

Now this Statute has Three Branches, as it is in Dive and Manningham's Case,
Plowden.

1. Commandment and Authority to the Sheriff, to let to Bail' such persons as
are Mainpernable: So it extends to Coroners, Stewards of Franchises, Bailiffs,
Keepers of Prisons, etc.

2. A Restraining branch, That they shall not let to Bail such persons as be in
their Ward by Condemnation, Execution, Capias Utlagat', or Excommunication,
Surety of the Peace, and such as shall be Committed by special Commandment of
the Justices, nor Vagabonds.

3. The third is, to make Obligations void, taken in any other form than the
Statute limits; That no Sheriff, nor any of his Officers and Ministers
aforesaid, shall take or cause to be taken, or make any Obligation for any
Cause aforesaid, or by color of their Office, but only to themselves, of any
person, nor by any person which shall be in their Ward, by the Course of the
Law; but by the Name of their Office, and upon Condition written, That the said
Prisoners shall appear at the Day contained in the said Writ, Bill, or Warrant,
and in such places as the said Bill, etc. shall require: And any other
Obligation taken by them in any other form, shall be void.

Now there are Three Forms to be observed:

1. That is shall be made to the Sheriff himself.

2. Note these words (For any other Cause) refer to all that went before, as
well those contained in the Exception, as in the First branch. Therefore a Bond
taken of a man in Execution is void by this Statute, and the Surety may plead,
this was taken by him in Execution as Sheriff, and and the words color Officii
make it void; for he he lets him to Bail who is not Mainpernable, Plowd. 69,
80. Dive and Manningham.

3. Note also ( Nor any of his Officers) it is not The Stat' mistaken in print.
so, and the printed Statute is mistaken. It is not the Sheriff, nor any de ses
Officers, (or any of his Officers) but not any des Officers; not ejus
Officiarii, but alii Officiarii. And so is Old Rastal which is in French, and
so Adjudged in Langham's Case.

In Debt on Bond to Lenthal, the Defendant pleaded it was for Ease; it was held
to extend to the Marshal, though he is not one de ses Officers but one des
Officers and Ministers of Justice, 3 Keb. 71. Monday and Frogate.

And if the Statute be mis-recited it may be demurred to, as it was in this
very Case, Cro. El. 108. Teussell and Acton.

In this Statute are Three Forms to be observed:

1. That it shall be made to the Sheriff himself. Vide infra.

2. That it shall be made to him by the Name of his Officer.

3. That it shall be only for Appearance at the day and place, Cro. El. 862.
Cotton and Vale, 2 And. 173. mesme Case.

But as to the Insufficiency of the Sureties, that is Matter and not Form, and
the Obligation is not void. Vide infra.

The Statute prescribes the Form, and that the Sheriff under Color of his
Office should not He must pursue the Form, not the Matter.
oppress the party to make him any other manner of Obligation; for the Statute
makes the Obligation void for not pursuing the Form, but not in the Matter
thereof: Therefore the sheriff may take one Surety, or one that has no Land in
the County, Cro. El. 808. Sir Geo. Clifton's Case, Mod. Rep. 32. Franklyn's
Case.

Per Hobart, ex Relatione Twisden: Because the Statute would make sure work,
and not leave it to Expositions what Bond should be taken: Therefore it was
added, That Bonds taken in any other form should be void.

What Obligations and Conditions are good, or not.
1. In respect of the Persons and Officers to whom they are made.

2. In respect of the Form.

1. In respect of the Officers or Persons to whom made.

Such Bond given to a Deputy of a Bailiff of To a Deputy of a Bailiff of a
Franchise. Sergeant at Arms.
a Franchise is void, or to an Under-sheriffs Deputy; it must be to the Bailiff
or Sheriff himself, Noy p. 69. Tavernor's Case.

A Sergeant at Arms, attending on the President and Council of the Marches of
Wales, is not an Officer within this Stat. Cro. Car. 9. John's and Stratford.

If the Bailiff of an Hundred, which is a Bailiff of an Hnudred.
Franchise, take Bond, he must do it in the Sheriffs Name, 3 Keb. 21, 117, 127.
Monday and Frogate.

This Bond must be taken to the Sheriff himself, and not to another, Dyer 119.
10 Rep. 100. 7 Ed. 4. 5. Plowd. Com. 68. a. b.

A Sergeant at Arms in Wales is not within Sergeant at Arms in Wales
the Stat. Styles 234. Barton's Case.

The House of Commons had Voted one VV. guilty of High Treason, and the
Plaintiff being a Sergeant at Arms took the said VV. into Custody; and the
Defendant entered into Bond to the Plaintiff, Conditioned for the said VV's
Appearance, who did not appear. Debt was brought, and on demurrer. Per Cur',
It Is a void Bond by the Common Law, being entered into for ease and favor of
the Prisoner, and he was not bailable. But the Court agreed the Plaintiff was
not an Officer within 23 H. 6. c. 10. Obj. The Condition recites the Bond was
entered into for Appearance only, is an Estoppel to say it was for other Cause.
Per Cur', Here is no Estoppel; for Estoppel is when the Bond is a good Bond,
then the Recital is an Estoppel; but when the Bond is void, the Estoppel is
void too, Hardress p. 464. Norfolk's Case.

A Sergeant to the House of Commons is not Sergeant to the House of Commons.
within this Statute, 1 Keb. 391. Norfolk and Aylmer.

This Statute does not extend to Bond made to the Plaintiff himself, Allen p.
58. Leech and Davis.

The Bond not being taken by the Sheriff in Not taken by the Sheriff in the
name of his Office.
the Name of his Office, in Debt upon the Bond, the Defendant demurrs upon Oyer.

Sed non allocatur; for the Statute is not pleaded, Pleading the Stat'.
and it may be for a just Debt, 2 Keb. 620. Jacques's Case.

Marshal of the King's Bench is within this Marshal of the King's Bench.
Statute, and if he takes Bond against this Statute it is void, Cro. El. 66.
Bracebridge and Vaughan, 9 Co. 98.

A Bond to Neele, Sheriff of Warwick, and the Bond was to Neele Vic' Com'
praed', and Warwick put in the Margent. Per Dodderidge, This is not a good
Bond; he ought to be named Sheriff, and of what County, 2 Rolls Rep. 360. Neele
and Cooper.

As to Appearance, where the Condition is good, or not.
An Obligation to the Sheriff, to Appear and Answer, etc. is void by the
Statute of 23 H. 6. Aliter to Appear to Answer; for the party by the Law may
Appear, yet Judgment may be given by default, Noy 53, 54. Lord Ever's Case,
Dyer 274. contra 172. Rowles and How.

Condition to make an Appearance, quaere if good.

Obligation was taken by the Sheriff for an Appearance, where the Term is
adjourned.
Appearance at Westminster, and the Term ws Adjourned to St. Albans, and the
party appeared there; he had not forfeited the Obligation, quaere. Mo. n. 578.
Corbet and Downing.

That Obligation shall always relate to the day and place comprised, and he
ought to appear at the King's Bench, or else he forfeits his Bond, Mo. 466.

The Condition was, If the said J. D. personally appeared, etc. a die Paschae
in 15 dies, to Answer to J. H. as shall appertain, and farther to do and
receive as the Court therein shall consider in that behalf, that then, etc.
it is a void Bond, Cro. El. 672. Scriven and Dyther.

If the Sheriff take an Obligation for the Appearance Bond for appearance
before Process comes to the Sheriff.
of J. S. before Process comes to him to Arrest J. S. and after the Process
comes, this Obligation is good, Siderfin p. 151.

Bail Bond was to appear at Westminister die Sabbati prox' post Purificat'. to
Answer; its ill, it was intended the Feast day, 3 Keb. 260. Rodd and Huans.

Bill of Middlesex was Retornable die Veneris, Mistake of the Day.
the Condition of the Bail Bond was, If the Defendant appeared die Sabbati, it
is a void Bond, 1 Sand. 21, 22. Bennet and Filkins.

Condition to Appear and Answer is good To appear and answer.
enough, 2 Cro. 286. though Mildmay and Cage his Case was Objected, being
intended generally to answer any Action, and the Writ was of Trespass, 3 Keb.
422. Briscoe and Richardson.

Thc Condition of the Bond was, That if the Insenfible.
Defendant do appear in Banco Regis such a day, then the Condition of the
Obligation to be void; yet per Cur' both are good: For if these words were
omitted, it is but Surplusage, Siderfin 456. Maleverer and Hawkins, 2 Keb. 615.
mesme Case, Mod. Rep. 35. mesme Case.

To a Condition to appear before his Majesty's To appear at Westminster.
Justices of King's Bench at Westminster. The Defendant pleads the Statute of 23
H. 8. and that this was alia forma; it should be coram Dom' Rege ubicunque,
etc. yet it ws adjudged good. The Statute is not to be avoided by such mistakes
of Retorns, 3 Keb. 551, 611, 627.

So in Cadwell and Dawkin's Case the Condition was, Ad respond' E. exec' in
plac' Trans. de 100 l. and the Writ was, Ad respond' E. in placito Tresp' ac
etiam billae 100 l. de debito, etc. this variance is not material, if the Bond
be made in the name of his Office, and the Condition express the time and place
of his Appearance, and at whose Suit, its enough, Cro. Jac. 286. Villars and
Hastings, Sir Tho. Jones 137. Cudwell und Dawkin's Case, so Kerby and Curtis.

The Condition is, If such an one who is To appear personally.
arrested on a Latitat, appeared personally and answered, etc. in regard his
appearance is necessary to put in special Bail, if the party require it, the
Bond is good, Cro. El. 776. Bowls and Hersteo, Dalt. 446. 10 Rep. 100.

A Writ out of the King's Bench was Returnable Appearance on a Writ Retornable
out of Term.
out of Term, the Sheriff takes the party and takes Bond to appear at the day
of the Retorn, and for Nonappearance brought Debt on this Obligation: This
Bond was void by the Statute, and the Sheriff shall not be amerced for
Nonappearance, nor liable to any False Imprisonment by the party, 2 Siderfin
129. Jenkins and Hatton.

The Writ is placito Trans. the Condition of To answer, Trans. ac etiam billae
the Bond is to answer Ac etiam billae 100 l. in placito debiti is void, being
another Writ; but if the Writ were in placito debiti, or the Bond taken only to
answer the Writ in placito Trans. it were well enough. And a Nil capiat per
Billam was awarded on Demurrer by the Plaintiff upon the Defendants Plea upon
the Statute, it being in alia forma, 3 Keb. 164. Mildmay and Cage, and p. 711.
Moor and Finch.

Ad respond' de platito debiti is good without Ad Respondend' de placito
debiti, without mentioning the Sum.
mentioning the Sum. The Bond ought to be made to the Sheriff by the name of
his Office, and ought to express the day and place of his Appearance, and these
Circumstances being observed, though it be variant in other Circumstances, its
not material, Cro. Mich. 9 Jac. 286. Villers and Hastings.

The Sheriff cannot take Bond to appear at another day than is contained in the
Writ, 2 Keb. 526.

If an Obligation be taken by the Sheriff after Bond taken by the Sheriff after
the day of the Retorn void, and why.
the day of the Retorn, its void by the Statute, and is not a single
Obligation; and the Statute was made to prevent such great Oppressions, for the
party so taken after the Retorn, may not be bailed without coming before a
Judge; and he may not do this out of Term without the Consent of the other
party, Siderfin 301. Courtney and Phelps

L. gives Bond to the Sheriff, being arrested On Attachment out of Chancery.
by Attachment out of the Chancery. The Condition was, That the Defendant
should appear such a day in Chancery, apud Westm' ubicunque fuerit. This Bond
is within the Statute; but here the Variance makes it void, Ubicunque fuerit, 2
Keb 526. Levezer and Redshaw, Styles 234. Burton and Low, 3 Keb. 599, 614.
Kirby's Case.

As to Courts.
The Sheriff, by virtue of an Attachment under the Privy Seal of the Court of
Requests, took the Defendant, and for his Enlargement made the Obligation to
appear before the Kings Counsel, etc. Per. Cur', Here is no Warrant to take the
Body, or the Obligation; for that Court has not any power by Commission,
Statute, or Common Law.

But the Sheriff ought to obey the Process out of the Duchy Court, for that is
appointed by Dutchy-Court.
Act of Parliament, but the other is not within the Statute, for the Statute
speaks of such who are in their Custody by course of Law. So this Obligation is
avoidable by Duress, Cro. El. 646. Stephens and Fludd, 2 Anderson 122. mesme
Case.

Plaint in a Court Baron of 39 s. and an Court Baron.
Attachment against the Defendants Goods, and detained till the Plaintiff
caused a 40 l. Bond to be made to the Plaintiff himself to appear and answer,
and Condemnation by a day, and pleaded the Statute of 27 H. 6. This Bond is
void at Common Law.

Its void also for Extortion, because of the Extortion.
unreasonable sum, etc. and the Statute does not extend to such a Bond, 1 Keb.
872, 873. Randall and Keite.

The Condition was to appear before the Justices Not according to the Style of
the Court.
de B. R. at Westminster, and says not ad placita coram Nobis tenenda
ubicunque, etc. the Variance is not material, and by common Intendment it is
the same Court, Sir Tho. Jones 46. Kirby and Curwin.

As to Sureties.
The Statute says, That he shall take Obligation Sureties.
with sufficient Sureties; but this is for the benefit of the Sheriff, that is,
for his Indemnity, that if he be amerced for Nonappearance of the party, he
shall have his remedy; for he may take what Sureties he thinks fitting, Mo.
636. Cotton and Vale.

Therefore if the Sheriff take Obligation for Bond not void for insufficiency
of Sureties.
Appearance, its not void per Stat. 23 H. 6. for insufficiency of the Sureties;
or that the Surety had no Land; for the Sheriff may take one Surety or two, 2
Anders. 157.

The Sheriff is Judge of the Sufficiency, and its no plea to say, he took Bonds
of Insvfficient persons, Mo. Rep. 118. Cotton and Vale.

The party that gives the Bond must be in the Ward of the Sheriff. So is
Beaufage's Case, vid. 10 Rep. 99. b. Winch. p. 20, 50. Empson and Bathurst.

So, Condition to Appear; the Defendant on The Bond must be taken of the person
who is in Lawful Custody.
Oyer pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. that the Plaintiff (Bailiff of St
Edmondsbury) Imprisoned the Defendant without Warrant, and thereon took the
Bond. Per Cur', Its an ill Plea; for the Bond must be taken of the person in
Custody, i. e. Lawful Custody; and this Bond is voidable by Duress at Common
Law, 3 Keb. 756, 760. Lord Suffolk and Birket, Sir Thomas Jones 76. mesme Case.

The Sheriff upon a Fieri fac' took Bond of the Defendant to pay the Money in
Court at the Retorn of the Writ; this is good, and not void by Stat. 23 H. 6.
Vid. Dalton 443. 10 Rep. 99. Beaufage's Case.

Color Officii.
Color Officii is taken in malam partem. No What it is, and to what it
extends, or not.
Sheriff shall take Obligation contrary to the Statute Color Officii. As one
in Execution escapes and is retaken, and then a Bond is made for his
Enlargement, this is Color Officii. But if a Sheriff take a Bond for a true
Debt; this is good, because its not Color Officii, 2 Leon. 118. Philips and
Stone.

Debt on Obligation taken by the Plaintiff Sheriff, of the Defendant his Clerk,
upon Condition to pay the King's silver into the Exchequer within fourteen days
after he received it. The Defendant pleads Stat. 23 H. 6. and averred it was
taken Color Officii. And upon Demurrer it was adjudged for the Plaintiff; for
the Statute does not intend such Obligation taken of them which are not to
appear, nor in Custody. The Plea that the Bond is taken Color Officii, will
not avoid a Bond taken of the party, to do what he ought, Mo. n. 685.
Cartwright and Dalesworth, 3 Keb. 790.

A Bond for Tuition of a Child as Curator, Curator. Tutor.
and to give Account to the Ordinary, is but a voluntary undertaking of the
Guardian, and so not within the Stat. 23 H. 6. and its good at Common Law,
notwithstanding 3 Inst. 149. 3 Keb. 671.

Note, If the one part of the Condition be The whole Bond is void, if against
this Statute in any point.
according to the Statute, and the other not, all shall be void; for the
Statute extends to the whole Bond, Dive and Manningham Pl. 68. b. Palmer Rep.
378. Noel and Cooper.

If the Sheriff take Bond for a Point against this Law, and also for a due
Debt, the whole Bond is void, Hob. p. 14.

Note, The Warden of the Fleet, and the Kings Palace at Westminster, are
excepted out of this Act.

Of Pleadings.
Regula, This is a particular private Law, and ought to be pleaded.
Regula.
Condition was, That J. S. appeared in B. R. etc. The Defendant demands Oyer,
and so demurred; because it is not taken by the Sheriff in the name of his
Office. Sed non allocatur; the Statute being not pleaded, (as Whelpdale's Case)
No Exception can be taken against it, for it may be a just Debt, 1 Sand. 155.
Dive and Manningham's Case, Parker and Wells, Siderfin 24. Allen and Robinson,
Hob. 13. contr. 3 Keb. 320, 361. Oaks and Ceel.

A Condition to appear in B. R. according to Custom, at the suit of M. On Oyer
the Defendant pleads there is no such Custom in B. R. ad the Plaintiff has
alleged, to appear to an etiam billae, and so the Obligation void. The At
etiam Billae.
Plaintiff demurrs, and Judgment pro Querente; because the Statute of 23 H. 6.
is not pleaded, being a particular Law. But it might be pleaded, the Bond was
by Duress, being in another manner Duress.
than the Statute allows; and that Statute makes the Bond void for the whole, 2
Keb. 620. 3 Keb. 60, 181. Forth and Walker.

If the Statute be misrecited, it may be Demurred to, Siderfin 356. Holbay and
Bray, 2 Keb. 278. Pench and Woodnoth,

Quare, How the Court will take notice of it, by the printed Book or by the
Record, or otherwise?

Regula, To plead an Appearance, and not to say, Prout patet per Recordum, is
naught.
Regula.
So Corbet's Case; On the Sheriffs Bond it must be averred a Record in the
Rejoinder as well as in the Bar, 1 Brownl. 91. Andrews and Robins, Cro. El.
466. Corbet's Case, 2 Keb. 250, 278. Knight and Pit.

Condition was, If he appeared at Westminster such a day, to answer, etc. The
Defendant pleads, that before the Day of the Retorn of the Writ the Term was
adjourned to Hartford, and that there he appeared. The Plaintiff demurs. Per
Cur', He ought to conclude his Plea, prout patet per Recordum; for though he
appears, yet if his Appearance be not entered of Record, he forfeits his
Obligation, and he ought to Conclude his Plea so, otherwise the Plaintiff
cannot answer thereunto as to say Nultiel Record, Cro. El. 466. Corbet and
Cook.

Debt upon a Sheriffs Bond for Appearance in B. R. the Defendant pleads
comparuit ad diem; the Plaintiff denies it, and by Mittimus out of the Chancery
it was brought into the Common Pleas, and Judgment there given, Palmer and
Steward cited Cro. Car. 297. in Lutterel and Leas's Case.

Though the Bond is made void by Act of Parliament, Non est factum not to, be
pleaded.
yet the party may not plead Non est factum, but must plead the Special Matter,
and take advantage of the Act of Parliament, 5 Rep. 117. Whelpdale's Case.

In Debt upon Bond, the Defendant pleads the Traverse, That he was in Prison
tempore confectionis, not good.
Statute of 23 H. 6. and shows that W. was in Execution, and that the Bond was
made for his Deliverance against the Statute. The Plaintiff Replies, That
tempore confectionis of the said Bond W. was at Large; absque hoc that he was
in Prison tempore confectionis, etc. the Traverse is not good: For one may be
in Prison, and make a promise to make a Bond, for which he is Enlarged, and
within an Hour after he makes the Bond, the same is within the Statute; it
ought to have been absque hoc, that it was made pro deliberatione, 2 Leon. 107.
Bows and Vernon, 2 Keb. 512. Die and Adams.

Debt on Bond, dated 25 Sept. the Defendant Plead primo deliberat' after the
Arrest.
pleads a Capias ad satisfaciend' was awarded against B. who was taken on it
the 30th of Sept. and that the Obligation was made for the Enlargement of B.
The Plaintiff demurs, and had Judgment; because it appears the Bond was made
before the Arrest, and so could not be avoided by 23 H. 6. but he ought to have
pleaded it with a primo deliberat' after the Arrest, Noy 23. Collins and
Phillips.

To Debt on Bail Bond to Appear, the Defendant Plea, That before the day of
Appearance he was taken by a Cap' Utlagat'.
pleads before the day he was taken by Capias Utlagat', and detained till after
the day, and so could not appear. The Plaintiff demurred, and it was Adjudged
to be an ill Plea; for the party may remove himself by Habeas corpus, and if
this should be good, all Bail Bonds may be thus avoided, and the Plaintiff does
but his Duty, 2 Keb. 262. Jeffreys and Cooper, Siderfin 406. id. Case.

In Debt, the Defendant pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. and that was for ease
and favor, and not for a just Debt. The Plaintiff Replies, It was for a just
Debt, absque hoc that it was for ease and favor. To which the Defendant
Rejoyns Rejoinder.
specially, and the Rejoinder was set aside in the Vacation by Judge Rainsford;
and the Plaintiff entered Judgment for not joining on the Issue tendered by the
Plaintiff: And per Cur' the Judgment was affirmed, 2 Keb. 554. Berry and Bishop.

Regula, For when an Issue and Rule is given, the other party must join, and
cannot depart to any new matter.
Regula.
A Sheriff brought Debt on a Bond, dated the 13th of Jun. the Defendant demands
Oyer on Traverse. Time of the delivery of the Bond.
the Condition, which was, That if he appear Veneris prox' post tres Trin', and
pleads, That Veneris prox' post Trin. was 14 Junii, and that he was Imprisoned
by the Plaintiff till the 19th of June, and that the Obligation supra fuit
primo deliberat' by the Defendant the 19th of June; absque hoc, that this was
delivered as his Deed before the 19th day of June, Siderfin p. 300. Courtney
and Phelps, 2 Keb. p. 108, 109, 122. mesme Case.

Per Cur', This is not a good Traverse; it ought to have been, absque hoc that
it was delivered as his Deed before die Veneris prox' post tres Trin'. For if
the Traverse supra be allowed, the Plaintiff shall be excluded from answering
to the Time alleged of the Retorn, although it be false.

The Defendant pleads Stat. 23 H. 6. and that Traverse. Time of the Retorn.
he was in Custody by warrant of a Writ Returned Veneris post Octab.
Purificat'. The Plaintiff Replied, The Defendant was taken by a Warrant on a
Writ Returned Sabbat' post Octab' Purific', and not by any Writ Returned
Veneris, etc. The Defendant Rejoyned, That he was in Custody by virtue of a
Writ Returned Veneris post Octab' Purific', absque hoc that he was taken by any
Writ Returned Sabbat' post Octab'. The Plaintiff demurrs. Per Cur', This is no
Traverse upon a Traverse; and there would be no Traverse in the Replication,
which would make an end; but in the Rejoinder it does, 2 Keb. 94, 105. Bennet
and Philkins, 1 Sand. p. 20. mesme Case, 3 Keb. 656. Gold and Cutler, 191.
Sturges.

Debt on Bond; the Writ was, Ad respondend' H. G. nuper Vic' Norf. and the
Count was, Qd' concessit se teneri praefat' J. H. in praedict' 40 l. and says
not, Tune Vic' Norfolc' existen'. And per Cur', Sur Demurr' upon the Bar it was
Ajudged, que Count fuit insufficient, Cro. El. 800. Guyben and Whichstcomb, 3
Keb. 191. Twisleton and Dunken.

J. S. puts himself in a Special Bailiff, and Special Bailiff takes Bond. It is
by Duress.
Arrests J. D. and takes Bond, etc. This is by Duress, and the Defendant may
plead that; yet its not within the Statute, nor aided by it. For J. D. was
never in the sheriffs Custody after the Arrest, and the Bond was taken out of
the County where he was Arrested, and so by Duress, Cro. El. 746. Brown and
Adams, 3 Keb. 756, 760. Earl of Bristol and Lord Burkin.

The Defendant pleads to the Sheriffs Bond, After the Writ purchased, and
before the delivery of it to the Sheriff, he may take Security.
that there was no Writ ever delivered to the Sheriff, and so would avoid it by
Stat. 23 H. 6. The Sheriff after the Writ sent out, but before the Delivery,
takes Security: Which per Cur', he may, if the Defendant will give it, 1 Keb.
554. Bromfield and Penhay.

What Appearance to a Sheriffs Bond is good, etc.
If Appearance be the same Term, it is good. Appearance after the Day is good.
The Defendant pleads to a Sheriffs Bonds, taken for his Appearance in B. R.
die sabbat' prox' post Octab' Sancti Martini, and that he appeared at the day:
And the Court of Common Pleas gave him a Day to bring the Record of his
Appearance by Mittimus out of the Chancery. And the Record was certified, that
he appeared Lunae prox' post Quindena Martini, which was after the Day, and
adjudged good, 1 Brownl. 58. Statifield and Grony, Idem 74. Carter and Freeman.

So in Daly and Fryar's Case: The parties Appeared two days after the Day in
the Condition, is good, and shall be a discharge of the Bond; for the whole
Term is but one day in Law. so it is in the Common Pleas, and in the
King's Bench, 2 Bulstr. 255. Daly and Friar.

A Debtor having given Bond to the sheriff Defendant ought to Appear
notwithstanding a Supersedeas
to Appear, though a Supersedeas comes to the Sheriff before the day of
Appearance; yet he shall appear to take his Bond.

A Sheriff sues his Bail Bond for Nonappearance: Plea of Comperuit ad diem, how
Issue to be joined, and on whose part the Proof lies.
The Defendant pleads Comperuit ad diem. The Plaintiff Replies, Null tiel Record
comparentiae. The Defendant Rejoyns, Quod habeatur tale Recordum. Now the Proof
lies on the Defendants part, to produce the Record in Court.

A Condition to Appear in B. R. where the Process is Retornable, etc. The
Defendant said in facto that he had appeared secundum formam, etc. Et hoc petit
Repleader was awarded; for it must be tried by the Record.

A. is bound to Appear such a day, etc. and A. How the party may: Enter his
appearance. No Process is Returned.
at the said Day goes to the Court; but there no Process is Returned. Then the
party may go to one of the Chief Clerks of the Court, and pray him to take a
Note of his Appearance. Vide the Form of the Entry in such case, 1 Leon. p. 90.
Brett and Shepard.

If the other party plead Null tiel Record, it behooves that the Defendant has
the Record ready at his peril: For the Court of Common Pleas cannot Write to
the Justices of the King's Bench, to certify a Record thither.

Of the Sheriffs Retorn upon taking Bail, and of his taking Insufficient Bail;
or his refusing sufficient Bail, and the Remedy: And his pleading in an Action
brought against him.
Note, After the Statute of 23 H. 6. the Sheriff cannot make a Special Retorn
in a Capias; but only a Cepi Corpus or Non est inventus: And the Statute, though
it compells him to take Bail, yet it does not alter the Retorn. The design of
the Statute is to provide against the Extortion of Sheriffs, being obliged to
Retorn Cepi and paratum habeo, and yet to let the Defendant at large; and
therefore there is no reason he should be Charged for not having the Body at
the Day.

The Retorn of a Paratum habeo, is in effect no more than that he has the Body
ready to bring into Court, when the Court shall Command him.

And for his False Retorn of Paratum habeo, he is amerceable to the Court till
he do bring in the Body, (and the Common Practice is so); but that is nothing
to the party, and no Action lies against him by the party. And therefore vide
Page and Tulses's Case.

Now, as to the sheriffs taking Insufficient bail, and refusing to take
Sufficient bail, the Law stands thus:

If the Sheriff refuse to take Reasonable Bail, an Action on the Case lies
against him, Siderfin p. 23.

If the Sheriff refuse to take Bail, he is liable to an Action of False
Imprisonment.

If the Sheriff take Insufficient Bail, yet no Action lies against him by the
party; for he is Judge of the Bail. Vide supra. Therefore,

In Action on the Case against the Sheriff for Escape. the Defendant pleads the
Statute of 23 H. 6. that he Let H. to Bail, and took Reasonable Sureties A.
and B. persons having sufficient within the County. The Plaintiff Replies,
Absque hoc, that he took Bail, having sufficient within the County. The
Defendant Demurrs, and Judgment pro Defendente, Mod. Rep. 227. Ellis and
Yarborough.

Where Trespass on the Case was brought Sheriff pleads Stat. 13 H. 6.
against the Sheriffs of Middlesex for suffering an Escape and Retorning Cepi
corpus, and Paratum habeo (which was false.) The Defendants plead, That the
party Arrested put in J. B. and J. C. Sureties, and plead the Statute of 23 H.
6. and they took Bond according to the Statute, and so let him Escape. Per
Cur', The Plea is good, for the Reasons aforesaid. So in Bowls and Lassell's
Case, if the Sheriff Retorn a Languidus in Prisona, having taken Bail secundum
Stat'; it was adjudged, that though the Defendant was at Large, yet no Action lay
against the Sheriff. All this must be understood of Mean process); for else
this would be to frustrate the Statute of 23 H. 6. Cro. El. 852. Bowls and
Lassels.

But Note, Then it must appear to the Court on the Record, that it is on the
Statute of 23 H. 6. and not a Retorn at Common Law: Not Guilty.
And the Sheriff may in such case plead Not guilty, Siderfin 22. Allen and
Robinson.

But if the Sheriff demurrs to the Declaration, If the Sheriff demurr, al'
Narr', the Action is against him.
then the Action is against him. For the Declaration shall be taken to be true
upon the Demurrer. For the Statute is private, and the Court will not take
notice of it unless it be pleaded. But if the Defendant had pleaded this
specially, or if he had pleaded Non culp', he might have had advantage of the
Statute, and oufted the Plaintiff of his Action, Cro. El. 624. Barton and
Aldworth, Siderf. Parker and Welby, Mod. Rep. 244. 244. Page and Tulse, p. 33.
Franklyn and Andrews, Mo. n. 427. Cro. El. 460. Gardner and Langton.

By these Words in the Statute, That if the Sheriff Retorn a Cepi Corpus, he
shall be chargeable to have the Body at the Day of the Retorn, etc. it is
intended only that he may be Amerced to the King for not having the Body at the
Day, 2 Sand. 60. Postern and Hanson.

An Action on the Case against the sheriff for not taking Reasonable Sureties,
not having sufficient Estates in the said County, and Retorning Cepi corpus,
and yet not having the Bodies ready by the day, lies not; forhe is compellable
to let to Bail, and if he have not the Body he shall be amerced; And because
he shall be amerced, the Statute gives him Advice to take sufficient Sureties,
for his own Indemnity, 2 Sand. 59. Postern and Hanson.

In Action on the Case for taking Insufficient Sheriff pleads, He had taken
sufficient Bail, he need not say where, nor Traverse the Intent.
bail: The Defendant pleads, he had taken sufficient Security. He need not say
where, nor need he traverse the Intent, to deceive the Plaintiff of his Debt:
For it is not issuable at what place the Security was taken, and therefore need
not be showed; and the Intent is not Traversable; and had the Defendant pleaded
so it had been ill, Siderfin 96. Bentley and Hoar.

Action on the Case against a Sheriff for taking How the Sheriff is to plead on
23 H. 6. c. 10
Insufficient bail. The Defendant pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. The
Plaintiff Demurs to the Bar, because the Sheriff had not alleged, that he had
not dismissed one B. (whom he had taken) by sufficient Mainpernors, but only
alleges this by way of Implication, and not positively, 2 Sand. 58. Postern
and Hanson.

Of Bail Bonds, being Discharged or Assigned.
In Debt on Sheriffs Bond, the Principal being Where the Bail Bond shall be
discharged, paying the Americaments, and where not.
in Prison may be admitted to plead, discharging the Amerciaments (and this is
the course of the Court) where the Prosecution is fresh: But where the
Defendant in the Original Action, ( viz.) the Principal is become insolvent.
Per Cur', The Bail Bond is the only remedy, and they will not discharge that on
Ordinary Rules. In this Case North prayed the Continuance of Process on the
Bail Bond, in regard since the default of the Appearance of Fludd the
Principal, he is become Insolvent by suffering several Judgments. But Jones
said, That the Bail appeared on the very day of the Retorn, and the default is
the Plaintiffs own, and the Bond not above an year old. And per Cur', paying
the Amerciaments and Costs, the Bail were discharged, and the Principal
admitted to plead, 2 Keb. 545, 553. Fludd and Williams.

The Surety paid the Debt, and he sued the Bail Bond sued by the Surety who
paid the Debt, and the Coroners took a New Bond.
Bail Bond assigned by the Sheriff; on which a Writ being directed to the
Coroners, they took a New Bond and assigned it, and they prayed the Money out
of the Coroners hands for the Surety. Per Cur', The Coroner cannot discharge
his Bail Bond no more than the Sheriff, and they ordered the Principal Debt to
be paid, 2 Keb. 287, 400. Foster's Case.

A Bail Bond was discharged upon Motion, Discharged by payment of the Money
before the Retorn of the Writ. Assigument of the Bail Bond.
the Money being paid before the Retorn of the Writ, and Common Appearance
ordered, 3 Keb. 356. Randall's Case.

If the Defendant appears not to the Sheriffs Bond, according to the Condition
thereof, the Plaintiff may (by leave of the Sheriff) sue the Bond in the
Sheriffs Name; but its at the Plaintiffs Election to sue the Sheriff: And the
Sheriff shall be amerced till he assign the Obligation to the Plaintiff, Pract.
Reg. 24. Siderfin. p. 24.

When Bail is put in de been esse, (as Bail taken Bail de been esse.
in a Chamber) the Plaintiff cannot sue the Sheriffs Bond till it be refused or
set aside; but he ought to except against it in the Judges Chamber, 1 Keb. 478.

The Court cannot compel a Sheriff to assign Where the Sheriff shall be
compelled to assign his Bail Bond.
his Bond regularly. But in some Cases they will, as the party was arrested by
the Sheriff, and through his default in not Retorning the Writ. The Defendant
died. Now in this case, he shall not take advantage ofhis own wrong; but shall
assign the bail Bond, or pay the utmost Amerciaments, 2 Keb. 388. Hill and
Browning.

It was moved in B. R. to stay Proceedings Proceedings upon Bail Bond shall not
be stayed until Special Bail given, where the Plaintiff had been prejudiced by
delaying of Appearance.
upon bail Bond, upon discharging the Amerciaments and Costs (as is usual.) And
it was alleged on the other side, That after the same Bail given the Principal
had sold his Land, and became irresponsible, and rendered himself to the
Marshalsea. And for this cause the Court refused to stay Proceedings, and said,
it would not be done until he had given Special bail; because they did not
cause him to appear at first, according to their Obligation. And so it is, when
the Principal on such default of Appearance becomes a Bankrupt, Siderfin page
386.

Of other Bonds (beside Bail Bonds) Entered in to the Sheriff, what are good,
and what not: And Pleading.
Vide infra tit. Bonds, between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff, and others.

Bond to be a True Prisoner.

A Bond given to be a True Prisoner (as by Law he ought) is good, and not
within the Statute of 23 H. 6. As to this,

There is a Notable Case of Lenthall and Cook. The Case is,

Lenthall the Marshal brings Debt on Bond against Cook. The Condition was,

If the above-bounden A. P. now Prisoner in The Condition.
the King's Bench in Southwark, do and shall from henceforth be and continue a
true Prisoner, in the Custody, guard, and safe-keeping of the abovenamed John
Lenthall, Marshal of the same Prison; and in the Custody, guard and
safe-keeping of his Deputy Officers and Servants, or some or one of them, until
he shall be lawfully discharged, without committing any manner of Escape or
Escapes during the time of his Restraint, Then this present Obligation to be
void.

The Defendant Pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. Pleadings.
of Obligations made to the Sheriff color Officii. And further pleads, That at
the time, and long before the Plaintiff was Marshal, that P. at the same time
was a Prisoner at the Suit of, etc. And that the Defendant, together with the
said P. pro easiamento and favore to be showed by the Plaintiff to the said P.
made the said Bond, etc. The Plaintiff Replies, and Bond was pro meliori
securitate of the said Plaintiff, that the said P. should not Escape, and
traverseth the Ease and Favor. The Defendant demurrs.

And these things were Resolved by the Court.

1. That the Marshal of the King's Bench is within the words, Jailer and Keeper
of Prisons.

2. Bonds made to Gaolers for Ease and Favor of Prisoners, are void.

3. A Bond given to save harmless from Escapes, Bond to save harmless from
Escapes, is void.
is within this Statute and void; but a Bond to continue a True Prisoner is
good: And there is no agreement that it is for Ease and Favor appears, but the
contrary rather; for the Plaintiff in his Replication has Traversed it, and
the Defendant has confessed the Replication to be true by his Demurrer, 1
Sand. 162. Lenthall and Cook, Latch. 23, 143. Elworthy and Perryer, and Hill
there cited.

This Case of Lenthall and Cook is Reported by Siderfin; and the Case there
truly put as here.

The Intention of the Obligation was for Ease Plea.
and Favor, and Traversing it has taken it away.

Now when the Defendant had such Issue Demurrer.
offered, and refused to join, but demurrs; the Defendant agreed it was for
Ease and Favor, Siderfin 283.

Note, A little Evidence in such case would serve to prove Ease and Favor.

A Bond to the Warden of the Fleet to be a True Prisoner. The Defendant without
pleading the Statute says, it was for Ease and Favor. The Plaintiff demurrs.
The Plaintiff should have Traversed the Ease. And Judgment for the Defendant, 3
Keb. 320, 361. Oaks and Cell.

Condition is, Where D. F. is under his Custody ( i. e. of the Obligee) upon
Arrest, at the Suit of the Plaintiff, in Action of Debt of 1400 l. upon Bond by
him to the Plaintiff, and at the Request of the Defendant he is permitted to go
at Large for six days. If therefore the said D. before the 12th of February
renders himself a Prisoner to the Sheriff of Middlesex at the Plaintiffs Suit
on Action of 1400 l. and remain a True Prisoner till he shall be discharged by
Consent of the Plaintiff. See the Pleading. Quaere de Judgment, Sir Tho. Jones
Rep. 139. Rushant and Wait, Siderfin 132.

But a Bond of one in Execution to be a true A Bond of one in Execution to be a
True Prisoner, is void.
Prisoner is within this Statute, and void. And as to this the Case was:

The Condition of the Bond was, If Thomas Manningham keep the Sheriff without
damage against our Lord the King and one T. P. and at all times be at the
Commandment of the said Sheriff as a True Prisoner, and appear before the
Justices, etc. Then the Obligation to be void.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 23 H. 6. and that the Body of Thomas
Manningham was in Execution upon a Recognizance, and that the Sheriff made the
Obligation for the delivery of the said Thomas Manningham, and demanded
Conclusion of the Plea.
Judgment si Actio, i. e. If the Plaintiff ought to maintain his Action.

This is no good Conclusion of the Plea; he ought to have Concluded, Issint
nient son fait. For the Statute says it shall be void; and if it shall be
void, then it shall be void from the beginning, and then it is not his Deed.
And further, That he had not wisely Concluded his Plea; for this Special
Conclusion had straightened the Defendant so, that if the Obligation be void for
any other Cause, the Defendant shall not have benefit of it. And yet because it
appeared to the Judges on the Matter in Law, that the Plaintiff had no Cause of
Action, the Court gave Judgment against him; for the Obligation is void by the
Letter of the Statute, for it makes void Obligations taken in other manner,
which extends to avoid Obligations for Bailing those which are contained in the
second Branch; as those in Execution, etc, Plowd. 66, 67. Dive and Manningham.

But as for the Conclusion of the Plea, the Condition was, That the Defendant
should appear in B. R. to Answer in a Plea of Trespass, and satisfy the
Damages. The Defendant pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. that the Bond was made
for his Enlargment, and Issint non est factum. The Plaintiff demurrs Specially
upon the Conclusion of the Plea, which ought to be Judgment Si Actio, and
agreed the Plea to be ill, Allen p. 85. Leech and Davies.

The Defendant and L. were jointly bound Judgment confessed on Escape.
to Sir J. Lenthall for the true Imprisonment of W. and there was a Warrant of
Attorney to Confess Judgment on the Escape of W. Glyn moved to set aside the
Judgment, being a way for Ease only, and Judgment entered without Trial of the
Escape. But per Cur', It is to be entered on Action brought, which is brought,
and the parties are at Issue. But Sir J. Lenthall assigned his Security to the
Creditor, which per Cur', is well enough; and there appearing no Fraud, they
refused to set aside the Judgment, 1 Keb. 815. Sir John Lenthall versus Lord
Landois.

The Marshal takes Bond of one in Execution The Rules of the King's Bench.
to be a True Prisoner, who Escapes; Action is brought against him, and well,
for the Bond is good. The Marshalsea was Ruled to be enlarged, and this shall
be called Within the Rules; and if the Marshall take a Bond to tarry there, it
is good, Latch. 143. Sir G. Reynell versus Elworthy, Poph. 165. fine, Sir G.
Reynel's Case.

But a Bond to the Marshal, etc. to save harmless from Escapes, is void, and
within the Statute; because it is not a Bond that he shall continue a True
Prisoner. Vide the Condition, Record and Pleadings, 1 Sand. 160, 161, 162.
Lenthall and Cook, 2 Keb. 422. Id. Casus.

The Marshal ought not to take Bond for Bond for Chamber-Rent void.
Chamber-Rent; this is to come in in Allowance Fees. The Warden, nor other
Jailer, cannot impose what Rents they will on Chambers, 3 Keb. 102. Bond and
Mosedale, 3 Keb. 133, 603. Duckenfield's Case.

A Bond or Covenant for Fees is void; but a Bond for Fees.
Bond for True Imprisonment is not void prima facie, without Circumstances,
etc. 3 Keb. 133. Mosedale and Middleton.

A Bond for Chamber-Rent is void by Common Law; because the party is restrained
contra voluntatem, and shall be Imprisoned till payment. Also the Statute
extends to the Marshal only for such Bonds as they may take virtute Officii,
Latch. 10. Epsom Case.

Upon a Statute acknowledged, and Extent sued, the Sheriff takes Bond of 20 l.
for payment of 10 l. his Fee; and this was before the Liberate. Its a void
Bond, 1. Because he takes the Bond before the Liberate. 2. He took his Wages
before he did his work, 3 Keb. 678. Ellis and Nelson.

Vide infra tit. Fees.

Note, A Promise is within the Statute, as well Promise.
as a Bond. But it is where the Bond or Promise is made by the Prisoner
himself, or some other for him. And therefore in an Action on the Case the
Defendant promised the Plaintiff, That if B. (a Special Bailiff at his
Nomination) arrested A. at his Suit on Cap' ad satisfaciend', and suffered him
to Escape, he would not sue the Plaintiff; this is not within this Statute, 1
Leon. 132. Palmer and Smalbrook.

But Hobart in Norton Sim's Case says, Covenant is not within this Statute;
that is, because it was not a Bond (for performance) made in the behalf of a
Prisoner, as Beaufage's Case is, Hob. p. 13.

As to Assumpsits and Considerations about delivering Prisoners in safe
Custody, saving harmless from Escapes, permitting to go at large. Vid. infra.
Sub tit. Escape in fine.

By the Statute of 13 Car. 2. c. 2. persons arrested Where the Sherist is not
to take 60 or 40 l. Bail.
by Process out of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas, not expressing the Cause
of Action in the Writ, Bill, or Process, and which are bailable by the Statute
of 23 H. 6. c. 10. shall give Bail Bond, not exceeding the Sum of 40 l. and
upon Appearance at the Retorn, he shall discharge such Bail Bonds. And if the
Plaintiff do not Declare before the End of the next Term after Appearance, then
he shall be Nonsuit, and Judgment and Costs shall be against him. But this
Statute extends not to Arrests upon Capias Utlagat', Attachment or Rescous,
Contempt or Privilege; nor to popular Action, or Action on any Penal Law
(except for Tithes) Indictment or Information.

Now if the Sheriff in such Personal Actions, do take a Bond of 150 l. (where
it ought to be but 40 l.) the party shall have an Action upon the Statute
against the Sheriff; but the Bond is not void. This was the Case of a Coroner,
2 Keb. 387, 311. Foster and Closon.

And therefore Villars and Hasting's Case, where it says, The Statute does not
restrain him from any Sum, is good Law; but with this Caution, That Action lies
against him if he exceed 40 l. de placito debiti generally, upon this late
Statute, Cro. Jac. 286.

In what other Cases the Sheriff may Bail, or not.
The Sheriff cannot bail one Committed for Felony, except it be by the Kings
special Writ directed to him for that purpose.

A man Indicted for Trespass, or any the like Offense, before Justices of the
Peace, and thereupon Committed to Prison, may upon the Kings Writ be Bailed by
the Sheriff to appear at Sessions.

Upon a Supersedeas the Sheriff may bail a man Sued, or Indicted, etc.
whereupon a Capias or Exigent shall be awarded against him, and the party
thereupon is Imprisoned.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Retorn of Writs, and when they may be Returned. General Rules and Maxims of
Retorns. What Writs must be Returned, and what need not. What shall be a good
Retorn of Writs, or how Retorns shall be made, in respect of the Person that
makes the Retorn, as Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Franchises, etc. In respect of the
Forms, and where insufficient Retorns are aided. Where Retorns shall be void
for the Uncertainty or Repugnancy. What shall be a sufficient excuse for the
Sheriffs Non-retorn of a Writ, and what not. What Acts, Process or Appearance
shall be good before the Retorn. The Penalty on the Sheriff by the Court for
Non-retorn.

A Retorn is but a Certificate made by the Sheriff or Bailiff to the Court,
from whence the Writ issued, of that which they have done touching the
Execution of the same Writs.

There is a difference between the Test and Retorn of Writs.

A Retorn may be on the Essoyn-day. A Writ Retorn may be on the Essoyn Day.
Appearance.
shall not abate if the Retorn be quarto die post.

If a man be bound to appear the first day in Term in Court, he may appear the
first day of the Essoyn, and then have his Appearance recorded, and this is
good, 2 Bulst. Bedoe and Piper.

Note, Where the Writ or Process is directed to the Bishop, there the Bishop is
to make Retorn thereof: And so where the Writ is directed to other Persons (as
Coroners) they are to make Retorns.

General Rules of Retorns.
Deputies are allowed in Ministerial Offices: But all Retorns made by them are
to be made in the Name of the Principal Officer, 3 Bulst. 78.

The Sheriff must retorn true, and not contrary to the Record; if he do he
falsifies all his Proceedings. L. brought Trespass against J. G. Widow, hanging
the Suit, she takes D. to Husband; Judgment was against J. G. and a Writ was
directed to the Sheriff, qd' caperet J. praedictam per nomen J. G. ad
satisfaciend', etc. the Sheriff cannot now retorn that she was married. Crok.
Jac. 323. Doley and White.

The Retorn must not be contrary to the former Retorn. If the Sheriff retorn
upon the Venire Retorn of Jurors.
fac' 12 Jurors, upon the Distringas he may not retorn one had nothing, for
this is against his former retorn, 19 H. 6. 38. For if he had at first and
alien since, yet it is chargeable with Issues. But if the Land be recovered by
Eign Title, in the mean time he may retorn it with this Conclusion Et issint
nihil habet. Id. ibidem. So if he had Land in the right of his Wife, and she is
dead in the mean time.

The Sheriff is to put his Name to every Retorn made by him, or the Retorn is
to be void. By the Statute of York 12 Ed. 2. c. 5. 1 Bulst. 73. The Statute
appoints that he who Retorns shall add his Name to the Retorn, and it is
sufficient if it be his Christian Name and Surname, and the name of his Office
is not requisite, Crok. Car. 189. Bethell and Parry. Plowd. 63. though in Scrogs
Case, More 548. says the Name of Office must be subscribed, as well as by the
Sheriffs Christian and Surname, but by Coroners only the name of Office.

If the Sheriff arrest one upon Mean Process, and does not Retorn the Writ, he
is a Trespassor; and therefore Styles Pract. Reg. 276. is not Law, where he
says it is not requisite that the Sheriff in making a Retorn should insert his
Title or name of Dignity, or Christian or Surname, but only his Name of Office.
Before the Statute of York, 12 Ed. 2. c. 5. Rast. Ret. of Sheriffs fol. 345. no
Name was used to be put to the Retorn of the Writ by the Sheriff, nor any other
Minister or Officer which was inconvenient, upon which complaint was made to
this Parliament, and so remedied.

The Retorn of the Venire fac' was executio istius Brevis patet quodam panello
huic Brevi annex' Tho. H. nuper Vicecom', and then the now Sheriff added these
words, istud Breve sic indorsat' fuit mihi J. R. Vic' deliberat' per Tho. H.
Mil' nuper Vic' in executione Officij sui; it is sufficient, for T. H. ought to
put his Name to the Retorn: For nuper Vic' shows he was not then Sheriff, he
ought to have put his Name to it T. H. and then the new Sheriff ought to
subscribe istud Breve sic indorsat', etc. Plowd. 63. 5 Rep. 41. 2 Roll. Rep.
209. Bethers and Parry. Vide infra Cro. Car. 289. contra.

Retorns must be made according to the Ancient Course, and according to
Presidents. As Waste was assigned in S. the Retorn must not be qd' accessit ad
S. but ad locum vastatum; vide infra, 27 H. 8. Roll. 2. Dalt. 162, 163.

So a Retorn of non inveni partem for non est inventus, it is Error and not
amendable, 9 H. 6. fo. 12.

Mercer was outlawed at the suit of H. it was moved to avoid the Outlawry,
because the Sheriff returned the Exigent on the back of the Writ thus, ( viz.)
superdictus Mercer, where it ought to be infra nominatus Mercer; for nothing
was written above but within. But by all the Justices the Retorn was good. So
if he had writ the Retorn on the inner side of the Writ. Dalt. 164.

Surplusage is no hurt to the retorn of a Writ, as in Elegit, and the Sheriff
retorns that to be executed, the extent of the Church of St. Andrews, alias
dict' St. Edes, and the true name is Andrews, yet good. Winch. p. 27. In Scire
fac' retornable in B. If the Sheriff retorn Scire fac' etc. qd' sit coram vobis
ad faciend', qd' Breve requirit: Although vobis had relation to the King, where
the garnishment ought to be coram Justiciariis, yet good; for those words ad
faciend' qd' Breve requirit, comprehend all. 29 Ed. 3. 33. adjudged every
Retorn must exactly answer the Writ.

Statutes aid Misretorns and insufficient Retorns, but not where there is not
any Retorn. Cro. Car. 587. Becknam.

None can make the Retorn of a Writ, but such a person, who at the time of the
Retorn, remains an Officer to the Court. Vide infra.

Retorn of a Writ is not Traversable, vide infra: Or against the Retorn of the
Sheriff, there is not any Traverse, Averment or Answer.

Per Maynard in Searl and Longs Case. Mod. Feigned Retorns mischievous.
Rep. 248. It Is a great abuse in Officers to retorn such feigned name, the
first cause of which was the ignorance of the Sheriffs, who being to make
Retorns, and looking into the President Books for the Form, and finding John
Do and Richard Roe put for Examples, made their Retorns accordingly, and took
no care for true Summoners and true Manucaptors. And he cited a Cause.

Judgment was entered in B. in a Plea of Quare Impedit, upon nonappearance to
the Grand Distress; but there the Party was summoned and true Summoners
returned. Upon Nonappearance an Attachment issued, and real Summoners returned
upon that; but upon the Distress it was returned that the Defendants districti
fuere per Bona and Catalla, and Manucapt' per J. Do and R. Roe; and for that
cause the Judgment was vacated.

Note. When the Grand Distress is awarded, it Grand Distress.
is, that the Sheriff is commanded to seize the thing in question.

If the Defendant be taken, then at the retorn Rule to the Sheriff to retorn
his Writ.
of the Writ, the Plaintiffs Attorney at the day of the Retorn of the Writ, may
give a Rule at the Clerk of the Rules, for the Sheriff to retorn his Writ; or
if he go out of Office, then a Distringas to the new Sheriff to distrain the
old Sheriff to retorn his Writ: But if the Defendant be arrested by a Bailiff
of a Liberty, who has the Execution and Retorn of Writs, then he must retorn
his Warrant back to the Sheriff by Rule of Court, or Distringas directed to the
Sheriff to distrain the Bailiff, and so amerce the Bailiff that way.

Of Retorns in respect of the Old Sheriffs and New Sheriffs.
Upon the Cap' the Sheriff retorns languidus Languidus in Prisona.
in Prisona, and a Distress issues to the new Sheriff to make the former^
Sheriff to have his Prisoner; and the new Sheriff retorns issues on the former
Sheriff, and an alias Distringas issues What must come in way of Retorn, and
not by way of surmize.
against the Sheriff. And After one of the Council would have surmised, that
the Sheriff against whom the Distress issued was dead.

But by the Court, He shall not have this by way of Surmise, but it ought to
come in by the Retorn of the Sheriff. Dier 25. a.

The Retorn of the old Sheriff shall not conclude the new Sheriff. On a Fi' fa'
the Sheriff returned qd' cepit bona ad valentiam 10 l. and non invenit
Emptores, whereupon there went out to the new Sheriff a vendition' exponas, who
returned that his Predecessor non cepit bona, and ideo, etc. and held good. 34.
H. 6.

Where and what Writs need to be returned, and where, and what not.
Generally all Writs of Execution (except Elegit) Ca. sa. Habere fac. Seisin.
Possessionem, Fieri fac.
as Cap' ad satisfaciend', Habere fac' seisinam, Habere fac' possessionem,
Fieri fac', Liberate, etc. which are the final Process, and after which no
Judgment is given, nor no further Process; and when matters en fait are only to
be done, as Land to be delivered, Seisin had, Goods sold, etc. are good, though
the Writs be not Returned or Eiled (if the Execution be duly made.)

But in case of an Elegit otherwise, because the Elegit must be Returned, and
why.
Extent is to be made by Inquisition, to the intent that the Court may judge of
the sufficiency of it, and every Inquisition ought to be of Record.

Capias in Process must be Returned, 4 Rep. 67. Cap' in Process must be
Returned.
Fullwoods Case; in other cases the Party is at the end of his Suit; otherwise
of a Cap' in Process, for the end of the Arrest is, that the Defendant shall
appear. 5 Rep. Hoes Case.

In a Scire fac' for Execution, it is a good Bar that the Sheriff levied the
Damages by Fi' fac' though he had not returned the Writ. More 468. Hoes Case.

The Writ of Retorn' Habend' is not retornable, Retorn^ haben do.
2 Roll. Abr. 434.

The Sheriff was ordered to retorn an Hab' Habere fac' seisinam.
fac' seisinam, the Execution is good if he do not retorn it. But perhaps a
Writ of Error in Parliament may be brought; and if he will not retorn it, the
Court shall amerce him. 1 Rol' Rep. Godsall and Sir C. Heydon.

The Writs of Redisseisin and Postdisseisin are Redisseisin, Postdisseisin,
Admeasur' de pastur', Dower.
Vicountiels, and not Retornable; and the Sheriff shall hold the Plea, and give
Judgment, 2 Inst. 82.

So the Writs of Admeasurement of Pasture, and of Dower, and the parties may
thereupon plead before the Sheriff in the County. But these Pleas may be
removed out of the County Court by Pone, 2 Inst. 369.

Where the Sheriff Retorns Cepi corpus and paratum Duces tec^^^.
habeo, and brings him not in, then the Writ of Duces tecum shall be awarded,
to have the Body in Court sub poena, 1 Bulstr. 82. Gerton's Case.

Scire fac' issues out of Chancery to the Sheriff Security of the Peace. The
Sheriff not to Retorn separatim.
of H. and the Justices of Peace, to call L. before them to take Security of
the Peace. L. enters into a Recognizance, and the Sheriff Retorns; this Matter
is not good, the Justices should have Returned too. For the Viscount does not
meddle with them as Sheriff, but by virtue of this Commission only, 21 H. 7.
20, and 21. 2 Rolls Rep. 257. Leonard's Case.

What shall be a good Retorn, or not; or how Retorns of Writs are to be made.
In respect of the persons that make, or ought to make the Retorn. As,
Sheriffs. Bailiffs of Franchises. Sheriffs.


If a Writ be directed to a place where there Where there are two Sheriffs and
one Retorns the Writ.
are two Sheriffs, as London, Bristol, etc. and one of them does Retorn the
Writ, its insufficient; for it must be Returned in both their Names, though one
(according to Custom) may execute it, 21 Assize 20. Br. Officer 22.

But if a Warrant be directed to two Bailiffs Two Bailiffs of a Franchise.
of a Franchise to execute a Writ, the Retorn of one of the Bailiffs in the
Name of both is sufficient, Tr. 39 El. Palmer and March.

If a Writ directed to the Sheriff be executed, How the new Sheriff ought to
Reto^n the Writ executed in the time of the old Sheriff.
and after a new Sheriff is chosen, the new Sheriff ought to Retorn the Writ in
this manner, (scil.) Recepi hoc breve praedecessori meo directum sic Indorsatum.

So if upon a Warrant directed to the Bailiff So of a Bailiff of a Franchise.
of a Franchise to Execute a Writ, it be served; and after and before the
Retorn of it the Bailiff is removed, and a new Bailiff chosen, the Retorn to
the Sheriff shall not be in the Name of the old Bailiff, but of the new Bailiff
in the manner aforesaid; for the old Bailiff is now as a mere Stranger.

But if a Writ directed to the Sheriff is not How, if it be not executed in the
old Sheriff.
Executed by him before he is removed, and another chosen, and after the Writ
is Executed; this shall be Returned generally in the Name of the new Sheriff,
without any mention of his Predecessor.

The same Law is of the Bailiff of a Franchise, Trin. 39 Eliz. Palmer and
Marsh. If a Writ be Executed by one Sheriff, and before the Retorn of it a new
Sheriff is chosen, he ought to Retorn the Writ, and not the old Sheriff,
because the new Sheriff is now the Officer of the Court.

Maxim, None can make the Retorn of a Writ, but such a person, who at the time
of the Retorn remains an Officer to the Court.

A Venire was Returned in this manner: Per T. R. Vicecomitem. Istud breve cum
pannello annexo mihi deliberat' fuit per Thomam Hanmer Militem, nuper
Vicecomitem in exitu ab Officio suo. Et sic Indorsatur. Thomas Hanmer Miles,
nuper Vicecomes. It was assigned for Error, in that it appears it was Returned
by one who had no Authority; for in saying Nuper Vicecomes excludes him, and
that he was not Sheriff when he made the Retorn.

Per Cur', Its good; for it appears by the Record, that he was Sheriff next
before Thomas R. and this word Nuper Vicecomes indeed does necessarily imply,
that he was not then Sheriff at the time of the delivery of the Writ to the new
Sheriff, then it must be construed, that by the word nuper Vicecomes he was
Sheriff at the time of the Panel made; and if he had Returned it without the
word Nuper Vicecomes, it had been good, Cro. Car. 189. Bethyll and Parry.

The Record is, that the Venire fac' to try the Issue was Returned by J. S.
Sheriff of the County of D. It was assigned for Error, that J. S. was not then
Sheriff of the said County. And it was certified by a Record under the Seal of
the Exchequer, (viz.) That he was Sheriff; upon which the Judgment was
affirmed. But some are of Opinion, that this cannot be assigned for Error
against the Record of the Court, Mich. 11 Car. B. R. Smith and Smith.

If the Writ be Returned by one that was not Appearance cures the Retorn of one
that was not Sheriff.
Sheriff, its a manifest Error; but if the Defendant appear afterward and
plead, its not material; for his Appearance has made it good, Cro. El. p. 582.
Thoroughgood and Scroggs.

If the Sheriff shall Retorn Mandavi ballivo Retorn to Mandavi ballivo, etc.
how.
Libertatis, and shall not therein set down the proper Name of the Bailiff, its
not good.

The Sheriff cannot serve a Writ in part, and write to the Bailiff of a Liberty
to execute the other part; as a Writ served as to part of the Jurors. But if
the Sheriff upon a Capias in Debt against Three, Retorn that he had taken Two,
and as to the other Mandavit Ballivo Libertatis, etc. good.

The common Form of Vic' Ret' is, Feci quoddam Warrant'; but to the Bailiff of
a Liberty, Mandavi, etc. 2 Roll. Rep. 263.

Praecipe quod reddat was awarded Vicecomitibus Sheriff cannot Retorn* He
summoned himself.
Glouc', versus A. B. and C. The Sheriffs Retorn, that the said C. was one of
the Sheriffs of the said City. Ideo ego praefat' C. etc. alter Vicecom'
Civitat' praedict' meipsum secundum Exigentium brevis istius summonere non
possum. Respons. It was Adjudged a good Re^orn, Bendl. n. 160.

The Retorn was in this Form, upon a Writ of Entry against Edw. Mytchell,
Thomas Wykes and others.

Summ' infranominat' Edward' Mychell, R. Fenn and J. Denn, and quoad summ'
praedict' Tho. Wykes* Justiciar' infrascript' Certifico qd' idem Thomas, and
ego Tho. Wykes jam unus Vicecomit' Civitatis praedict', sum' unus and idem, and
non alius neque diversi. Ideo ego praefat' Thomas and Hugo Hyde alter Vic'
Civit' praedict' meipsum secundum Exigentiam brevis istius summ' non possumus.
Respons. praedict' Thomae Wykes and Hugonis Hyde Vic'. Anderson 110. n. 21.

Bailiffs of Franchises, vid. supra.

Retorn' de Vic' per Bailiff.
If a Writ to enquire of Damages be directed The Sheriff cannot Retorn a Writ
of Inqu^ry, and^ ^i^ected to himself to be executed by a Bailiff of a Liberty.
to the Sheriff, he ought not to make such a Retorn, That he had Commanded such
a Bailiff of such a Liberty, etc. Cui executio praedict' brevis t^talit' restat
fienda, and quod alibi infra Com' praedict' per se fieri non potuit, qui quidem
Ballivus sic sibi respondet; and so sets down an Inquisition before the
Bailiff, and 40 l. damage. This Retorn is erroneous, untrue and against Law;
because the Warrant was directed to the Sheriff himself to be Executed in any
part of his Shire, and no Venue contained in this Inquest of Office, as there
is in other Writs which Intitles the Bailiffs of Liberties. But because there
were diverse Presidents of this Form, the Court would not Reverse it, Hob. p.
83. Virely and Gunstone.

If the Sheriff Retorn, That the Bailiff of a Franchise (who had Retorn of
Writs) had Returned, etc. this is good, although he does not show of what place
he is Bailiff, 29 Ed. 3. c. 1.

W. had a Cap' ad satisfac' to the Sheriff of New Process, because the Retorn
was mistaken.
Middlesex, and makes Precept to the Bailiff of the Duchy, and the Precept was
Ad capiend' H. ad respond' W. where it should be ad satisfaciend', and the
Bailiff retorn the Precept served, and the Sheriff retorns to the Court Cepi
corpus secundum Exigentiam brevis; it was moved to have a new Cap. ad satisfac'
against H. For though the Sheriff by his Retorn had Charged himself to the
Plaintiff, so that he may demand Execution against him; yet where in truth the
Defendant was never taken in Execution for the Debt, as here, but only taken ad
respondend', there the Plaintiff is at liberty to take new Process against the
Defendant, which the Court granted, Yelv. 52. Wood and Harborn.

Presidents,

Mandavi ballivo qui nullum dedit responsum, 2 Sand* 99. Jaques and Caesar.

Mandavi ballivo upon Fieri facias, and upon Non omittas awarded. Vic' ret'
nulla bona, 1 Sand. 305. Merchant and Driver.

The Form. What Retorns shall be good in respect of the Form, or not; and where
Insufficient Retorns are aided.
As to the Sheriffs setting his Name to the Retorn, vide supra.

Sometimes the Retorn is Insufficient for omission Omission.
of Words: As where the Retorn was, Residuum hujus brevis apparet in quadam
Schedula, for Residuum executionis hujus brevis, Fitzh. Ret. 14.

And the Sheriff is bound to take knowledge of the Law in making his Retorn;
therefore in a Scire facias to L. B. Master of the Grammar School of S. etc,
and to the Scholars of the same, he returned that Scire fecit to the Master,
and does not say, To L. B. Master, Bro. Ret. 88.

In a Scire fac. the Sheriff returned Scire feci A. B. modo and forma prout
istud breve exigit and requirit, and said not infra nominat' A. B. yet per Cur'
its good, for these words prout hoc breve exigit are tantamount, 2 H. 4. 13. 3.
H. 4. 9.

The Sheriff returned Non inveni, for Non est Retorn Non inveni is Error.
inventus, and the party thereupon was Outlawed. This was assigned for Error,
and not amendable, Fitzh. 19.

A Retorn by the Sheriff in the Third person, A Retorn in the 3d person not
good.
is not a good Retorn. The Sheriff returned, Quod praecepit ballivo de S. for
Praecepi ballivo, and he was amerced for it, 21 Ass. 17.

The Sheriff upon a Capias returned, That he Rescous returned.
arrested the Defendant at S. and would have carried him to the Gaol, and A. B.
rescued him. This Retorn was Insufficient, because he did not show at what
place A. B. made the Rescue; for it shall not be intended the place where the
Arrest was, Bro. Ret. 97.

Vide plus tit. Rescous.

The Test of a Writ was 2 Martii 11 Eliz. Prox* futur', how to refer.
The Retorn was, In quarta Septimana Quadrigesimae prox' futur'. The words
prox' futur' refer to quarta Septimana, not to Quadrigesimae, Mo^ 365. Barton
and Lever.

In Trespass the Sheriff returned in the Common That the Defendant was attached
per, etc. how to be returned.
Bench, that the Defendant was attached per catalla ad valentiam de 10 l. Its a
void Retorn, for he ought to retorn he was attached by one Beast or Chattel
certain, and name them, that so they may be forfeited, Cro. El. 13. Lawrence
and Nethersole, 1 Anders. 51. vid. tit. Attachment.

In Outlawry of Murder the Sheriff retorns, Retorn in Outlawry.
Ad Comit' meum tent' apud D. en le County de Northumberland, and says not in
Comitat' meo Northumbriae tent', etc. Its Error, for one may be Sheriff of
Cambridge and Huntingdon, and of Surrey and Sussex, 2 Rolls Rep. 52. Alder's
Case.

Action of the Case upon Escape of one taken Time ( viz.)
by Ca. sa. ret' Paschae 16 Car. 2. on a Judgment entered in Mich. 16 Car. 2.
which is repugnant and impossible; and this moved in Arrest of Judgment on the
retorn of a Writ of Enquiry. But the Test appearing to be Jan. 16 Car. 2. ret'
Crast' Ascent', and that Virtute brevis postea and ante retorn', (viz.) such a
day of May 16. which should be 17. Per Cur', This is a void Retorn, ( Viz.)
being expositive only, 2 Keb. 101. Hanmer and Unit.

Where a Retorn shall be void for the Incertainty or Repugnancy, or not.
In a Replevin on the Causam nobis significes, In Replevin.
if the Sheriff retorn, That the Beasts cannot be delivered, quia visum inde
habere non potuit. This is not good, because he does not say accessit ad locum;
for perhaps he could not have the View, because he did not go where the Beasts
were, 2 Ed. 3. 54. b.

Outlawry was reversed, because the Exigent had Uncertain retorn of the
Exigent. Prout sibi constare poterit, is ill in retorn.
an uncertain Retorn, 2 Rep. Dr. Drury's Case, 141.

If a Capias comes to the Sheriff to take a man, its no Retorn that he was
found within his Bailiwick after the delivery of the Writ prout sibi constare
poterit. This is not good, but he ought to retorn expressly Quod non est
inventus, 9 H. 6. 57.

So in a Fieri fac' de bonis Testatoris against Executors, if the Sheriff
retorn that they have not any Goods in balliva sua, after the delivery of the
Writ prout ei constare poterit. This Retorn is not good; for he ought to take
notice whether they had Goods or not, and so retorn it, 9 H. 57. b.

But in Debt against an Executor, who pleads Retorn on Assets.
plene Administravit, and Assets are found upon a Fieri fac', the Sheriff
retorns, that he had nothing within the same County; its a good Retorn,
Bendloes n. 91.

Upon Habere fac' seisinam the Sheriff retorns, Uncertain.
that the party who ought to take the Seisin non prosecutus est breve. This is
not good; for the uncertain Intendment of it, and the coming of the Sheriff to
have seisin is not properly a prosecution of the Writ, Pasch. 15 Jac. Floyd and
Bethill.

On Entry sur disseisin of two Acres, Hab' fac' Repugnant
seisinam was awarded. The Sheriff as to one Acre retorns Habere feci, as to
the other Tarde; the Sheriff shall be amerced for such a Retorn, as being
contrary and repugnant in it self. As in Ca. sa. against two, the Sheriff
retorns as to one Cepi, and to the other Tarde, he shall be amerced, 2 Leon.
175.

Vide Rescous.

What shall be a good Retorn against the Admittance of the party, or not.
Debt against the Heir: If the Defendant In Debt. against the Heir.
pleads, Nothing descends to him but an House in B. upon which Judgment is
given for the Plaintiff; sed quia ignoratur of what value the House was, a Writ
issues to the Sheriff to enquire of the Value, and according to that to make
Execution; and the Sheriff retorns, That the Heir sold the House before the
Writ came to him. This is not a good Retorn, Hen. 7 Jac. B. R. Goldson and
Bennet.

If in Action of Debt against Executors the Defendant In Debt against an
Executor.
acknowledges the Action, on which a Fieri fac' issues, the Sheriff may retorn
Nulla bona, etc. for this stands with the Judgment, inasmuch as he confessed the
Action; but not, that he had Goods, 2 Roll. Abr. 459. Newman and Babington.

Upon Habere fac' seisinam, upon a Judgment against J. S. it is no good Retorn
for the Sheriff to retorn, That J. S. had nothing in the Land, nor was Tenant,
17 Ed. 3. 66. b.

The Sheriff on Levari Retorns, That he had Sheriff pleads.
Levied the said sum (which was 2000 l.) and in Debt he pleads as to 308 l. Nil
debet, and as to the rest a Release from the Plaintiff; the Plaintiff demurrs.
Now the Plea of Nil debet is ill, and the Sheriff is Estopt to plead it; for it
is contrary to the Retorn. But per Cur', since they have not relied upon the
Estoppel, but taken Issue, that could give them no advantage, Hob. 206. Speak
and Richards.

What shall excuse the Sheriff for his not Retorning, and what shall not.
As for the Sheriffs retorning a Rescous, Vide sub tit. Rescous.

The Sheriff returned a Resistance on Habere Resistance.
fac' seisinam, and he was amerced 20 Marks; because he did not take the Posse
Comitatus, and an Alias awarded, Hill. 19 Ed. 2. Execution 147.

On Habere fac' seisinam, its a good Retorn to That none came to take Seisin.
excuse the Sheriff, that he at all times was ready to deliver Seisin, and
appointed diverse times in certain for the party to come to the Land to receive
Seisin; but none comes for the party to receive it, 2 Roll. Abr. 459. Floyd and
Bethell.

So he ought to excuse himself from the time before the day aforesaid,
otherwise the Retorn is not good; for peradventure he was requested before, and
would not perform it, mesme Case.

It is no good Retorn for the Sheriff to say, That he is not paid his Fees.
That the party will not pay his Fees, and therefore that he would not execute
the Writ, 34. H. 6. Bro. Ret. 10. The very words of the Writ do enjoin the
Sheriff to make retorn of it; and if he be not paid his Fees where he is
allowed to take them, he may recover them by Action.

If a Writ out of the King's Bench be directed Though Inferior Court be not bound
to allow a Writ, yet they must make a Retorn.
to an Inferior Court, which the Inferior Court is not bound to allow, but may
proceed notwithstanding the Writ directed to them; yet they ought to make a
Retorn upon the Writ, and in the Retorn to show the Cause: For the Writs from
above ought to be obeyed, Styles Pract. Reg. tit. Retorn.

Sheriff returned a Protection on Arrest. It Sheriff cannot retorn a Protection
on arrest.
was set aside per Cur', in regard the Sheriff can retorn nothing but Non est
inventus, or Cepi-corpus, at his own peril; and its in his discretion to allow
or disallow any Protection, and the Sheriff was ordered to retorn his Writ on a
Pain, 2 Keb. 681. The Sheriff of Yorkshire' s Case.

If a man be taken in Execution at the Suit If Supersedeas comes. he must
retorn the Supersedeas with the Body. If the party discharge him, its a a good
Excuse.
the King; afterward a Supersedeas comes to the Sheriff, by 2 H. 7. fo. 17. he
may retorn the Supersedeas with the Body.

So the Sheriff is to retorn the Capias and the Body at the Day; but if the
party discharge him, this is a good excuse, 3 Bulstr. 96, 97.

In Replevin, if the Sheriff retorneth, That the Defendant claims Property,
its a good Excuse, Dalt. 181.

The Sheriffs of London may retorn their Custom, Dalt. c. 73.

Mandavi ballivo Libertatis, qui nullum dedit responsum, is a good Retorn to
excuse.

Tarde is an Excuse.

So that the Plaintiff non invenit plegios de prosequendo.

Amendment. Where Amendment shall be of Sheriffs Retorns, and where not.
On Venire fac' no Retorn was indorsed, nor any Name of the Sheriff on the back
of the Writ, nec quod executio brevis patet in quodam pannello, etc.

The 18th of Eliz. aids Insufficient Retorns, not where there is no Retorns;
and it could not be amended after Verdict, and a new Venire fac' issued, 5 Rep.
41. Rowland's Case.

8 H. 6. c. 12. extends to Retorns; but yet Misprision of Clerks are only to be
amended. But it extends not to a Retorn by the Sheriff where it should be to a
Coroner; nor does 18 Eliz.

Nor to a Retorn of a Venire fac' without the Name of the Sheriff; vid. plus
Co. 8 Rep. 162. Blackmore's Case.

The Venire fac', and other Process, is directed Vicecomitibus de Canterbury,
and the Retorn is made by one Sheriff only. The Court amended this at Common
Law, and not upon the Statute of Jeofails, as was Sherington and Talbot's Case,
1 Cro.... and 39 H. 6. 40. And they swore the Jury here, that there was but one
Sheriff in Canterbury, Siderfin p. 243. the King and Pereival.

Album breve returned is not amendable, Mo. Rep. 1196.

Where the Retorn of the Sheriff shall be amended, as well after Verdict as
before, vid. 10 Rep. Denbaud's Case.

Vide hic sparsim pluis de Amendments.

Having now Treated largely of the Insufficiency and Validity of Retorns in
General, I shall consider how the Law is in Cases where Sheriffs retorn no
Writs; or what Act, Process or Appearance shall be good before the Retorn, and
the penalty on the Sheriff for not Retorning.

As to not retorning of Execution, vide infra.

Where a man is to lose an Inheritance if he do not appear, he shall appear
without the Retorn of the Sheriff gratis, by Day in the Roll, 10 H. 7. 11.

Where a man is to have a ^orporal pain if he does not Appear, he may appear
without the Retorn of the Sheriff gratis, Id. ibid.

In Trespass; if after the Exigent is issued, the Defendant renders himself and
had a Supersedeas, he may appear by the Roll, although the Sheriff does not
retorn the Exigent at the Day, 38 Ed. 3. 20. b.

In a Writ of Debt, if no Original be returned, nor any Retorn made, yet the
Defendant may appear by the Roll, 29 Ed. 3. 18.

In a Writ of Debt, if the Sheriff retorn the Original Nihil, etc. yet the
Defendant may appear for fear of a Capias, 10 Jac. B. R. Slaney and Vautrey.

The penalty for not Retorning.
Nota pro Regula by Hales: (1) The Court will
discharge Prisoners on Common Bail in two Terms. (2) They will inflict
Penalties on Sheriffs, for not making Deputies; and will (whether in Office or
not) imprison them, for not retorning of Writs by the Day, and not leave them
to Amerciaments, or Distringas nuper Vicecomit', 2 Keb. 812.

In 1 Bulstr. 201, 202. an Habeas Corpus was directed to the Warden of the
Fleet, to bring in the Body of a Prisoner in his Custody; who refusing to make
his Retorn, another Day was give^ him upon pain to return the Body.

If the Sheriff takes J. S. upon a Latitat or Capias, and does not retorn the
Writ, an Action lies against him.

CHAP. IX.
Remedy against the Sheriff for a False Retorn: Where and in what Cases, and
what Action lies against him for a False Retorn. Where such Actions are to be
brought, how to be laid, and the manner of declaring therein. Of the reason of
the Retorn of Cepi Corpus upon Bail taken. Where Action lies against the
Sheriff or Bailiff of a Franchise, and which of them upon a False Retorn.
Remedy against the Sheriff for not Retorning the Writ; or against his Bailiff,
or against the Bailiff of a Franchise. Of laying the Action; and of the
Declaration thereon. Where, and in what Cases a man may traverse the Sheriffs
Retorn or not.

FOr Remedy against Sheriffs, Bailiffs and Gaolers, and where the Action is to
be laid as to Mis-feazance, Non-fezance, Faux-retorns and Non-retorns, vide
Stat. VV. 2. c. 39.

For Mis-feazance,

1. For a Faux Retorn; where and in what Cases Action lies, and where not; and
where and how such Actions are to be brought, and the manner of Declaring
therein.

In Partition, or other Real Action, if the Sheriff Summoned.
Retorn the Tenant summoned, when in truth he was not, Action of Deceit lies
against him, 26 Ass. 48. 1 Brownl. 157.

So in a Real Action, if the Demandant deliver a Writ of Summons to the
Sheriff, and the Sheriff summon the Tenant accordingly, and after does not
retorn the Writ, Action on the Case lies against him, H. 32 El. B. R. Marsh and
Astery.

So if the Sheriff retorn one Summoned or Proclaimed, which is not, Action on
the Case lies; but this is not assignable for Error, Mo. 349. Corbet and Marsh.

Action on the Case lies against the Sheriff Delivery on Inquisit ion.
for retorning, That he had delivered to the Plaintiff, upon Inquisition taken
where he refused to deliver it, and so the Retorn is false; though it was
objected, that perhaps the possession is kept against him manu forti. But per
Cur', that is but mitigation of Damages; but his Retorn was false, and
therefore the Action lies, 1 Roll. Abr. 738. Lister and Bromley.

If the Sheriff retorn Exigent 3 aut 4 exact', Exigent.
and that there were not more Counties, where in truth there was a fifth
County; the Plaintiff shall have Action on the Case against him, 9 H. 6. 60. b.

Sheriff arrests the party, and yet retorns Non est inventus; Action on the
Case, or Trespass Non est inventus.
or False Imprisonment lies against him; for he is a Trespasser ab initio, Cro.
El. 729. Hawkin's Case. 18 Ed. 4. 18.

Action on the Case was against the Sheriff, Cepi corpus on Stat. 23 H. 6.
for that he arrested J. S. and set him at large absque aliqua securitate
inventa for his Appearance, and at the Day returned Cepi corpus, and that the
said J. S. did not appear at the Day, but hid himself; and that upon an Habeas
corpus awarded he returned Paratum habeo, which was Faux, whereby the Plaintiff
was delayed in his Suit, etc. The Defendant pleaded, That J. S. being arrested
put him in Sureties for his Appearance, J. N. and J. D. who are persons of
sufficient Estate within the County, and were bound to him in 40 l. for the
Appearance of J. S. at the Day in the Writ mentioned, and pleaded the Statute
of 13 H. 6. c. 10. by reason whereof he let him at large, and traverseth Absque
hoc that he let him at Large, absque aliqua securitate inventa prout, etc. Cro.
El. 624. Barton and Aldworth.

The Court held the Plea and Traverse to be good; for he is by the Statute
compellable to take Bail, and its left to his discretion what Bail to take: And
although he had not the Body at the Day, and afterward at the day of the Habeas
corpus returned, quod paratum habco, when he was at Large, that is a contempt
to the Co^^t and Fineable; but its nothing as to the party, nor can he take
advantage of it.

So that the Law which has been disputed, is Sheriff not charged in Action on
the Case for retorning Cepi corpus, when he had bailed the party. 23 H. 6. 10.
A General Law in some Cases.
settled, That where the Sheriff takes Bail according to the Statute of 23 H. 6.
and retorns Cepi corpus; though the party do not appear at the Day, yet the
Sheriff shall not be charged in an Action on the Case for a False Retorn,
Siderfin p. 22, 23. Allen and Robinson, Mo. n. 590. Langton and Gardner.

For the Statute of 23 H. 6. is a General Statute, of which the Judges shall
take notice; but if it does not appear to be a Retorn within the Statute, but
at Common Law, there for his Nonappearance Action lies. And there is a Case in
Siderfin on this Point which is worth observation, as to laying the Action and
Pleading:

Action on the Case was brought for a False Retorn, i. e. Cepi corpus, and yet
he had him not at the Day, but suffered him to escape. The Defendant demurs to
the Declaration. Now the Action is good, because the Declaration shall be taken
to be true upon this Demurrer. And the Statute of 23 H. 6. is in part a private
Statute, and the Court will not take notice of it without pleading it. But had
the Defendant pleaded it Specially, or had he pleaded Not Guilty, he might have
had advantage of this Statute, and have ousted the Plaintiff of his Action.
After the said Statute the Sheriff cannot make a Special Retorn, but Cepi
corpus, or Non est inventus. So that the Case of Allen and Robinson as to that
Point, is good Law. For such Action lies not properly against the Sheriff,
because the Statute of 23 H. 6. compels him to Bail the Prisoner; and yet the
Sheriff shall retorn a Cepi corpus, as formerly, Siderfin p. 439. Parker and
Welby.

Now its said in Benson and Welby's Case, that 23 H. 6. c. 10. is a private
Statute, and ought to have been pleaded, 2 Sand. 154. Benson and Welby.

Now that Statute, as Whelpdale's Case is, is a private Law as to Sheriffs
Bonds; but as to Extortious Fees, its a public Law, 2 Keb. 626, 657, Mod. rep.
33. mesme Case.

If a Sheriff levy Money on a Levari facias, Debt verse. Vic', if he levy the
Money on Levari.
upon a Recognizance, at the Suit of J. S. and retorns the Writ served, J. S.
may have Debt against the Sheriff, or against the Sheriffs Executors. But in
this Case the Plaintiff demurred to the Defendant's Plea, and Concluded ill.
The Plea was grounded on a Release, and he should have demanded Judgment, if
the Defendant should be admitted to plead a Release made after the Sheriff had
made his Retorn, 1 Rolls Abr. 518. Speak and Rich^^ds, 1 Brownl. 57. mesme
Case. Hob. p. 206. mesme Case.

Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff, who Action lies for accepting the
Retorn of one that is not Bailiff. Against Bailiff of a Franchise.
accepts of a Retorn of one that is not Bailiff, and against him that made the
Retorn, Mo. 431. Palmer and Smalbate.

Action on the Case lies against the Bailiff of a Franchise for negligent
Execution, or a False Retorn, Mo. p. 431.

Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff, for For making other Retorn, than
is returned by Bailiff of a Liberty. Where the Action lies against the Sheriff
or Bailiff of a Franchise on a False Retorn.
making other Retorn than is returned to him by a Liberty or Bailiff of a
Franchise, who had Retorna brevium, 1 Roll. rep. 119.

Upon a Fieri fac' against an Administrator, the Sheriff makes a Warrant to the
Bailiff of a Franchise to execute it, and after the Bailiff is removed, and
another Bailiff elected; and after the old Bailiff retorns in his own Name to
the Sheriff, That the Administrator had not any Goods praeterquam, etc. which
is false, and after the Sheriff makes retorn accordingly to the Court; yet no
Action on the Case for this False Retorn lies against the Bailiff. For the
Retorn ought to have been made of the new Bailiff, and so the Sheriff had
accepted a Retorn from one as it were a mere stranger, and so void. And he
ought to take Cognizance of the right Ministers of Law; and therefore the old
Bailiff for this False retorn is not punishable by the Law, but the Sheriff, 1
Roll. Abridgm. 99. Palmer and Marsh.

If the Sheriff retorn Mandavi ballivo Libertatis, etc. qui mihi responsum
dedit, etc. if the Matter of the Retorn be false, no Action lies against the
Sheriff, but only against the Bailiff: For the Sheriff ought to accept the
Retorn of the Bailiff, and not examine the reality of it, (if it be sufficient
in Law) 1 Roll. Abr. 98, 99. Palmer and Marsh, Cro. El. 512. Palmer and Potter.

If a Venire fac' comes to the Sheriff in a Against the Sheriff, for a Retorn
by one who is nor Bailiff of a Franchise.
Quare impedit, and the Sheriff command the Bailiff of the City of C. to retorn
the Panel, who does it accordingly, where he had not any Warrant to do it, not
being Bailiff of a Franchise, whereby the Panel is quasht. The Plaintiff for
this default in the Sheriff, and for his Damages shall have an Action on the
Case, 38 Assize
13.

The Sheriff upon a Fieri facias against J. S. Against the Sheriff, and not
against the Bailiff.
makes a Warrant to J. S. to execute as his Bailiff, and he does it; and
afterward the Sheriff makes a False Retorn, ( viz.) that the Writ came Tarde,
etc. by which he is a Trespasser ab initio, yet it amkes not the Bailiff a
Trespasser, 2 Roll. Abr. 562. Parkes and Moss.

It was the Opinion of all the Judges in the Case of Fawces and Cotton, That
the Sheriffs submission to a Fine, is no Conclusion to the parties grieved, to
bring their Actian for the false Retorn of the Sheriff, if it were so, Sir
Thomas Jones p. 39.

In retorn on Elegit, the Sheriff Retorns, That Case, and not Debt.
he had appraised the Goods in specie to 40 l. and extended such Lands, and
delivered them to the Plaintiff. Ubi revera he never delivered them to the
Plaintiff. Action of Debt lies not in this Case, but Action on the Case; for it
is no Debt in the hands of the Sheriff, Cro. Jac. 566. Coryton against Thomas.

And its not like to Pyke's Case, 14 Jac. which was, the Sheriff on a Scire
fac' returned, That he had sold the Goods for so much Money, and delivered the
Money to the Plaintiff; and the Plaintiff thereupon averring that he had not
the Money, maintained an Action of Debt: For there the Sheriff confessed by his
Retorn, That he had sold the Goods, and delivered the Money; but here it is not
returned, that he meddled with the Goods, or the value of them, so as there is
not any Certainty to charge him, Pyke's Case, 14 Jac.

Where the Action is to be brought.
Action for a False Retorn may be brought in the County where this was, or in
Middlesex where the Record is, Cro. Jac. 532. Parkhurst and Powell.

So Escape at D. in Wales, and the Retorn was Non est Inventus, and it was
tried at Westminster, the False Retorn being made at Westminster, which is the
cause of the Action, 2 Keb. 362. Mancer and Smith.

If a Sheriff on Cap' Utlagat' will not arrest the party, but retorn Non est
Inventus, an Action may be brought against him in the County where he received
the Writ; or in Middlesex, where the Record of that False Retorn is, at
Election, Hob. 209. Siderfin p. 218, 219. Russel's Case.

A Doubt was, Whether Action on the Case for a False retorn on Elegit lies in
the County where the retorn of the Exigent was, i. e. in Middlesex, or where
the Land lies? And the Court inclined. that it lay most properly in Middlesex,
Winch. p. 100. Sheir against Sir Francis Glover.

One brings Debt against B. Sheriff of the County Palatine of Lancaster, and
sues him to Outlawry on Mesn Process, and had a Capias directed to the Chancery
of the County Palatine, who make a Precept to the Coroners of the County, being
Six, to take his Body and have him before the Justices of the Court of Common
Bench at Westminster; one of the Coroners being in sight of him, and having a
fair opportunity to arrest him does it not, but they all retorn Non est
inventus. The Plaintiff hereupon brings his Action against the Coroners in
Middlesex; And the Court inclined, that the Action is well brought in
Middlesex; because the Plaintiffs Damages arise here, by not having the Body
here at the Day, Bulmer's Case Rep. and Dyer 159.

The Chancery retorns to the Court the same Coroner.
Answer that the Coroners return to him, so that the False Retorn is the cause
of prejudice, and the other things are but Arguments to prove it. And the Court
conceived an Action would not lie against one Coroner, no more than against one
Sheriff of London, York, etc. Mod. Rep. 198. Naylor and Sharpley.

Of Declarations in Actions for False Retorns.
In Pigot's Case it was alleged for Error that the Declaration was naught:

1. The Bond was made for 200 l. dared Process before the Bond made.
29 Aug. 13 Jac. and this was before the Bond made; yet being retornable in
Michaelmas Term, and the Latitat upon it after the Bond, its sufficient to
maintain the Action, and the Process always bears Test the last day of the
Term before.

2. The Declaration is, The Sheriffs Bailiffs Its not showed the Defendant did
not appear.
arrest the party, and the Sheriff falsely returned Non est inventus. It was
alleged for Error, that the Declaration was not good, because he does not show
that the Bailiffs delivered the Bond to the Sheriff, which they had taken for
his Appearance; nor is it showed that the Defendant did not appear. Sed non
allocatur. For these serve but for aggravation of Damages, and are supplied by
the Verdict, Cro. Jac. 561. Pigot and Rogers.

Fieri fac' for Debt was delivered to the Sheriffs of N. who executed it, after
which the Sheriffs were discharged of their Office, and new ones elected. The
old Sheriffs redeliver to the party his Goods taken in Execution, and indorse
Nulla Action against the old Sheriffs.
bona on the Writ of Fieri fac', and deliver it to the new Sheriffs so
Indorsed. And an Action on the Case was brought against the old Sheriffs for
this False Retorn, and Judgment pro Quer'. And these Exceptions were taken:

1. The Plaintiff in his Declaration does not say, that the old Sheriffs did
retorn Nulla bona, but only that they did indorse Nulla bona, which is no
Retorn.

2. He says not, they delivered this Writ thus indorsed to be returned, i. e.
by Indenture.

3. It appears not whether any Retorn of the Though it appear not that any retorn
of the contrary was made by the old Sheriffs.
Writ were made by the old Sheriffs or the new. Per Glyn Chief Justice. He
conceived it to be well, and according to the course in that kind. For the old
Sheriffs to make the Retorn, and to deliver the Writ over by Indenture to the
new Sheriffs, and here was a Verdict. And a Retorn is not properly a Retorn
till it be filed here; yet it is the Retorn of the Sheriff in the County where
he is Sheriff; and yet it seems Judgment was reversed. Quaere. Style p. 474.
Toft and Day.

Action on the Case on a False Retorn of Non est inventus by the Sheriff of
Galloway in Ireland. It was averred, that the Sheriff at the time of the
delivery of the Capias had the person in Custody at Galloway in the City of
Dublin, and the Action is brought in the County of the City. Per Sanders. On a
Capias delivered to the Sheriff out of the County, he is not bound to hold him
there. So upon a Latitat, which is no Warrant to the Sheriff, to take him but
only in his Bailywick. Per Cur'. This may be by Habeas corpus or Fresh Suit,
and being after Verdict, that finds the False retorn (for the retorn was Non
est inventus in balliva) and the Jury find that he was in balliva at the retorn
of the Writ, the Court will presume him legally in Custody, 3 Keb. 557, 561,
600. Bradshaw and Andrews.

Plaintiff declares, he had prosecuted a Capias against Chapman, who was
indebted to the Plaintiff in 100 l. and delivered it to the Sheriff at Newport
P. and that the Sheriff postea and adtunc and ibidem potuisset arrestar' the
said Chapman; but that the Defendant machinans, to delay the Plaintiff, etc.
arrestare the said Chapman, etc. adtunc and ibidem abstinuit and recusavit, and
had falsely returned Non est inventus. Defendant pleads Non culp', and Verdict
pro Quer. Per Cur'. After Verdict the Declaration is good enought; and though
potuisset arrestare, without showing how, or that the Defendant was in view of
Chapman, and potuisset denotes a possibility; and this is true if he were in
the County, and the Sheriff is not bound to attend his Office in every
particular case; yet it shall be intended such Matter was given in Evidence, by
which it appeared to the Jury, that the Sheriff potuisset arrestare, and the
Declaration quod recusavit does imply Opportunity: But it was agreed to be good
Cause of Demurrer, Sir Tho. Jones p. 40. Fish versus Aston Sheriff of Bedford.

Error brought by the Sheriff, upon a Judgment against him upon a Writ of Scire
fac', for an ill Retorn of a Fieri fac', 2 Sand. 338.

Actions against the Sheriff for Non-feasance. For not retorning of Writs.
If a Capias issues against J. S. and the Sheriff does not make any retorn upon
the said Writ, he is a Trespasser ab initio, and false imprisonment lies
against him. 16 H. 7. 14. 3 H. 7. 36. 21 H. 6. 5. 5 Rep. Hoes Case.

Before the Stat. VV. 2. 19. Regularly for not retorning a Writ the Sheriff was
amerced Quousque, etc. but for a False Retorn or imbesilling the Writ, Action
lay at Common Law. Co. 2 Instit. 451. Rast. Entries 501, 626. Presidents of
Actions on this Statute. This Statute prevents the Retorn of a Tarde, i. e.
quod breve adeo tarde venit, quod praeceptum Regis exequi non potuit.

It Is a Question in Sir William Clarks Case if ^up. utlegat.
Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff for not retorning a Cap. Utlegat. It
seems it does, for the Party has loss by not retorning the Writ, though the Queen
may amerce him for his Contempt. Cro. Eliz. p. 873. Sir Will. Clark.

Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff for not Summons.
retorning a Summons. 1 Leon. 146. Marsh and Astrey.

If a Capias be returned out of an Inferior Inferior Court.
Court to an Officer of the Court to take J. S. and he took him accordingly,
and does not retorn the Process, he is a Trespasser ab initio, for as much as
he is the Officer that ought to retorn it, Bailiff errand or Servant not to be
punished for not retorn of the Sheriff.
and he is a Sheriff within his jurisdiction. 2 Roll. Abr. 563. Kirk and Atkins.

If a Capias in Process be awarded to the Sheriff, and he makes his Warrant to
a Bayliff-errant, who is a sworn and known Bailiff within ^he County to take
him, and he does it accordingly, if the Sheriff does not afterward retorn this
Writ, it shall make him a. Trespasser ab initio, because he is but the Sheriffs
Servant, and for this he ought to be subject to the wrong done to the party as
his Master is, 20 H. 7. 13. 21 H. 7. 22. M. 14. Car. B. R. How and Stocken har.
But if the Bayliff-errant, in that Case, retorn the Body and the Warrant to the
Sheriff, although the Sheriff does not retorn the Writ, yet he is excused. And if
the Sheriff upon such Process makes special Bailiffs, and they take the Party,
and the Sheriff does not retorn the Writ; although there is not any default in
the Bailiffs, yet they are Trespasser, ab initio, because they are but Servants
to the Sheriff and by his appointment; but this seems a sorry reason: And I
take it Girling and Allens Case is good Law. For though the Sheriff ought to
retorn his Writ, otherwise his Justification in False Imprisonment is not good;
yet it is not so with his Servant, for he has no means to enforce the Sheriff
to make retorn thereof; and if what he does is legal, it shall not be made
illegal to him by the act or default of another. Crok. Car. Gilling and Allen.
11 Car. B. R.

Upon a Capias in Process, if the Sheriff makes Where no default is in the
Bailiff of a Franchise, he is excused.
his Warrant to a Bailiff of a Franchise to execute it, who does it
accordingly, and makes retorn of the Body and Warrant to the Sheriff, and the
Sheriff after does not retorn the Writ, yet this shall not make the Sheriff a
Trespasser ab initio, because he had done his duty, and no default is in him,
and he is the Officer of the Franchise, and not of the Sheriff. 8 Ed. 417. b.
21 H. 7. 22.

The Court was moved, that the Sheriff may Sheriff not to file the Retorn,
depending Action on the Case against him.
not be admitted to file the retorn of a Writ, because action on the Case was
depending against him for not retorning it, because then the Action would
abate, and it was granted by Rolls. Styles 408.

Laying the Action and Declaration for not Retorning.
In a Writ of Entry sur disseisin, the Land lying in the County of H. if the
Plaintiff deliver the Writ of Summons to the Sheriff of H. in London; and after
the Sheriff summons the Defendant upon the Land, and after does not retorn the
Writ; for which Action on the Case is brought in London, where the Writ was
delivered to him, and the Defendant pleads he did not summon him, etc. upon
which they are at issue, this may be tried in London. 2 Roll. Abr. 807. Rash
and Astrey.

Action on the Case against an Undersheriff, and declares, whereas the
Plaintiff had brought a Writ of Entry against H. C. and delivered it to the
Undersheriff to be executed in forma Juris, and gave him two shillings for the
executing of it, and that at such a day he caused the said H. C. to be
summoned, yet falso, etc. he did not retorn the Writ of Summons at the day of
the retorn. Cro. Eliz. 175. Marsh and Astrey. and p. 397. Collet and Marsh.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, for that It is not averred that the
Officer continued in his Office.
it is not averred he was Undersheriff, and continued in in his Office at the
day of the Retorn; for otherwise the Action lies not against him, sed non
allocatur. 1 Leon. 146. Mesme Case.

It shall be intended that he continued in his Office, for he was Undersheriff
when the Writ was delivered to him; and it is alleged that he caused Summons to
be made, and did not retorn it at the day, by which it shall be intended, that
the Authority was in him. The Declaration was, that the said Astrey (Defendant)
intendens and machinans ipsum querentem in Action^ sua praed' prosequend'
impedire, etc. did not retorn the Summons, but says not tunc existen'
Undersheriff, yet it is good; and if the Defendant were not Undersheriff, the
same shall come in of the other side.

Where a man may have a Traverse, or Aver against the Sheriffs Retorn, and
where not.
It is commonly said in our Books, that no Averment shall be against the
Sheriffs Retorn which is of Record, and therefore in a Redisseisin it cannot be
assigned for Error that the Sheriff non accessit ad tenementa, as he has
returned, for that is against his Retorn, which is recorded. Gaudy in Collet
and Marshes Case. Leon. 183. Holl^^ds Case.

Gaudy in Collet and Marsh's Case, 1 Leon. 397: held, against any thing done or
returned by a Sheriff, as an Officer, there may be an averment; as an averment
against a Bishops Certificate; but the other Justices contra: For the Justices
ought to credit the Officers. Error because the Defendant was not summoned in a
Praecipe quod reddat, at the Church door, according to the Stat. 31 Eliz. c. 3.
and by reason of the default a grand cape was awarded, and the Sheriff returned
him summoned at the Church Door. Per Cur', he shall not have this Averment, but
his Action of Deceit against the Sheriff, Cro. Eliz. Action sur Deceit, but
not on an Averment.
397. Collet and Marsh's Case, so Cro. El. 9. 10. Clay's Case. If in Partition
the Sheriff Retorn, he was there in proper person, and this Retorn be received,
and the Writ filed, then the Court cannot examine it; for the Retorn is good,
and the party can have no Averment against the Retorn, nor Error. The Jury
appeared on a Trial, and the Defendant would have challenged the Array ore
tenus; because it was Returned by one S -- Sheriff, two days after he had
received a Writ of Discharge. Per Cur', He cannot Challenge it for that Cause;
because it would be a direct Averment against the Record, for it was Returned
by him as Sheriff, and the Retorn accepted, Cro. El. 369. Hoar and Broom.

In the Lady Russel and Wood's Case, Cro. El. 780. the King's Bench would suffer
a Traverse to a Sheriff's Retorn, because it is False. As 4 El. Dyer 412. and
in the Common-Bench is usual, and Presidents ordered to be searched.

Sed distinguendum est. And I shall show in what Cases one may aver against the
Retorn of the Sheriff.

A man may aver against the Retorn of the Matter Collateral.
Sheriff, if the Retorn be a matter Collateral.

As if the Sheriff upon a Capias retorn a Rescous, there may be an Averment
against it, Owen 132.

So Winch. p. 100. in another Action Averment may be against the Retorn of the
Sheriff, though In another Action.
not in the same Action; as 5 Ed. 4. for False retorn. VVinch. p. 100. Styles
versus Sir Francis Glover.

If the Retorn of the Sheriff concern my Inheritance, Retorn concerns ^ man's
Inheritance.
I shall have averment against it. 2 Rolls Rep. 54.

In a Praecipe quod reddat, at the Summons returned, he may say that his name
is T. B. and that he was summoned by the name of J. B. because otherwise he
shall lose his Land by default, 19 H. 6. 10. b.

If the Sheriff retorn a man outlawed of In Outlawry for Felony.
Felony, he may aver against this Retorn, that he came in at the 5th County,
and tendered Sureties, and so was Outlawed; for this is in case of Life and
Member, 1 Ed. 3. 24. b.

On Scire fac' against the Tertenants, the Tertenants
Defendant after the Retorn of the Sheriff pleads, that he is not Tertenant.
The Plaintiff demurs; because, as Cro. El. 872. Blood's Case, he is estopped by
the Sheriffs Retorn. And in Rastall's Entries, Tertenancy is traversed: And 4
El. Dyer 212. the Retorn of a Capias is traversed as to Rescue. And Cro. El.
859. its agreed, that Waste is traversable Waste.
on the Retorn of the Sheriff. But per Cur' a general Non tenure by Lessee for
years is pleadable; for else his possession would be disturbed by Ejectment,
Cro. El. 872. Co. Ent. 620, 622. 3. 4. Cro. El. 859. 3 Keb. 170. VVitrony
versus Blany.

So per Windham. In some Cases one may Diversity between a general Nontenure,
and a special Nontenure, pleaded.
plead and aver against the retorn of the Sheriff, as to a Scire facias, that
there were other Tertenants not named; for he is not Omniscient. And though the
Sheriff retorn that such are Tertenants, yet that shall not conclude the
Defendant, but that he may say another is Tertenant of parcel, who is not
warned. But Rolls is express, that Nontenure cannot be pleaded in (...) against
the Retorn of the Sheriff, 1 Keb. 55. (...) Cro. Jac. 50. Mitchell's Case, 2
Rolls (...) (...)

In Waste, if the Officer retorn, That the Jury Waste. View.
had the View; yet if the contrary appear by Examination at the Trial, the
Retorn shall not conclude any of the parties, 2 Sand. 255. Green and Cole.

Though a man may not aver contrary to the Averment, that he was not Sheriff.
Sheriffs Retorn; yet he may say, he which had Indorsed his Name on the
Backside of the Writ was not Sheriff, because by the Common Law, until the
Stat. of Ed. 2. c. no Sheriff or Officer used to put their Names to the
Retorns; and this Averment, That he that made the Retorn is no true Officer, is
not taken away by the Statute, Yelv. p. 34. Arundell's Case.

If Bailiffs of Franchises that have Retorns of Averment against false Retorns
of Bailiffs of Franchises.
Writs, make a False retorn, the party shall have Averment against it, as well
of too little Issues as of other things, as well as he shall have against the
Sheriff; but all the punishment shall be upon the Bailiffs, Dr. and Stud. 2d
Book 42. c.

The Sheriff retorns a Rescous on Mean process to a Writ of Privilege, and
Attachment awarded nisi causa. The Preignotaries affirmed that the parties
might traverse the Retorn; but Tota Curia of Opinion to the contrary, Sir Tho.
Jones p. 39. Fawcett and Cotton.

CHAP. X.
Of Venire facias, Habeas Corpora Juratorum, and Distringas. What Retorns
shall be good on a Venire, etc. or not. Amendments of Venire's, etc. Of Tales.

Venire fac', Habeas corpora and Distringas.

Of the Statutes of Jeofails.
THe principal Statutes of Jeofails are 8 H. 6. c. 12, etc. 15. 32 H. 8. c. 30.
18 El. c. 14. 21 Jac. c. 13. 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 8.

8 H. 6. c. 12. extends to any Record, Specialty, Copy, etc. 2. Parol. 3. Plea.
4. Warrant of Attorney. 5. Writ Original and Judicial. 6. Panel. 7: Retorn.
But by it misprision of Clarks are only amendable: But it extends not to an
Insufficient Trial, where the Venue is mistaken. It extends not to a Retorn of
a Sheriff, where it should be by a Coroner. Nor to a Trial by one not returned
in the Venire fac'. Nor to a Retorn of a Venire fac' without the Name of the
Sheriff. Now these Misprisions are not remedied by 8 H. 6. c. 2. 32 H. 8. nor
18 El. c. 4. (Viz.) Where the Retorn is by the Sheriff, where it ought to be by
the Coroner, when the Sheriff does not put his Name to the Retorn of the Jury;
when no Retorn is on the Venire fac'; nor when one gives a Verdict, who is not
returned; nor to Insufficient Trials, where the Venue is mistaken, 8 Rep.
Blackamore's Case.

By the Stat. 21 Jac. c. 13. After Verdict Judgment shall not be arrested, for
that the Venire fac', Hab. corpora, or Distringas, was awarded to a wrong
Officer, upon any insufficient Suggestion, or that the Venue was in some part
misawarded, or issued out of more or fewer places than it ought to be, so as
some one place be right named. Or for misnaming any of the Jurors either in the
Surname, or any addition in any of the Writs or Retorns thereof, so as constat
de persona. Or for a want of retorn of any of the said Writs, so as a Panel be
returned and annexed thereunto; or for that the Officer's Name is not set to
the Retorn.

No Acts of Jeofails extend to Appeals or Pleas of the Crown; nor to Actions or
Informations on Penal Laws, except in 16 and 17 Car. 2. other than concerning
Customs, Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, to which it extends not. But the
Stat. 21 Jac. helps not, if the Christian Name of a Juror be mistaken, and the
Law notwithstanding Codwell's Case. 5 Rep. Roll. 176. and Cro. Jac. 458.
Goddard's Case remains as it was.

But its amendable per Stat. 18 Eliz. as a discontinuance of Process, as Teppet
on the Venire, and Tippet on the Distringas was amended. So Samuel in the
Venire, and Daniel in the Nomina Jurator'.

If there be no Venue, its aided by 16 and 17 Car. 2. after a Verdict, if the
Cause be tried in the proper County where the Action is laid, 2 Sand. 227.
Perry's Case in Skinner's Case. Vide infra.

If the Plaintiff deliver the Venire to the Sheriff Venire with ^ Proviso.
Tarde, so late that he cannot serve it, the Defendant shall have a Writ with a
Proviso; but at the same time the Plaintiff may have another Writ, and the
Sheriff may not retorn which of them he pleases, the Proviso ought to be
quando duo brevia sunt in eodem gradu and qualitate, 8 H. 6. 6.

If the default be in the Plaintiff after Issue in the prosecuting of the
Venire facias, then the Defendant may have a Venire facias with a Proviso; but
not an Habeas corpus with a Proviso, until the Plaintiff have made a default in
the same Writ. For he ought only to have the same Process with a Proviso, in
which there was a default of the Plaintiff first; and therefore though the
Defendant had a Venire facias with a Proviso, upon a default of the Plaintiff,
yet he cannot have a Nisi prius by Proviso, without another default of the
Plaintiff.

Note. The Venire ought to be delivered to the When the Venire ought to be
delivered to the Sheriff.
Sheriff four days before the Retorn of it, if the Jury dwell forty Miles off,
and eight days if they dwell further from the place where the Trial is to be,
Pract. Reg. 87, 333.

The Name of the Sheriff to the Distringas and Tales, are of necessity; and to
the retorn of the Habeas ^orpora by the Statute of York, 12 Ed. 2. c. 5. and
these are not helped by any of the Statutes of Jeofails, Cro. El. 310. Steyner
and James, Cro. Jac. 188. Holdswrith's Case, Cro. El. 509. Blodwell's Case;
482. Weare's Case.

What Retorn shall be good in a Venire, or not; and what shall be Error, and
what amendable.
Insufficient Retorns are aided by the Statute Omission.
of Jeofails: As upon the retorn of the Venire fac' there wanted these words,
Quilibet Jurator' per Legios. This is not, as if there was no Retorn at all.
And per Cur', its an Insufficient retorn which is aided, and it was awarded to
be amended; for the omission* of Pledges is but Matter of Form, and not like to
Dr. Hussey's Case, where there was a want of an Original. And so in 2 Roll.
Rep. 87. the Sheriff retorns a Venire fac', (viz.) Executio istius brevis, etc.
and the Panel of the Jurors was filed to it; but under the Names of the Jurors
he omitted to file the Pledges, Cro. Jac. Moor and Blackwell, 2 Roll. Rep. 87.

In the Writ of Venire fac' awarded to the Sheriff of Somerset the word (
Vicecomiti) was omitted; yet he returned the Panel, and his Name was endorsed.
Per Cur', it is Error; but because upon the Roll it was Vic' Somerset, it was
amended, Cro. Car. 595. Sloper and Child.

Venire fac' was album breve (i. e.) no Name of the Sheriff was endorsed. It
was denied to be amended, 1 Brownl. 43. Bullen and Jarvis.

The retorn of a Venire by one Sheriff of London, is ill, and not helped by the
Stat. 21 Jac. But a Certiorari Coronatoribus, where there is but one, is well
enough, Hob. 70. 1 Keb. The King against Percival.

A Venire facias was awarded in the time of Variance.
Queen Elizabeth* and a Distringas with Nisi prius in the time of King James,
reciting quod distringat Juratores nuper summonit' in Curia nostra, whereas in
truth there had not been any Summons in Curia of the King, but of the Queen
only, and Trial and Judgment thereupon; and it was Reversed for this Error. For
this Distringas Distringas, Nisi prius.
with Nisi prius is a special Authority to the Justices, who being Justices by
the special Commission, and not having Authority to take any Jury but such as
was summoned in Curia Regis, there being none such, the Trial by the Jury was
Erroneous, Goodwin's Case, cited in Comyn's Case; Cro. Jac. 161. But in the
principal Case, which was Error of a Judgment in Durham, such Case was amended;
because the Justices of Durham Amendment in Durham, and why.
are Original Judges of the whole Record, and had the Record before them at the
time of the Trial, and the Writ being variant might be amended there, Cro. Jac.
161. Goodwin's Case.

The Venire was between Heath and J. T. and the Sheriff returned it to be
between Heath and W. T. This was a Mis-tryal, and Judgment shall not be for the
Plaintiff, Winch. p. 73. Trist's Case.

Venire fac' bears Test on a Sunday; it was amended after Trial, Short and
Arundel's Case.

A Venire fac' bore Test out of Term, and made Amendment by the Roll.
to accord with the Roll, Gonnel's Case; and a Distringas was amended a long
time after the Trial; yet, the Roll being good, it was amended, Cro. Jac. 161.
Comyn's Case.

Venire awarded, Vicecomitibus Lond' praecipimus sibi, was amended after
Verdict. So if after the Hebeas ibi hoc breve, if the nomina Jurator' be left
out, Cro. El. 543. Roll. 201.

In the award of a Venire fac' super quo praeceptum fuit Vicecomiti Com', etc.
it is Error; it ought to have been Praeceptum est, 2 Sand. 393.

The Nisi prius Roll is, That Challenge being Amendment.
made to the Sheriff after Issue and Confessed, a Venire fac' was awarded to
the Coroners; but the Roll of Nisi prius was, that the Venire fac' was awarded
to the Sheriff. Per Cur', This Roll of Nisi prius being a Misprision and which
ought to be warranted by the Record, ought to be amended, Cro. Jac'. 353. Sir
Ed. Musgrave, Winch. Rep. p. 73.

If the Sheriff retorn, That there are no Freeholders Where a Venire fac' shall
be of the Issue next ^^ning.
of the Visne, or if the Visne be where the Kings Writ runs not; as in the
Cinque Ports, etc. or in a place where the men are privileged from serving on
Juries out of that place, as the Isle of ^ly, etc. the Plaintiff may pray a
Venire fac' of the Visne next adjoining; and if the Visne be in Wales (where
the Kings Writ runs not) the Venire fac' shall be directed to the Sheriff of
the next English County, to cause the Jury to come de propinquiore Visne of his
County to the Visne in Wales adjoining; for the Court shall not be ousted of
the Plea, Fitzh. Abr. tit. Visne 8. Jurisdict. 24.

If the words ( quorum quilibet habeat) be left out, or duodecim, or qui nulla
affinitate attingunt; these are amendable, as Mistakes of the Clerks, Roll.
204, 205.

Venire fac' was in this manner, Jacob', etc. Vicecomiti salutem, and says not
o^ what County; it was amended, Cro. Jac. 78. Low and Lacock.

Venire fac' what Retornable coram Majore and Ballivis de Exceter, without
saying in Curia vel hic. Its Error; because it may be Returned in a Tavern,
Siderfin p 77. Davies and Pitts.

If a Venire fac' be quasht for Consanguinity to the Sheriff, a Venire fac' de
novo shall be granted to the Coroners, 2 Roll. Abr. 720.

The awarding of a New Venire fac' to the Sheriff, where the Veniri fac' was
quasht for Favor in the Undersheriff, is not Error, 1 Roll. Rep. 272.

A Venire fac' is to the Coroners, without any Process directed to a wrong
Office^, not amendable.
Suggestion at all of any Challenge to the Sheriff. This is not aided by 21
Jac. c. 13. nor by the 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 8. and the Court cannot amend this
direction of Process to a wrong Officer; and the Court cannot examine the Truth
without a Suggestion. And Judgment was arrested, 3 Keb. 624. Hancock and Weyman.

Venue awarded to the Coroners, and Tales to the Sheriff, is Erroneous, Cro.
El. 574. Morgan and Wye.

If a Venire fac' be directed to the Coroners, all the Coroners ought to join
in the Retorn, and so both of the Sheriffs of London ought to join, or else the
Retorn is not good, Hobart 97.

The Sheriff need not retorn the Names of all the 24 on the Distringas, Hab'
corpora, or Venire fac', nor affix them to the said Writs, 1 Keb. 418. Coldham
and Lo.

And it was agreed per Cur', 2 Roll. Rep. 111. Distriugas amended per le Vic'.
because the Venire fac' was good and well Returned, the Distringas shall be
awarded by the Sheriff, 2 Roll. Rep. 111.

If a Distringas sicut alias issue against the Jury, and no other Distringas
was awarded against them before, by which the supposal of the Writ is false,
yet this is not Error; for the Venire fac' serves instead of a Distringas. 2
Roll. Rep. 133.

The Panel of the Hab. corpora was amended upon the Sheriffs Oath. And where
the Distrngas was blank, yet the Venire fac' was well returned, Cro. Jac. 483.
Church and Wright.

A contrary Distringas is by the Sheriff put to the right Panel and Tried* The
Trial was held good, so though no Distringas had been; for as this is, there is
no Writ between the parties, 3 Bulstr. 180. Fowkes and Child.

Tales not returned by the Sheriff or his Deputy, or any sworn Officer; but by
a Clerk of the Court, by general appointment of the Sheriff its well enough,
and the Sheriff is answerable for it, 1 Keb. 357. Lestrange and Temple.

Array returned by the Sheriff, after his Discharge, is not good, Cro. El. 369.
Hoar and Broom.

Presidents,

Distringas Juratores on the Hustings; vid. the Form, 2 Sand. 240.

Retorn' de Venire fac' Jur'

Executio istius brevis patet in quadam pannella hui^ brevi annex'. A. B.
Armig. Vic'.

Nomina Jurator' inter A. B. Quer' and C. D. Def. in placito Transgress.

Then Write down the Names of the 24 Jurors thus:

A. W. de E gen' and sic ad 24. F. C. de W. Yeoman and sic ad 24.
Quilibet Jurator' praedictor' per se separatim Manucapt', Or, Attachiatus est
per pleg'. J. D. R. R.
A. B. Armig' Vic'.
The like in the Habeas corpora.

Only in the Retorn of this Writ the Sheriff must retorn Issues on every person,

Exitus eorum cujuslibet -- x s. or more, Dalt. c. 58

CHAP. XI.
Of Habeas Corpus, and Retorns upon it. Of Habeas Corpus. The several sorts,
and the consequence thereof. Of the Retorns of Habeas Corpus by the Sheriff,
etc. and in respect of the Courts commanding. Rules on Habeas Corpus, who to
pay the Charges. The Forms of the Retorns.

AN Habeas Corpus is either ad subjiciend', which Habeas Corpus ad subjiciend.
Habeas Corpus ad respondend' recipiend, etc.
is granted on the Criminal side, or an Habeas Corpus ad respondend' recipiend'
or faciend' granted on the Pleas side; for so the Court of the Kings Bench is
divided in the practice of it, (that is to say,) into Criminal Causes between
the King and the Party, and Civil Causes between Subject and Subject.

Now an Habeas Corpus ad respondend' is, when any one is Imprisoned at the Suit
of another upon a Legal Process in the Fleet, or any other Prison except the
Kings Bench Prison, and a third person would Sue that Prisoner in this Court (
B. R.) and cannot because he is not in Custody of the Marshal of this Court,
there he may have an Habeas Corpus to remove the Prisoner out of the Prison
where he is into this Court, to answer to his Action here. This is called a
Habeas Corpus cum causa; and an Habeas Corpus cum causa does remove the
Prisoner for whom it is granted, and all the Causes which are then depending
against; him for upon Habeas Corpus to an Inferior Court, to remove Corpus cum
causa, they ought to return all* the Causes that are depending there concerning
the Party that has the Habeas Corpus, (if any of the Causes depending be above
5 l.) Styles Rep. 150.

When an Habeas Corpus is Awarded and Bail taken though they be not Filed, yet
presently the Prisoner is discharged, and his Sureties also in the Inferior
Court. Cro. Jac. 203. Franley and Basset.

One was in Execution in the Fleet, for a Debt recovered against him in B. R.
he being before condemned in the Kings Bench, for another Debt, was by Habeas
Corpus cum causa removed into the Kings Bench; per Cur. in this Case he may
acknowledge satisfaction for both Debts in B. R. he being in the Custody of the
Marshal for both Debts. If the Marshal suffer him to Escape, he shall be
charged for both the Debts. Dyer 152, 307.

As for Retorns of Habeas Corpus.
What shall be a good Retorn on Habeas Corpus, or Corpus cum causa.

An Habeas Corpus to remove one committed for Debt from one Prison to another,
may be granted Retornable immediate, or indilate, for this is only an Habeas
Corpus ad Recipiend' in the nature of it.

An Habeas Corpus is not a Record till it be Amendment.
Returned and Filed, and then it cannot be amended, but it may be amended
before its Filed.

Whatsoever person, or by what means soever Conclusion of the Retorn.
he was committed, the conclusion of the Retorn ought to be Corpus tamen ejus
paratum habo; yet it cannot always be so. 1 Leon. p. 70.

An Habeas Corpus ad subjiciend' is always intended Retorn by the Chancellor of
Durham.
to him that has the Body, though ad faciend' may be circular, as an Habeas
Corpus was directed to the Chancellor of Durham, that he make a Precept to the
Sheriff, to have the Body coram nobis apud Westminster. The Retorn is, that the
Chancellor issued a Precept to the Sheriff to return his Body before him; and
that the Sheriff returned paratum habet, and its not said the Chancellor had
him here, which is ill per Cur. for it should be cujus Corpus paratum habeo, in
this Court. 3 Keb. 229. the King against Pell and Offley.

Habeas Corpus was directed to the Steward and Cause of commitment showed.
Marshal of the Marshalsea for H. the Marshal Retorns the said H. was committed
to the Custody, per mandatum Francisci Walsingham Mil' principalis Secretar and
unius de privat' Concilio Domini Regis. This is insufficient, because the Cause
of Commitment is not set down in the Retorn; Then it was amended and Returned
in this manner -- ex sententia and mandato totius Concilij privati Domini Regis
ita qd' ejus corpus habere non possumus. This per Cur' is in sufficient also;
he ought to have concluded Corpus ejus tamen parat' habeo.

Note, Where the Party is committed by the whole Council, no cause of the
Committment need to be showed. 1 Leon. p. 70.

On Latitat the Sheriff Returned, that he had By Habeas Corpus to bring into
Chancery.
Arrested the Defendant, and that such a day, and before the Retorn of the
Latitat, Habeas Corpus was to bring the Body into Chancery, and there the
Prisoner was Discharged; the Retorn is good, for the Sheriff is bound to obey
the Kings Writs, and he cannot compel the Parties to put in Sureties here in B.
R. But it was ill done of the Master of the Rolls to Discharge him. Per Curiam,
we have oftentimes persons here upon Habeas Corpus, who are also Arrested by
Process out of the Exchequer, or of the Common Pleas; but we will not Discharge
them before they have found Sureties for their appearance, and we cannot punish
the Sheriff, for the Habeas Corpus was first retornable before the Latitat. But
because the Retorn was a custodia nostra exoneratus fuit, which might be
intended as to the Cause in Chancery only, and not for the Cause here, for he
has not alleged, that he was committed to any other in Custody; the Sheriff
was to amend his Retorn. 1 Leon. 145. Carry Amendment.
and Dennis.

A Retorn of Habeas Corpus by the Warden of the Fleet, was propter contemptum
extra Cur' Cancellariae. Its not good, 1 Rolls Rep. 92.

General Directions for Writs of Habeas Corpus, Error or Privilege, vid.
Complete Solicitor 106, and other Manuals.
On Habeas Corpus the Sheriff Retorns, that the That the Justices committed him
for a Fine.
Justices of Peace committed the Plaintiff for a Fine on Contempt, for which
the Court awarded him to remain in Prison till payment. Siderfin p. 144. the
King versus Mayo.

The Retorn on Habeas Corpus was a Protection. Protection.
1 Leon. p. 70. Searchers Case.

Note, The Retorn of an Habeas Corpus ought Retorn to be Writ on Parchment.
to be Written in Parchment, and not on Paper; for the Retorn is to be Filed,
and made a Record of Court, and all Records are to be Written on Parchment: And
therefore, after the Retorn is Read and Filed in Court it cannot be amended:
But in Hob. p. 113. An Habeas Corpus was Returned without the Surname of the
Sheriff, and after Verdict amended.

It is agreed, The Retorn of an Habeas Corpus Amendment. Good to common intent.
need not be so punctual as a Plea, because not made by Persons of such
Learning as Pleas are; but if they be good to common intent and substance, its
enough.

Upon Habeas Corpus granted by the Kings Rule to bring in the Body.
Bench to the Warden of the Fleet, to have here in Court the Body of D. W. the
same Retornable at a day certain; at which day the Warden of the Fleet did
refuse to make his Retorn, and to bring in the Body. And the Court entered a
Rule to bring in the Body of B. W. the next day Sub Poena 20 l. and so are all
Presidents of Felony and Treason.

Note, If it appear that the Committment is good, and there is good Cause; the
Court remands the Prisoner; if it is not good, they Discharge him, if it be
doubtful they Bail him.

The Sheriff may suggest, that the Party will Who to pay the Charges of the
Retorn.
not pay his Charges of Retorn of Habeas Corpus, ad faciend' and recipiend',
which is at the Suit of the Party. But contra in Habeas Corpus, ad faciend' and
subjiciend', which is at the Suit of the King, he must Retorn at his Peril. 1
Keb. 272, 280. the King versus Armiger.

And on Habeas Corpus to remove any Prisoner, the Sheriff must Retorn the Writ,
and the Court will allow his Charges here. So in the Case of the Steward of --

Upon Habeas Corpus, the Officer ought to bring the Prisoner to the Court, and
the Court shall tax Charges and compel payment, if the Officer and Prisoner, or
Plaintiff cannot agree, or payment be not made according to the Agreement. Sir
Tho. Jones p. 178.

Error on a Scire fac', on the Sheriffs Retorn being an Original Suit, lies not
in the Exchequer Chamber; but Error on Scire fac' Quare Executionem non, has
been constantly allowed to lie there. 2 Keb. 833. Jones and Anderson.

The Form of the Retorn.
Languidus,

Detent' in Prisona, attamen Corpus ejus, etc. The Causes of the Caption and
Detention Returned. vide Dalton cap. 63. that he was taken in Execution by the
late Sheriff, etc. that he was Imprisoned by a Justice of Peace his Warrant.

Retorn of a Certiorari per Viscount.
The Sheriffs of London appeared in Court in their proper person, upon a Rule
of Court, to show Cause why they did not grant out Execution, upon a Judgment
given in their Court, or else to make a sufficient Retorn of a Certiorari
directed to them, because they had made three insufficient Retorns. Styles p.
444.

A Certiorari was directed to the Sheriff to certify, whether the Conisor in a
Recognizance had an Heir. Jones p. 319.

CHAP. XII.
How many sorts of Juries. Of Retorns, and by whom Returned; what manner of
persons shall not be Returned on Juries, and how they shall be Discharged.
Where, when, and how persons exempt shall have Action against the Sheriff for
Impannelling them. Of returning trop petit Issues. Of levying the Issues. Of
other Erroneous proceedings, and misdemeanors of Sheriffs about Jurors. What
Estate every Juror must have by the late Statute of 4 and 5 W. and M. Of
Challenges, The several sorts and causes of Challeng, and what are good or not,
and when to be taken.

Of Enquiry. Of Trials betwixt Party and Party.
Jurors are of two Sorts.

Juries to Enquire, are grand Juries at Assizes, or the Quarter Sessions. So
Juries Returned before Justices of Peace, to enquire of Riots, Forcible
Entries, and Juries Returned before Commissioners of Sewers, or upon the
Statute of Bankrupts, Coroners, etc. and Inquisitions taken before the Sheriff,
and all these the Sheriff is to Summon (except Bankrupts.) Qu.

Now upon every Trial in personal Actions the Sheriff must Retorn two
Hundredors at least. Cok. Litt. 1 25, 158.

As for the number of Jurors Returned, vid. Dalton 86.

Retorn of Jurors.
If it be conceived an indifferent Jury will Jury Returned by the Secondary.
not ^e Returned in the Country, the Court on motion will order the Sheriff to
attend the Secondary of the Office with the Book of his Freeholders, to have an
indifferent one Returned, Pract. Reg. 163. So it was done in Pooles and Markham
Case, Styles 477. because the Plaintiff in a former Trial between the Parties
had Feasted four of the Jury, and had Feasted some of the Jury that were
Returned upon that Trial; and the like was done in Coxes Case, 15 and 16 Car.
2. B. R. because Cox who was Entitled to the Reversion, had forbid Rent to be
paid by the Tenants, and took on him the defense of the Ejectment brought
against the Tenants, was of Kindred to the Sheriff and Undersheriff, and
Trustee for them: But in another Cause, 17 Car. 2 B. R. The Court on
Certificate of a Judge, that Verdict was given contrary to Evidence, would not
allow, that the Sheriff should bring in the Book of Freeholders to the
Secondary for the ill Example; but ordered the Sheriff should Retorn a good
Jury in the new Trial.

Upon motion that the Cause to be Tried at the Bar is of great consequence, the
Court will make a Rule for the Sheriff to Retorn 48 Jurors upon the Jury.
Pract. Reg. 163.

When a Trial is to be for a thing which concerns Who to Retorn the Jury.
the Undersheriff, there the High Sheriff shall Retorn the Jury; aliter, if the
Trial concerns the High Sheriff, the Undersheriff shall not Retorn the Jury,
but the Coroners. Pract. Reg. 164.

What manner of persons shall not be Impanelled on 8 Rep. 5. 3. 6 Rep. 108. 9
Rep. 49.
Juries, and how they shall be Discharged, and where they shall have Actions
against the Sheriff for Impannelling of them.
The Sheriff ought not to Retorn Privilege, Exemption.
to be exempt from Juries; but he ought to Summon, and shall not be liable to
an Action. Siderfin p. 243. The King and Percival, the Case was, Venire fac'
was awarded to the Sheriff of the City and County of Canterbury, to Retorn a
Jury here at the Bar, and upon the Distringas the Sheriff Retorns this to be an
Ancient City and County, and that the King had granted to them an Exemption,
not to serve in any Jury out of their City, except in Cases of High Treason;
and by express words, that they should not serve coram ipso Rege. Per Cur'.

First, The Retorn is ill: Because, if it were in the power of the Sheriff to
Retorn Privilege, he cannot do this upon the Distringas or Habeas Corpus, as
he did here; because by the Retorning of the Venire. (viz.) That there are 24
prob' and Legales homines he had concluded himself, there being also Pledges
upon every such Retorn.

Secondly, That the Sheriff may not Retorn so Privilege of Exemption, when to
be clai^ed.
at any time, but ought to Retorn them Summoned, and the Parties ought to come
here; and then every person who had cause of Privilege ought to calim here in
person, and not the Sheriff for them. More 883; 30. Wallers Case, Siderfin 293.
The King and Percival. The Court awarded an alias Distringas, in regard the
Sheriff cannot vary from the first Venire Returned; but must have the same Men,
Keb. 867. mesme Case. And no Action lies against the Sheriff, upon their
Delivery of the Writ of Exemption, Hardress. Rep. 389. mesme Case.

But in the Town of Darby, and Foxleys Case, Action, on the Case against the
Sheriff for Retorning one exempt
1 Roll. Rep. 119. Action on the Case adjudged to lie against the Sheriff, for
Retorning one of a Jury, who lived in a place which his exempt, and Co. Mag'
chap. 382, 130, 447, 488, 461. Action, on the Case lies against the Sheriff,
for Retorning a person exempt of a Jury.

The Sheriff must not Retorn magis remotos, minus What Jurors the Sheriff must
Retorn.
sufficientes and magis suspectos, by the Statute W. 2. chap. 38. and if he do,
the Plaintiff or Demandant shall recover Damages by the Statute, if he be
delayed, and the Defendant, if he lose his Land, and Articuli super chartas
gives double Damages to the Demandant.

The Sheriff by Statute W. 2. c. 38. must not Retorn Men, decrepit senes ultra
70 annos, hominos non in patria commorantes. This Statute is a direct
Prohibition in it self, and therefore the Party grieved may have Action on the
Act against the Sheriff, without giving notice of Sickness, Notice.
or Non-commorancy; yet the use is to Sue out a Writ grounded on this Statute,
that he Retorn them not, and notice by word is good, if notice were requisite,
Co. 2 Inst. 477.

Peers of Parliament not to be Impannelled, Remedy for undue Retorns. Who is
the party grieved that shall have his Action.
nor Tenants in Ancient Demesne.

Where the Demandant or Plaintiff is delayed of his Suit, by such Retorn of the
Sheriff, as magis remotos, he shall by the Statute recover Damages against him,
or where the Defendant, after he has lost his Land by the Oath of them so
Returned contrary to the Form of the Statute; and after he does convict them in
an Attaint and so is restored, he may then have his Action on this Statute for
his Damages, 2 Inst. 448. sur Stat. W. 2. c. 38.

If one dwell in Middlesex, and had Freehold in the County of York over 40 l.
the Sheriff of York may not Summon him to Middlesex, to Try a Cause at the Bar
in Westminster for Land in Yorkshire, W. 2. c. 42. 1 Roll. Rep. 163.

In a Writ of Right or any other Writ, a Baron Peer.
of the Realm may excuse himself.

Action on the Statute, W. 2. c. 8. for Retorning Men more remote or suspected,
Count and Bar inde. Dr. Bonhams Case. 8 Rep. 118.

Upon a Trial between a Peer and another, Peer.
the Sheriff must retorn a Knight; but if he do not, and the Peer does not
challenge the Array, but the Jury give a Verdict, he shall not have advantage
of this afterward, Lord Powes and Kertman P. 9 Car.

A Jury was Empannelled of the Town of Southampton, and called to the Bar and
made default, and the Men of that Town showed to the Court a Grant made to the
Inhabitants of that Town, that no Retorn should be made of the Men of that Town
to be of any Jury, and prayed the allowance of their Charter; and the Court
appointed them to plead their Charter, and so they did, 1 Brownl. p, 36.

If a Man has a Charter of Exemption, and shows it to the Sheriff, yet he may
Retorn him; for the Sheriff is not a Judge to allow or disallow his Charter,
but he must Sue out a Writ of allowance of his Charter, and deliver the Writ to
the Sheriff, and show his Charter to him, and then if the Sheriff Retorn him,
Action on the Case lies against him.

On a Dorsetshire Trial at the Bar, on default of all the Jurors but three, It
appeared, that She^iff countermands the Summons
the Sheriff had by command of the Plaintiff, countermanded their Summons
against the Gree of the Defendant, who now prayed a Trial. But this being
impossible, for the Court in such Case will not supply the Jury with a Tales de
Circumstantibus: No Tales de circumstantibus on Trial at Bar.
But they offered to Nonsuit the Plaintiff on Record, and conceived the
Defendant should contribute to the payment of the Jury, because they should
remain indifferent Jurors, 2 Siderfin 77. Hunt and Hollis.

Retorn of a Distringas, for appearance of the President.
Defendant in the Hustings, 2 Sanders 233.

Retorn of a Jury by the Bedels of the four next Wards, 2 Sanders 244.

If the Sheriff Retorn but 40 l. which is the Issues. Action case against the
Sheriff for Retorning two several Issues.
usual Issues on Distring as Juratores, the Court on prayer of the party cannot
cause him to Retorn greater; but only make a Rule, that good Issues be
Returned: But by Twisden Action on the Case lies against the Sheriff, 1 Keb.
475. The Plaintiff ought to bring a Writ against the Sheriff on Averment
against the Sheriffs Retorn of Issues.
Averment, that he might have levied greater Issues, and so the Court may
increase them.

Note, Before Stat. W. 2. c. 39. the Plaintiff could not aver against the
Retorn of the Sheriff, if he Returned too small Issues, for he is but an
Officer in Court, and has no day in Court to answer the Plaintiff party: But
now by 1 Ed. 3. the Plaintiff may aver what the value of the Issues be, Rents
of the Land, Corn in the Grange, What shall be said Issues.
Hay in the Barn, all movables except Riding furniture, and Utensils of House.

Retorn of the grand Inquest.
Stat. 11 H. 7. c. 9. No Indictment shall be found by any persons named to the
Justices, without due Retorn of the Sheriff, but by Inquest of lawful liege
People Returned by the Sheriff. One Scarlet whom the Sheriff had not Returned,
by confederacy betwixt him and the Clark who read the panel, procured himself
to be sworn of the grand Jury, with intent to indict his Neighbors
maliciously, and he did so; he was adjudged an Justices may alter the Panel.
Offender within this Law, and by Statute 3 H. 8. c. 10. The Justices of Gaol
Delivery, or Justices of the Peace, of whom one to be of the Quorum, in open
Court may alter the Panel Returned by the Sheriff, to enquire of the King
only, by Addition, or substraction of any of the Jurors so Returned, and they
have power to command the Sheriff, to put other in the Panel according to
their Discretion. And the Sheriff ought to Retorn the Panel, so reformed upon
the Penalty of the said Act. So that none can be of any Grand Inquest, but by
the Retorn of the Sheriff, Coke 12 Rep. Rob. Scarlets Case, Dalton. 394.

Note, By the Statute of 4 and 5 of William and Mary, all Jurors are not to
have 10 l. per annum vide infra.

It is very needful for the High Sheriff, to have a Book containing the Names
of all the Freeholders in his County, and their sufficiences, that he may make
the Pannells according to his Oath, and better know Pledges and Sureties.

As for Issues lost for default of appearance, scilicet by Jurors, or by
Tenant, or Demandant; the Sheriff may not levy till they shall be estreated
under the Seal of the Exchequer, and the same delivered to him, for without
Warrant he may not Levy the same, 27 Ed. 1. c. 7.

Other erroneous Proceedings and Misdemeanors of Sheriffs, about and concerning
Jurors.
After the parties were at Issue in Trespass, and an Habeas corpus awarded
against the Jury, the Common-Bench (in which the Action depended) Supersedeas
restrains the Sheriff from Retorning a Jury.
awarded a Supersedeas, quia improvide, etc. which was delivered to the
Sheriff, who notwithstanding returned the Jury and tried the Cause. This was
assigned for Error, and in nullo est erratum pleaded, it was adjudged Error.
For the Error assigned is a Matter of Fact, depending on a Matter of Record;
and then the Defendant What is confessed by pleading In nullo est erratum.
by pleading In nullo est erratum had confessed this, (that is to say) That
such Supersedeas was awarded and delivered to the Sheriff before the Trial.
Upon which it follows, that after the Supersedeas delivered, the hands of the
Sheriff are closed, that he cannot proceed to distrain the Jury, nor to Retorn
the Writ before the Justices of Assize. Its a manifest Error, if the Sheriff
Retorn the Writ of Hab' corpora at the Assizes with Nisi prius after
Supersedeas awarded for staying the Retorn of the Writ; as the Proceedings are
erroneous in Inferior Courts after Habeas corpus delivered without a
Procedendo, Yelv. p. 57. King and Andrews. Cro. Jac. p. 43. King and Hill.

It is not necessary for the Sheriff to Retorn Reasonable things shall be
intended to be done.
the Panel of the Jurors Names, but to say they are de vicineto of such a
place; for so it shall be intended, and the Forms of all Retorns of Jurors are
so, Pract. Reg. tit. Retorn.

In a Writ of Error Eleven Jurors were Returned and one Stranger; yet because
it was the Retorn of the Sheriff, it shall not abate, 1 Roll. Rep. 302.

The Statute of -- Eliz -- provides, There Reasonable things intended to be
done.
shall be two Hundredors in a Jury; yet its never seen that the Retorn of the
Sheriff is so. So the Statute of 42 Ed. 3. c. 11. is, That the Sheriff shall
arraign the Panel in Assize four days before the Assize, yet its never
Returned to be so done; but such reasonable things shall be intended to be
done, unless the contrary appear, 2 Siderfin p. 144. Barclee's Case.

An Attorney was picked over the Bar, for directing a Sheriff to retorn Jurors
Names, Mo. 882. n. 1237. Hanson's Case.

Note, But now by the Statute of 4 and 5 W. and M. Stat. 4 and 5 of W. and M.
all Jurors (other than Strangers, per medietatem Linguae) Returned upon Trial
of Issues joined in the King's Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer, or before
Justices of Assize, or Nisi prius, Oyer and Terminer, Jail-deliver, or General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, shall have in their own Name or Trust within the
same County Ten pounds per annum above Reprizes, of Freehold or Copyhold Land,
or in Ancient Demesne, or in Rents in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for their own or
some other persons Life; and in Wales Eight pounds per Annum. If any be
returned of Lesser Estate, he may be discharged by Challenge, or upon his own
Oath; nor shall a Jurors Issues be saved but by Order of Court, for reasonable
Cause proved upon Oath.

The Sheriff, Coroner, or other Minister retorning any person of Lesser Estate,
shall forfeit Five pounds to Their Majesty's for every person so Returned.

They must be summoned six Days before the day of their Appearance, and none
shall take a Reward to excuse a Jurors appearance, on pain to forfeit Ten
pounds to Their Majesty's.

This Act extends not to Cities, Buroughs or Towns Corporate.

Of Challenges.
A Challenge to the Jurors is Twofold: To the Array, Polls.


To the Array, is, to except against all the persons Impannelled: And as to
this there is a Challenge Principal, or for Favor.


Note, That the Challenge to the Array is in respect of the partiality or
default of the Sheriff, or other Officer that made the Retorn, and not in
respect of the Persons returned, where there is no partiality or default in the
Sheriff. For if the Challenge to the Array be found against the party that
takes it; yet he shall have his particular Challenge to the Polls.

If the Sheriff or other Officers be of Kindred or Affinity to the Plaintiff or
Defendant; if the Alliance continue, a good cause of Challenge, 1 Bulstr. 5, 6,
7, 8. Earl of Salop versus Earl of Rutland.

Challenge was taken to the Array, because the Sheriff was Cousin to the Lessor
in Ejectment, and concludes not to the Favor; its a principal Challenge. Yet
in Roll. Rep. 183. its adjudged a Principal Challenge; and in 1 Roll. Abr. 328.
Guest and Bridgman, says, It is not a Principal Challenge that the Lessor is
Cousin. But Trin. 1657. B. R. in the Lord Brook's Case its a Principal
Challenge, Cro. Jac. 575. Simonds and Walsh, 2 Rolls Abr. 182.

Venire fac' was awarded to the Coroners on surmize, that the Lessor in
Ejectment was Servant to the Sheriff. It was doubted, whether it was a
Principal Challenge in 1 Jac. Harbottle's Case. Coke said, It was Adjudged in
27 El. in Packington's Case, that it was not a Principal Challenge; but in
Spicer's Case it is Resolved otherwise, Cro. Jac. 21. Dyer 7, 367.

If the Challenge be taken for Cosinage, it ought to be showed coment Cousin;
but in such case Challenge to a Juror, is not necessary.

Its clearly a good Challenge to the Array, that the Sheriff is Cousin to the
Wife of the Defendant, though the Wife is no party to the Action: But it must be
averred, that she was alive, or had Issue at the making of the Panel.

1. If the Jury may try a Challenge for Cosinage of the Sheriff to the
Plaintiff or Defendant, and sometime the Coroners, or Attorneys in Court, are
Elisors, 2 Roll. Rep. 363. Lloyd and Elisors.
Williams.

If the Defendant challenge the Array, for that the Sheriff is Cousin to the
Plaintiff; it is no Counterplea of the Challenge that the Sheriff is also
Cousin to the Defendant; but the Array shall be quasht, because the Defendant
first took the Challenge, Pasch. 41 El. B. R.

2. If any one or more of the Jury be returned at at the denomination of the
party, Plaintiff or Defendant, the whole Array shall be quasht.

3. If the Plaintiff or Defendant have an Action of Battery or Debt against the
Sheriff, or if the Sheriff have parcel of the Land depending on the same Title;
or if the Sheriff or his Bailiff be either of Counsel or Attorney, or Servant
or Gossip of either party; all the Array shall be quasht.

A Prayer to Elisors in Trials at Bar may be at Elisors.
the Suit of the Defendant or Plaintiff; but in Nisi prius, at the Prayer of
the Plaintiff only.

Consanguinity or Affinity are the principal Causes; but its no Challenge to
the Array, if all the Jurors be of Affinity.

Challenge to the Array for Favor, That the Sheriff is Servant to the
Plaintiff, or was Arbitrator for a party: That the Sheriff purchased part of
the Land in question: That one party is Tenant or Servant to the Sheriff.

Malice between the Sheriff and one of the parties, is good cause of Challenge,
That one of the parties has brought an Action of Debt against the Sheriff, etc.
but not that the Officer has Debt against the party; for he may demand his Debt
without Malice.

This kind of Challenge being no principal Challenge, must be left to the
Conscience and discretion of the Tryors.

Challenge to the Polls, i. e. to the particular Challenge to the Poll.
Jurors; and these are of four sorts:

1. Peremptory, without showing any Cause; and this for Treason is 35. Felony
20.

2. Principal Challenge to the Polls; so called, because it stands of it self,
without leaving any thing to the Conscience or Discretion of the Tryors. Now
this is such Matter as proves evident Favor or Enmity in the Juror.

And this is, Propter respectum; as the Nobility may be challenged, or he may
challenge himself, propter defectum, as Aliens, Villains; not having Freehold
sufficient; not having two Hundredors. Propter affectum, as Jurors of Kin or
Blood to either party; that he has formerly Tried the Cause; Counsel; not a
Commissioner for Examination of Witnesses; Fellow Servants; for Favor; propter
delictum, as Outlawed, etc.

3. Challenger to the Poll must show Cause presently. After one has taken
Challenge to the Poll, he cannot challenge the Array.

4. If the Plaintiff allege a Cause of Challenge against the Sheriff, the
Process shall be directed to the Coroners; and if any Cause against all the
Coroners, then the Court shall appoint Elisors. Sometime, two of them that be
Elisors.
Impannelled.

When any Challenge is made to the Poll^, two Tryors shall be appointed by the
Court.

Note, All Challenges must be taken before the Jurors are sworn.

No Challenge shall be admitted against the Tryors, appointed by the Court.

There may be a Challenge to the Panel by Exception to the Sheriff, after a
Tales prayed to him: So after a Venire fac' prayed to him, though the cause of
Challenge were before the Prayer, Hob. p. 235.

Upon a Writ of Error the Record was certified, That the Challenge was to the
Sheriff for Cousinage, and after a Venire fac' awarded to the Coroners, upon
the Diminution it may not be Certified, That the Challenge of the Cousinage was
after the Retorn of the Venire fac'; because this is contrary to the Record
before certified, 1 Roll. Abr. 764. Floyd and Bethell.

That the Sheriff was quondam Servant to the Defendant, Earl of Rutland, is no
principal Challenge, its past and executed. Aliter, had it been so at the time.

To say, That between the Sheriff or Officer that retorns the Panel, and one
of the Defendants, there was an Action of Trespass then depending, is a
principal Challenge.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Writ of Enquiry of Damages, and the Sheriffs demeanor therein, and in
what Cases a new Writ shall be granted, or not. By whom to be executed. The
time of Executing it. The Form of the Retorn of a Writ of Enquiry of Damages.

Vide sub tit. Waste.
IF upon the Executing of a Writ of Enquiry A new Writ granted.
of Damages the Sheriff refuses to swear and examine some of the Witnesses
produced on either part, and yet does execute the Writ; the Court will grant a
new Writ to the party grieved, for the old Writ was not well executed, Pract.
Reg. 348.

A Writ of Enquiry of Damages directed to the Sheriff, cannot be executed by a
Bailiff of a Liberty, Hob. p. 83.

Writ of Enquiry of Damages varies in the Amended.
retorn of the Award upon the Roll, which was amended and made agreeable to the
Roll, Mo. 711. n. 998.

As to time of Executing it.
If a Writ of Enquiry of Damages be Retornable Octabis Michaelis, the Sheriff
may take the Inquest and enquire the Damages the day of the Retorn, and after
he Retorns it the same day; this Writ is well executed, Trin. 38 El. B. R.
Gawen and Ludlow.

If on a Writ of Enquiry of Damages the Inquest be Impannelled the Essoyn Day,
and the Jury then hear their Evidence two or three days after; yet this is well
executed, Mich. 11 Car. 1. B. R. Stainby and Waterman.

Retorn of a Writ of Enquiry of Damages.
Executio istius brevis patet in quadam inquisitione huic brevi annex'.

INquisitio indentat' capta apud C. in Com' War' (tali die and anno) coram A.
B. Armig', Vicecom' ejusdem Com', Virtute cajusdam brevis domini Regis, eidem
Vic' direct' and huic inquisitioni consut' per Sacrament' R. S. F. G. etc. (ad
numorum 12 Jurors) qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum quod A. P. in brevi
Inquisition' huic consut' nominat' sustinuit damna occasion (Trangress.
praedict') per H. in praed' brevi nominat' prout in eodem brevi fit mentio ad
40 s. and pro mis' and custag' ipsius A. P. per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac
part appositis ad 40 s. In cujus rei, etc.

In this Writ, to Enquire of Damages in Trespass, the Jury cannot find that no
Trespass is done. Neither may the Sheriff make such a Retorn; but if the Jury
will find no Damages, the Sheriff must make his Retorn accordingly.

CAP. XIV.
Where and in what Cases the Sheriffs Retorn of a Devastavit shall be good or
not, and the late practice in such Cases.

THe Defendant pleads plene administravit, and Sheriff concluded to make any
retorn, contrary to the Verdict.
Verdict is for the Plaintiff, this estops the Sheriff of the County where the
Trial was to Retorn Nulla bona; for he is concluded by the Verdict to make any
Retorn contrary to it; but the Sheriff of another County shall not be so
concluded. But the Sheriff of the County where the Writ is brought ought to
Retorn a Devastavit, and thereupon the Plaintiff shall have Process into
another County, 2 Leon. n. 90. p. 67. Noon's Case, 1 Anders. 32.

And the Question further was, If a Testatum shall issue into another County,
before the Sheriff of the County where the Writ was brought had returned a
Devastavit, and not Resolved; but without doubt its the safer way to do it upon
the Retorn.

The principal Case was; Debt in London against an Executor, upon plene
administravit it was found for the Plaintiff, the Plaintiff assigned the same
to the Queen, and a Scire fac' issued out of the Exchequer against the
Defendant, etc. into the County of D. and the Sheriff returned Nulla bona, etc.
which was not good, causa qua supra, though the Debt was well assigned. And upon
a Constat of Goods in another County, he may well have a Scire fac' into
another County, 2 Leon. n. 90. Bendl. 23.

But if Executors plead plene administravit, it was found they had Assets, and
a Fieri fac' issued to the Sheriff, who Returned that they had not any thing
within the County. Per Cur', Its a good Retorn, because the Jury it may be
found Assets in another County; so the Verdict shall not bind the Sheriff, 2
Brownl. Rep. p. 116. Morgan and Took.

If it appear by the Defendants Plea that he has When the Sheriff may ret^rn
Devastauit.
Assets in his hands, and if the Sheriff cannot levy the debt in the Defendants
hands, he may upon the Defendants own showing (without any damage) retorn a
Devastavit; and if Judgment be given against an Executor on Demurrer, and
Execution awarded, the Sheriff cannot Retorn Nulla habet bona Testatoris. But
it is a Devastavit if it be found against the Executor by Verdict. Cro. Eliz.
102. Stubs and Rightwise.

Judgment was given in Banco de bonis Testatoris, Special Scire fac'.
and Fieri fac' issues out; the Sheriff Retorns Nulla bona; the Plaintiff may
have a Special Fieri fac', That the Sheriff shall levy the Debt of the Goods of
the dead, and si sibi constare poterit, Fau^ Retorn.
that the Executors have wasted them, then de bonis propriis; and if the
Sheriff makes a False Retorn, the party may have an Action on the Case. But if
upon the Retorn of Nulla bona, and a Quia Testatum est, that they have wasted,
a Writ of Enquiry is awarded what Goods were wasted, and its found that Goods
ad valentia^ of the Debt were wasted, and upon that a Scire fac' to have
Execution de bonis propriis upon two Nichils returned; This is Erroneous, and
if the Inquisition be false, the party has no Remedy, and upon two Nichils
returned the Defendant shall be condemned; yet perhaps he had not Notice, 5
Rep. Pettyfer's Case.

To that purpose is a Case in Littleton's Reports, Judgment was given against
the Executor, and Execution awarded; and the Plaintiff informs the Sheriff,
that the Executors have wasted the Goods of the Testator; but the Sheriff would
not retorn a Devastavit. Henden Sergeant moved for a Commission, to enquire
whether the Goods were wasted; and if it be found, then the Sheriff might
retorn a Devastavit without peril. But the Judges said, they would not Advise,
because it was a New course, Lit. Rep. 47.

But in Aldworth and Peel's Case it was Resolved. There Debt was brought
against Peel as Executor, the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover de bonis
Testatoris; and thereupon a Scire Scire fac' de bonis propriis shall not be
awarded upon the surmize of the party, but on the Retorn of the Sheriff of a
Devastavit.
fac' was awarded, and the Sheriff retorneth quod nulla habuit bona Testatoris;
and the Plaintiff surmizeth, that he had wasted the Testator's Goods; whereupon
he prayed a Scire fac', why he should not have Execution de bonis propriis. And
per Cur', this Writ shall not be awarded upon the surmize of the party of a
Devastation, nor in any case where the Judgment is de bonis propriis; unless it
be on Retorn of the Sheriff, where he retorns a Devastavit, Cro. El. 530.
Aldworth and Peele.

If A. recover against B. Debt and Damages, and after B. died, and
Administration is granted to C. his Wife, who wastes the Goods, and after takes
D. to Husband, and a Fieri fac' is awarded de bonis Testatoris in the hands of
D. and C. and the Sheriff Retorns Nulla bona, etc. and upon this, on surmize
that they have wasted the Goods, another Writ was awarded to the Sheriff, Si
sibi constare poterit per Inquisition', that they have wasted the Goods, then
to warn them to show cause why Execution should not be de bonis propriis, and
so an Inquisition is taken. And the Sheriff Returned, That they had not in
their hands any of the Goods of the Intestate; but that the Feme being
Administratrix of her first Husband, had Goods of the value of 100 l. of the
said Intestates, and had wasted them during her Widowhood, and the Husband had
not wasted any of them. Et si devasterunt according to the Writ, the Jury pray
the Discretion of the Court. Per Cur'. This Special Retorn of the Sheriff is
good, and by this the Husband is
to be charged for the Conversion of the Wife. Cro. Car. 603. King and Hilton.

The Sheriff Retorns a Devastavit (no Assets over being in Question) on Non est
factum against an Administrator by Fieri fac', with a Scire fac'. Per Cur',
Though it be a False Retorn we cannot Faux Retorn.
help it, but its at the Sheriffs peril, 3 Keb. 530. Brown and Collins.

On Fieri fac', with a Scire fac' and Assets, the Sheriff returned Waste, and
the Defendant pleaded plene administravit. The Plaintiff demurred, because the
point of the Inquisition is not traversed, and Judgment pro Querente.

Debt against an Executor, and a Recovery by Verdict, and Judgment upon this,
and a Fieri fac' de bonis of the Intestate; upon which a Devastavit was
returned, an Elegit issues de bonis propriis, Mo. 299. n. 446. Mead and Cheney.

If A. recover against B. and Execution de bonis The party may discharge
himself of a Devastavit by Plea, That the Sheriff levied the Money on the first
Fieri fac'.
Testatoris, si non, de bonis propriis, and the Sheriff upon a Fieri fac'
levies the Moneys, and after to another Fieri fac' to him directed, Retorns a
Devastavit; and upon this a Scire fac' is granted against B. to show cause,
etc. B. may discharge himself of this Devastavit by Plea, that the Sheriff
levied the Money upon the first Fieri fac. 1 Roll. Abr. 903. Middleton and
Powell.

President,

Retorn of a Fieri fac' upon a Devastavit, Dyer 222.

But now the Practice is more nimble than by the tedious Inquisitions, and that
is, by bringing Action in the Debet and Detinet against an Executor, suggesting
a Devastavit in his Declaration, without any Retorn of the Sheriff, Siderfin
397. Wheatby and Law.

On a Fieri fac' in a Scire fac' to have Execution de bonis propriis.
Sheriff Retorns upon Inquisition, That the Defendant (Administrator) habuit
bona and catalla Plea to Scire fac' de Devastavit.
in manibus suis quae fuerunt del intestate tempore mortis suae ad valentiam
debiti and damnorum recovered by the Original Judgment; and that the Defendant
bona and catalla illa ad valenc' debiti and damnorum praedict' vendidit and
elongavit ac in usum suum proprium convertit and disposuit. Defendant at the
Retorn of the Writ comes in, and protestando that he had fully Administered, for
Plea he says, non vendidit seu elongavit, etc. Et hoc, etc. Plaintiff replies,
That the Defendant vendidit and elongavit, etc. and found for the Plaintiff.
Per Cur', Though this is no apparent Issue (but whether devastavit vel non) for
the Defendant might pay Debts with his proper Moneys, and that he might dispose
of the Goods to his own use; yet its good after Verdict. For the Writ of Scire
fac' suggests, That the Defendant bona and catalla, etc. disposuit ea
intention qd' dict a executio fieret, 1 Sand. 306. Merchant and Driver. And it
is the Defendant's own fault to take such an Issue; for he might have taken
Issue, that he had not Goods of that value, or that he had paid any special
Debt.

CHAP. XV.
Of Prisons, to whom they belong, and the place where kept. Who may be keeper
of Gaols, etc. and how forfeitable. Of the Sheriffs of Londons Prison, and of
the Marshalsea, and the Grant thereof. Of the Sheriffs detneanor toward
Prisoners. Of the Prisoners Misbehaviour, and what payment of a Debt to a
Jailer shall be good, or not. And of those that break Prison.

Of Prisons, etc.
ALL Prisons are the Kings; but a Subject may be Keeper, Co. 2 Inst. 100, 580.

The custody of County Gaols is incident to County Gaol inseparable to the
Office of Sheriff.
the Office of Sheriff, and inseparable from the Sheriff; and therefore if the
King grant the Custody of such a Gaol to another, its void: For the Sheriff is
the immediate Officer of the Kings Courts, and shall be answerable for Escapes,
and be subject to Amerciaments, and therefore he shall put in such Keepers as
he shall answer for, 4 Rep. 34. Mitton's Case, 14 Ed. 3. c. 10.

The Sheriff may remove his Gaol from one The place where to be kept.
place to another within his Bailywick. And the Sheriff may hold the Assizes in
the Castle where he held them there by Prescription, although the King grant the
Custody of the Castle to another. So that though the Sheriff may keep the Gaol in
what place he will within his Bailywick, yet in a particular place not without
Prescription, Heb. p. 202. 1 Anders. 345.

Infants or Feme Coverts are keepers of Gaols, to charge them in Execution for
an Escape, 2 Inst. 382.

As the King may by his Letters Patents make a County, so he may in the making
of it, save and except to him and his Successors such part of the Jurisdiction
or Privilege, which the other County (from which it is exempted) had in it
before. As in many places in the Realm, the Gaol of a Town, which is a County
of it self, or a place privileged from the County, is the Gaol of the County,
and the place where the Assizes or Jail-deliver is holden, is within the
County of the Town, and yet serves also for the County at large: As in the
Sessions-Hall at Newgate, which serves as well for the County of Middlesex, as
for London, and yet it stands in London; but by Usage it has been so. And so
the Gaol of Berry, etc. Poph. p. 16. The Case of the Town of Gloucester.

The Sheriffs of London's Court is moveable, Prison of the Sheriffs of London.
and the Sheriff is chargable with a Prisoner while he is in Prison, though he be
Judge also. For why should the City Sergeants give Security to the Sheriff,
unless the Sheriff be the Officer? And it has been Ruled, That although the
Sheriff be Judge, yet a Precept is directed to him. Therefore its a good Plea
in Debt on Escape, That the Sheriff Commanded the Sergeant at Mace to deliver
the Prisoner to him, Siderfin p. 318. 2 Keb. 141. Husband and Cole.

Note, The Sheriffs of London may make their Houses their Prisons, as well as
the Compters: And the bringing the person arrested to the Sheriff, albeit it be
sub dio, and not into any House; yet its as good as delivering into the
Sheriffs Prison. Vid. infra. Note, Upon Forfeiture the Custody of a Prison is
given to another, and yet till he is actually removed he shall answer for all
Escapes, and he that occupies the Gaol by Tort shall answer; and actual Escape
lies against him who had possession at Will, 11 H. 7. 23. Dyer 274.

But if he be not sufficient, Respondeat superior. 9 Rep. Reynold's Case. Vide
supra.

Grant by Patent of the Office of the Marshalsea Marshalsea.
of the King's Bench for years is not good, for the Inconveniences that might
ensue; it may thereby become in suspense upon probat of a Will, till
Administration committed thereof; and it might fall to persons Insufficient;
and in case of Fee or Tail it descends to an Infant, the Court puts a fit
person in for the time, Cro. Car. 587. Meade versus Sir J. Lenthall.

Vid. more of the Marshalsea, 9 Rep. Sir G. Reynold's Case, 10 Rep. Case of the
Marshalsea.
Marshal of the Kings Bench shall not be privileged from Execution. But if the
Court do grant him in Execution its an Escape as to all the Prisoners; but they
may make a new Marshal, and then take him in Execution, Siderfin p. 68.

By Hyde, Chief Justice of B. R. The Court Informat' versus le Marshal.
cannot sequester the Marshal's Office, for not paying a Debt due to any
private man. But by Windham, an Information may be against the Officer for this
ill using his Office to shift men's Debts, and on that the Court may sequester.
So on any Contempt by him, 1 Keb. 846. Roberts versus Sir J. Lenthall.

Attorney of B. R. brought Trespass against the Warden of the Fleet.
Warden of the Fleet, who advised with the Court of C. B. that he being an
Officer of this Court, ought not to be impleaded elsewhere. Per Cur', Its
equality of Liberty, and he that first begins the Suit shall have the
privilege; and so he was advised to Answer, 2 Leon. p. 41. Povey's Case.

G. brought Action of Debt against the Warden by a Bill of Privilege, but he
would not appear; and the Court were in doubt, what remedy the Plaintiff has
to compel the Defendant to appear. For he cannot be fore-judged the Court,
because he had Estate of Inheritance in the said Office: But the Warden having
made a Lease of his Office for three years, he shall not have his Liberty, 2
Leonard 173. Gittonson's Case.

As for Gaols which have been granted in Fee, or Life, or which have been held
by Prescription, may be forfeited several ways.

Where the Jailer detains a Prisoner after Fees paid, the King may seize the
Gaol, 2 Inst. 43, 53.

Of the Sheriffs Demeanor toward Prisoners.
Britton c. 11. says, No Prisoner shall be put in Irons, but Traitors, or
those taken for Felony or Trespass in parcis and vivariis, or which shall be
found in Arrears in Account before they be attainted. Vide 1 Ed. 3. c. 7.

My Lord Coke, in his 3 Inst. 35. extremely inveighs against Racks. It is true,
the punishment is amazing; but as the sins of every Age grow more impudent, so
their penalties ought to be more severe: And if we will translate our
Neighboring Nations Villainies, we ought to imitate their punishments;
especially for Offenses public, and which go to the ruin of a Nation.

I will put a common Instance. At this present our current Trade is almost
spoiled by our Noncurrent Money, and he that shall break open a Bakers Window
to take a Sixpeny Loaf to supply mere Nature, shall be as severely treated, as'
he that Clips and Counterfeits the Coin; I mean, a little dry Hanging serves
for both; for as to the Sledge, its insignificant. And we shall conclude, It
will never be otherwise unless the Breaking on the Wheel and dying by
piecemeal, sometimes used in other Countries, may terrify Spectators, and
those to whom it is Reported; ut poena ad paucos, etc.

Though there is no person that has a greater Veneration for our Common Law than
my self; yet I conceive I may say, the spreading and new Villainies of our
Nation are chiefly owing to our undistinguishing punishments.

He that takes but Half a Crown on the Pad shall be hanged, and deservedly; and
he that Blasphemes his God, Murders his Father, and commits a Rape upon his
Mother, shall even make his Exit with a few wry wet Looks, and a little Swing
or two: Which punishment I must needs observe is almost grown into Contempt by
the major part of Criminals.

I need but mention the notorious Case of Felton; and the late Story of the
barbarous Midwife.

By our Law it is plain, A Prisoner in Execution shall not be in Fetters, but
for Criminal Causes.

But to return to my purpose: A Prisoner (while he is such) is under protection
of the Law, and accordingly is to be used.

And therefore where a Prisoner, by duress of the Jailer, comes to an Untimely
End, it is Murder in the Jailer, 3 Inst. 52, 91. And the Law implies Malice in
him in respect of the Cruelty.

And therefore if a man dye in Prison, the Coroner ought to sit upon him, to
the end it may be enquired, if he came to his death by the duress of the
Jailer, or otherwise, 3 Inst. 91. 52.

If the Sheriff, or other Officer, where he ought to Hang the party attainted,
according to his Judgment and his Charge, will (against the Law) of his own
wrong, Burn or Behead him, etc. the Law in this case implies Malice in him.

By the Statute of 14 Ed. 3. c. 10. If a Keeper, or Under-Keeper of Prisons, by
too great duress of Imprisonment, or by Pain, make a Prisoner become an
Appellor, ( viz.) an Approver against his Will, its Felony.

Every Imprisonment is in Law duritia, duress; a little addition to it by the
Jailer, is too great duress in this case.

There is a remarkable Case in 3 Bulstrode. The Court was moved by Sir G.
Reynell against one of his Prisoners, who had much misbehaved himself, offered
to Escape, and had endangered the killing of one of his Servants, and that he
had spent Ten pounds after him; and he would have had the Court to have fined
him. But per Cur', We will not do it; you must keep him in arcta custodia in
Irons, and you may Indict him for these Misdemeanors, and by that way you may
have him Fined, 3 Bulstr. 245. Sir G. Reynell's Case.

The payment of a Debt by a Prisoner to a Payment of the Debt to ^ Jailer.
Jailer is not good; and therefore in Debt the Defendant pleads, That he was a
year in Execution and the Plaintiff could not be found, whereupon he paid the
Money to the Jailer. The Plaintiff replies, That he was to be found at D.
absque hoc, that he absented eo animo, to keep the Defendant in Prison. And the
Defendant to this Demurs, because the Marshal may dye, and no Recovery can be
by the Defendant against the Marshal, if he do not pay it over. But the Court
gave Judgment for the Plaintiff; it being not reasonable to pay Money to the
Jailer for the Plaintiff, whether he will or not. And also, they thought it too
hard for the Plaintiff to prove payment, or to prove Assets in the hands of the
Marshall's Executors, 3 Keb. 748. Tailor and Baker, Sir Tho. Jones's Rep. mesme
Case.

Where the Imprisonment is unlawful the Prisoner is not to pay for his Diet, 1
Roll. Rep. 329. Oliver's Case.

Note, If a Prisoner is in Execution, and the Jailer or Sheriff dye, he is in
abeyance and custody of the Law, 3 Rep. Westby's Case.

A Jailer is not bound to deliver his Prisoner, who is Discharged by the Court,
until he pays his due Fees.

A Prisoner acquitted of Felony, the Jailer may take Twenty pence, which is
called a Bar Fee.

Every Sheriff Bailiff of Franchise, and every other person having Authority of
keeping Gaols, or of Prisoners for Felony, shall certify the Names of every
such Prisoner in their keeping at the next General Jail-deliver in every
County or Franchise where such Gaol is, there to be Kalendred before the
Justices of the Delivery of the same Gaol, whereby they may, as well for the
King as the party, proceed to make delivery of such Prisoners, according to the
Law, on pain of Five pounds, 3 H. 7. 3.

If the Jailer shall suffer an Escape, the High Sheriff or Jailer are
chargeable therefore.

CHAP. XVI.
When one may be said to be in Execution or not. And when without Prayer or
not. In what Cases the Sheriff may break open an House to do Execution or not.
To what Sheriff, and of what place and County shall Execution be Awarded. Of a
Cap. ad satisfaciend' for what and against whom it lies, and the Sheriffs
Demeanor therein, and Retorns thereupon.

Of Execution.
When one may be said to be in Execution or not.

When one shall be in Execution without Prayer of the Plaintiff or not.

IF a Man recover Damages in Action on the Case against J. S. in the Kings
Bench, the said J. S. being in Custod' Mareschal'; yet he shall not be in
Execution on this Judgment, although it be within the year, before Prayer of the
Plaintiff; for the Marshal may not take notice of every Where a Man Comittitur.
Judgment against every Prisoner; but upon Prayer of the Plaintiff, a
Comittitur shall be entered upon the Roll, and then he is in Execucution; but
if the Defendant being taken in Execution, be brought on by Habeas Corpus, and
then an Entry of the Com^^^tur is made in the Book of the Office, its Go^^
Hill. 12 Jac. B. R. Sir Henry Bellows and Hanford. 2 Rolls Rep. 112.

If a Man recover in B. C. Debt and Damages against J. S. and had Judgment,
although that J. S. be a Prisoner in the Fleet for other Causes, (which is the
Prison of the Common Bench) and the Warden informs the Court of it, and the
Court commands him to retain him, in Execution until satisfaction of the
Judgment; yet he is not in Execution, because he was not brought to the Bar by
Habeas Corpus, and viewed and demanded of the Prisoner, if he be the same
person, who is Condemned or not; and it is the Office of the Court to oppose
him, Dier 13, 14 El. p. 306. pl. 63. So if the Warden inform the At the Prayer
of the Party or not.
the Court of Chancery, that J. S. (which is Prisoner there on a Judgment) is
in his Ward for certain Causes, on which the Court commands the Warden to
Retorn him in Execution, until satisfaction of the Judgment; yet J. S. is not
in Execution upon the Judgment, because this was not done at the request of the
Plaintiff, but without his Prayer, for it may be he will Elect another
Execution, Dier 306, 63.

In Debt against J. S. if the Defendant be taken upon a Latitat, and committed
to the Marshal for default of Bail, and after the Plaintiff recovers against
him he continuing in Prison; yet he shall not be in Execution for this
Judgment, before the Prayer of the Plaintiff, M. 4 Jac. B. R. Car. and Copping.

If a Man recover in Debt and Outlaw. The On Cap. Utlegat.
Defendant after Judgment, and after within the year the Defendant is taken by
Cap' Uslagatum, he shall be in Execution for the Plaintiff before Prayer,
because the Outlawry was at the Suit of the Party, 5 Rep. 88. Garnons Case, H.
41. El. B. R. Bonner and Stackley. Otherwise it is, if he be taken in Execution
after the year, because in that Case he may not have any Capias against him,
Hill. 38. El. B. R. Norton and Sharp. But if a Man Outlaw the Defendant in Debt
after Judgment, and after within the year, the Defendant is taken by Cap'
Utlagatum, although he be in Execution for the Plaintiff prima facie; yet he may
make Election, that it shall not be an Execution for him, 44 El. B. R. Shaw and
Cutter.

If Execution by default be Awarded in a Scire fac'
Scire fac' upon a Judgment in Debt, and the Defendant four years after was in
the Fleet for other Cause; and by Habeas Corpus he was brought up to the Common
Bench, and being opposed by the Court, if he were the person who was condemned,
ut supra, and he grants it, he Though after the year and day.
shall be committed in Execution, at the Prayer of the Plaintiff as it seems,
though it be after the year and day, Dier 214, 147.

If A. recover against B. by Judgment in the Kings Bench, and upon this B.
renders himself to Prison, and after brought a Writ of Error and had a
Supersedeas; yet after upon Prayer of the Plaintiff, the Court may commit him
in Execution, Writ of Error, Bail.
although that the Record be removed; forasmuch as he had not found Bail upon his
Writ of Error, p. 9. Car. 1. B. R. Symonds Case.

How and in what Cases the Sheriff may break open an House to do Execution.
The Leading Case in this Point is Semaines Case, reported by my Lord Coke, in
5 Rep. and in Crokes Eliz. 98. out of which I shall Collect these ^ollowing
Resolutions.

The Case was, A Joint Termor of an House with B. dies, being bound in a
Statute. The Sheriff Retorns him dead, Conusee Sues another Writ to extend his
Lands, which he had at the time of his death or after, and what Goods he had at
the time of his death: The Sheriff Impanels a Jury to enquire what Goods, etc.
and it was found there were diverse Goods of the said deceased at the House of
B. in London: And the Sheriff came with the Jury to view Appraise, and seize
them for this Debt, and the (Defendant) Surviving Termor, premissorum non
ignarus shut the Door, and disturbed him to make Execution.

It was resolved,

First, Upon Recovery the Sheriff may break On habere fac' possessionem.
open an House, and deliver it to the Plaintiff; for the Writ says, habere
fac' seisinam, or possessionem. And after Judgment it is not the House of the
Defendant in Right.

Secondly, upon a Capias ad satisfaciend', the Defendant may not break open any
Man's House to make Execution; but in all cases, when the Door is open the
Sheriff may Enter to make Execution of Body or Goods.

Thirdly, In all Cases where the King is Party, so on Hue and Cry, if no Door
be open, the Sheriff may break open the House to take him, or to do Execution
or other Process; as upon a Cap' Utlagat', or upon Contempt: But he ought first
to signify the Cause of his coming, and request the Owner to open the Door,
but not to break open any Man's House by night.

Fourthly, Upon a Fieri fac', or Extendi fac', the Sheriff may not enter into
the House of any, the Door being shut, nor draw a Latch no not after request
and denial; yet though the Sheriff be a Trespassor in breaking open the House by
Fieri fac', yet the Execution is Good.

Fifthly, The House of any one is not privileged but for himself and his
Family, and his own proper Goods, not to protect any who fly there, or the
Goods of another conveyed there; and in such case after request, the Sheriff
may break open the Door; but in the principal Case he did not request it, and
so the shutting the Door by the Defendant was lawful, and no Action lies
against him. And as for the Allegation of ( premissorum non ignarus) it is too
general, and Notice ought to be specially alleged, that he Notice.
was Sheriff and what he came to do; and the Defendant being a Stranger to the
Execution, he is not bound to take notice of the Sheriffs intent.

Upon a Fieri fac', a Barn which stands in the Field may be broken by the
Sheriff, because it is not part of the Dwelling House, and there needs no
request, aliter had the Barn been adjoining and parcel of the House, Siderfin
186, 187. Pentons Case, 1 Bulst. 146. Foster and Hole.

But though a Sheriff cannot break open a House, being to take Execution by Fieri
fac', yet when the Door is open that he enters, then he may and ought to break
open the Door of an Entry or Chamber which is locked, or break open any Chest
which is locked and take the Goods, and if he do not, an Action of the Case
lies against him, 1 Browl. Rep. 50.

Diversity was taken in White and Wiltshires case, where the Execution is
lawfully begun, there the Sheriff or his Officers may break the House to make
Execution, otherwise, when it is not lawfully begun. If one be Arrested by the
Sheriff and he escapes to his own House, and the Sheriff persues him and
breaks open the Doors of his House, and takes him again, the party shall never
take benefit of this his own wrongful escape.

Two of the under Sheriffs Bailiffs entered into the House, the Door being open,
to take Execution of the Goods, and the Plaintiff shuts the Door upon the
Bailiffs, and imprisoned them for two hours; the Sheriff may break open the
House to Rescue his Bailiffs. Cro. Jac. 555. White and Wiltshire.

Note, the Sheriff was fined for breaking open an House, and rushing in with
Sword drawn, the Door being half open, on private Process. By the Stat. W. 1.
c. 15. the Sheriff may break open an House or Castle to make Replevin when the
Goods of another are Conveyed there. 5 Rep. Semain's Case.

If a Bankrupt convey his Goods to his Neighbors House, the Sergeant
Commissioners may not, but the Sheriff may break open the House, because he is
a sworn Officer of the Kings Goodwins Law against Bankrupts 65. Quer.

Upon a Commission of Rebellion out of Chancery, the Sheriff may break open the
House to apprehend the party therein, whether in his own or another House.
Cromp. fo. 47.

The Sheriff may take the posse Comitat. to do Execution Per Stat. W. 2. c. 39.
and he may take it post vel ante querimoniam, but he may take it after
resistance, and not before; for sequi debet potentia justitiam non praecedere.
Co. 2 Inst. p. 454.

But suppose the Sheriff cannot do Execution Posse Comitat.
by the posse Comitatus, then says the Book 1 Keb. 99. 117. he ought to
acquaint the Deputy Lieutenants of the County, and if they assist not, he must
acquaint the King and Council, and yet the Sheriff shall not be amerced, if he
return he cannot do Execution; but in Godbolt. 79. upon a resistance of
Execution, the Council Table refused to meddle in it, because the Court of
King's Bench ought to see their own Judgment executed: and a Writ was prayed to
the high Sheriff with a special Rule, that the high Sheriff should execute it
himself, which the Court granted, and a Tipstaff to fetch the under Sheriff up
to return his Writ, which is better than an Attachment which is returnable by
it self. 1 Kel, 99. 117. Godbolt 79. Bush and Chamberlain.

To what Sheriff, of what place or County shall Execution be awarded.
If Recognizance of Bayl be taken by a Judge of the Common Pleas at Sergeants
Inn in London, upon an Original brought in London, and certifies this into the
Court of Common Pleas, and is there enrolled; but it appears on Record, that it
was taken as before, a Scire fac' may be awarded upon this Recognizance to the
Sheriff of London where the Capias was, for there was the Commencement of it,
and also the Scire fac' may Scire Fac. the Sheriff of London or Middlesex on
Recognizance of Bail.
be awarded to the Sheriff of Middlesex where the Recognisance was enrolled, 1
Roll. Abridg' 891. John's and Lee, Andrews and Harbin, Poltney and Forebench,
Feildgate and Gardener, contra. 5 Mariae by Brook, And by all the
Prothonotaries then, it ought to be brought in London and not in Middleseas.
But in 13 Car 1. the Prothonotaries certified that it may be brought in London
or Middlesex.

W. 2 c. 18. says Vic. ei liberet Medietat' per rationabile extent. (viz.) per
inquisition, and the Sheriff Sergeant at Mace may execute Elegit.
is sworn, and a Sergeant at Mace is not sworn to take a Jury; yet the Stat.
extends to every other immediate Officer, to any of the Kings Courts of Record,
and so a Sergeant may execute this, and a Fieri Fac' also, and this Stat.
couples Elegit with a Fieri Fac' and limits both to be executed by the Sheriff,
but in Wast and Redisseisen, the Sheriff must do it in person. 4 Rep. 65, 66.
Fullwoods. Case

If a Man recover Damages in Action of Wast The Writ to levy Damages in Waste
to whom to be derected.
in one County, the Writ to levy them shall issue to the Sheriff of the same
County where the Action was first brought, and not to any other; but if the
Sheriff retorn he had nothing, he shall have execution into any other County
where the Recoveror will. 29 Ed. 3. 9. b.

Having treated of Executions in general, as far as relates to Sheriffs; I
shall now proceed to speak of Executions in particular, as to the Sheriffs
demeanor about the executing of them, and making due Retorns upon them. And
'its a Point very fit for the consideration of all Sheriffs specially.

There are but 4 mannner of Executions, Two by the Common Law, and Two by the
Stat. Law, by Common Law Levari and Fi' Fac'
Executions. Stat. Staple, St. Merchant, Recognizance.
By Statute Law Capia. Elegit.
Of which I shall treat distinctly, limiting my self therein to the duty and
Behavior of Sheriffs, And first of the Capias.

Capias ad Satisfaciend is a judicial Writ and lies where a man has recovered
in a personal Action, any Debt or Damages in the Kings Court, directed to the
Sheriff to command him to take the Body of the person condemned in Debt and to
put him in Prison till satisfaction made.

Of Capias ad satisfaciend' against whom and Cap. ad sa.
for what it lies, and the Sheriffs demeanor therein, and retorn thereof.

It lies not against an Earl, Duke or Baron, or their Wives, except in some
special cases, nor against an Heir or Executor, except in false pleading.

It lies against such Presons against whom a Lies not for a recovery of Damages
in all Actions.
Capias does lie in the commencement of a Suit, as Debt, Account, Action on the
Case, Trespass Vi and Armis, Annuity and Covenant; but it lies not for a
recovery of Damages in a real Action.

If one be in Execution by Ca. Sa. which is returned, no other Execution can be
sued against him, his Lands and Goods, vid. Stat. 21 Jac. 14.

A Capias is to have the Body of such an one such a day, and the Sheriff brings
the Body or retorns the Writ before the day, It is good. Winch. p. 7.

If one be delivered in Execution by the Kings Writ, he is presently in
Execution and in Custody without Laying hands on him to Arrest him, by Cok. C.
J.

The Sheriff is to be Excused for taking one Sheriff takes one by a false name
by a false Name in Execution; and if the Judges admit this false Name, yet the
Judicial Writ ought not to be Examined by the Sheriff, Lane Rep. 49, 52. Doyly
and Jolliff.

One in Execution may not be discharged by Habeas corpus or Writ of Privilege;
and if one taken on Contempt be taken in Execution, he shall not be set at
Large, Siderfin 289. Swallowe's Case. Id. p. 90.

The Sheriff may execute Process of Execution Execution against one attaint of
Felony.
against one attaint of Felony and in Custody, if he please; and if the Felony
be pardoned, or the Attainder reversed, he shall be in Execution, Mo. 178, 274.
Mich. 10 Car. 1. B. R. Chappel's Case.

If a man recovered Debt against B. and levy Ca. sa. after a Fi. fa.
part of the Debt by Fieri fac', which is Returned; yet he may take the Body of
B. by a Cap' ad satisfac' for the residue, 4 Jac. B. R. Carter and Copping.

Though the King's Debtor be in Execution by his Body or his Land, yet the
Subject may take him in Execution by his Body; for the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. 13.
is to be intended of Executions of Lands and Goods, and not of the Body, which
is tout a tout, Hobart 160. Shirley's Case.

Of Escape of one in Execution by Ca. sa. Vide tit. Escape.

Sheriffs of Bristol took the Plaintiff by a Cap' ad satisfac', and detained
him in Prison until the party Defendant, and now Plaintiff, paid the Money to
the Sheriff. Per Cur', This was contrary to his Warrant, which is, Ita quod
habeat denarios in Curia; and because he did not so, he is chargeable to him
that was in Execution, Hetley 122. Read and Earlfield.

A Capias ad satisfac' was Retornable Quind. Retorn'.
Mart. and that Writ was Returned Album breve, and a Testatum thereupon, and
the Defendant taken by it. The Testatum issued out accordingly, because the
Capias was not Returned. And the Court granted a Supersedeas, 1 Brownl. 40.
Supersed'.
Reyner and Mortimer.

Debt on Judgment in B. R. the Defendant One in Execution on Cap' ad satisfac',
ought not to pay the Money to the Jailer.
confesses the Judgment, and Execution above an year; and not being able to
find the Plaintiff, he paid the Money to the Marshal. Plaintiff Replies, he did
not absent voluntarily; and the Defendant demurrs. Judgment pro Querente. The
Sheriff on Cap' cannot receive the Money as on Fieri fac', nor is the party
remediless, for he may pay his Money into Court, 1 Leon. 140. and have an
Audita Querela; but the Plaintiff were remediless should the Jailer be
Insolvent, Dom' Rex and Javan. He on Indictment and Conviction of a Disorderly
House, was Committed to the Marshal for payment of a Fine, but before actual
Imprisonment the Fine was paid to the Marshal; yet Resolved, this is no good
payment, and the party was forced to pay it over again. Per Jones, It is
doubtful whether Voluntary payment to the Sheriff on Fieri fac', before
Execution of his Goods, be pleadable in Discharge (but that is Adjudged it is
so,) much less on a Cap' which is ad satisfaciend' the party in Court, and he
is Committed quousque satisfaciat parti, not the Sheriff, 3 Keb. 788. Tailor
and Baker.

Verdict,

If the Issue be, Whether the Sheriff took J. S. and kept him in Prison under
his Custody in Execution by force of a Capias ad satisfaciend'; and the Jury
found he took him by force of an Alias Cap' ad satisfaciend'; Although it is
not found he kept him in Execution for the Debt and Damages aforesaid,
according to the Issue; yet this is a good Special Verdict. For it shall be
intended; for the Consequence is necessary of that which is found, because he
cannot take him, but he ought to be in Execution, Hobart, Foster and Jackson's
Case.

Vide 3 Rep. 67. Westby's Case. 5 Rep. Blomfield, Garner, Frost and Drury's
Case.
How Execution upon a Ca. sa. shall be sued upon a Judgment against two or
more, and he shall have but one Execution; and the Execution of one is not
sufficient, but the Sheriff may take the Body of all in Execution. Vid. 5 Rep.
86. Blomfield's Case, and 11 Rep. Godfrey's Case.

CHAP. XVII.
What Goods, etc. of whom shall be taken in Execution on Fieri facias, or not.
After the Sheriff has seized, how he stands in the Eye of the Law, either to
bring Actions for the Tortious taking them away, or to make satisfaction to the
party who recovered. Remedy against the Sheriff for the Money to the value of
the Goods taken in Execution, or not, and how to be pursued. The Sheriffs
Office and Demeanor in executing a Fieri facias, and of the Venditioni exponas
and the Retorn; what shall be a good Retorn on the Fieri fac', or not. Of
Restitution to Lands or Goods seized by the Sheriff after Reversal of the
Judgment, and after Sale of the Sheriffs selling a Term for years taken in
Execution, and when such Sale shall be good, or not. Whether a Scire facias
shall go into Wales.

Of Fieri facias.
I Shall next Treat of Execution by Fieri fac'; which is a Judicial Writ, lying
for him who has recovered Debt or Damage, directed to the Sheriff, Commanding
him to levy the same of the Defendant's Goods: And it lies within a year and
day; but after the year there must be Scire fac'.

This Writ of Fieri facias is only against the Goods and Chattels of a man; (
viz.) Leases for years, Corn growing or sown upon the Land, or movable Goods;
as Cattle, Corn in the Barn, Household Goods, Money, Plate and Apparel, Co. 1
Inst. 290. 6.

What Goods, and of whom shall be taken in Execution by Fieri facias, or not.
Goods pawned shall not be taken in Execution Goods pawned.
for the Debt of him which pawned them, during the time they are pawned,
Kitchen 226.

The Sheriff upon a Writ of Execution may Furnace annexed.
not seize and sell to the party a Furnace annexed to the Freehold; for this
would be Waste in the Lessee, 37 El. B. C. Day and Austin.

The Goods Ecclesiastical of Clergymen are Bona Ecclesiastica.
not to be taken by the Sheriff, but by the Bishop, upon a Levari fac', on a
Recognizance, 2 Inst. 472.

If one sell any Goods to another depending an Action against him, these Goods
afterward shall not be put in Execution; for they were lawfully bought, (if
done bona fide, and valuable Consideration.) But if a Fieri facias be directed
to make Execution of Goods, and after the Test of the Writ, and before the
Sheriff executes it, the party sells his Goods bona fide, they may nevertheless
be taken in Execution; ( aliter now by the Statutes of Frauds and Perjuries,)
Cro. El. 174. Mo. 21. n. 72.

If the party dies after the Writ of Execution Goods in the hands of the
Executor.
awarded, and before it be served, the Sheriff may serve it of the Goods in the
hands of the Executor. For by the Execution awarded the Goods are bound, and
the Sheriff needs not take notice of his Death, Cro. El. 181. Parker and Moss,
1 Leon. 144, 145. mesme Case.

After the Sheriff has seized the Goods, how he stands in the Eye of the Law.
Either to bring Action for the Tortious taking them away, or to make
satisfaction to the party who Recovered.
The Sheriff may have Trover or Trespass at election, against him that takes
them away; as Wilbraham and Snowe's Case.

The Plaintiff being Sheriff seizes the Goods in Execution by force of a Fieri
fac', and after (and before the Sale of them) the Defendant takes them and
carries them away, and converts them to his own use; and the Plaintiff (being
Sheriff) brings his Action of Trover; and Adjudged the Action well lies. By the
Seizure of the Goods in Execution the Sheriff has a property in them, so that
he may reseize them and sell them, as well when he is out of his Office, as
before, Mod. Rep. 2 Sand. 47. Wilbraham and Snow, Mod. Rep. 57. Air and Aden,
2 Sand. 244. Mildmay and Smith, Yelv. contra fo. 44.

Therefore Dyer 99. cited in Dalton 147. is not Law, which says, That by the
Seizure of the Sheriff, the property is not altered until they be sold.

After the Debt levied, the Sheriff is Debtor to the Plaintiff, and capable of
a Release from him, the Action ceasing against the Defendant is ipso facto by
the Law transferred to the Sheriff, having both the Judgment to make it a Debt,
and the Levy to make him answerable; and though Action of Account will properly
lie in this Case, yet the same will many times bear both Actions, though the
Moneys be received by auter mains, or the like, Hob. 206, 207. Speak and
Richards.

The Case is Reported by Roll* thus:

If a Sheriff levy Money upon a Levari facias, upon a Recognizance at the Suit
of J. S. and Retorns the Writ served; J. S. may have Debt against the Sheriffs
Executors. But in that Case the Plaintiff demurred to the Defendants Plea, and
Concludes ill, 1 Roll. Abr. 418.

The Plea was grounded upon a Release, and Action against the Sheriff or his
Executor, for levying money on the Levari and not retorning the Writ.
should have demanded Judgment if the Defendant should be admitted to plead a
Release, made after the Sheriff had made his Retorn; and in such case Action
lies against the Sheriffs Executor, although it does not appear that the Fieri
fac' on the Judgment was Returned; for this is not material, inasmuch as the
party is discharged by payment of it without Retorn: And this is not grounded
on a personal Tort, but on a Contract in Law; and this is not a simple
Contract, but principally grounded upon a Record, as it was Adjudged in
Parkinson and Culleyford's Case.

But in an Anonymous Case, Cro. Car. 297. Action Action by Executor, for
levying the Debt and not retorning the Writ in vita Testatoris.
on the Case was brought by Executor against the Sheriff, who had levied the
Debt in Execution, and did not retorn the Writ; and after the Testator died,
and the Plaintiff for that Tort, in vita Testatoris, and for the Loss which
came to him, brought the Action. The Quaere was, if it lies by the Executor,
because its a personal Wrong to the Testator: And the Court was divided, Cro.
Car. 297.

Vide Escape.

Where and what remedy against the Sheriff for the Money to the value of the
Goods taken in Execution, or not.
The diversity lies on the Sheriffs Retorn. Retorn.


If the Sheriff in executing a Fieri fac' does not misbehave himself, he shall
not be charged in Debt or Scire fac', unless it appear by his Retorn that he
had the Moneys in his hands. As if the Sheriff retorn, Cepi and seisiri feci in
manus meus bona and catalla ad valentiam 160 l. quae remanent in manibus meis
ob defectum emptorum.

On this Retorn the Sheriff shall not be charged in Debt or Scire facias,
because it appears not that he has misbehaved himself. But if upon the Fieri
fac' the Sheriff Retorn, That he has levied the Money, and does not pay it to
the Plaintiff at the Retorn of the Writ, the Plaintiff may have a Scire fac'
against the Sheriff, to show Cause wherefore the Money should not be levied of
the Goods of the Sheriff, 2 Sand. 344, 345. Mildmay and Smith, Hutton 32. 11.
Smith and Linsey.

So if in Fieri fac' to levy 200 l. Debt, etc. the Sheriff Retorns, That he had
made a Warrant to his Bailiff, who had seized diverse Goods of the said S. ad
valentiam of 160 l. and that they were rescued out of their Custody, ita quod
he could not Levy the Debt, and that the said S. nulla alia habuit bona. The
Plaintiff may bring a Scire fac' to have Execution against the Sheriff for the
Moneys, according to the value Returned, and the Sheriff shall pay it out of
his own proper Goods, 1 Anders. 247. Roke and Wilmot.

With this agrees, 9 Ed. 4. 50. Scire fac' 21. If Old Sheriff. Scire fac.
against the old Sheriff to pay the Money levied in execution.
the Sheriff Retorn upon a Scire fac', that he has levied the Money and has
the same in Court, but has not the Money at the day, and then a new Sheriff is
chosen; in this Case it being on Record, that the Money is levied by the old
Sheriff, a Scire fac' shall issue against the old Sheriff to pay it. And if he
cannot or will not Discharge and pay the Money, the Party shall have a Fieri
fac' or Elegit against the Sheriff, of his proper Goods.

On Fieri fac' the Sheriff seized several Goods which were Mercery Ware, and
Retorns Fieri fac' ad valentiam -- which Retorn was Filed. The Sheriff appears
and prays to amend the Retorn, because some of the Goods were impaired by
lying, and he could not get Buyers.

Per Cur' 1. Such Retorn may not be altered, Retorn not amendable after it is
Filed.
after it is Returned and Filed.

2. Where the Sheriff Retorns Fieri fac' ad valentiam, this shall be no excuse
of his payment of the Money, because he might have Returned he had seized the
Goods, and that they remain pro defectu emptorum, and then he may be excused,
if the bona peritura perish, Siderfin p. 40. Needham and Bennet.

Therefore the Sheriffs were ordered to pay the Money, and to answer
Interrogatives for their Contempt, having been ordered to bring in the Money,
and not appearing till a Tipstaff was sent.

As to amendment of Retorns. Matter of Form Amendment of Retorn.
in a Retorn is amendable, but not matter of fact; which goes to justification
of the Imprisonment, 2 Bulst. 259. Dr. Alphouses's Case.

The Sheriff Demeaner in Executing the Fieri fac'.
If the Sheriff have a Fieri fac' against a Man's Tresp. versus vicount
Goods, and before Execution he pay him the Money, in this case he cannot do
Execution after, and if he do, an Action of Trespass or false Imprisonment lies
against him, B. R. p. 12 Jac. 1.

As to breaking open Houses to do this Execution vid. supra.

The Sheriff upon a Scire fac' cannot deliver Cannot deliver Goods in
satisfaction of the Debt.
the Defendants Goods to the Plaintiff in satisfaction of his Debt, but must
retorn the Execution in Court, Cro. El. 504. Tompson and Clark Noy 56. Mesme
Case.

Action on the Case was brought against the Sheriff, for fraudulent omission of
Execution of Goods that were in Conspectu suo; but he says not in his
Declaration, that he knew them to be the Goods of the Defendant in that Action:
And for this omission after Verdict Judgment was Arrested, by Twisden and
Windham, 1 Keb. 946. The gift of the Action is the fraud, which cannot be
without notice, which is now wrapped in the Verdict, though it could not be
pleaded, the Sheriff being bound to take notice whose Goods they are, Russel
and Comber.

On Fieri fac' against J. S. who has the Goods of Sheriff sells the Goods of J.
S. a strange Security.
A. in his possession, if the Sheriff sell these Goods, Trover or Trespass will
lie against him; and to prevent this, all the Sheriffs of England take
Security, Keb. 693. Sander's Case.

Quaere if the Seriff may take Bond for his Security: But the safest course is,
for the Sheriff to enquire by a Jury in whom the property of the Goods is, or
else not to meddle with any such Goods, which do not plainly appear to him to
be the Defendants, and it being found by the Jury, that excuses the Sheriff.

Pleading by the Party, who has paid the Money to the Sheriff.
In Detinue the Plaintiff had Judgment, and brought Scire fac' to have
Execution. Defendant pleads, that upon a Distringas to the Sheriff on that
Judgment, he delivered such Goods to the Sheriff, and for the residue that they
were appraised at so much by Inquisition taken by the Sheriff, and that he
delivered the Money to the Sheriff, but he does not aver this matter to be
Returned by the Sheriff; its a good Plea, for otherwise the Defendant should be
prejudiced, for he might have twenty several Executions served against him upon
one Judgment; and he should be put to his remedy against the Sheriff only, who
may be insolvent. And it is a less mischief to enforce the Plaintiff, if his
Plea be true, to take his Action for it against the Sheriff, and if it be not
true, to take Issue thereupon, Crok. El. 390. Atkinsons Case.

Now if the Sheriff levy Goods by force of a Where the Plaintiff shall have a
new Fieri fac', or not. Defendant discharged upon seizing the Goods by the
Sheriff.
Fieri fac', and delivers them not to the party, nor retorns the overplus, the
Plaintiff may have a new Fieri fac', because a Record shall not be avoided by a
matter in Fact: But by the taking the Goods of the Defendant to the value of
the Debt by the Sheriff, the Defendant is discharged, although the Sheriff do not
satisfy the Plaintiff, therefore he shall not have a new Execution, 2 Rolls
Rep. 57. p. Jac. 1 Rolls Ab. 902.

Where a Sheriff on a Fieri fac' Retorns, that New Execution.
he had seized Goods of lesser value which were rescued, and that nulla alia
bona, etc. the Plaintiff may not Sue a new Execution, but only for the surplus
beyond the value of the Goods rescued, 2 Sanders 344. Mildmay and Smith.

If the Sheriff levy Money in Execution, the Lord Keeper cannot order the Money
shall stay in the Sheriffs hands, or order that the Plaintiff shall not call
for it, Marsh Rep. 54.

If the Sheriff shall Retorn Fieri feci, sed non inveni emptores, then a
Venditioni exponas shall go out.

Of the Sheriffs Selling Goods on Fieri fac', and of the Venditioni exponas.
As to what Sale is good or not.

If the Plaintiff tenders the Debt, its a wrong for the Sheriff to sell the
Goods, 1 Keb. 655. Lefans Case.

If Goods remain in the Sheriff hands, for default of buyers, and there perish,
the Sheriff shall not be chargable. But if the Sheriff refuse a buyer, Action
on the Case lies, 2 Keb. 464. Needham's Case.

The Sheriff took the Defendants Goods in After seizing the Goods and before
sale a Supersedeas.
Execution by Fieri fac', and before Sale the Record was removed by a Writ of
Error into the Exchequer Chamber, and a Supersedeas awarded; and the Sheriff
returned upon the Fieri fac', seizure of the Goods, and that they remained in
his hands pro defectu emptorum; and he also returned, that a Supersedas was
awarded, etc. and hereupon it was prayed for the Defendant, that he might have
restitution of his Goods. Crok. Eliz. 597.

But per Curiam, Although this Record be removed, and notwithstanding the
Supersedeas awarded, in regard it came not to the Sheriff, till he had begun to
make Execution, as appears by his Retorn, that a Venditioni exponas shall be
awarded Venditioni exponas.
to perfect it*

And although the Plea Roll be removed, yet it shall be awarded on the Retorn of
the Fieri fac' which remains still in the Office. But as it is in 1 Keb. 324.
Brownwood and Estwel, if the Error were allowed before seizure, then though the
Sheriff be unpunishable in that Case, yet Supersedeas notwithstanding Execution
done shall go, quia improvide, etc.

And per C^riam if the Goods be sold, the Money may be brought into Court to be
restored to the Party; but if not, the Goods may in Goods restored in specie.
specie be restored.

But if before Sale a Supersedeas comes to him, Under sale.
if the Sheriff after Sells the Goods without a Writ of Venditioni exponas,
this is void. p. 8. Car. 1. Scarling and King.

The Sheriff sells Bricks for 7 s. per thousand on the place, for which he
might have 16 s. per thousand. The question was, Who should pay the overplus,
the Buyer or the Sheriffs Executors. And per Curiam, The Sheiffs Executors
shall pay the overplus; the Sale being absolute, and not an Argeement to Sell,
3 Keb. 285. Cutten and Hunt.

The Sheriff persuaded the Jury to prize the Goods at undervalue, and so sold
them. This is an Oppression enquirable at the Assizes by Indictment, Crok. Jac.
426. Cayers's Case.

If the Sheriff upon a Fieri fac' against J. S. Where the old Sheriff after a
Writ of discharge may sell.
seize certain Wood whereof J. S. was possessed, and the Sheriff pay parcel of
the Money received, and does not Retorn his Writ, and after the Sheriff is
removed and another Sheriff chosen, and after the Writ of Discharge delivered
to him he sells the Wood, this is a lawful sale, because by the seizure although
the Writ is not returned, he is chargeable to the Party, Tr. 3. Jac. B. R. Cro.
Jac. 73. Air and Aderly. And there a Distringas issued to the new Sheriff to
distrain the Ancient Sheriff to expose to sale, which does not give to him
Authority to sell, but compells him to do that which he might do by Law. But if
upon a Fieri fac', the Sheriff Retorns that he had seized the Goods, but non
invenit emptores, and But the old Sheriff after removeal may not sell upon non
invenit emptores returned. Venditioni exponas.
after he is removed, and a new Sheriff made, the old Sheriff may not sell them
after, though a Distringas come to him, and if he sell them the sale is not good,
for the new Sheriff must sell them, P. 32. El. Dodd and Conney, 2 Latch 117,
Dixson's Case.

A Venditioni exponas may not be awarded, if it appear that the Goods are out
of the Hands of the Sheriff, 2 Sanders 344. Mildmays Case.

What shall be a good retorn of the Sheriff on a Fieri fac' or not.
Note, If the Sheriff do make Execution on Where there needs no Retor^ on Fieri
fac'.
Fieri fac' though he never retorn the Fieri fac', yet the Execution is good.
Aliter in Elegit. Vid. infra, And if the Sheriff levy the Money and give it the
Plaintiff, though he never make any Retorn to the Court, it is good enough. 4
Rep. 64. Fullwoods Case, and p. 90. Hoes Case.

The Bailiff of the Savoy levied Goods, and yet Retorns nulla bona on
Attachment, and for causesaith, that one V. at the time of the Execution showed
a Bill of Sale on good consideration, whereby if he executed, he was liable to
an Action: and therefore, without Security to save Security to the Sheriff.
him harmless, he refused to make any other Retorn; which the Court agreed, and
ordered the Money to be brought into Court, and as the Trial goes between the
Sheriff and V. the retorn to be amended or not, 1 Keb. 901.

Upon a Fieri fac', the Sheriff retorneth qd' nihil habet, this is not good
without saying further, nec habuit post receptionem brevis, 39 H. 6. Fitz. Ret.
30.

On Recovery of Debt on Fieri fac' directed to Ret' quod Clericus est
beneficiatus
the Sheriff of London, he returned qd' Clericus est beneficiatus in Ely. The
Court conceived this retorn improper, in regard there should have been a
suggestion on the Roll, after the retorn made by the Sheriff of London, that
the Defendant had Goods in Ely, and that the Sheriff of that County should have
made this Retorn of Clericus beneficiatus. Now if the Sheriff of London retorn
nulla bona, but that he is Clericus beneficiatus in Ely, thereupon went a Fieri
fac' to the Bishop of Ely on Testatum, and he returned that he had nulla bona
Ecclesiastica; this retorn by some is not good, but he ought to Retorn a
Sequestration, having admitted him to be Clericus beneficiatus; but he is not
estopped to say, that he is not Clericus beneficiatus by the Retorn of the
Sheriff. The Court agreed, the Fieri fac' well directed to the Bishop and not
to the Sheriff, but they conceived it a good Retorn, and if it be false the
Plaintiff may have his Action on the Case, 1 Keb. 497. 2 Keb. 83. Picard and
Payton.

On a Statute, if the Sheriff retorn quod est Clericus beneficiatus nullum
habens Laicum feod' nec bona nec catalla, but that he is beneficiatus in such a
Diocese, then a Writ of Sequestration shall go to the Bishop to Sequester the
Profits, and to deliver them to the Conisee until he be satisfied, 2 Rolls
Abridgm. 474. Pope and Bautree.

If there be false Retorn on a Fieri fac', the Action on the Case on a false
Retorn on Fierifa^.
remedy is by Action on the Case. In a Fieri fac' to the Sheriffs of London,
they Retorn nulla bona, but that he is Clericus beneficiatus in Ely; upon which
a Writ issues to the Bishop of Ely, and he retorns nulla bona Ecclesiastica: If
it be so that he has a Spiritual living, the Plaintiff may have Action on the
Case against the Bishop, Siderfin p. 276.

The Party may aver the value of the Goods greater than the Retorn, but the
Sheriff is Estop't, 2 Keb. 789, 821.

Retorn of a Fieri facias.
VIrtute istius brevis Fieri fe^i de bonis and catallis terris and tenementis
infranominat' R. B. ad valentiam 200 l. and illa de die in diem venditioni
exposui and i^de vendidi ad valentiam 100 l. Qu^^ quidem centum libras ad diem
and locum infra Content' parat' habeo ad reddend' infranomin^t' J. W. prout
interius mihi praecipitur, and resid' bonorum and catallorum praedict' adhuc
penes me remanen^ i^vendit' ob defect' emptorum.

VIrtute istius brevis cepi bona and catalla A. W. infrascript' ad valentiam
omnium denariorum infrascript. Et illa venditioni exposui ad quod nondum inveni
emptores. Et ideo denarios infraspecificat' habere non possum ad diem and locum
infracontent', prout mihi praecipitur.

Other Forms of Retorns, vid. Dalton, cap. 61.

Of Restitution to Lands or Goods seized by the Sheriff, after Reversal of the
Judgment, in what Cases it shall be, and in what not.
If a man recover Damages, and had Execution by Fieri fac', and upon a Fieri
fac' the Sheriff sells the Term for years to a Stranger, and after the Judgment
is Reversed, he shall only be restored to the Moneys for which the Term was
sold, which was by default of the party, and not to the Term it self; because
the Sheriff had sold this by Command of the Writ of Fieri fac', Dyer 363. 8
Rep. 143. Dr. Drury's Case, 19. b. Matthew Manning's Case, 5 Rep. 90. b. Hoe's
Case.

So if the Goods of a man Outlawed be sold by the Sheriff upon a Cap. Utlagat.
and after the Outlawry is Reversed by Writ of Error, he shall be restored to
the Goods themselves; because the Sheriff was not compellable to sell these
Goods, but only to keep them for the use of the King, 5 Rep. 90. Hoe's Case.

But upon Fieri fac' he shall have Restitution only to the value:

1. Else none would buy.

2. By Fieri fac' the Sheriff is compellable to levy the Debt upon the Goods:
One is compulsio, the other voluntas, 8 Rep. 143. Dr. Drury's Case.

If a man recover Damages, (as suppose in a Writ of Covenant) against B. and
had Elegit of his Chattels, and of the moiety of his Lands; and the Sheriff
upon this Writ delivers a Lease for years of Land which B. had, to the value of
50 l. part of the Sum recovered, and after B. Reverseth the Judgment; he shall
be restored to the Term it self, and not to the Value. For though the Sheriff
might have sold the Term upon this Writ; yet here is not any Vendition to a
Stranger, but a delivery of a Term to the party who recovers, by way of Extent
without any Sale, and therefore the Owner shall be restored: For the Sheriff is
not bound by this Writ to sell the Term, as he is in a Fieri fac', Pasch. 16
Car. B. R. Buckhurst and Mayo.

Quaere, For this is a Sale; all the Term being delivered to the party
according to the value in gross, and not annual, 1 Roll. Abr. 778.

So if Personal Goods were delivered to the party per rationabile pretium and
extentum, upon Reversal of the Judgment he shall be restored to the Goods
themselves for the same Reason.

Lessee for 99 years, by his Will devised his Lease in these words; ( viz.) I
devise my Lease to my Wife during her Life, and after her death, I will, that
it go to her Children unpreferred; and made his Wife Executrix and dyed. The
Wife entered and married with J. S. and afterward for 140 l. Debt recovered
against J. S. on a Fieri fac' the Term was sold by the Sheriff, and afterward
the Judgment was reversed by Writ of Error, and awarded, quod omnia quae

amifit ratione judicii restituantur. The Wife (the Executrix) died. And per
Cur' These Points were Resolved:

1. The Executory Devise of the Lease after the death of his Wife to the
Daughter (Unpreferred) was good.

2. That the Sale made by the Sheriff upon the Scire fac', did not destroy the
Executory Devise.

3. That sale made of the Term by the Sheriff stood good, although the Judgment
was Reversed; and the Plaintiff (the Daughter) shall be restored to the value
of the Term, but not to the Term it self; and yet the Vendee had an absolute
property in the Term during the Life of the Wife, Mich. 27 El. B. R. Amner and
Lodington, 8 Rep. 96. Manning's Case.

A Judgment in D. being Reversed in B. R. a Writ of Restitution was awarded,
and to enquire what were the Profits of the Land recovered a tempore judicii;
(videlicet) 7 Aug. 19 Jac. And the Inquisition returned, That they amounted to
10 l. Per Cur', The Writ is ill; for it ought not to have been, what the
profits of the Land amounted unto from the Judgment. For the Plaintiff is not
to answer the Profits longer than from the time of the Execution sued. Then
there was a new Writ of Restitution, which was, What profits of the Land the
Plaintiff (who recovered) had taken color judicii praedicti, which was 2 Aug.
19 Jac. and after the Reversal thereof, Cro. Jac. 698. Sympson and Juxon.

Form of the Retorn.
J. G. and alii infranominat' nihil habent nec eorum aliquis nihil habet in
balliva mea, unde restitutio bonorum and catall' infrascript' infranominat' W.
M. habere facere potui: Necnon 24. l. infrascript' eidem W. M. fieri facere
potui prout, etc.

Virtute istius brevis mihi direct' (tali die and anno infrascript') tenement'
infrascript' cum pertin' reseisiri and infra-nominat' T. and H. plenam
possession' and seisinam inde restitui prout interius mihi praecipitur.

Of the Sheriffs selling a Term for years taken in Execution, and when such
Sale shall be good, and when not.
For the understanding how the Law is in this Where it shall be in the Election
of the Sheriff upon Fi. fac. to him directed to sell a Term. or deliver it on
Extent.
Point, you must observe a diversity between the sale of a Term on a Fieri
fac', and Extent on an Elegit; for the Elegit is, Quod per Sacramentum XII.
proborum, etc. per rationabile pretium and exentum, That they Appraise the
Goods and Chattels of the Debtor, and extend his Lands; and therefore if they
are not Appraised by the Jurors, he cannot sell them, (as Dyer so. 100. and so
is 5 Rep. Palmer's Case.) Execution by Elegit ought to be per Inquisitionem per
Stat. W. 2. c. 18. which says, ( per rationabile pretium) which extends to
Chattels, and per extentum, which refers to Lands. In Elegit the Goods are to
be delivered to the party per rationabile pretium; but in Fieri fac' the
Sheriff must sell the Goods, 1 Keb. 566. Glasswell and Morgan.

In Elegit the Term may not be extended Difference between the Extent of a Term
on Elegit, and Sale by Fi. fa.
without showing the certainty of the Commencement; for after the Debt
satisfied the party is to have his Term and Remainder. But upon Fieri fac' the
Sheriff may sell, and his Retorn is general, quod fieri feci de bonis and
catallis, 5 Rep. Palmer's Case.

Now the Sheriff is to be careful in the sale Recital of a Term in the Sale of
it.
of a Term on Elegit, if he make particular Recital, that there be no mistake.
But a general Recital is better: As,

In Ejectment it was found by Special Verdict, that the Sheriff upon an Elegit
impannelled a Jury, who found that the Defendant was possessed of a Lease for
100 years, which began at Mich. 2 and 3 of Ph. and M. ubi revera, as it was
found it begun Mich. 3 and 4 of Ph. and M. cujus quidem H. statum interesse and
terminum in tenementis praedictis praedict. Juratores appretiarunt ad 80 l. and
the Sheriff sold it to the Lessor of the Plaintiff for 80 l.

Now the Inquest found one thing, and he sells another (as this Case was,) and
the Sale not being warranted by the Inquest is void. But had the Inquest found
he had been possessed of such Land generally for the Term of diverse years to
come, and they had Appraised it for so much, without showing the certain
beginning or determination, it had been well enough, for they shall not be
compelled to find a Certainty, not having means to be informed thereof; or if
the Sheriff sells all such Interest which the Defendant had in the same Term,
the Sale had been good, 5 Rep. Palmer's Case.

So is Sir G. Sidenham's Case in B. R. The Inquest on a Fieri fac' found that
the Defendant was possessed of such a Term, and mistook the Date, and the
Sheriff sold it; the Sale was not good. And on the New Fieri fac' the Court
directed that it should be found, That he was possessed of a Lease for years
generally, and yet continuing, and that he sold it, Cro. El. 584. Palmer's
Case, 4 Rep. 74. mesme Case.

W. and his Wife possessed of a Term in Baron and Feme.
right of the Wife, as Administratrix to C. W. being indebted, granted it to B.
to the use of W. and his Wife for their Lives, and afterward to the use of B.
himself. W. is sued for this Debt, and Recovery against him, and a Fieri facias
being awarded to the Sheriff, he for this Debt of W. sold the Term What Term
not extendible.
to the Plaintiff. Per Cur'. This Grant of the Term to the use of the Grantor
himself is not void per Stat. 1 H. 7. for this Grant is not to avoid Creditors:
For the Term being in right of the Wife as Administratrix, and if it had so
continued in the hands of W. and had never been granted, this was not
extendible for the Debt of W. and if W. had it as Executor himself, it was not
extendible for his proper Debt, and Fraud shall not be intended except expressly
Fraud not to be intended.
found; therefore the Sale is good, Cro. El. 291. Ridler and Punter.

W. had Execution out of the King's Bench by Officer first sells on one Judgment
and delivers upon another, pretending the first Judgment was fraudulent. The
Sale shall bind the King.
Scire facias, of a Term, which was sold by the Bailiff of a Liberty. After,
upon another Judgment the Bailiff delivers this Term to another, pretending
that the first Judgment and Execution was fraudulent. But per Cur' it is not
well done; for he is not a Judge of Fraud, and the Court will not allow such
pretense to Sheriffs and Officers, Latch. p. 53. Warrington's Case.

If the Sheriff extend or sell a Lease, this Sale shall bind the King (as to
his Debt,) because it is but a Chattel, and there was no Covin, 8 Rep. 171. Sir
Gerrard Fleetwood.

Upon an Execution against the Husband for Sell the Wises Term for the Debt of
the Baron.
his Debt, the Sheriff may sell the Wives Term during her Life, Co. Lit. 351. a.

The Form of a Retorn of Fieri feci on a Fieri facias. Vide Dalt. c. 61.

Whether a Fieri fac' upon a Judgment in the King's Bench shall go into Wales.
Plaintiff recovers a Debt against the Testator in B. R. the Action was laid in
London; and after the Death of the Testator the Plaintiff after Judgment in
Scire fac' sues a Fieri fac' at London, upon which the Sheriff retorns nulla
bona, by which he sues a Testatum fieri fac' to the Sheriff of Montgomery in
Wales, directed to levy the Moneys recovered de bonis Testatoris in manibus
Executoris. Upon which Writ the Sheriff Retorns this:

EGo C. L. Baronet', Vic. infra-mentionat' Comit' Montgomery domini Regi
humillime Certifico quod infra specificat' Comitat' Montgomery est un' duodecim
Comitat' infra Principalitat' sive Dominium dicti Dom' Regis Walliae ubi Breve
Domini Regis ipsum regem minime tangen' non currit, quodque non patet per istud
breve quod idem breve dictum Dom' regem ullo modo tangat, unde advisament'
Curiae dict' Dom' Regis coram ipso Rege humillime imploro si mandatum istius
brevis exequi poterim.

C. L. Baronet, Vic'.

The Sheriff on this Retorn was amerced, Sheriff not to dispute the
Jurisdiction of the Court.
and that the Plaintiff should have a new Writ. For the Sheriff by his Retorn
ought not to dispute the Jurisdiction of the Court, to which he is a Minister:
But if the Court erroneously award Process which was not to be awarded, the
Sheriff ought to obey and execute it; but the party grieved may show this
Matter to the Court, and pray that they will supersede their Erroneous Process,
and so have remedy.

But as to the Question, vid. 2 Sand. 194. Draper and Blaney, 2 Keb. 657.
Draper's Case 715.

Elegit lies into Wales, and so does Execution on a Statute Merchant, and that
breve Dom. Regis non currit in William, is intended of Originals, not on
Judicials, 3 Keb. 170. Witrong and Blaney, 1 Bulstr. 54. Hall and Rotheram,
Cro. Jac. 484.

A Capias on a Fieri fac' lies into Wales, 2 Keb. 715.

It was the Opinion formerly, that a Fieri fac'. on Original Judgment in B. R.
does not lie into Chester, Wales, etc. but as Dyer, the Court shall send the
Record and Writ thither. And in Action of Debt there it may be; but its granted
every day into Lancaster, Wales, etc. 2 Keb. 410. The King versus Needham and
Bennet.

A Writ of Execution goes into Wales, and 27 H. 8. c. 26. makes this plain;
for by it Wales and England are annexed, PLowd. fo. 200. Stradling and Morgan.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Sheriff is to demean himself in giving Possession and Seisin upon the
Writs of Habere fac' possessionem or Seisinam. As to the manner of doing, or
the retorn of a Supersedeas. Where it shall stay the Sale of Lands or Goods,
or not. What amounts to a Supersedeas. Where and when a Writ of Error is a
Supersedeas. Of Audita Querela.

IN all Cases where the Execution of a Judgment, The Sheriff to make Execution
of the thing at his peril.
in which the Demand is of a thing certain; If the Sheriff do this thing, he is
not any Disseisor. But where the Execution is in the generalty, without
mentioning of any thing in particular, there the Sheriff ought to make
Execution of the right thing at his own peril, Diversity.
otherwise he shall be a Disseisor; for he is bound to take notice of it, and
he had not any Warrant from the Court to make Execution of any but the right
thing. As if a man recover in Assize diverse Houses, and after the Tenant
reverseth it in a Writ of Error, and a Writ of Execution issues to the Sheriff,
to put him in possession of the Houses which he had lost by the Judgment,
although the Tertenants are Strangers to the Recovery, and for this they ought
not to be ousted without Scire facias against them; yet if he do Execution by
putting them in possession by force of this Writ, he shall not be any
Disseisor, for that he has the direct Authority of the Court to do it, Pasch.
15 Jac. Floyd and Bethel.

So in Judgment for the Casual Ejector for 47 Houses, and on Habere facias
possessionem the Sheriff turns out these 47 Tenants, and 80 other Tenants,
without any Process or Plea against them. Per Cur'. We will not grant any Writ
Trespass against the Sheriff for wrong executing Possession.
to supersede the Execution against the 80 Tenants; for if it should be, it
ought to be quia erronice, and there was not any Error in the proceedings
against them, because there was not any proceedings. But they did Advise, that
every one should bring Trespass against the Sheriff, 2 Siderfin 155.

If the Sheriff do deliver possession of more Case against the Sheriff for
delivering more Acres than are in the Writ. Diversity.
Acres than are in the Writ, this makes not the Writ erroneous; but in such
case Action on the Case lies against the Sheriff for doing it; or an Assize
against him that has the possession delivered to him for the Surplusage of the
Land. But if the Writ of Hab. fac. possess. to deliver possession to the
Plaintiff of Lands recovered by him in Ejectment, contains more Acres of Land
than were in the Declaration, the Writ is erroneous, Pract. Reg. 131, 132.

Trespass lies against the Sheriff, if he does not Execution must be done in
the right places.
execute on the right places, 1 Keb. 278. Lufton's Case.

If a man bring Ejectione firmae of 40 Acres of Land and recovers 30, and not
the residue; upon the Writ of Execution the Sheriff may deliver to him any, (
viz.) three or more in the Name of all, without setting out the Land recovered
Where possession of some in the Name of all, good or not.
by Metes and Bounds, although the Plaintiff had not recovered all the Acres
whereof he had brought this Action, and whereof he had supposed the Defendant
Tenant. But if a man be to be put in possession of diverse Messuages upon a Writ
of Execution, and the Houses are in possession of several men, he ought to go
to every House particularly, and to deliver Seisin of it, and the delivery of
Seisin of one in the name of all is not sufficient; for he ought to deliver
plenariam Seisinam, Trin. 15 Jac. Floyd and Bethell's Case.

In Formedon on Non-tenure of three Messuages In what Case the Plaintiff is to
show to the Sheriff what part the Jury intended.
the Jury found he was Tenant of one of the Messuages, and not of the other;
the Plaintiff may have Judgment, and a Writ to the Sheriff to deliver Seisin:
And the Plaintiff at his peril is to show to the Sheriff what Message it was
the Jury did intend; for the Jury is not tied to set Bounds to it, Cro. Eliz.
256. Scriven and Prince.

If a Writ of Execution goes to the Sheriff, to Acres that are to be delivered,
must be according to the Usage of the Country. Of Rent or Common. Seisin of
Rent or Common by Parol.
put a man in possession of 20 Acres of Land, the Sheriff ought to give him 20
Acres in quantity, according to the Usage of the Country where it lies, and not
according to the Statute, Floyd and Bethel.

If a man recover Rent or Common, upon which a Writ issues to the Sheriff to
put him in possession, and the Sheriff comes upon the Land, and delivers to him
seisin of the Rent or Common by Parol, that is well made, and the Recoveror is
in actual possession of this, 22 Assize 84.

If the Undersheriff delivers Possession riotously Riotous possession by
Undersheriff, Attorney in C. B. not to be enquired of by B. R. without
Information.
on Extent on a Statute Merchant, and the Sheriff refuses to Retorn any Jury
to enquire of the Force, and he was an Attorney of the Common Pleas, the Court
of King's Bench, unless the Cause were depending, cannot take notice of the
Offense without an Information, 2 Keb. 541. Morgatroyd versus Peebles, Vid. Mo.
781, and 462.

Where shall be a New Execution or not, and of the Sheriffs Retorn on this
Writ.
ThemRecoveror is put in possession by Habere fac. possessionem, and the
Defendant ousts him again; What remedy?

In 2 Brownl. p. 216. Stile's Case in B. R. by After Possession and Ouster what
remedy. New Execution. Retorn.
Williams, he cannot have a New Writ of Execution, but is put to his New
Action, and the filing of the Writ is not material; for it is within the
Election of the Sheriff, whether he will file or retorn it, or not. But if the
Execution had not been fully made, as in the Execution of an House, some hid
themselves in the upper Rooms, and when the Sheriff was gone they came down and
ousted those that the Sheriff had put in possession before; in such a Case a
New Writ of Execution was awarded. By the Chief Justice, In this Case of
Re-entry the Court may award an Attachment against him, for Contempt against
the Court.

But in Peirson and Taverner's Case, the Recoveror is put in possession by Hab.
fac. possess. and the Defendant ousts him again; if the Writ be not Returned,
the Plaintiff shall have a New Retorn.
Hab. fac. possess. 1 Roll. Rep. 353.

And if Hab. fac. seisinam be executed, it is good without Retorn; yet the
Court may command the Sheriff to Retorn it, 1 Roll. Rep. 77.

On Habere fac. (seisinam) the Sheriff cannot Retorn, That another is Tenant of
the Land by Right, for that cannot come in Issue between the Demandant and him,
and therefore he ought to execute the Writ, 6 Rep. 52. Boswell's Case.

Upon Habere fac. possess. the Sheriff returned, Retorn.
That in the execution of the said Writ he came to the House recovered, and
removed out all the persons he could find, and delivered to the Plaintiff
possession and departed; and soon after Three persons secretly Lodged in the
House expelled the Plaintiff: On Notice whereof he returned again to the House
to put the Plaintiff in full possession; but the others resisted him, so that
without peril of his Life he could not do it, 1 Leon. page 145. Upton and Wells.

On this Retorn the Court awarded a New New Hab. fac. possess.
Execution. A Writ of Habere fac. possess. was directed to the Sheriff; a Writ
of Error was brought, and a Supersedeas granted, directed to the Sheriff to
stay Execution: And the Supersedeas was showed to the Sheriff as he was going
to do Execution; yet he refused to obey Execution by the Sheriff after a
Supersedeas.
it, and did Execution notwithstanding. This is a great Contempt in the
Sheriff, and the Court ordered a Writ of Restitution to be granted, 2 Bulstr.
194. Thomas and Owen.

Retorn of Habere fac' possessionem.
VIrtute istius brevis mihi direct' Justiciariis infrascript' Habere feci (quod
tali die and anno infrascript') Habere feci A. G. plenam seisinam de un'
Messuag' cum pertin' in S. infra-specific' in omnibus prout istud breve exigit
and requirit.

Note, The Sheriff in Cases where Land is revered, is to put the party in
possession and seisin by a Twig, Clod, etc. of an House by the Key, etc. of
Rent by Corn or Grass, growing on the Land, out of which the Rent Issues. 6.
Rep 52.

It is no good Retorn, that another is Tenant of the Land by right, or that he
has nothing in the Land.

Seisin of the Land in one Vill in the name of all the Lands in 3 Vills; is
good.

Retorn of Habere fac possessionem.
VVirtute istius brevis mihi direct. 24 die Maij Annot. infrascript. habere
feci infra nominat* H. H. possessionem termini sui infrascript. de t^n^m^ntis
infrascript. cum pertin. prout interius mihi praecipitur. Dalt. c. 63.

Infra nominat. R. B. Miles nulla habet bona so^^ catalla terrat aut tenementa
in balliva mea unde denar. infraspec. Fieri facere possum prout Interius mihi
praecipiter.

Of Supersedeas.
If the Roll be marked for a Writ of Error What a mounts to a Supersed.
before Execution done, the Sheriff shall be excused for doing it before a
Supersedeas delivered, but this is sufficient to supersede the Execution. Where
Writ of Error is a Supersedeas or not, and when.
1 Keb. 12. If a Writ of Error be brought, and showed to the Attorney, if
Execution proceed, a Supersedeas quia erronice may go. But in Noel's Case. 2
Keb. p. 33. Error brought and showed to the Attorney, is no good Supersedeas,
till it be showed to the Clerk of the Errors.

Till the Roll Marked, or the Writ delivered unto the Officer in Court, Writ of
Error is no Supersedeas, especially after the Retorn of it. 3 Keb. 171.

The party ought to take notice of a Recipitur upon the Record if it be Entered,
and if the party take not out Execution after the Writ of Error allowed, it is
a Contempt, else not; and the Attorney is not bound to view the Record, if a
Writ of Error be brought, but may take out Execution, if there he not a
Supersedeas, or notice given to the party. Styles Rep. 105. Winn and S^^bbins.
'Its the duty of the Clerk of the Errors to mark the Roll and not the Attorney.
Styles Rep. 159. Mercer and Rule. A Writ of Error is duly persued, tho the Roll
be not marked and if neither the Roll be marked nor notice given to the
Attorney of the other side of the bringing the Writ of Error, if the party
proceed to take out Execution it is no Contempt to the Court.

Marking the Roll, paying Fees for, or allowance Where and when a Writ of Error
is a Supersed. or not.
by the Chief Justice of a Writ of Error is no Supersedeas, unless actually
taken out before Execution, per Touisden. Error brought and showed to the
Attorney, is no Supersedeas until it be showed to the Clerk of the Errors,
which is an Allowance in Court, and therefore if Execution be done before it be
allowed by the Judge, or showed to the Clerk of the Errors, it is well done,
because the Attorney otherwise would never have it allowed, but only showed to
the Attorney of the other side; but if he show it, and declare his Intention to
have it speedily allowed, there Execution is superseded in the mean time, but
yet if Bayl be not given according to the Statute, the Execution may be well
done, which the Court agreed. 1 Keb. 33. Noel's Case.

Formerly ( per Hales), if Execution were gone out before a Writ of Error
delivered, or showed to the party, it was not to be a Supersedeas, and by him
it shall not be a Supersedeas, unless showed to the pary, and must not
foreclose his time in having it allowed, for if it be not allowed by the Court
within four days it is no Supersedeas, and a Writ of Error taken out, if it be
not showed to the Clerk of the other side and allowed by the Court, it is no
Supersedeas to the Execution. Mod. Rep. 112.

The Sheriff makes his Warrant to a Bailiff to Time of the delivery of the
Supersed.
take the Body of etc. Upon a Ca. Sa. and before the Warrant executed, the
Sheriff receives a Supersedeas, and the Bailiff having no notice proceeds; yet
the Arrest is not lawful, but the Bailiff is excusable in Tresspass. Moor p.
677. Prince and Allington.

One purchases a Supersedeas, and does not deliver it to the Sheriff till
after the fourth County day, and then he is Outla wed, yet the Outlawry Outlawry
is void. Moor. n. 73. Ca. sa. was delivered to the Sheriff of E. at 11 Clock,
and a Warrant thereupon made to the Bailiffs, 4 hours after a Supersedeas comes
to the Sheriff, and a Warrant upon this Supersedeas delivered to the Jailer to
set the parties at liberty if they were Prisoners, who upon it were discharged.
Per. Cur. the Sheriff has done well, being the same day, Lit. Rep. 296. Porter
and Corbet.

Fi. Fac' to the Sheriff to Levy the Debt, and the Defendant brought Error, and
had a Supersedeas; so much Money as the Sheriff had received before, shall go to
satisfaction, and a Venditioni exponas shall issue upon it. Yel. p. 6. Tocock
and Honyman.

Supersedeas, as to Goods seized is a Supersedeas Where a Supersed. shall stay
the Sale of Goods or not.
as to Sale; but if the Sheriff has received the Money he must return it into
Court, 3 Keb. 174 Mud and Warren; and it is not discharged by the Supersedeas.
And the case was, a Supersedeas came before Execution, but in truth after Goods
seized and before Goods sold, but after the Sheriff had taken security for the
Money, and discharged the Execution; Sheriff returns that he had received a
Supersedeas out of Chancery in the nature of an And. Querela, It is not good,
because the Record was not there 1 Roll. Abridg. 383. Merston and Mannory.

A Certiorari delivered to the Justices of the Peace after Restitution awarded,
and before it be executed by the Sheriff, is not a Supersedeas to the Sheriff,
unless the Justices make a Supersedeas upon it, which if they do not, they are
fineable for the Contempt. Mo. Rep. 673.

Note, By the Stat. 16. and 17. Car. 2. c. 8. All stays of Execution by
Supersedeas on Writs of Error after Verdict, are taken away; but the other
remains as they did.

And. Quer. on escape where it lies or not, or upon other Execution by the
Sheriff, not well made and delivered.
Vide infra sub titulo, where the Escape of one shall be a discharge of the
other, or not.

Audita Querela, is an Equitable Writ, and not to be allowed without Equity.

If one in Execution escape of his own wrong, he shall never have Audita
Querela to discharge himself; and the Jailer may retake him; but if he escape
with the consent of the Jailer the the Jailer cannot take him again, and if he
do, the party shall have an Audita Querela. Cro. Car. 240. Robinsons Case, 1
Roll. Abridg. 307. Trevillian and the Lord. Roberts.

So if the Sheriff Arrests one in Execution, and does not retorn the Writ, but
suffers him to escape, and upon the alias Capias, he Arrests him again, Audita
Querela lies. Mo. 57. n. 163.

But where two were bound jointly and severally, one was condemned and taken in
Execution, after the other was sued, condemned and taken, the first escapes,
the other shall not have Audita Querela, for there must be satisfaction in
part. 5. Rep. 67. Blomfields Case.

A word that is surplusage, shall not avoid this Writ, as in Arundels Case: The
Audita Querela comprehended, that M. had recovered against the Plaintiff in
Debt, and that he was taken by Cap. ad satisfaciend. at the Suit of M. by the
Sheriff of G. who let him go at Large, and on Issue upon the voluntary escape
it was found for the Plaintiff. And it was moved, that the Writ of Audita
Querela was not good, for the words are, that the Plaintiff capt. fuit virtute
brevis nostri judicialis, and this word judicialis is not in the Register, but
only brevis nostri de Capiendo, yet adjudged good. 1 Leon. 73 Arundell and
Morris.

Audita Querela on escape of the Testators Creditor, and recovery against the
Marshal. Defendant protestando, that the Plaintiff escaped after the Defendant
recovered against the Marshal, and the Plaintiff did not pay the Marshal,
absque hoc that the Marshal satisfied and paid the Testator. This case differs
from all others of escape by consent of the Jailer, this being not purely Debt
which goes over to Executors, but is grounded on a Tort general by the death of
the Jailer; the Court concluded, that recovery against non payment to the
Marshal, was no discharge of the Plaintiff in this Audita Querela. But
Adjornatur, to take Issue on payment by the Marshal to the Creditor, viz. the
Defendants Testator 3 Keb. 763. Gardner and Sedgwick.

One was Outlawed in Debt, and taken upon Outlawry Pleaded to Audita Querela
where it is good, or not
the Capias and committed to the Fleet, and the Warden suffered him to go at
Large voluntarily, and after the Executor of the Plaintiff in Debt, takes him
in Execution again upon a new Writ, and upon this he brought Audita Querela,
and shows this matter, and Outlawry in the Plaintiff in the Audita Querela was
pleaded, Per Cur. it is a good Plea, because this Writ is not directly to
Reverse the Outlawry (as Error is) but is founded upon a Tort ( scil.) upon the
Escape, and not upon the Record only, aliter in Error or Attaind. Outlawry is
no Plea; nor is there any difference as to this Case, where the Outlawry is at
the Suit of the Defendant or of a Stranger. Vid. other good reasons Sider. 43.
Jason, and Kete.

If upon Elegit, the Sheriff takes an Inquisition, and there are found several
Lands subject to the extent, and found of the several values; and the Sheriff
Retorns he had delivered some of the said Lands in Particular for the Moieties,
where it appears, that according to the values found an equal Moieties is not
delivered to the party who recovers, but more than a Moiety; this is not void,
neither is it a Disseisin by the Entry, but only voydable by an Audita Querela.
Tr. 15. Car. 1. B. R. Row and VVeeks.

If A. recover against B. Debt or Damages, and Elegit is granted to the Sheriff
to extend the Moiety of his Land, which is ancient Demesns, although it be
admitted, that this is not extendible, yet B. may not avoid this by Entry,
without Audita Querela, because the Sheriff had a Warrant to deliver the Moiety
of half his Land, and this was his Land, Ergo not void. Hob. p. Cox and Barnaby.

CAP. XIX.
Of Elegits, and the Sheriffs Duty therein, and of the Retorns thereof. The
difference of it, as to Lands and Goods, how to be managed by the Sheriff that
it may be well executed, and what thing may be executed or not. Of the
Inquisition, Retorns of Elegit, how to be made. Where a new Elegit shall be had
or not. Of extent by the Bailiff of a Liberty. The Sheriffs Office about
Execution for the Kings Debt; of Stat. Merchant, Staple, Recognizance: The
difference of the Retorns. Retorns of Scire fac. the Sheriffs demeaner as to
Outlaries, and Capias Utlagatum, and the Retorns

Of Elegits, etc.
ELegit is a Judicial Writ given by the Stat. The nature of an Elegit, as to
Lands or goods.
VV. 2. c. 18. either upon a Recovery for Debt or Damage, or upon a
Recognizance in any Court. By this Writ the Sheriff shall deliver to the
Plaintiff, omnia catalla debitoris (exceptis bobus and afri^ Carucae)
medietaten terrarum, and this must be done by Inquest taken by the Sheriff, for
the valuation of the Goods, and Lands ought tobe first found by the Inquisition
of a Jury. VV. 2. c. 18. gives the Elegit, so that in Elegit the Sheriff may
take in Execution the Moiety of the Lands of the Conizor, etc. and all his
Goods and Chattels, (except as aforesaid) and was to deliver them to the
Conisee, or he who recovers upon a reasonable extent or price, until the Deb^
be satisfied, and the Sheriff shall deliver him the Seisin of the Land, and he
is called Tenant by Elegit, and shall do no Waste. 4 Rep. 47.

The Elegit as to Goods, is in effect but a Fieri fac. and therefore if there
be no Lands, and Execution be upon Goods, and they are not sufficient, he may
have a Capias; aliter if Lands be extended.

If one prays to have Elegit, and the Sheriff Retorns he has no Lands, and he
prayed a Capias, but the Court granted it not; the cause is, the Entry in the
Roll is, that he has chosen the Execution of the Moiety of the Lands which he
must stand to, 30. Ed. 3. But the Law now is not so, for if the Sheriff return
Nihil, the party may have a Capias, Hob. 57.

Elegit, how to be managed by the Sheriff, that so it may be well Extended, and
what things may be executed or not.

As to what things may be extended or not, you must know.

All the Goods and Chattels, in which are included Leases for Years.
Leases for Years, shall be extended, (except Oxen and Beasts of the Plow) the
Moiety of the Lands. Vid. infra, how it shall be done.

A Rent seck, where there is not any Reversion A rent seck.
cannot be delivered ut liberum Tenementum. Cro. Eliz. 656. VValshal and Heath.

Annuity Certain is extendible by Elegit. Cro. Annuity.
Jac. 78. York and Twine.

Lands in Ancient Demsne may be delivered Aunc. demesne.
in Execution by the Sheriff by force of an Eelegit out of the Kings Court, for
the Land it self was never put in plea directly in the Kings Court. Vid. the
Million Act.
5. Rep. Aldens Case, Hob. 47. Cox and Barneby.

If the Lands descend to an Infant, the Sheriff shall cease to extend.

As to the Inquisition,

Note, If the Inquisition in Elegit be void in Inquisition void in any part,
void in the whole.
any part, its void in the whole, and the whole must be quasht; and not quoad
that only; so if more than a Moiety be delivered on the Elegit, it is void for
the whole, 2 Keb. 582. Harris's Case, Siderfin p. 91. Berry and Wheeler.

It was moved in the said Case of Harris to quash an Inquisition of Elegit upon
Judgment in B. R. because it appears not in what County the Lands extended
were; but Monmouth being in the Margent, and directed to the Sheriff there, and
the Retorn made by him, it shall be intended in Monmouth, 2 Keb. 582.

Upon a Writ of Extendi facias upon a Statute, The Jury cannot alter a Verdict
in substance.
if the Sheriff Impannel a Jury, and they deliver the Verdict to the Sheriff in
Writing, they may after make it more formal, but cannot alter it in substance;
for it is a complete Verdict by delivery of it to the Sheriff, 2 Roll. Abridgm.
712. D'albie's Case.

Elegit recites the Judgment, quod Elegit executionem Elegit vicious upon
Omission.
of the moiety of the Goods, and of the Lands; and the Writ was, Ideo tibi
praecipimus quod bona and catalla of the Defendants, quae habuit die judicii
praedicti redditi deliberari fac', omitting these words, and medietatem
terrarum and tenementorum praedict' tenend' the said Goods and moiety of the
Lands; Quousque debitum levetur, by virtue whereof the Sheriff delivered the
Moiety in Execution. Per. Cur' This shall not be amended, and he ought to
Amendment.
have a new Elegit; because the Inquisition was taken without Warrant, the
Sheriff New Elegit.
having no Warrant to extend those Lands, Cro. Car. 162. Walsall and Riches.

Two Inquisitions taken at several days by Two Inquisitions no one Stat.
Merchant.
several Juries upon one Statute-Merchant, were adjudged naught; one was taken
of the Land, and the other for the Lands and Goods, 1 Brownl. 38.

Lessee had a Lease of the value of 100 l. and The Sheriff not to deliver the
Lease at another. value, than the Jury find it.
after the Test of the Elegit, and before the Sheriff had executed the Elegit,
assigns his Term to one, who assigns it over to the Plaintiff in the Scire
fac'; and afterward the Sheriff executes the Elegit, and delivers the Lease to
the Plaintiff, Tenend', etc. for the satisfaction of the Debt, which came but
to 43 l. 6 s. 8 d. Per Cur. The Sheriff could not deliver the Lease at another
value than what the Jury had found it at. And the Sale made by the Sheriff is
as strong as if Sale by the Sheriff, as strong as in open Market.
it had been made in open Market, and all the Goods and Chattels are bound
after the Test of the Elegit, and cannot be sold by the Owner after, 1
Brownlow 38. Connyers and Brandling.

Upon Elegit there needs no Liberate. Aliter upon a Statute, March. 117.

In every Elegit the Sheriff must Retorn and The Sheriff to set the moieties
distinctly.
set out the Moieties distinctly, unless they be Tenants in Common; and in that
case he must Retorn the special Matter, 1 Brownl. 38.

On Inquisition of a Lease which is but a Sale, or extent of a Lease, and the
diversity On the 2d Elegit, the Sheriff can only deliver a moiety of the moiety
l^ft.
Chattel, the Sheriff may sell it as Goods; but if he extends it, there shall
be no other benefit than as of a Common Extent, Id. ib.

Two persons Recovered severally against one in Debt: He who had the first
Judgment sued first an Elegit, and had the Moiety of the Land delivered in
Execution; after the other sued the Elegit, and the Sheriff prayed the Advice
of the Court. Per Cur. He shall deliver but the Moiety of that Moiety which he
had at the time of the Writ awarded, Cro. Eliz. 482. Huitt and Cogan.

S. H. acknowledged two Judgments in Debt Two Elegits and the whol^ Land
extended by them.
to A. upon Bond, and was bound to F. in a Bond bearing date before the
Judgments. F. assigns his Debt to the King. A. takes out Execution upon his
Judgments, viz. two Elegits; by one he has one Moiety of H's Lands, by the
other the other Moiety: Then Process issued out of the Exchequer, for the Debt
assigned to the King. Per Cur. It was Resolved,

1. This Subjects Title is prior to the Kings, and the King is bound by the
Statute of 33 H. 8.

2. Pasch. 13 Jac. B. C. Rot. 121. Crook's Case, Adjudged. The two Extents are
well executed; because both Judgments are in one and the same Term, and no
priority between them, Hardr. p. 23. Attorney General versus Andrews.

Actual possession ought not to be delivered on Actual possession not to be
delivered on Elegit, only to enable an Ejectment.
Elegit, the Sheriff ought only to deliver Seizure to enable the Plaintiff to
maintain an Ejectment, and the Tenant may plead on the Ejectment, else the
Tenant would be turned out unheard and be remediless; yet if Actual possession
be delivered it is remediless, 3 Keb. 243. Jefferson and Dawson.

In Elegit the Sheriff ought to deliver the The moiety to be delivered by Metes
and Bounds
Moiety by Metes and Bounds, Hutton p. 16.

If the Land be first Executed upon a Statute, and afterward an Elegit upon a
Judgment obtained before the acknowledging of the Statute come also to the
Sheriff, the Moiety of the Land extended shall be delivered to the Plaintiff
upon the Judgment, 1 Brownl. 38. Freeman's Case.

The Retorn, how to be made.
Vid. tit. What Writs need not be returned, 4 Rep. 65.
If a man sue an Elegit upon a Recovery, and Ca. sa. after an Elegit.
the Sheriff Retorn, That he made partition of the Lands of the Defendant by 12
Jurors; but he could not deliver the Moiety to the parties according to the
Writ; because all the Land was extended to another upon a Statute. He may after
have a Ca. sa. for this Retorn is all one with a Nihil Returned, Mich. 31 and
32 El. Palmer and Knowles.

If one pray an Elegit, and this entered on Record in Banco, and takes out the
Writ; and before the Retorn of it the Record is removed into the King's Bench,
where the Judgment is affirmed within the year, and after it is affirmed to the
Court, that the Sheriff had Returned his Writ in Banco; yet the Plaintiff may
have a Capias, for that this Allegation does not appear to the Court, and now
its impossible it can be Returned here, and so its stronger than if a Nihil had
been Returned, trin. 15 Jac. B. R. Andrews and Cope.

Upon Elegit the Sheriff ought to Retorn the Extent, and also that he has
delivered the Lands.

Elegit need not to be Returned. Therefore if the Sheriff by force of an Elegit
delivers to the party the Moiety of the Lands of the Defendant, and does not
Retorn the Writ; if now the Plaintiff will bring Action of Debt de novo, the
Defendant may plead in Bar the Execution aforesaid, though the Writ of Execution
was not Returned, Earl of Leicester's Case, 1 Leon. p. 280. Penruddock and
Newman.

The Sheriff Retorns upon Elegit, That the Extent by the Bailiff of a Liberty.
party had not any Lands, but only within the Liberty of St. Edmondsbury, and
that J. S. Bailiff there has the Execution and Retorn of all Writs, who
enquired and returned an Extent by Inquisition, and that the Bailiff delivered
the Moiety to the party, and the Plaintiff by virtue of that Extent entered.

Per Cur. 1. The Bailiff may make such Inquisition by Warrant from the Sheriff.

2. When a Jury by the Inquisition find the seisin and value of the Land, the
Jury shall extend all the Land; and the Bailiff in a Franchise, The Sheriff to
deliver the moieties, and not the Jury.
and the Sheriff where there is none, shall deliver the Moieties, and not the
Jury, Cro. Car. 317. Sparrow and Mattersoch.

On an Elegit, averring no Goods were seized, it has been held no Scire facias
lies; but upon a Fieri fac. bare seizure is an Execution, 2 Keb. 789, 821.
Smith and Mildmay.

It was found by Inquisition on Elegit, that the Retorn, where there are other
Lands not to be in severalty.
Defendant was seized of the Moiety of a Message and Lands for Life, and other
Lands in the Right of his Wife; the Sheriff Retorns, Quod virtute brevis, etc.
deliberari feci medietatem omnium praemissorum, videiicet, medietatem
medietatis unius messuagiis necnon duo pomar' necnon unum clausum. The Elegit
was filed; the Retorn is not good, the Sheriff ought to have delivered to him
the moiety of the moiety of the Lands jointly, so that the Tenant by Elegit may
be Tenant in Common of a fourth part with the Joyntenants: But by this delivery
in Severalty he had in effect but the 8th part; for the other Joyntenant may
occupy the Land delivered with him in Common; if it had been duorum pomariorum
it had been good. And he cannot have a New Elegit properly; but the Plaintiff
shall New Elegit.
make a surmize that the Sheriff male suggessit in the Execution of the Elegit,
and then he shall have a New one at his peril, Latch. Rep. 77. Score and
Kendale.

An Extent upon a Statute-Merchant. The Conisor keeps the possession of the
House.
Plaintiff put the Conisee in possession of parcel of an House and Lands, and
suffered the Conisor to continue in the rest of the House, by reason whereof
the Conisor kept the possession of the whole and held the Conisee out. The
Conisee, to the intent he might have a full and perfect possession of the
Whole, caused the Sheriff that he did not Retorn the Writ of Extent, on which
it is entered on the Roll, Quod Vicecomes nihil inde fecit nec misit breve; an
Alias An Alias extendi fac', where it may be, or not.
breve extendi facias may well be awarded. And the Sheriff cannot Retorn, that
the Land was formerly extended by the Old Sheriff; because by the Entry upon
the Roll it appears that no Entry of Retorn on the Roll.
Execution was done; but if the Entry be not, the same is an Execution for the
party, though it be not Returned, 2 Leon. 12. n. 20. Coleshill and Hastings.

It was said in 1 Keb. 91. That after one Elegit New Elegit without
Continuances.
Returned, they cannot have another Elegit without Continuances. But per Cur.
the Course is not to make Continuances in the Roll, but awards severally. And
per Cur. if Nihil be Returned he may have a New Elegit; but if an Acre be
Returned, he can have no other.

The Form of the Retorn of an Elegit with Inquisition, taken, 2 Sand. 244.

Sheriff takes Inquisition upon Elegit, the Plaintiff may enter immediately
before the Retorn of it, 1 Rolls Abr. 738. Lister and Bromley.

Presidents.
Retorn of Elegit with Inquisition taken on it, vid. 2 Sand. 68.

The Sheriff Retorns Nihil as to Goods and Chattels on the first Elegit; yet on
the second Elegit a Lease for years was taken in Execution, though the Suggestion
for the second Writ was of Lands, and nothing of Chattels, Mo. 341. Hunger and
Fry.

The Form of the Retorn of Elegit, Dalt. 231, 232.

Upon Elegit the Sheriff Returned, That he Retorn must be on an Inquisition.
had delivered to the Plaintiff Goods and Chattels of the Defendants ad
valentiam 20 l. per rationabile pretium, and showed what the Goods were in
certain; and also that he had delivered 20 Acres of Land of the Defendants,
quae est medietas omnium terrarum per rationabile extentum; but Returned no
Inquisition, scil. per Sacramentum 12. etc. Per Cur', There ought to be
Inquisition, and the Sheriff himself cannot extend it, Dyer 100.

Plaintiff declares, where the Defendant had In Consideration he would
prosecute a New Elegit, a Promise to procure the Goods to be sound is not good
seized Goods of I. S. by virtue of an Elegit, sued by the Plaintiffs and
delivered to the Defendant, being Deputy Sheriff, he in consideration, that the
Plaintiff at the request of the Defendant, would prosecute another Elegit, and
deliver to the Defendant, and Authorize, some person to receive the Goods,
promises to procure the Goods to be found by the Inquisition, and to deliver
the Goods to the Person Autorized. Per Cur. the P^^mise is not lawful, the
seizing of the Goods, by the first Elegit was not good, for want of an
Inquisition: And it differs from a Fieri fac. so that the Defendant is a
Trespassor ab initio, and this promise is to make good his Tort, and the
Sheriff must Retorn a Jury indifferently, and this promise engages him to the
contrary, and one part of the promise being unlawful makes all Vicious. Sir
Thomas Jone's. Rep. Morris and Chapman, Carter Rep.

A new Elegit, Issued upon Suggestion, that the Where shall be a new Elegit.
party had other Lands in the same County, for if it appear that one takes part
of the Land upon delivery of the Sheriff and accepts it, he cannot after take a
new Extent; and if he does 'its wholly void, for then the Record is ended, and
the Attorneys of both parties are out of Court; but if it is found that he came
into Court, and surmised that the party had other Lands in the same County, and
prayed a new Elegit, he shall have it; for this is intended the first day of
the Extent Returned, and then it is reason he may wave it, and pray a new
Extent, for he never accepted of the first. Mo. 341. Hunger and Fry. Cro Eliz.
310. mesme Case.

After a full and perfect Execution had by Extent, and Returned of Record,
there shall never be any Reextent upon any Eviction; but if the Extent be
insufficient in Law, there may go out a new Extent; as Elegit Issued out
against G. Esquire; who at the time of suing the Writ was Baronet, it was
insufficient since the Stat. 23. H. 8. cap. 5. Co. Lit. 290, etc.

Of Elegit, and the Retorn, Vid. Fulwood's Case 4. Rep. Vid. W. 2. c. 17. 2
Inst. 39.

Where Execution shall be awarded upon Elegit, and how the Sheriff shall demean
himself upon it, and what Lands shall be delivered, and the Retorn.
If more than a Moiety be delivered upon the Elegit, 'its for the whole,
Siderf. p. 91. Berry and Wheeler.

Of the Sheriffs Extent of a Term, vid tit. Fi. fac.

The Sheriff may Extend, or sell a Lease, and How Delivered.
this Sale shall bind the King, because but a Chattel, and no Covin in the
case, 8. Rep. Sir George Fleetwoods Case. Judgment in Debt against a
Joynttenant for Life, who releaseth to the other and dies. The Plaintiff sues
Elegit. Per. Cur. the release being his own act shall not discharge his Moiety
of the Execution, for by the Acceptance of the Release he has deprived himself
of the jus accrescendi, 7. Rep. 78. Lord Aburgavennies Case.

A Rent seck (where there is not any Redisseisin) What shall be delivered.
cannot be delivered, ut liberum tenementum, Cro. Eliz. p. 656. Walsal and
Heath. Annuity certain is extendiable by Elegit. Cro. Jac. 78. York and Twine.

Where the Sheriff extends a Manner by the name of Acres, Land, Meadow, Wood;
no Advowson passes, Owen's Rep. p. 4. Brag and Brook.

In Elegit the Sheriff ought to deliver the Moiety by Metes and Bounds. Hutton.
p. 16.

Upon recovery in C. B. against G. The Plaintiff prays Elegit to the Sheriff of
London, where the Action was brought, and to the Sheriff of Lancaster, (as the
course is) by Sci. fac. directed to the Chancellor of the County Palatine, and
this Elegit appears to be grounded upon a Testatum, first made by the Sheriff
of London, that G. had nothing in London, ubi revera they never made such
Retorn, and upon this the Sheriff Returned that he took a Lease of Tithes,
which the Sheriff delivered to the Plaintiff, as the Goods and Chattels of G.
for the Debt, and that G. had not plura bona, etc. Per Cur. no Retorn ^eing
made by the Sheriff of London, and it appearing that no Testatum was ever
awarded, it is Error, for the Plaintiff in B. C. might have taken his Elegit
immediately into London and into Lancaster, Elegit into London and Lancaster or
any other Counties.
yet he has waved this benefit, and grounds his Execution upon a Testatum,
which is false, and now G. shall be restored to his Term again; for the Sale
and delivery of the Lease to the party himself on an Elegit is no Sale On Sale
of a Term where the Term shall be restored or not.
by force of the Writ, and it is in Law, but a bare delivery in specie, and
upon reversal shall be restored in specie, and does not alter the property
absolutely, but attends the goodness or illness of the Execution. But if the
Sale had been to a stranger for. 100 l. tho the value had been 1000l. yet upon
reversal, he shall not have the Term, but the Money, for it is the folly of the
party that he did not pay the Judgment: So on Sale by Fi. fac. the Term shall
never be restored. vid. supra Cro. Jac. 246. Yel. p. 179. Goodyear and Ince,
Yel. 180. Vid. where there shall be a Reextent or no.

If no Retorn be upon Elegit, the party after the Year and Day shall have a
Sci. fac. and after this a new Elegit. Mo. p, 24. n. 83.

The Sheriffs Office about Execution for the Kings Debt
After the Stat. 33. H. 8 c. 39. was made for levying of the Kings Debt, the
usual Process to the Sheriff at this day is,

QUOd diligenter per Sacrament. proborum and legalium hominum de balliva tua
inquiras, etc. quae and cujusmodi bona and catalla and cujusmodi pretii idem
debtor habuit in dicta balliva tua, etc. Et ea omnia capias in manus nostras
ad valentiam debiti praed. and inde Fi. Fac. debitum praed. etc. Et si forte
bona and catalla praedicti debitoris ad solucion. debiti praedict. non
sufficerent tunc non omittas propter aliquam Libertatem quin eam ingrediaris
and per sacrament' praed. proborum, etc. diligent inquiras quas terras and quae
tenementa and cujusmodi Annui valoris idem (debtor) habuit seu seisitus fuit
in dicta balliva tua, etc. Et ea omnia and singula in quorum manibus jam
existunt extend. fac. and in manus nostras capias, etc. Et capias praed.
(debitorem) ita quod habeas corpus praed. (debitoris) ad satisfac. nobis de
debito praed.

Whereby it appears, that if the Goods and Chattels of the Kings Debtor be
sufficient, and so can be made to appear to the Sheriff, whereupon he may levy
the Kings Debt, then ought not the Sheriff to extend the Lands of the Debtor or
his Heir, or of any Purchaser, or Ter-tenant.

If one extends a Statute Staple at the Suit of The King to be preferred.
A. the Sheriff extends the Lands, and takes the Goods, and seiseth them into
the hands of the King, but does not make Livery, and and after a Writ of
Prerogative of the King issues out of the Exchequer, and commands the Sheriff
to levy the Kings Debt of B. ( viz.) 100 l. of the Goods of the Debtor; and if
he had not sufficient, then to Extend his Lands; and this is delivered to the
Sheriff after the first Writ of Extent, but that was not Returned. The Sheriff
in this Case ought to execute the Extent for the King's Debt; because the
property of the Goods and Lands were not in A. before they were delivered to
him by a Writ of Liberate, and the Goods being seized into the hands of the
King for the use of the party, were privileged from all other Executions, but
that of the King only, 2 Roll. Ab. 158. Dyer 67. Stringfellow's Case. Hob. 339.

Where the Officer without any Warrant or Property of the Goods not in the
Plaintiff before the Liberate.
Authority shall levy any Duty for the King, and shall after account for the
same in the Exchequer, or otherwise pay the same to the King's use, there the
Officer seems chargable but as a Trespassor; but if he shall convert the same
to his own proper use, it is Felony.

If a man be bound in a Statute-Merchant Execution on Stat. Merchant.
(and does not pay the Debt at the day) Execution shall be done thereof in this
manner; the Conisee must come to the Major, or other Officer, before whom the
Statute was acknowledged, and pray him to Certify the same into the Chancery,
under his Seal, etc. and if he will not Certify it, then a Writ of Certiorari
must be sued forth of Chancery, directed to the said Officer, to Certify the
acknowledgment of the said Statute into the Petty-Bag Office in Chancery, and
upon the Certificate a Writ of Execution; scilicet, First, a Capias shall go
out to the Sheriff against the Body of the Conisor ( si Laicus sit;) but the
Debtor, after he is taken, has liberty given him (within a Quarter of a year)
to sell his Lands and Goods to discharge his Debts: And if he do not agree for
his said Debts within the next Quarter; or if he cannot be found, then all his
Lands and Goods upon Extendi facias shall be Appraised by a Jury, and shall be
delivered to his Creditors by a reasonable time, to hold till the Debt be fully
paid; and yet the Body of the Debtor, if he be taken, shall remain in Prison
until the Debt and Damages be paid. And this Writ may be Retornable into the C.
B. or B. R.

Though it be within a Franchise, the Sheriff is to execute it himself.

If the Sheriff Retorn, That the Debtor is a Clerk, then an Extent shall go out
against his Lands and Goods only.

If the Debtor find Sureties, they shall be Ordered in all things as the
Principal; scilicet, As to the Arrest of their Bodies, and delivery of the
Lands and Goods.

The Statute ought to be showed to the Court, where the Certiorari is Returned.

The Creditor out of the Profits of the Lands, is to find the Debtor Bread and
Water in Prison.

Of Statute-Staple.
A Statute-Staple is of two sorts:

1. Per Stat. 26 Ed. 3. cap. 9. and sic proprie dicitur, and is acknowledged
before the Mayor of the Staple.

2. Per Stat. 23 H. 6. c. 6. before one of the Chief Justices, or before the
Mayor and Recorder of London.

A Statute-Staple must be Certified into Chancery Stat. Staple.
as a Statute-Merchant, and on that Certificate Execution shall go presently
forth against the Body ( si Laicus sit,) and Lands and Goods of the Conisor,
Retornable into Chancery, in the Petty-Bag Office there, and not into B. C. or
B. R. as Statute-Merchant.

The Sheriff on this shall take the Body of the Conisor, and per Sacramentum
proborum, etc. presently extend, and prize and seize into the King's hands his
Lands, Goods and Chattels, and shall Certify the Appraisment into Chancery.

Upon which the Conisee shall have a Liberate to the Sheriff, to deliver these
Lands and Goods to the value of his Debt; and shall not be delivered to him by
the Sheriff before the Liberate.

Of Retorns on Statute Merchant, Staple and Recognizance; and the Sheriffs
demeanor in the Executions.
Before I speak of the Retorns, it will be needful to consider the Writs
themselves, and the different Forms of them: For they are the Sheriffs
Directions.

The Writ of Execution upon a Statute Merchant, Statute-Merchant.
is for Lands and Goods thus:

QUod Vic' omnia bona and catalla terras and tenementa quae fuerunt praedicti
(le Conisor) sine dilatione Liberari faceret per rationabile pretium and
extentum tenend' ut liberum tenementum, etc. And he is not commanded to do it
per Sacramentum proborum, etc.

But the Writ of Execution upon a Statute-Staple, and upon a Recognizance in
the nature of it (on 23 H. 8.) is,

QUod Vic' omnia terras and catalla per Sacramentum proborum and legalium
hominum de balliva sua per quos, etc. juxta verum valorem diligent' extendi and
appretiari faceret and in manum nostram seisiri faceret ut ea praefato (le
Conisee) quousque sibi de summa praedicta satisfactus fuerit, liberari
faciamus, etc. Et qualiter, etc. So that as ye may observe by the Forms, by
force of the Writ on the Statute Merchant, the Sheriff may deliver the Lands
and Goods presently upon the Extent to the party. But by the Writ on Statute
Staple, or Recognizance in the nature of it, he is to extend the Lands and
Goods, and to seize them into the hands of the King; but not to deliver them to
the party without a Liberate.

The Proceedings in a Statute-Merchant, is a Difference between proceedings in
a Stat. Merch. and Stat. Staple.
Capias, and if the Sheriff thereupon retorn a Cepi corpus, then he shall
remain in Prison a quarter of a year, within which time he may sell his Goods
and Lands to pay his Debts, and this by the express words of the Statute of 15
H. 7. c. 16. but if the Sheriff retorn Non est inventus, Execution shall be
granted of his Lands and Goods.

But in a Statute-Staple and Recognizance, the first Process is to take his
Body, Lands and Goods all in one Writ; for this is by the express words of the
Statute, and a more speedy Remedy than the Statute-Merchant.

Now on a Statute-Staple and Recognizance, the Writ of Execution upon Retorn of
the Conisor dead, is to extend the Lands nec non catalla, which were of the
Conisor at the time of his death: And this is the constant course, as appears
by Records of Extents which are in the Rolls.

On Extent of a Statute-Merchant the Sheriff Retorns, That the Body cannot be
found, and that he had extended the Lands and delivered them to the Plaintiff,
Reg. 146.

The Sheriff may retorn Non est inventus, nec habet bona nec terras; the
Sheriff returned the Conisor mortuus, Dyer 299.

Upon Extent of a Statute-Merchant, or Staple, the Sheriff may retorn, That the
Debtor is Clerk. If he retorn Trade, or Mandav' ballivo Libertatis, he shall be
punished.

Lands in Ancient Demesne shall be taken in Execution on a Statute; but not
Copyhold-Lands, 4 Rep. 67. 5. Rep. 105.

Where, the Debt of the Conisor appears in the Retorn, there of necessity his
Seisin must be found to be of an Estate in Fee-simple only, Dyer 299.

Execution upon Recognizance per Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 6. has the effect of a
Statute-staple.

Retorn' Liberate post Extent' fact' super Oblig' Statut' Stapulae.
VIrtute, etc. Liberavi infranominat' B. S. maneria terras and tenementa
infrascript' habena' sibi and assignat' suis ut liberum tenementum suum
quousque sivi de debito infrascripto una cum damnis misis and expensis suis
plenarie fuerit satisfact' prout, etc.

Retorn' de Extent' super Recogn' vel Stat'.
VIrtute istius brevis mihi direct' cepi corpus infranominat' W. W. cujus
quidem corpus ad diem and locum infra content' paratum habeo prout interius
mihi praecipitur.

Resid' Executionis istius brevis patet in quadam Inquisitione huic brevi
annex.'

A. B. Armig. Vic.

War. INquisitio indentat' capt' apud C. in Compraed. 12 die Jan. Anno, etc.
coram A. B. Armig. Vic. Com. praedict. Virtute brevis Dom. Regis mihi direct.
and huic Inquisitioni annex' per Sacramentum T. B. etc. (Et sic XII.) qui
dicunt super Sacramentum suum quod W. W. in brevi praedict. nominat. die
recogn. debit' in eodem brevi spec. fuit seisitus in dominico suo ut de feodo
de and in manerio de A. in Com. praed. clar. annui valoris in omnibus exitibus
ultra reprisas 100 l. Et ulterius Juratores praedict. super Sacramentum suum
praedict. dicunt quod praed. W. W. die recognitionis debiti praed. seu unquam
postea nulla habuit bona sua catalla, neque al. sive plura terr. five tenementa
in Com. praed. ad eorum notitiam quod extend. appretiari aut in manus dicti
dom. Regis capi aut seisiri possint. Quae quidem manerium terr. and tenementa
praedict. cum pertinentiis Ego praefat. Vic. die captionis hujus Inquisitionis
cepi in manus dict. dom. Regis per Extent. praed. In cujus rei testimonium tam
ego praefat. Vic. quam Jurat. praed. huic Inquisition. sigilla nostra
alternatim apposuimus die anno and loco supradict', etc.

A. B. Armig. Vic.

Extent on a Statute-Merchant issued out Retorn.
against R. the Conisor; the Sheriff Returned, That the Conisor was possessed of
diverse Goods, and seized of Lands, which he delivered to the Conisee, and that
the Conisee accepted of the Land; and because the Sheriff did not Retorn, That
he had not any other Lands, Goods or Chattels. It was Adjudged Insufficient,
and a new Writ awarded; though some held it was well enough in the Case of a
Conisor, but not in the Case of a Purchaser, 1 Brownl. 37. Fletcher and
Robinson.

Note, If the Conisor be Returned dead, Execution If the Conisor be dead, how
Execution to be.
shall be granted against his Executor, without Scire fac' to have Execution of
his Goods; so against the Heir and Tertenants of his Lands without a Scire
fac', Quaere. 15 H. 7. 16. b. 2 R. 3 8. b.

If the Sheriff do not Retorn the Capias, or retorn Tarde, or that he directed
it to a Bailiff of a Franchise, he shall be punished, and yield Damages to the
party grieved, according to the Statute of de Mercatoribus, W. 2. c. 39.

Two Inquisitions taken at several days by several Juries upon one
Statute-Merchant, were Adjudged naught: One was taken of the Lands, and the
other for the Lands and Goods, 1 Brownl. 38.

If another had these Lands. in Execution by Elegit, or is in by descent; in
such Cases the Sheriff shall Retorn the special Matter; i. e. in the first
Case, that he has extended the Land of the Defendant: But he cannot deliver
the same to the Plaintiff; for that another had the same in Extent before.

The Sheriff having an Extent upon a Statute, may gather the Goods all into one
place to be viewed and appraised by the Jurors, and he is not a Trespassor, Mo.
563. Attorney General verse. Crocker.

As to what Lands, etc. shall be extended upon Statutes, etc. it does not
properly belong to this Treatise, which has a respect only to the Office of
Sheriff.

Note, If Lands delivered in Execution (on a Scire fac', and New Writ of
Execution, where.
Statute-Merchant, Staple or Recognizance, or upon recovery of Debt and
Damages) are lawfully recovered or evicted out of the possession of the
Conisee, before his Debt and Damages be satisfied, he shall have Scire fac',
etc. and upon this a new Writ of Execution, or Re-Extent, to levy the residue
per Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 1. 1 Inst. 289, 290, 5 Rep. 87.

Note also, It is a Question in 2 Brownl. 270. By whom.
King James Incorporated the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of Berwick, and
granted to them the Execution and Retorn of all Writs, Whether an Extendi
facias shall be Executed by them, or by the Sheriff of Northumberland?

Some said Berwick is English, which appears by the Act of Parliament which
confirms the Letters Patents, and also they send Burgesses to Parliament.

Others said, It is a part of Scotland, and a Sheriffwick. An Obligation there
shall not be Tried in England; and it is not in the County of Northumberland,
nor part of it.

By Siderfin p. 382. our Laws are not current there: But yet in Jackson and
Crisp's Case, Local breach of Covenant at Berwick, Tried at Belford in
Cumberland* 2 Brownl. 270. 2 H. 7. 31. 26 H. 23.

Retorns on Scire facias.
Scire facias is a Writ Judicial, directed to the Sheriff, etc. and is usually
to warn a man, to come and show Cause to the Court, etc. why Execution of a
Judgment shall not be done. But this Writ shall not be granted before the year
and day past, after Judgment given.

Conisor in a Recognizance dies, Scire fac' Retorn not agreeing with the Writ.
goes against his Executors, and Haeredes terrarum, etc. Sheriff Retorns, That
he had no Executor; and Scire feci W. H. filio and haeredi praedict. M. ( le
Conisor.) This Retorn agrees not with the Writ; yet it may be good, 3 Rep. 15.
Sir William Herbert's Case.

Scire fac' on a Recognizance in Chancery against C. who was Returned dead,
then a second Scire fac' issued against the Heir of C. and against the Tenants
of the Lands of C. which he had tempore Recognitionis vel postea. The Sheriff
Returned C. Tertenant, and omitted to Retorn any thing against the Heir. This a
Non-retorn of the Sheriff, and not a Misretorn, and is not aided by any of the
Statutes of 32 H. 8. or 18 Eliz. or 21 Jac. of Jeofail. The Heir must be
summoned as well as Tertenant, on a Recognizance
Its Error: The Tertenant without the Heir ought not to be charged; therefore
the Heir ought to be summoned, for the Heir may have a Release to plead, or
other Matter to bar the Execution. Also if the Heir be within Age, the Parol
shall demur, and the Tertenant shall have advantage thereof: And a new Scire
fac' issued ad Informand' Curiam; and the Retorn was, That he had not any Lands
in his Bailywick that descended to his Heir, nor any Heir within his Bailywick,
and good enough; though it had been better, if he had Returned who was Heir, and
that he was warned, or that there was not any Heir in the said County, Cro.
Car. 295. Eyres and Taunton.

The Writ Commands the Sheriff to give The words of the Writ not answered in
the Retorn.
Notice to the Tenants of the Land in Feesimple, and the Sheriff Retorns not,
That those which he had Returned were Tenants of the Land in Fee-simple, and so
the words of the Writ are not answered, 1 Brownlow Rep. 145, 146.

The Sheriff may Retorn 24 Tertenants of the whole, and every Tenant may plead
in discharge of himself; or he may Retorn, That each is Tertenant of so many
Acres, 2 Keb. 601. Henshaw's Case.

Scire fac' to have Execution on a Recognizance. The Sheriff Retorns the
Conisor dead, other Scire fac' Issues against the Tertenants of the Conisor, on
which the Sheriff retorns a Scire feci to W. and R. Tenants; and further, that
there was no Heir nor any other Tenants, quibus Scire fac' poterit, and la
form, 1 Keb. 621. 2 Sanders 6. Jefferson and Moreton.

Scire fac' against the Heir and Tertenants, the Sheriff Retorns no Heir, and
the Tertenants appear, and la form, 2 Sanders. Jefferson's Case.

Scire fac' to Tertenants, the Sheriff retorns they are Summoned, la fo^me 2
Sanders 6, 8, 232.

Scire fac' ad audiend' errores must be delivered Scire fac' ad audiend errores.
to the Sheriff, 1 Rols Rep. 329. Sr. Thomas Midleton's Case.

If a Special Scire fac' do Issue forth, a Nihil Special Scire fac. ret.
cannot be returned upon it, for Nihil is a general Retorn, and the Writ is
Special, Pract. Reg. tit. Retorn.

The Retorn of the second Scire fac' ought to Ret. of the second Scire fac'
when to bear date.
bear date on the Retorn of the first Scire fac'.

Retorn de Scire fac'.
VIrtute istius brevis nihil direct' per A. B. and C. D. probos and Legales
homines de Balliva mea Scire fec' infra nominat' J. S. quoth. sit Coram
Justiciariis Domini Regis (if it be in the Common Pleas) vel Coram Domino Rege
(if in the King-Bench) vel Coram Baronibus Domini Regis (if in the Exchequer)
ad diem and locum infra script. ad ostend. and proponend. si quid pro se habeat
vel dicere sciat quare, etc. according the Matter contained in the Writ) prout
mihil interius praecipitur.

Infra nominat. A. B. nihil habet in Balliva mea per quod ei Scire facere
possum, neque est inventus in eadem (if the Retorn be in Chancery) -- qd' sit
Coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria.

Two Nihils Returned countervail a Scire fec'.

To Scire fac. sur Recognisans, Sheriff Retorns that the Defendant is dead, 2
Sanders.

Scire fac. Vid. Tertenants, The Sheriff Retorns they are Summoned, 2 Sanders 8.

The Sheriffs Demands and Office as to Outlawries and Capias Utlagatum, and
Retorn.
He which is sued in a personal Action, if he The manner of suing to the
Outlawry.
do not appear on the Mean Process, then the Exigent is directed to the Sheriff
to call and proclaim him in five County Court Days one after another, to answer
to the Law; and when, upon the Exigent the Sheriff Retorns quod non comparuit;
upon this Retorn, the Plaintiff shall have a Cap. utlagatum against the
Defendant, but if the Defendant appear upon the Exigent, he shall have a
Supersedas.

Where upon the Exigent the Sheriff retorneth Retorns.
Reddidit se, he must have the Body in Court at the day of the Retorn of the
Writ, except the Party be Sick.

The Sheriff may Retorn the Coroners were absent.

As for the Forms of these Retorns, vid. Dalt. cap. 59.

A Capias utlagatum is a non omittas in it self. The Bailiff of a Franchise
cannot Execute a Cap Uilagat. Sheriff not to put the party out of possession.
And therefore the Bailiff of a Liberty cannot Execute a Cap. Utlagt. and if
the Party be in the hands of the Bailiff the Sheriff may take him.

If a Capias Utlagatum Issues to the Sheriff to take the Party, and to enquire
what Lands and Tenements he had, the Sheriff finds by Inquisition, that is
seized of many Lands, and continues Possession in them, he cannot put the Party
out of Possession by force of that, Winch p. 78.

An Outlawry Returned in London in these Retorn as to the Hustings in London.
words. Ad Husting. tentum in Guildhal Civitatis London tali die A. B. exactus
fuit and non comparuit: This is no good Retorn, because there are two Hustings
in London, one is de communibus placitis, and the other is de placitis terrae;
in such case the Retorn must be apud Husting de communibus placitis.

The City of Norwich is within the County of Ret. where the City is City and
County.
Norfolk. Also it is a County in it self, which may hold Plea. And therefore if
a Retorn be made in these words, Ad Com' tentum apud Norvicum in Com. Norfolc.
This is not good, for that it may have two Intendments ( scilicet) that the
County which was held there was for the City, or for the County of Norfolk: But
if the Retorn be in these words, Ad Comitatum Norfolc' tentum apud Norwiucm in
Commit. Norfolc. it is good, for now it cannot be intended, but only that their
County was held for the County of Norfolk, 11 H. 7. 10. b.

In a Cap. Utlagat. the Sheriff returned, that Protection Returned.
the Party who was Arrested had a Protection from a Peer of Parliament it is
Ill; and day was given to the Sheriff to amend his Retorn, Winch p. 24.

Proclamation was directed to the Sheriff of Proclamation Returned.
Cheshire against J. H. and the Writ was Returned, Tali die ad Commit. meum
tent. en le Shirehall, etc. Proclamationem feci ac eod. die ad General'
Session. etc. Proclamationem feci, and this Matter was pleaded in avoidance of
the Outlawry to Reverse it, because the Proclamations were made one day, and
the Writ was tribus specialibus diebus, etc.

Per Curiam, It is an ill Retorn, and the Sheriff was amerced for it,
Goldsborough 111.

By the Custom of London the Writ was directed to the Sheriff of London, and
not to the Coroner (who is Mayor.)

The Retorn of the Outlawry out of London in B. R. is generally made without
saying per judicium Coronat. 2 Rolls Ab. 806.

Error to Reverse an Outlawry in the County of Lancaster, for that the Sheriff
returned quoth. ad Com. Lancastriae tent. ibid. where it should have been ad Com.
Lancastriae tent. apud Lancaster, or at some other place certain, and it was
reversed, 9 Rep. 94. Dyer 105.

The Exigent was Returned, ad Com. tent. apud Retorn Exigent.
castrum de Exon primo exactus fuit, etc. and because it was not set down in
what County, it was held to be Erroneous. One was returned Outlawed, and for
that it did not appear, that it was per judicium Coronatorum, it was reversed,
and that without any Writ of Error.

VIrtute istius brevis mihi direct. cepi corpus A. B. Cap. 1. This the Form of
Retorns.
infrae nominat. cujus corpus Coram Justioariis infra script. ad diem and Locum
infra content. parat. habeo prout interius mihi praecipitur, residuum vero
Executionis istius brevis patet in quadam inquisitione huic brevi annex.

So on non est inventus, residuum vero, etc.

Inquisitio Indentat. capt. apud, etc. Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum quoth. J.
S. in dicto brev. nominat. nulla Bona neque Catalla Terr. sive Tenementa habuit
aut tenuit in Com. praed. die Jovis prox. post festum Sanct. B. Martyr. Anno
Regni Domini Regis nunc tertio in dicto brevi specificat. nec unquam postea,
quae in manus dicti Domini R^gis capi ac seisiri possunt ad noticiam Juratorum
praedict. In cujus rei Testimonium tam sigillum Com. praed. quam Juratorum
praed. huic Inquisitioni Indentat. sunt appensa dat. die anno and loco
supradict.

Other Retorns in Capias Utlagat. vid. Dalton, 215.

Retorna de Exigent, vid. Dalt. 236.

The Judgment is, Ideo Utlagat. Coronator' 1 Inst. 288.

The profits of Lands of the Person Outlawed in personal Actions, the Sheriff
may seize without any Office, and also the Goods.

CHAP. XX.
Where and in what Cases Action lies against a Sheriff for a Rescous, and what
Action. Diversity between Mean Process and Execution: Where the Sheriff makes
himself chargeable by his Retorn. Where and what Remedy against the Rescouser
by Action or Indictment. Of Retorn of Rescous. What is good or not. Of Laying
the Action, and how to Declare. Of Rescous and Pleadings in it. The Venue in
this Action.

Of Rescous. Where and in what Cases Action lies against the Sheriff for a
Rescous or not.
IF in the Arresting the party is rescued, be it on Execution or Mean Process,
no Action for this lies against the Sheriff: And if the Prisoner be Arrested on
Mean Process, and as he is bringing to the Gaol he is rescued, no Action lies
against the Sheriff, for the Sheriff cannot be supposed to have the Posse
Comitatus upon every Mean Process, aliter if it be upon Execution; there Caveat
Vicecomes. But if he be Arrested Diversity between Mean Process and Execution
as to Rescous.
upon Mean Process and brought to the Gaol, then its no good Retorn for him to
say, the Gaol was broken and so he was taken from him. And therefore, Action on
the Case was brought against the Sheriff of London and Middlesex on Escape,
they plead they had taken the party on a Latitat, and that in bringing him from
Islington to the Gaol, Rescous was made of him from them, and so Retorn the
Rescous, 16 Ed. 4. 3. Bastard Faulconbridges Case, 2 Bulst. 198. May and Proby,
Cro. Jac. 419. Mo. 852. Cro. El. 868. Noy 40. 1 Roll. Rep. 388. Roll. Ab. 99.
Mesme Case. Popham 192.

Per Cur. The Plea and Retorn is good, notwithstanding Waldoe and Lamberts
Case, 44 El. B. R. and that upon the former differences; and the difference
between Mean Process and Execution was enforced in this Case. If the Sheriff
take one in Execution for Debt, and after he suffers him to Escape; the debt is
gone and the Process served, therefore in such case, if he should not have his
remedy by way of Action against the Sheriff, he should be without remedy: But
not so in Mean Process, for there the Party may be taken again.

Action of Debt lies against the Sheriff upon a Cap. returned qd' cepit Corpus
and he was rescued, 2 Rolls Rep. 57, 58.

No Rescous can be on a Scire fac' for Goods, but in such case the Party shall
have Action on the Case: And a Rescous lies only on a Capias which lies against
the person, and Cro. Car. 515. Sly and Finch's Case, which is full as to the
Point, and was as follows, Lit. Rep. 297. the Sheriff of Surry and Alderton's
Case, Hetly 145. Mesme Case.

Scire fac' was brought against Finch Sheriff of Glouc', for that the Plaintiff
having brought a Fieri fac' directed to Finch, he returned that he had taken
Goods into his Hands to the value of 72 l. and had sold as much of them as
amounted to 11 l. and the residue remained pro defectu emptorum till such a
day, at which time he putting them to sale, they were rescued from him, upon
which retorn the Scire fac' was brought to show cause, why the remaining Debt
should not be levied on his Goods: To this the Defendant Demurrs. All agreed
that the Retorn is not good. But the Question was, Whether he has charged
himself by this Writ, Cro. Car. 515. Sly and Finch, Sanders 340, 343. Mildum
and Smith, 2 Keb. 789, 821. Mesme Case.

And per Cur' he is chargeable by this Retorn. Where the Sheriff makes himself
chargable by his Retorn.
If he had returned only qd' remanent pro defectu emptorum, therein he had done
his Office, and in such case on the Election of a new Sheriff, a Distring as
Vicecomit' shall Issue to sell the Goods, and to deliver the Money to the new
Sheriff. But when he says further, that they were rescued out of his Hands,
therein he has misdemeaned himself. And by Dodderige, the Sheriff Vend'
exponas.
has charged himself by this Retorn, as well in regard of his Misdemeanor; as
also, that he has his remedy over against the Rescoussers: Nor can the Court
award a Writ of Venditioni exponas, because its against his own Retorn. But if
it be objected, that perhaps he had seized the Goods again, so as he may sell
them on a Venditioni exponas, if so, then he ought to have pleaded Plead.
it to the Scire fac' and it had been good.

Action on the Case.
Lynn and Cunninghams Case. It was a great Question, if one shall have Action
against the parties that rescued. Three Judges were of Opinion he should, though
it was well objected, if he shall have Action against the party, he shall also
have Action against the Sheriff, and so betwice satisfied, and the Sheriff
shall have Action against the party, and so he shall be twice charged.

By Richardson, a Man in some case shall have Election of Action, and both are
but to recover Damages; a man had an Execution against one, another saw the man
and conveyed him out of sight; Action on the Case lies against him, and perhaps
the Sheriff is dead, and he shall have no remedy.

Harvy ad idem: The Law gives a man Remedy against the party that does the
wrong. If an Action on the Case will lie for hindering a Sheriff in Executing
his Office, as it was adjudged in Semain and Greshams Case 5 Rep. a fortiori
when it is actually done, and he is rescued out of Custody.

Cro. ad idem that the Action will lie; there is a mischief on both sides; the
Defendant may be twice charged, and the Plaintiff may lose his Debt; and if the
Sheriff brings the Action, he may plead the Recovery by the Plaintiff. When the
Sheriff made his Retorn of the rescous, there is no remedy against him; and if
the party taken, be rescued before he be brought to the Gaol, there is no
remedy against the Executors of the Sheriff. If Debt be brought against the
Sheriff, and in that a recovery, the Plaintiff shall never take the Defendant
again; and so if he bring Action against the party and recovers, the Sheriff
may plead that; and Fitz. N. B. 12 is doubtful.

Hutton contra, That the Action does not lie. The difference is good where a
man is arrested upon mean Process and rescued, and after becomes nonsolvent, so
that they who rescued him are the cause of the loss of my Debt, it is a wrong
upon which he may be Indicted, yet the party shall not have remedy against him,
because he may proceed. Yelverton of the same Opinion, and agreed the
difference.

By Hutton, upon mean Process the Sheriff never had remedy for the Rescous, but
he shall retorn the Rescous; but upon Execution he shall not retorn the
Rescous, but have an Action, and the party is not prejudiced, for he shall have
an Action against the Sheriff, tho in Judgment of Law the party is liable.

Remedy against the Rescouser by Action and Indictment.
The Rescouser shall be doubly punished, by the King, and by the party; upon
the Retorn of the Sheriff, he shall be fined to the King, and Attachment shall
issue out against him, and the party shall have a Writ of Rescous against him,
and so shall the Sheriff too.

Action on the Case lies against the party that rescoused, by the party who had
the Loss, and he shall not be forced to Sue the Sheriff, for perhaps the
Sheriff is dead, and then no Action lies against his Executors ( actio
personalis moritur, etc.) and if the Plaintff recover the parties may plead it
if they be sued by the Sheriff, so as there is not any danger of being doubly
charged; so is Hoppings Case 2 Keb. 340. Action on the Case lies against the
Rescuer as well as the Sheriff. But as to the Case of Mine and Caughton, it is
well reported and agreed by the Judges in Hetly. p. 94. by the name of Lyn and
Cunningham, which was full to the Point, and the Reasons in respect to this and
other cases of like nature, are weighty; I have set down as it is in the Book,
with the Reasons of the Judges that differed in Opinion. Cro. Car. 109. Mynn
and Coughton. 2 Keb. 340. Hoppings Case. What Damages the Rescouser shall
answer.


The Defendant rescued B. S. out of the Baylisff hands when the said B. S. was
arrested by Alias capias out of the King's Bench, which Writ is only in nature
of a Plea of Trespass; the party who rescued him shall answer in this Action,
Damages for the Debt, which was 300l. because by this means the Defendant lost
his Debt, but if the Sheriff or Bailiff in this case had only suffered a
negligent escape, they should be charged only with the Damages in the same Plea
as the Writ supposes, and nothing for the Debt. Lanes Rep. p. 70. Kent and
Kelloway.

Remedy against the Rescouser by Indictment, and for what reason quasht or
reversed.
Error was brought to reverse an Indictment of Rescous and Riot, and the Errors
Assigned were.

1. There was a Warrant to three conjunctim and divisim to arrest H. and two of
them arrest him, it ought to have been by one or all three, because it is a
Ministerial Act, 14. H. 4. 34.

2. Juratores pro domino Rege praesentant, and do not say 12 Jurors present and
peradventure, but eleven did present. Tr. 2 Car. 1. Harrison and Erington.

The Names of the Jurors ought to have been certified, for peradventure they
were not probi and legales homines, but Villains and Outlaws, 15 H. 4. 41.

Note, an Indictment before Coroners, which found B. felo de se, was quashed,
because it did not appear it was per sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum.

4. It is found that the Sheriff by virtue of a Writ directed to him came, etc.
and upon this Rescous was made by H. etc. and it appears not what manner of
Writ it was ( viz. Eleg.) Capias, etc. and if there were no Writ there can be
no Rescous; and albeit he had no Writ, yet if Execution were done by virtue of
another Writ, the Sheriff mistakes the Warrant.
party may disobey it (if he be not a Bailiff known) as if on Hab. fac.
seisinam the Sheriff makes a Warrant as on a Capias. Tr. 2. Car. 1. Harison and
Exington.

An Indictment for a Rescous returned against one in B. R. ought not to be
quashed, although it be erroneous, except the person Indicted for it do personally
appear in Court. Pract. Reg Tit. Rescous.

Indictment of rescous ought to express, the Indictment not to be uncertain.
place where and the time when the Rescous, or else it is ill for the
uncertainty, Pract. Reg. Tit. Rescous.

Retorn of Rescous.
By Stat. W. 2. c. 39. a Retorn of Rescous is forbidden, for redundat in
dedecus domini Regis. The Sheriff may take the posse comitatus post vel ante
Queremoniam, as well before as after complaint made, and the Delinquents must
be Upon a voluntary return (if i^^ the* Sheriff is not si^eaable, but Action
lies against him.
punished coram Rege in the King's Bench, Co. 2 Inst. 45.

Note, the Court never sines a Sheriff for the ill retorn of a Rescous, because
it is voluntary, but they allow exceptions to quash it, because the party
cannot Traverse it: But where he is compellable to make a Retorn, he is
finable, but the party shall have his Action on the Case. Yet in Chamber's
Case, 2 Keb. 358. the Sheriff is Finable for retorning a Rescous on Fi. fac';
but the Retorn is well enough as to the party, 1 Keb. 878. Burrough's Case, 1
Roll. Rep. 389. Proby and Lumley.

Now as to the Ill Retorns of Rescous, and the Exception to quash it, I shall
briefly cite the Cases Adjudged in our Books, for the more perfect Direction of
such Retorns hereafter to be made.

The Retorn of a Rescous, without mentioning The Retorn must mention the place
where it was made.
the place where it was made, is void. The Sheriff retorns Rescous upon him at
Dale in the County of Bucks, which was the County into which the Process was
awarded. Exception was taken, because he says not ( infra ballivam meam.) But
non allocatur; for if it be within the County, it cannot otherwise be taken,
but to be within his Bailywick, Mo. 422.

Upon a Latitat awarded, the Sheriff retorns a Rescous tali die; but there is
not any place mentioned where the Arrest was made. Its a void Retorn. For non
constat, whether the Arrest and Rescous were within the County and Jurisdiction
of the Sheriff, Yelv. p. 51. Woolfrost's Case.

The Sheriff returned a Rescous against the Father and Son; against the Father
for rescuing his Son, and against the Son for rescuing himself.

As to the Father, the Retorn was sufficient as to time and place: But that
against the Son wanted such Certainty.

By Dodderidge, The Retorn is good: It shall be intended at the same time that
the Father rescued the Son, that the Son rescued himself, and the word ( Et) is
a Conjunction Copulative; and compleats both together.

Haughton contra. A Prisoner may be rescued by others, and he not know of it;
and the Rescous may be at several times, 2 Bulstrode 137.

The Sheriff in his retorn of Rescous said, That he was in Custodia ballivi
Itinerantis, and that a Rescous was made to his Bailiff Itinerant. Its not
good. Aliter, if it had been Bailiff of a Liberty, March. Rep. p. 92.

Rescous quasht, because it is quod arrestavit -- without saying in custodia
sua habuit --, 1 Siderfin 332.

The Sheriff ought not to say, He rescoused To say, he rescued him out of the
Custody of the Bailiff, is not good.
him out of the Custody of his Bailiff, but out of the Custody of the Sheriff:
But it is good, if it were by the Bailiff of a Liberty.

Retorn of a Rescous was not quasht for saying, in custodia for e custodia; but
because he says cepit and arrestavit, and not in custodia habuit, it was
quasht; for an Arrest may be only by word, 2 Keb. 177. The King against
Claypoole, and p. 227. The King against Sympson.

Exception was to the retorn of a Rescous, because it was e custodia ballivi
mei. Sed non allocatur; for there is veritas legis and veritas facti, and if
either be alleged its sufficient; therefore its as good as if it had been e
custodia mea. But Keeling held it ill; because a Retorn must answer the Law,
and the difference has alwas been between a Sheriffs Bailiff, and a Bailiff of
a Franchise. And according to the Opinion of Keeling is Dyer, 7 El. 241. Dyer
241. 39 H. 6. 42. 2 Roll. Rep. 263, 354.

If the Sheriff retorn in Banco a Rescous made to his Bailiff Errant by these
words, viz. Virtute istius brevis, etc. mandavi ballivo meo Itineranti, etc.
qui mihi sic respondit, quod arrestavit, etc. showing the year, day and place;
and that a Rescous was made, etc. This Retorn is not good, because this Arrest
is the proper Arrest of the Sheriff, and no credit is to be given to the
Bailiff Errant, Mich. 8 Jac. in Scaccario, Kent and Heltway's Case.

But per Cur. such a Retorn in Banco Regis is good enough, because the
Presidents of the the Court are accordingly; and such Retorn by a Bailiff of a
Franchise in B. R. is good.

Though its faid 2 Roll. Rep. 78. the Sheriff ought to retorn Rescous made to
him, and not to his Bailiff, yet in truth the Force is made to his Bailiff; but
it is according to the different course of the Courts.

Two Exceptions were taken to the Retorn of a Rescous:

1. Feci Warrant', but says not sub sigillo Officii. Non allocatur, because he
says feci Warrant' direct, and its not a Warrant unless it be sub sigillo.

2. It was not returned, That it was extra custod' of the Sheriff, but of the
Bailiffs. Sed non allocatur; for the Custody of the Bailiffs Virtute warranti
of the Sheriff, is the Custody of the Sheriff, Sir Tho. Jones Rep. 195.
Penfold's Case.

A Rescous was returned in this manner by the Sheriff; ( viz.) in the Recital
of the Arrest he said, Mandavi ballivo, etc. qui virtute praedicti Warranti
arrestavit, etc. and after shows the Rescous.

Exception was, He Commands his Bailiffs to In the Retorn he makes no mention
of his Warrant.
Arrest, and says, That by virue of the said Warrant they did Arrest, etc. and
makes no mention of any Warrant, but of his Command to them. Had this been to a
Bailiff of a Liberty it had been good; but not to those which are Bailiffs
Itinerants.

But per Cur', he cannot Command a Bailiff of a Liberty, but by his Warrant.

The Clerk of the Crown said, The Common Form is, Feci quoddam Warrantum; but
to a Bailiff of a Liberty it is Mandavi.

A General Warrant to a Bailiff of a Liberty ( viz.) for all Arrests is good;
but not to a Bailiff Itinerant, by Haughton.

But by Sir James Ley Chief Justice, Though the Common Form be Feci quoddam
Warrantum, yet this tantamounts: For the Mandate of the Sheriff to the Bailiff
is the Bailiffs Warrant. However a Rescouser as to this cannot take advantage,
but shall be fined to the King, 2 Roll. Rep. 263.

The Sheriff retorns a Rescous, and recites The time and place where the
Warrant was made, not showed in the Retorn.
where a Latitat was to him directed, etc. he made his Warrant to the Bailiff,
who arrested W. and that G. made the Rescous. It was held to be good, though he
does not show the time and place of the Warrant, 2 Roll. Rep. 255. Webb and
Withers.

A Rescous was Returned in this Form by the Sheriff:

CEpi corpus praedict. A. and idem A. fuit in custodia mea virtute brevis
praedict. quousque B. C. and D. Vi and armis (tali die and anno) in E. and F.
ballivos meos insultum fecere vulneravere and male tractavere, and A. de
custodia mea adtunc and ibidem rescussere. And two Exceptions were made:

1. He does not show any Warrant made to Mention no Warrant.
the Bailiff. Per Cur'. The Prisoner is alleged to be in custodia of the
Sheriff, and the Rescous to be from him, and therefore need not speak of the
Warrant; and this that is spoken of the Bailiff is Surplusage.

2. The Rescous is not well returned, because Rescous returned without Vi and
armis.
the Battery is alleged to be Vi and armis. Per Cur', This is Surplusage, and
the Rescous is not returned to be Vi and armis, Latch. p. 184.

Quaere, If a Rescous may be returned without Vi and armis?

But this Case is more truly reported by Rolls. Retorn quasht.


If a Sheriff retorn, That he by force of a Capias took the Body of J. S. and
ipsum habuit in Custodia quousque J. D. and J. N. Vi and armis such a day,
insultum fecer' in W. S. and W. N. his Bailiffs, and praedict. J. S. adtunc and
ibidem e custodia sua rescusser' and praedict. J. S. seipsum rescussit. This is
not a good Retorn, because it does not show that the Bailiffs had any Authority
to Intermeddle: And to lay a Rescous without Vi and armis is not good; and the
Vi and armis goes to the first Clause only, Pasch. 3 Car. 1. Wilcox's Case, 2
Roll. Abr. 457.

The retorn of a Rescous was quasht for these Exceptions:

1. It is said, Feci Warrantum meum Thomae Tailor; and does not say, Tho.
Tailor was his Bailiff.

2. He does not say, for what Cause he made his Warrant: And so it appears not,
whether it was lawful or not, Styles Rep. 159.

In a Cap. Utlagat. before Judgment, the Sheriff returned, That J. S. and J. N.
rescoused the party. Its good without addition: For no Statute nor Book will
compel the Sheriff to give Additions in this Case. And the Rescousers which
were present were Committed to the Fleet, Winch. Rep. p. 10.

If the Sheriff retorn, That the party himself, simulcum J. S. and J. N. made
the Rescous. It was said it was not good; because there is not any Averment
that J. S. and J. N. rescued him. And if it Insensible Retorn.
had been, that J. S. simulcum N. rescusserunt A. it is not good against J. S.
because it is rescusserunt, which is Insensible, Mich. 14 Car. 1. B. R.

Retorn of a Rescous was excepted to, because Res^ue by several returned.
it is said quod adtunc e custodia ballivi ceperunt and rescusserunt; and does
not say, and quilibet eorum rescussit. Sed non allocatur: For it shall be
intended all of them did it; and though their Fines are several, their Offense
shall not be intended so, 2 Keb. 436. Le Roy versus Suffeild.

Rescous was returned by a Sheriff upon Arrest by special Bailiffs hac vice,
(scilicet) That Cook and seven others made Assault upon the Bailiffs, etc. and
the party Arrested cepit and abduxit, where it should be ceperuns and
abduxerunt. Per Cur* The Retorn is good against Cook, and void against the
rest; and Cook (against whom the Capias issued) was admitted by his Attorney
to make fine, which was 6 s. 8 d. Lit. Rep. p. 2.

A Bailiff of a Liberty has Retorn of Writs, Rescue from a Bailiff of a
Liberty, how to be returned.
and therefore a Rescous made from him must be returned, to be out of his
hands. But a Rescous made from the Sheriffs Bailiffs, must be expressed to be
out of the hands of the Sheriffs Bailiff; for the Bailiff is but the Sheriffs
Servant. But as to this last, it is not Law, vide supra, Stile's Rep. 417.

The Retorn being made by the Bailiffs of a Franchise, and saying e custodia
sua, is not good, unless he says mea, 2 Keb. 177. Le Roy versus Claypoole.

The Sheriff made a Warrant Ballivis suis, to arrest such a man, and the
Bailiff of the Liberty retorns a Rescous; yet its good, Marsh. Rep. p. 25.

R. and W. were returned by the Sheriff, to have made a Rescous upon such a
Bailiff, to whom he directed his Warrant to execute his Writ. Per Cur. This
Retorn is insufficient, because it does not appear that the Bailiff had Retorna
brevium, which ought always to be mentioned Rescue from the Bailiff of a
Liberty how to be R^torn^d by the Sher^ff.
on the Sheriffs Retorn. And this must be so, if he retorn it as the Retorn of
a Liberty: But here in the principal Case he retorns it in his own Name,
wherefore it shall be intended it was his own Bailiff; and though he name him in
his Retorn, as Bailiff of a Liberty, yet that is but a void addition, Cro. El.
780. Lady Russel and Wood.

Though the Sheriff arrests a man within a Liberty in the same County of which he
is Sheriff, and the Prisoner is rescued, yet the Rescous is unlawful; because
the Arrest is good, and its no Offense unless it be to the Lord of the Liberty,
Yelv. p. 51. Winch's Case, cited in Woolfreston's Case.

Retorn of a Rescous or Mean Process was Retorn of Rescous on mean Process.
quasht, because it says ad Largum ivit quo voluit, and not ad Largum quo
voluit ire permiser', 2 Keb. 318. Le Roy versus Lisle.

Forms of Retorns of Rescous, vid. Dalton 215, 216.

Rescous. Of Laying the Action, Declaration and Pleadings.
A Warrant was from the Sheriffs to the Bailiffs of the Liberty of Pomfret, who
did Execute it, and there was a Rescous: And the By Bailiff of a Liberty.
Bailiff may have the Action against the Rescuers in his own Name; but he
failed in proving it to be a Liberty, and was Nonsuited, etc. And Note, He was
put to it first to prove the Liberty by Records. Foster and Legard's Case at
Yor^ Assizes.

B. brought out a Latitat tempore Eliz. versus E. Arrest in one Kings time, and
Rescous in another
who was served in the time of King James, and E. rescued himself, and the
Rescue was returned by the Sheriff of Essex. Per Cur. This is good; for a
Latitat is within the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. and is not lost or abated by the
Demise of the Queen: For its not any Original Writ, but is in the nature of an
Execution, grounded on a Record precedent, viz. upon a Bill of Middlesex, so
that the Latitat issues upon a Suit depending; and the Latitat, the nature of
it*
Arrest was good, and so the Rescous, Yelv. Everard and Blach.

In the Declaration the time of the Arrest must How to declare.
be showed upon which the Rescous is supposed to be made; and it must be
showed, that the Party Rescoused was in Custody of the Serjant, or Sheriff from
whom he was rescued, Styles Rep. 432. Gough and Cann.

The Plaintiff Declares, Whereas one S. was indebted to him by Bond in 300 l.
and for Nonpayment he Sued a Latitat out of the King-Bench directed to the
Sheriff of, etc. to Arrest him, retornable at such a day, intending upon his
appearance, and Bail put in according to the Course of the Court, to Declare
against him, (and shows the Course and Custom of the Court, that he upon
appearance should put in good Bail, that if Judgment were had against him he
should satisfy the Condemnation, or render his Body in Execution) That he
delivered the Writ to the Sheriff of Nott', who made a Warrant to the Bailiff
of the Kings Liberty of Newark to execute it; which Warrant was delivered to
the L. Deputy of the Lord Burleigh, Ballivi Libertat' Domini Regis Wapentagij
sui de Newark; who by force thereof Arrested the said S. That the Defendant
rescued him out of the Custody of the said Deputy, and he Escaped, etc. Errors
moved in the Exchequer Chamber.

First, Because the Custom of the King's Bench is alleged to be, that if any
one Arrested comes sub Custodia Vicecomit', he s^all put in Bail, which Custom
of the Court of putting in Bail.
is not so, for he shall be in Custod' Marr' and no Declaration can be against
him sub Custodia Vicecomitis. But non allocatur, that which is alleged of the
Custom of the Court is Idle.

Secondly, It is said, he was rescued from That he was rescued from the Deputy
of the Bailiff of a Liberty, good. Difference between Action on the Case, and
Retorns and Indictments of Rescues.
the Deputy of the Bailiff; where it ought to have been from the Baliff
himself, or from the Sheriff: Sed non all^cat', for there is a diversity in
this Case, which is an Action on his Case, wherein he shall show the Truth, as
in rei veritat' it is, and not as it is upon the Retorns of Rescues and
Indictments, which say it is done to the Sheriff or Bailiff himself, Cro. Jac.
241 Kert and Ellwis. Like the Case of Burgh and Apleton Sheriff of Essex, Lanes
Rep. 70. Mesme Case. In that Case it was declared, That the Bailiff of a
Liberty arrested the Party, and delivered him to the Sheriffs Deputy, and that
he rescued him from the Sheriffs Deputy, Dyer 244. And Judgment pro Querente in
that Case, and in Lane's Rep. p. 70. Burgh and Apleton's Case, in the same Case
says, that the course of the King's Bench is always so in Retorn of a Rescous,
to be out of the hands of the Deputy Bailiff; notwithstanding Dyer 7. El. 241.
And the Declaration was held good, that he sued an Alias Capias, without
mentioning a Latitat, before this Arrest was made by the Deputy Bailiff of
Newark. But the main Question was, Because it does not appear, that the Bailiff
had a Power in his Patent to make a Deputy Bailiff. No Escape upon a Tortious
Arrest.


The Action is brought in Suffolk against the Sheriff of Suffolk, for Arresting
the Defendant in the first Action upon a Capias Utlegat' and suffering him to
Escape, and the Defendant in the first Action is named of S. in Com' Norfolk,
and the Arrest is supposed apud S. praed' so the Arrest is supposed in the
County of Norfolk, and then it is Tortious, and there is not any Escape
thereon. Per Curiam, its an incurable Error, Cro. Eliz. 887. Eden and Floyd.

In Action or Case on a Rescous, The Plaintiff Declaration of Arrest at L. and
rescue at W. the same day (being 200 miles distant yet not Error.
declares, that A. was indebted to him by Obligation of 20 l. and that he Sued
a Writ against him directed to the Sheriff of Cornwall, to take A. etc. and that
the Sheriff 1 Oct. 6. Car. Arrested him at L. in Com' Cornub' and after the
Defendant at Westminster, the praed' 1 die October. rescued him out of the
Custody of the Sheriff; and on non culp' Verdict and Judgment verse. Quer' he
brought Error and Assigned this for Error, for that it was impossible he should
be arrested at L. and the same day be rescued at Westm' (200 Miles distant,)
yet the Court will not intend it to be impossible. But however, see what
Reasons the Plaintiff shall have to assign Error on his own Declaration, 1
Rolls Ab. 523. Kendal and Kendal.

Trespass and Assault laid and tried in Somersetshire, the Defendant justified
by Warrant to the Sheriff of Dorset, and that the Plaintiff endeavored to
rescue himself, and Issue de injuria sua propria. Gold after Verdict prayed
Judgment, because within the words of 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 8. there being three
Judgments in the Point. Wise and Adderly in C. B. Trin. 26 Car. 2. Croft and
Trial shall be where the cause of Action arises.
Winter, and Croft and Bays: But the Court were not satisfied with these
Judgments, and resolved that the Statute intended the Trial where the cause of
Action arises. But there was a Replead', because the Defendant Traversed
absque h^c, that he was Guilty aliter vel alio modo. The reply was he was
Guilty aliter and alio modo, which was a wild Issue, 3 Keb. 552, 612, Masters
and Wood.

Pleading.
In Action on the Case on Escape upon mean Diversity between pleading Rescous
in Debt on Escape. Averment.
Process. Defendant Pleads a Rescous ever since, 6 Car. 1. It has been held a
good Plea. Per Cur' If it be returned, its a good Plea, and it need not be
averred in the Plea that it was returned. But in Debt on Escape its no Plea, 3
Keb. 513. Hill and Mountague Bailiff of West.

In Action on the Case for a Rescous one may If not Guilty may be pleaded to
the Sheriffs Retorn of Rescous.
Traverse, etc. but Quaere, if not Guilty may be pleaded to the Sheriffs Retorn
of a Rescous, 1 Keb. 258. Rest. entr' 580. le Roy versus Mayor of Hereford.

Scire fac' to have Execution of a Judgment in Debt. Defendant Pleads, That at
another time the Plaintiff had sued Execution by Capias ad satisfaci^nd', and
that he was taken thereupon. Plaintiff replies, True it is, he sued a Ca. sa.
and the Defendant was taken thereupon, but he presently rescued himself and
escaped. Replication is good, As there is no cause for the Defendant to to have
Audit' Querela when he is escaped and taken again, unless it be for a voluntary
permission by the Sheriff, so there is not any bar for the Plaintiff to have
new Execution; And though its no good Retorn on a Ca. sa. that the Defendant
rescued himself (for the Sheriff at his own peril ought to have kept him) nor
any Plea in Debt on Escape; yet the Party himself shall never take advantage of
his own Tortious Act. And Scire fac' after the year is well maintainable, Cro.
Car. 240, 255. Robinson and Cleyton.

Venue. Verdict.
Action on the Case on Rescous is out of the Common Rules of the Court to alter
the Venue. But its in the discretion of the Court on circumstances to alter it,
as Action brought against a Bankrupt may be brought in the County, or here
where the Commission is awarde^*

Where a Man may lawfully rescue himself, 1 Keb. 346. Where a Man may rescue
him self and where not.


There is a difference between a Warrant of Record, and a Warrant or Authority
in Law, for if a Capias be awarded to a Sheriff to Arrest a Man for Felony,
albeit the Party be innocent, yet cannot he make Rescous. But if the Sheriff
will by Authority which the Law gives him Arrest any Man for Felony who is not
Guilty, he may rescue himself, Coke 1 Ins^. 161. a.

Note, Four Nobles Fine, is a general Fine imposed for a Rescuer, Sir Thomas
Jones p. 198.

In Debt sur Escape versus Vic. Plaintiff declares, That J. S. and his Wife
were in Execution, and that she escaped. On nil debet special Verdict sound,
that the Baron was in Execution and that he escaped; and further, that the Wife
was not taken in Execution, (being for Debt contracted before Coverture.) Yet
Judgment pro Quer. the Verdict was not in the whole persuant to the
Declaration, because they found the Hubband Escaped, 1 Siderfin 5. Roberts and
his Wife against Herbert.

In Action on the Case upon a Rescous and Escape: The Jury find the De^t due to
the Plainti^^, the prosecuting the L^^itat for this Cause, the making the
Warrant hereupon to the Sheriff, etc. Cro. Jac. 485. Hodges and Mark.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Escapes. Some Maxims and Diversities premised. Escapes, as to Mean process,
and as to Execution. What shall be or amount to an Escape of a Prisoner out of
Execution, or not. Of Escapes in respect of the Old and New Sheriff, and of the
Prisoners being* delivered over. What thing or act shall excuse an Escape, or
in what Cases the Sheriff or Jailer shall not be Answerable for an Escape. Of
Erroneous Process. Where the Escape of one shall not be the Discharge of the
other; and where the oiher shall have Audita Querela, or not. Actions of Debt,
or on the Case, by the party against the Sheriff for an Escape, and who shall
have such Action. To whom it shall be said an Escape, or not, at Election.

Of Escapes.
ESCAPE is where one that is Arrested, or Imprisoned on the Arrest, comes to
his Liberty before he is delivered by Order of Law.

But before I treat of Escapes, it will be very advantageous for the better
understanding thereof, to set down some few Diversities, which will help to
settle ones Judgment in reading and considering the Cases ensuing.

Diversities.
1. Between a Negligent, and a Voluntary or Permissive Escape. A Permissive or
Voluntary Escape is by the assent, privity and knowledge of the Sheriff,
Jailer, etc. Vide postea, Where the Prisoner may be retaken or not.

2. Between an Escape on Mean Process, and on Execution. In Escape upon the
Arrest by the same Process; as a Cap' ad respondend', the Writ ought to*
surmize ad largum ire permisit, and non comparuit ad diem; because the party
was Bailable, and the Sheriff might suffer him to go at Large. Aliter, if the
Arrest be upon Execution; as a Cap. ad satisfac. There permisit ire ad largum
is good enough. Noy 72. Sheriff of Nottingham's Case. Vide infra.

3. Between an Escape for Debt, and for Felony or Treason.

4. Between an Escape by a Sheriff or Bailiff, and an Escape caused by
Rescousers. A Rescouser shall be charged with the Debt. The Sheriff or Bailiff
for a Negligent Escape shall be charged with the Damages only in the same Plea,
as the Writ supposes, and not with the Debt, Lanes Rep. p. 70.

5. Between an Escape in Fact, and an Escape in Law: As where a man may be in
Custody without actual Arrest.

6. Between Error in the Proceedings and a Nullity of the Record, and how the
Sheriff shall take advantage of either.

7. Between an Escape in the Life of the Testator, and an Escape in the time of
the Executor, upon Execution in the time of the Testator.

Note, If Judgment be Reversed before Action of Debt brought for an Escape out
of Execution, the Action is gone, 1 Sand. 38. Jones and Pope, 8 Rep. 142. Dr.
Drury's Case.

Note, It was said by Twisden, in 16 Car. 2. B. R. The occasion of so much
liberty in the Marshalsea is, that the Marshal is not chargable but by Bill,
which must bear Test in Term time; and so in the former Term the party is not
Escaped: And by the first Day of the later Term the Prisoner generally is to
return to Prison, and so no remedy for the party, 1 Keb. 794.

Of Escapes as to mean Process.
When a man is in Custody of the Sheriff by Where a man may be in Custody
without actual Arrest, an Action for the Escape shall be good.
Process of Law, and another Writ is delivered to him to take him, presently in
the Judgment of Law, he is in his Custody without actual Arrest, quia Lex non
praecipit inutilia; as A. recovered in Debt; Defendant was Outlawed, and after
the year the Plaintiff procures a Capias utlag' and delivers it to the Sheriff
of London, after the Sergeant Arrests the Defendant to answer I. S. before the
Sheriff, the Plaintiff delivers the Sheriffs Warrant to the Sergeant (who had
the Defendant in his House) to Arrest the Defendant, the Sergeant refuses, and
after the Sheriff suffers him to go at Large; Plaintiff brought Action against
the Sheriff, supposing he had Arrested him, and Defendant plead non permisit,
etc. 5 Rep. Frost's Case.

By Windham in Benskins Case, by Law the Bailiffs ought not to hurry away any
immediately to Prison, but he may call any other persons in aid, and so may
commit the Prisoner to them. 1 Keb. 483. Benskins Case.

If by assent the Sheriff suffer me to go at Large no Action lies for the
Escape.

Of Escape out of Execution. What shall be said an Escape of a Prisoner out of
Execution for Debt or not.
If a man in Execution be suffered to go at Large for a time out of the County,
and to return again, and this upon Bail or Mainprise, yet this is an Escape,
for he ought to be kept in arcta custodia. So if he be suffered to go at Large
to any place within the County, and to return again, so if he be suffered to go
at Large within the same Town where the Prison is, it is an Escape, tho, he
retorn within his time. Plowd. 36. b. Platts Case. 3. Rep. 44. Boyntons Case.
Hob. p. 173. Earl of Essex.

The Case was, A. recovered upon a Plaint in London against B. and had him in
Execution in Ludgate. A. died Intestate. B. was permitted by the Keeper of
Ludgate to go at large into Southwark with J. S. Servant of the Keeper, and by
the Command of the Keeper. The Administrator of A. brought Debt against the
Sheriff of London upon the Escape. Per Cur. It was an Escape. He that waited
upon him into Surry could not be Officer to the Sheriff of London, and so he
had no Keeper: For the Power of a Sheriff does not extend beyond his own
County, unless in Special Cases. And the party might have Action of False
Imprisonment against him, though the Baston or Servant waited on him there; being
Voluntary, Dyer 166. accord.

If the Sheriff removes his Prisoner out of the County without being commanded,
'its an Escape, and if he remove Prisoners for ease and delight in the same
County, it is an Escape, as a Prisoner went to a Bearbaiting with his Jailer in
the same County, and it was adjudged an Escape; so if the Sheriff permit his
Prisoner to go to work, 'its an Escape. Hetly. p. 34.

To suffer a Prisoner to walk in the Town, tho with a Keeper, is an Escape,
unless it be upon a Habeas Corpus from a Court of Justice Hob. p. 202. If the
Habeas Corpus bear Test in the end of one Term retornable in another, this
Writ will not warrant the Prisoner to go at Large in the Vacation, Hob. ibid.
Balden and Temple's Case; for tho the Sheriff may remove his Gaol from one
place to another within his Bayliff-wick, yet he must keep it and his Prisoners
within it, and not suffer them to go at Large out of the Prison, tho he himself
be attending on them, without an Habeas Corpus from some Court of Justice. And
let Keepers of Prisons beware when they receive an Habeas Corp. from the
Chancery or any other Court bearing Test in the end of a Term to have the Body
of one in Execution in the Court the next Term, that they do not by Color of
such Writs suffer the party to go at Large all the mean time (as it is
sometimes practiced) for the Writ warrants no more than that he be brought out
of Prison only for that purpose, and only for so much time as in Judgment of
Law as shall be convenient and necessary for the Execution of the Writ and no
more, which in privilegiis odiosis must ever be strict.

By Hales in Lutterel and Mosedells Case, an Habeas Corpus.
Hab. Corpus out of that Court to which the party is a Prisoner does justify
the Jailer in Assisetime, but otherwise if it be out of any other Court; but
out of which soever, if the Authority of the Writ be-Executed either in Time or
Place at the pleasure of the Jailer or Prisoner 'its an Escape, as being
carried a month before the time, and staying a month after; also the Habeas
Corpus being at a place and day certain, 'its no pretense of stay at any other
places, or ultra, to search Writings or to speak with Witnesses, and immediate
is a convenient time without wilful delay, so is Mod. Rep. 116 tho the Sheriff
be not bound to bring the Prisoner the direct way, yet he ought not to carry
him round about a great way, for the accommodation of the party, if he do it is
an Escape. 3 Keb. 305. Lutterell and Mosedell's Case, and Mod. Rep. 116.
Mosedell's Case.

But upon this Point of the Prisoners being suffered Diversity.
to go at Large, there is a diversity to be well heeded. And that is,

Between one in Execution within the Franchise or County where the common Gaol
is, where the Office of Sheriff or Bailiff extends, for there if the Sheriff,
etc. assent that one in Execution shall go out for a time, although he retorn by
the time, or if he suffer him to go at Large by Bayl or Baston, it is an
Escape. But when the Sheriff, etc. is commanded by Writ to have the Body at
Westminster, he may be a Keeper of him in another County as in the Case of
Bennet and Halsey Mo. -- 3. Rep. 44. Boyston's Case.

The Plaintiff was taken in Execution by the Sheriff of B. and by an Hab. Corp,
he was brought to Smithfield by the Jailer of B. and there at eight a Clock at
night the Prisoner went into Southwark and none with him, and there continued
all night, and the next morning he Habeas Corpus ad Recipiend'.
returned to Smithfield to his Keeper, and there continued with him till the
retorn of the Writ at which day he brought him to the Lord Chief Justices
Chamber at Sergeants Inn, and he returned his Writ, and the Chief Justice
committed him to the Marshalsea, and it was adjudged to be no Escape in the
Sheriff, so in Burton and Andrews Case. Mo. Rep. Bennet and Halsey.

For the effect of the Writ is performed to have him there at the day, and the
Writ does not command him to bring him the usual way, but to have his Body at
the day, and so if one be Sheriff of two Counties and had Arrested two by two
several Capias in two Counties, he may bring one into the other County to have
them both at Westminster, and may bring them the surest way.

If a Jailer on an Hab. Corp ad Testificandum Habeas Corpus ad Testificand.
bring one whom he had in Execution to be a VVitness, by Twisden, it is an
Escape, and so has been adjudged. In Rolls his time, the Court was moved for an
Hab. Corp. for a Prisoner in the King's Bench, that he might be a Witness in a
Cause in Darby Shire at the Assizes, but it was denied; but he said he knew it
granted for one to be a Witness at a Trial at Guild Hall, but at the Charges
and Peril of the party, for whom he was to be a Witness if he Escape 14 Car. 1.
B. R. And in 24 Car. 2. B. R. Adam's Case, the Court granted an Habeas corpus
for a Prisoner in the Marshalsea to Testify in a Cause in Middlesex. But Hale
Chief Justice said, He would never grant it in his Chamber, being but a private
Person, and the party may escape, which would be remediless, Siderfin p. 13.
Fitz-Jeffreys.

If one be in Execution in the Fleet, or other The King cannot License one to
go at Large.
place, at the Suit of the King, or of a Common person, and the Warden or
Jailer (by the Command of the Lord Chancellor or Treasurer) suffer him to go
into the Country with a Keeper to gather Money, the sooner to pay the King; and
he goes accordingly, and returns to Prison again: yet this is an Escape as to
the Common person; for the King himself cannot License a man to go so at Large,
Dyer 12 and 13 Eliz. 297.

If one be in Execution at the Suit of the King in the Fleet, the Warden may
suffer him to go to his Counsel with his Keeper. But not so in the Case of a
Common person, Savill's Rep. p. 29.

A man is in Execution for Debt, and a Woman being Warden of the Fleet marries
the Prisoner, This is an Escape; for that he cannot be his own Prisoner, nor a
Prisoner to his Wife.

So if the Sheriff or Jailer marry a Woman that is in Execution for Debt.

Sir Gervas Clifton's Case, cited 1 Leon. 237. in Offley and Saltington's Case
was, He being Sheriff suffered one in Execution and in his Custody to go and
see a Play; and the same was adjudged an Escape, and the party could not be in
Execution again.

This Case was referred by the King to the Habeas Corpus in regard of the
Plague.
Judges, Trin. 12 Car. 1. Whether in regard of the Plague Habeas corpora may be
granted for the Prisoners in Execution in the Prisons of the King's Bench and
Fleet, upon Judgment in the Common-Bench and Exchequer; and it was Certified by
them to the Lord Keeper, that if upon Habeas corpus granted the Jailer suffers
the Prisoners to go at Large with a Keeper or Baston, that this is an Escape,
and that no Habeas corpus ought to be by the Law for this purpose, which the
King well approved of.

And in primo Caroli the Prisoners in the Fleet petitioned the Parliament, that
they may have Habeas corpora in the Vacation, in respect of the great Plague in
London; but the Parliament would not assent to it, because against the Law.

A Capias ad satisfaciend' is served upon one, who Execution served upon one
who is Prisoner for Felony, and then an Escape.
is a Prisoner for Felony, and Indicted, and Arraigned, and found Guilty, and
afterward Escapes. Debt lies against the Sheriff; for the Execution was well
served upon him, and although his Body was at the Queens pleasure; yet he shall
not take advantage of his own Tort, but he shall answer the Suit or Execution
of a Common person, Cro. El. 165, 517. 1 Leon. 87, 236. Ognel and Paston.

The Sheriff delivers the Prisoner upon a void Delivery upon a void Audita
Querela is no Escape.
Audita querela. This is no Escape, and there the Prisoner may be taken again
in Execution, Mo. 344. n. 479. Collins's Case.

But if a Scire facias had in it the words of Audita querela, its against Law,
and its an Escape if the Sheriff deliver the Prisoner upon it, 1 Roll. Rep. 383.

A forged Warrant of Attorney for Satisfaction One delivered upon a forged
Warrant of Attorney for satisfaction
is delivered into the Office where one is in Execution, and the Marshal lets
him go. Its an Escape, unless the Attorney's hand were to it, or a Supersedeas
delivered, 1 Keb. 873. Collet's Case.

If a man recover against Baron and Feme, and Debt lies upon Escape of the Wife.
take both in Execution, and after the Wife is suffered to Escape; though the
Husband continue in Prison, yet Debt lies upon this Escape against the Sheriff,
in which all the Debt shall be recovered; for this was the Debt of the Wife,
and she is as fully in Execution as the Husband: And Debt lies on it as well as
Action on the Case. So if the Feme be only taken in Execution, 2 Bulstr. 320. 1
Roll. Abr. 810. Dr. Sutloff and Sir G. Reynel, 3 Bulstr. 150. 1 Roll. Rep. 204,
205. Cro. Jac. 657. Whiting and Sir George Reynel.

Where the Sheriff shall be so chargeable with a Prisoner, as to Escapes; Where
the Action will lie, and in what Cases not.
The Entry of a Committitur upon the Roll In respect of the Entry on the Roll
of Committitur.
shall not charge the Marshal for Escape (if there be any after) for then it
should be in the power of every Attorney to charge the Marshal. A Committitur
was Ruled to be vacated, to the intent the Plaintiff should be at liberty to
take out what Execution he will. But if the party after such Committitur entered
be in the Marshals Custody, and then escape, the Marshal shall be charged for
Escape, Siderfin 220. Conny and Jacob.

Therefore let the Student beware of the Opinion in Keble (1 Keb. 775.) in this
Case of Conny's, where he tells you, the Entry of a Committitur alone is
sufficient to charge the Marshal, as in Execution for Escape of a Prisoner,
without actual proof of his being in Execution. But the better Opinion is in 1
Keb. 375. in Pettyware and Hamson's Case.

The Course has been always of late, that in case Committitur be entered on
Record, yet it must be proved he was in Custody since that time; because it is
the usual Course to enter a Committitur against every Defendant, though he be
upon Bail.

Wherefore the Court ordered the Marshal to show, whether one were in Custody
or not.

Capias ad satisfaciend' was delivered to the Sheriff versus J. S. and after
the Sheriff did arrest J. S. by force of a Capias Utlagat', and then the party
in the Capias came to the Sheriff, and prayed that the party may remain in
Execution for his Debt also. And the Sheriff suffers him to go at Large, and
upon both Writs Returned Non est inventus. Per Cur. The Sheriff was not bound
in point of Escape to detain the Prisoner for the Debt of the Plaintiff in
Escape; and it is not like where one is in the Fleet for Execution, there, if
other Condemnations in other Courts be Notified to the Warden of the Fleet, he
shall be chargeable with them all, 1 Leon. 263.

Scire facias lies not on the Escape of a Bail, if no Scire fac' issued out
against him; for the Sureties ought not to be taken in Execution presently. The
Condition of Recognizance of Sureties is, That they bring in the Defendant, if
he be Condemned, or to pay the Debt. Now if no Scire fac' issues out against
him, the Surety being taken cannot plead the Release of the Plaintiff, or the
death of the Defendant in his Discharge, as he might do upon Scire facias; 2
Leon. p. 29. Devered and Ratcliff.

Of Escapes as to the Old and New Sheriffs, and Delivering over.
The Sheriffs of London by Indenture deliver Escape in Law.
over J. S. (in Execution at the Suit of A. and B. severally) and only mention
the Execution of A. J. S. escapes; B. brought Debt against the ancient Sheriffs
on this Escape. It well lies: For he cannot be in Custody of the New Sheriffs
for this Execution; because they were not charged with this Execution, and the
fault was in the Old Sheriffs that they omitted this Execution of the Plaintiff
in their Indenture; and the Escape began eo instante that the Ancient Sheriff
delivered the Prisoner to the New, for then they cease to have the Custody of
him, and although he remain in the Rules of the Prison, its an Escape in Law, 3
Rep. Westby's Case.

The Old Sheriff Arrested one upon a Latitat, and at the day Returned
Languidus, etc. and afterward in exitu ab Officio suo delivered him to the New
Sheriff, as a Prisoner for this Cause, and the New Sheriff suffered him to go
at Large. This is an Escape in the New Sheriff, and an Action of the Case lies
against him; and though the other Sheriff returned Languidus, etc. yet this is
not material to the Plaintiff, he remains always in Prison, Cro. Jac. 380. King
versus Sir Eusebius Andrews.

If the Sheriff takes a man in Execution, and after a New Sheriff is made; and
before the other Sheriff delivers over, the party who was in Execution escapes.
The New Sheriff is not chargable for this Escape, but the Old Sheriff; for the
New Sheriff is not chargable with any Prisoner before delivery to him, 2 Roll.
Abr. 457. Sheriff Skinner's Case.

One in Execution is willingly let go out of Prison by the Jailer, and then
came into the Gaol again; then a New Sheriff is, and then he makes Escape.

By Hobart, on a Trial at Guild Hall, the New Sheriff cannot be chargable with
him, nor answerable for him, as in Execution; for the Execution by such Escape
was utterly discharged. Neither can two Sheriffs be Answerable simul and semel
for two Escapes, out of one and the same Execution at the same time, Hob. 202.
Sheriff of Essex's Case.

One taken in Execution on Ca. sa. by the Undersheriff, he took Money of him
for the Execution and let him go: Then the Sheriff dies and a New Sheriff is,
and the same Undersheriff; and a new Ca. sa. is taken out against the party,
upon which he was Arrested again, and escaped.

By Hobart, the New Sheriff is not Answerable, the second taking in Execution
being never lawful, Hob. p. 202.

If the Old Sheriff keep any Prisoner after he is discharged of his Office, its
an Escape, 2 Leon. 54. Smallman and Lane.

If one taken upon a Cap' Escape, and the Sheriff die, and a new Sheriff be
made for the remainder of the Year; then the same person is taken by another
Cap' for the same Cause, and Escape: This will not charge the new Sheriff, Hob.
p. 202.

If the Prisoner walk abroad and returns in the time of one Sheriff, and escape
in the time of another Sheriff, this is no Escape in the time of the second
Sheriff, Hob. 202.

A. was taken in Execution in the time of the New Sheriff shall be charged in
Escape upon a new Execution.
Old Sheriff, and then escaped, and afterward in the time of the new Sheriff
the Plaintiff again sued a Scire facias against A. upon the said Judgment: Upon
which Execution was awarded by Default, and thereupon issued a Cap. ad sat.
against A. by which he was taken, and escaped. Per Cur', The new Sheriff shall
be charged; for though A. was in Execution, which was determined by Escape in the
time of the Old Sheriff, yet when new Execution was awarded against him upon
his default in the Scire fac. the same shall bind the Sheriff, out of whose
Custody he escaped, 1 Leon. page 3. Gibbert and Sir George Heart.

What thing or Act shall Excuse an Escape, or in what cases the Sheriff or
Jailer shall not be Answerable for an Escape.
If the Sheriff Arrest a man upon a Latitat or On Retorn of Rescous on Mean
Process, the Sheriff shall be excused in Action of Escape.
other mean Process, and the Prisoner is Rescued from him before he be carried
to Prison, and the Sheriff retorns the Rescous against the Rescousers, this
shall excuse the Sheriff in Action sur case upon Escape, because he is not
bound neither is it convenient for him to bring a Posse comitat. with him to
serve every mean Process. But if the Sheriff bring him to the Gaol, and after
he is Rescued out of Prison, and he retorns the Rescous, yet this shall not
excuse the Sheriff, for he ought to keep his Gaol at his Peril. But if the
Sheriff takes a man in Execution, as on a Capias ad satisfaciend. and he is
Rescued before he brings him to Prisou, tho he retorns the Rescous, yet this
shall not excuse him, for that he is to take a Posse Comitat. and the party
cannot have a new Execution. Proby and Lumly.

Now let us see whether, and how far erroneous Process shall excuse the Sheriff.

Tho the Process of the Court be Erroneous, yet the Sheriff shall not be
chargable on Escape; as if first Capias be by a wrong name, and the Testatum by
a right name; so if one who is in Execution by a Capias ad satisfaciend. on a
Recognizance, tho the Capias is erroneously awarded, yet the Sheriff is
Chargeable. Yet this is not Law, for a Capias ad satisfaciend' lies on a
Recognizance, as in Ognell and Pastons Case. 1 Leon. 2 Bulst. 256. Keysar and
Tirrel.

So of a Capias awarded without a Fi. fac. Cro. Eliz. 576. Conyers Case. Cro
Eliz. 188 Bushes Case.

So that he is not to take advantage of Error Diversity.
in the proceedings, otherwise it is where he can allege a nullity in the
Record; and if the Court award a Capias where it lies not to the Sheriff, by
force of which he takes the party, and then suffers him to Escape, he shall be
charged, for he is not to dispute the Authority of the Court.

Another difference is, where the Court has Diversity, where the Court has
Jurisdiction of the Cause, and where not.
Jurisdiction of the Cause and where not; where the Court has Jurisdiction,
and does Misaward Process, this is but Error: But if the Court has no
Jurisdiction and does Misaward Process, there all is void, and the Sheriff may
show this in discharge of himself: As if a Formedon be commenced Originally in
B. R. or an Appeal in the Common-Bench, all is void, and no Action of Escape
lies against the Sheriff; as Kingston upon Hull is a limited Jurisdiction, and
they hold Plea of a Bond made out of their Jurisdiction, and thereupon a Capias
was awarded against the Obligor, who being Arrested on it, Escapes, no Action
lies against the Sheriff, and this is the difference in the Case of the
Marshallsea. But this is more fully reported in Rolls Abrig. 2 Bulst. 62.
Weaver and Clifford, Ognell and Parstons Case. 8. Rep. 243. Dr. Drurys's Case.

Action on the Case is brought in B. R. against the Officer in an Inferior
Court upon Escape, if the Plaintiff declare that he brought an Action against
I. S. in the said Inferior Court ( as Kingston upon Hull) on an Obligation
made at Halyfax in Com' Ebor' and does not allege this to be within the
Jurisdiction of the said Inferior Court, and upon this Judgment was given and
Execution granted, and the Defendant took him in Execution and suffered him to
Escape, and upon this he brings his Action. 1 Roll. Abrig. 809. Richardsan and
Bernard.

This Declaration is not sufficient to charge the Declaration. Tho the Action
be Transient, yet if brought in Inferior Court, the cause of Action must be
alleged, to arise there.
Defendant, because it is not alleged, the Obligation was made within the
Jurisdiction of the Court; for although the Action be Transitory, yet this
Inferior Court had a Limited Jurisdiction of things arising within the
Jurisdiction, and the proceedings there were coram non Judice, and utterly
void, of which the Officer shall take advantage in this Action for the Escape.

Upon the whole we may see that the Case. of Warren and Clifford is misreported
in Yel. p. 42. where it is said, it was held by three Judges that the Action did
not lie, because he was not a Prisoner by the course of Law, for he was in
Execution upon a Capias ad satisfaciend. on a Recognizance, which lay not, but
a Sci. fac. and therefore says that Book, he being taken by Capad
satisfaciend. he is not a Prisoner by Course of Law, for the Law has not
ordained any such means to Arrest him, and he being in Custody without Warrant
'its no Escape. But this is a double mistake, for a Capias ad satisfaciend. has
been adjudged to lie on a Recognizance, and if it did not, yet 'its but
Erroneous Process, of which the Sheriff shall not take advantage.

In Case upon Escape against the Sheriff of Lancaster for suffering one M. W.
to Escape out of Execution; and shows a Recovery against him in B. R. and Cap.
ad satisfaciend. and a non est Invent' returned; and a Testatum that he
concealed himself in the County of Lancaster, Erroneous Process, because the
Warrant varies from the command to the Sheriff of Com. pal. Laneaster.
and a Writ was awarded to the Chancellor of the County Palatine of Lancaster,
that he should command the Sheriff to take the said I. M. ad sa^isfaciend. etc.
ita quod the said Chancellor should have him, etc. and that the Chancellor
commanded the Sheriff that he should take the said M. ita quod the Sheriff
should have him coram Justiciariis, etc. and the Defendant being Sheriff did
thereupon Arrest him, etc. Error was brought because the Writ directed by the
Chancellor to the Sheriff, was not warranted by the Writ directed to him, for
it varies from the command, for it ought to have been that the Sheriff should
have the Body before the Chancellor, ita quod that he should have him before
the Justices, Sed non allocat' for tho there be Error in the Process, the
Sheriff shall not take any advantage thereof, but having suffered him to Escape
he is responsible to the party. Cro. Jac. 288. Burton and Air.

So the Sheriff shall not take advantage of Error in the Process, as in B. R.
the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover more than was due to him. 2 Sand. p. 100.
Jaques and Lockart.

To this agree Fitz. Tit. bar. pl. 253. Debt was brought against a Jailer for
Escape, who said the Sheriff did not deliver him lawfully to him: Process.
discontinued.
But Per. Cur. he is not to meddle, whether the Sheriff delivered him lawfully
to him. So 21 Ed. 4. 23. b. Action against a Jailer for suffering one condemned
to go at Large, 'its no Plea to say that the Process was discontinued before
the Judgment given, for he was a stranger to it. Dier 66. 15. 4 Rep. 84.
Southcotts Case.

If the Prison be broken by the Kings Enemies, Prison broken by the Kings
Enemies shall Excuse the Sheriff, not if done by Rebels and Traitors. Escape by
sudden force shall excuse the Sheriff.
this shall excuse the Sheriff from Escape, for the Jailer could not resist
them, and he can have no remedy over; but if a Prison be broken by Rebels and
Traitors within the Realm, so as the Prisoners Escape, this shall not excuse
the Escape, for the Jailer may have his remedy over.

If the Prisoners Escape by sudden Fire, this shall excuse the Sheriff, for it
is the Act of God. Dier pl. 66.

Where the Escape of one shall be a discharge of the other or not, and where
the other shall have Audita Querela or not, Vide Supra.
Two are bound jointly and severally, and one is in Execution, and the Jailer
suffers him to Escape voluntarily, this cannot be pleaded by the other, for it
is no discharge of the Debt, and by consequence the Action lies against the
other; now where two are bound jointly and severally, one was condemned and
taken in Execution, and after the other was sued condemned and taken, the first
Escapes, the other shall not have Audita Querela: Because it must be an
Execution with satisfactio; and tho the first may have Debt on Escape against
the Sheriff yet there ought to be satisfaction in Fact before Audita Querela
lies, and perhaps the Sheriff is worth nothing. And if the Defendants were sued
by one Writ and several Praecipes, although the Entry should be Quod unica fiat
Executio, this is intended to be with Satisfaction; for he shall have both
their Bodies. But if two are taken in Execution for Debt. and one Escapes, Debt
lies against the Sheriff; and after the Debt recovered against the Sheriff, or
against the other, the other which remains in Execution shall have Audita
Querela to be relieved; but the Audita Querela,
Body taken in Execution is no satisfaction for the Debt, 6 Rep. 86.
Blomfield's Case, Cro. Jac. 351. Pendavis's Case, Cro. El 478. 2 Bulstr. 321.

And so is Hobart express; The Escape of one joint or several Obligor, where
both be in Execution, shall not discharge the other, Hob. p. 2. 59, 60.

And therefore the Escape of one in Execution, where two are bound in a Bond,
is no Plea to the Bond; and though he escaped by the voluntary permission of the
Sheriff, so as the Plaintiff is entitled to an Action against the Sheriff, yet
that shall not deprive him of his Remedy against the other Obligor: But if he
had pleaded, That the Sheriff suffered him to go at Large by the License of the
Plaintiff, it might have been pleaded in Discharge, Cro. Car. 75. Whitacre and
Hankinson.

G. and A. were jointly bound to T. in a Bond of 7000l. The Obligee takes
several Actions, and had two several Judgments, and sued both to Outlawry, and
A. was taken upon a Cap. Cap. Utleg.
Utlegat. by the Sheriff of D. who voluntarily suffered him to Escape. T.
brought Debt against the Sheriff, and Recovered and received satisfaction, and
proceeded to take A. but A. brought Audita Querela: And he failed in his
Declaration, because the Satisfaction made by the Plaintiff to the Sheriff, was
not Specially pleaded, ( viz.) Time and Place where it was made; for it is
Issuable, and it may be made after the Audita Difference between Action of Debt
and Case.
Querela purchased. But if T. had recovered only Damages in Action of Case for
the Escape, the Plaintiff should have had no Audita Querela; but here he
recovered his Original Debt in Action of Debt; grounded upon the Escape, Mod.
Rep. 170. Alford and Totnell.

The Escape of any one upon a Joint Judgment Any one on Joyn^ Execution
escapes, Debt lies for the whole.
and Execution, the Debt lies for the whole; especially if they be in several
Prisons, as 5 Rep. 87. Blomfield's Case: Though the Duty wholly survived by the
Death of the party escaped before any Action brought, and though the Executor of
the party dead is discharged.

But if the Death of one before the Action brought, does discharge the Escape.
By Hales and Rainsford it does not: By Wild and Twisden it does, 3 Keb. 305.
Lutterell and Mosedale.

Of Actions on the Case, or Debt, by the party against the Sheriff, etc. for
Escape.
If a Suit be in the Admiralty for a Matter Where to b^ ought
arising super altum Mare; and upon this the Defendant is in Execution and
escapes, the Plaintiff may have an Action for this Escape in B. R.

Action on the Case for Escape lies at Common Law; but no Action of Debt lay at
Common Law, but the party was driven to his Special Action on the Case, which
Action was grounded on a Trespass or Tort, and not upon any Contract in Deed or
Law, 1 Roll. Abr. 536. Brightwight and Tailor.

But now Action of Debt lies against the Sheriff or Jailer for an Escape upon
the Statute W. 2. c. 11. and 1 R. 2. c. 12. 1 R. 2. c. 12. gave Debt against
the Warden of the Fleet; and so it is in equity against the Marshal: And though
the Statute limits the Action to be brought by Writ of Debt, which is by
Original; yet a Bill of Debt lies by the equity of these Statutes. And
forasmuch as this Statute gives remedy by Debt, it gives Damages also: And this
Act does extend to Feme Coverts, and Keepers of Gaols for escape of Prisoners
in Execution, 1 Leon. 17 Cro. Jac. 658.

Now we will consider Actions for Escape, On Mean Process, Execution.

On Mean Process.
It is said, 1 Roll. Rep. 389, 440. Action on the Case lies on Escape, on Mean
Process.
Case lies not for Escape on Arrest in Mean Process; but upon Execution it does.

But in 1 Rolls Abridgm. 99. If a man be arrested on Mean Process at the Suit
of J. S. and he escape, J. S. shall have a Special Action against the Sheriff
on this Escape, 1 Roll. Abr. 99. May and Proby.

If a man sue a Latitat, to the intent to Declare against the Defendant after
Arrest in Castod' Maresc' in Action of Debt, and the Sheriff arrests him, and
suffers him to escape, an Action lies against the Sheriff showing this Special
Matter, and he shall recover his Damages, having regard to the loss of his
Debt, 1 Roll. Abr. 537.

And so is the Bailiff of Newcastle's Case. Escape on Mean Process of one in
Prifon for want of Bail, lies against Bailiff of a Franchise.
One brought an Action against J. S. before the Mayor, Bailiffs and Stewards of
N. where the Bailiffs are the Gaolers of the Town-Prison, and J. S. is
Committed to the Bailiffs on Mean Process for want of Bail, and they let him at
Large before Judgment and Execution, and after the Plaintiff recovers against
him. The Plaintiff may have a Special Action against the Bailiffs for the
Escape; for by it he is deprived of the speedy means to have him in Execution
after the Judgment, 1 Roll. Abr. 99. The Bailiffs of Newcastle's Case.

On Executions.
If the Sheriff suffers one taken by him in Execution to Escape, the party at
whose Suit he was taken in Execution may have an Alias capias against the party
that escaped, to take him again in Execution, or an Action on the Case against
the Sheriff, Pract. Reg. 145.

If the Sheriff takes one by Capias ad satifaciend' Action lies, though the Writ
be not returned.
in Debt, if he after permits him to go at Large, and Retorns not the Writ, yet
Debt lies on this Escape; for there is a Record of which the party shall take
advantage, though the Writ be not Returned, Cro. El. p. 16. Clipton's Case.

Action on the Case, upon Escape of Escape on Cap. Utleg.
one brought in Execution by force of a Cap. Utlegat', is tam pro dom' Rege
quam pro seipso; and the party shall have all in Damages.

An Action on the Case, Tam pro dom' Rege quam pro seipso was brought, for that
he had a Capias Utlegat' after Judgment against J. S. and delivered it to the
Sheriff of D. to execute it, who seeing J. S. and being desired to execute it,
would not do it, but suffered him to go at Large and afterward the said Sheriff
Returned Non est inventus. Per Cur. The Action is well brought, and the King is
to have the benefit thereof as well as the party. And in his Declaration he
Declaration.
need not cite the whole Record, but begin at the Judgment quod non
recuperasses; for it is but a Conveyance to the Action, and its not necessary
to show the whole Record; and it suffices to begin at that which is the Cause
of Action, Cro. Jac. 532. Parkhurst and Powell, Cro. El. 877. Eden and Floyd,
Cro. Jac. 360. Barret and Winchcomb.

Who shall have an Action of Debt or Case upon Escape, or to whom it shall be
said an Escape, or not, at Election.
And this is to be considered in the Case of a Capias Utlegat', or a Capias pro
fine; or where one shall be said to be in Execution without prayer of the
party, and where not.

If a Cap. ad satisfac. issue upon a Judgment in On Cap. Utlegat.
Action of Debt, and the Sheriff Retorn Non est inventus, and thereupon he is
Outlawed; and afterward a Capias Utlegat' issues out against him, upon which
he is taken and Imprisoned, and after is permitted to go at Large; the party
who recovered shall have Action of Debt upon this Escape against the Sheriff;
for he was in Execution against him also, because he cannot have a new Capias
ad satisfaciend'. And if he escape, although he was taken at the King's Suit, yet
the party had such Interest in the Body, that Where one taken on Capias shall
be in Execution at the Suit of the party without Prayer.
he shall have Action of Escape against the Sheriff; and before the Plaintiffs
Prayer to have him in Execution, he is in Execution at his election. So that if
the Sheriff suffer him to go at Large before the Plaintiff has determined his
election, its an Escape against the Plaintiff if he will, and an Action of Debt
lies, Yelv. p. 20. 1 Roll. Abridgm. 810. 5 Rep. Garnon's Case.

A. recovers in Debt verse. D. in Banco Communi, and sues a Capias ad satisfac.
and an Exigi post cap. and Outlaws the Defendant, who brought Error in B. R.
and Judgment affirmed, and within the year a Cap. Utlegat. is awarded, and the
Defendant taken, and the Sheriff suffers him to escape before the Retorn of the
Writ; Action lies against the Sheriff. The Defendant here being taken by Cap.
Utlegat. out of the King's Bench, shall be in Execution for the Plaintiff
presently after the Arrest, if he will, although he was never brought into Court,
nor the Court committed him in Execution for the party, 5 Rep. Garnon's Case.

As to a Capias pro fine,

Note, In all Cases when the Plaintiff may On Cap. pro fine, he shall be in
Execution at the Suit of the party.
have a Capias ad satisfaciend. and the Defendant is taken by Capias pro fine,
he shall be in Execution for the Plaintiff, if he will, without Prayer: As, a
Capias pro fine on Recovery in Assumpsit, and also a Cap. ad satisfac.
retornable the same Term at one and the same Retorn; and as to the Capias pro
fine, the Sheriff Retorns Cepi corpus; and as to the Cap. ad satisfaciend. Non
est inventus. If the Sheriff in such case takes the party by Capias pro fine,
now upon this taking he is in Execution for the party; and if the Sheriff let
him go at Large, he shall answer for the Escape, 1 Leon. 51. Hudson and Leigh.

So if a man be taken by a Cap. pro fine for denying his Deed in an Action of
Debt, and is suffered to go at Large, he who Recovers shall have Debt against
the Sheriff; for the Capias is ad respondend' tam nobis quam parti, 7 H. 4. 4.

So in Recovery on Forger of False Deeds, if the Defendant be Imprisoned for
the Fine at the Prayer of the King's Attorney; if he be suffered to go at Large
before satisfaction to the Plaintiff, he may charge him for the Escape, because
he is in Execution to the party upon the Prisal at his election. For he ought
to be in Execution at the Suit of the party, before Suit to the King; because
the Suit of the party is the Original; and the Fine but accessory, because of
the Suit, 7 H. 6. 6. b.

But if a man be taken by Capias pro fine for Where no Capias lies in the
Original, he shall not be in Execution before Prayer of the party.
the King, where no Capias lies in the Original, (as in Assize with Force,
etc.) and suffered to escape before Prayer of the party to be in Execution for
his Damages, the party shall not have Escape against the Sheriff, because he
would not be in Execution for him before Prayer.

CHAP. XXII.
Action for Escape by Executors or Administrators, where it lies, or not.
Against whom Action of Escape lies. Where Execution shall be after Execution on
Escape; and where it shall not be a Discharge of Execution, but that he may be
retaken again. Of laying the Action, and manner of Declaration in this Action.
Where the Sheriff shall have his Action against the Prisoner that Escapes; and
how to Declare.

Action of Escape by Executors or Administrators, and how to be brought.
IT is made a Question in Jones 173. and On Mea^ Process.
Latch. 67. Lemason and Dixon's Case, Whether an Executor shall have an Action
on the Case against the Sheriff for an Escape in the time of the Testator on
Mean Process? But the better Opinion seems to be, The Executor cannot have any
Remedy: The Escape being in the time of the Testator it is a Personal wrong to
the party, and moritur cum persona, Latch. 67. Jones 173.

But on the other side it was said by Dodderidge, The Executor shall have this
Action, and that it is within the equity of the Statute of 4 Ed. 3. for it is a
Wrong, though upon Mean Process, and the Tort continues as to the Executor; for
every thing which makes to the hindrance of the execution of a Will is a wrong
to him, and the performance of Wills is much favored in Law. And if this
Action would not lie, it would be a mischievous case; for as soon as the
Creditor dies, the Jailer may suffer the Prisoner to escape, because none may
have Action against him.

Two Judges were against two.

Whitlock's diversity was, This Personal Tort may be considered in two
respects; as a Crime punishable, and that is gone; or as a Tort to the party;
and then it is but reasonable that the Executor should have remedy.

But it is agreed by all, according to Fitzh. N. B. After Judgment.
121. That if it were upon Escape after Judgment, that the Action would lie by
the Executor; therefore quaere as to Wade's Case 2 Keb. 616. The Executor moved
for a Scire facias against the Defendant, escaped out of Execution in the time
of the Testator, and that the Committitur then entered may be vacated. Per Cur.
albeit the party or the Jailer on Negligent escape, or the party on Wilful
escape may take him again, yet not by a New Process or Capias after a
Committitur; nor can the Executors have any Remedy.

But Stile's Rep. p. 32. Boomer and Payt, is positive, That the Administrator
may have Action of Debt against a Sheriff for the escape of a Prisoner,
suffered in the time of the Intestate. But this was in the case of Execution.

So that the difference seems to be wh^re the Diversity.
Escape is one Mean Process, and where it is out of Execution.

Another difference is, betwixt an Escape in Diversity between Escape in the
time of the Testator, and the time of the Executor.
the Life of the Testator, and an Escape in the time of the Executor upon
Execution in the time of the Testator. And it is agreed for Law, That if a
Prisoner escapes in the time of the Executor, the Executor may have Action of
Debt.

B^t the Question is in Sir George Reynell and Langcastel's Case; and it is
Adjudged, that it ought to be in the detinet only, for it is grounded It must
be brought by Executor in the Detinet.
on the former Judgment: And as an Action of Debt on the first Judgment shall
be in the detinet; So here; and the difference was taken, Where the Action is
grounded upon privity of Contract, it ought to be in the detinet. Aliter, when
grounded upon a Tort.

So is the same Case, Hob. 272. by the name of Langcastel and Sidley: If it
were in the debet and detinet, the Plaintiff should recover for his own use.

So it is in Stile's Rep. 32. Martin and Hendley, and 2 Roll. Rep. 132.

So Executor brings Debt upon Escape of one who was Bail in the Recognizance
with, etc. to his Testator; it must be in the detinet, Lane's Rep. p. 80.
Carew's Case.

Note, In Debt for Escape, brought by the Costs.
Executor; if he be Nonsuit, he shall not pay Costs, 1 Roll. Rep. 63.

The Plaintiff brings Action on the Case as Executor against the Sheriff
(Defendant) for Escape, and had Judgment given him per nomen of Executor. This
Judgment past by Non sum Informatus. Error was brought, because the first
Judgment was given for him as Administrator; and this in Action on the Escape,
and the Judgment on it was per nomen of Executor.

Dodderidge put the Case:

The Administrator has one in Execution for Debt, the Sheriff suffers him to
escape; he brought his Action of Debt against the Sheriff for this Escape, and
recovers; and after all he finds a Will, by which he himself was made Executor.
The Recovery shall now be good, and this Money recovered against the Sheriff
shall be Assets in his hands, and no Audita Querela in this Case lies against
the Sheriff. And Crook of the same Opinion.

Houghton contra. If the first Executor dies Intestate, his Administrator shall
not have an Action of Debt against the Sheriff for this Escape; no more shall
the Executor here in the Principal Case have his Action against the Sheriff for
the escape of him that was in Execution at the suit of an Administrator. The
Executor here has no privity to sue Execution upon this Judgment; because the
Scire fac' depends on the Satisfaction, and to this he is not privy. The Court
being divided, it was Compounded, 3 Bulstr. 112. Slingsby and Lambert, Cro.
Jac. 394. 1 Roll. Rep. 276. Godbolt 262. mesme Case.

Action on the Case lies by Commissioners of Action on the Case by
Commissioners of Bankrupts for an Escape.
Bankrupcy, for suffering one to escape who was Committed by them; because he
refused to be examined, 1 Roll. Rep. 47. Barnes and Carry.

Against whom an Action for Escape lies.
If the Undersheriff takes one in Execution, Against an Undersheriff.
and suffers him to escape; Action of Debt lies against the Sheriff himself.

But there is a Case cited in Marsh and Astrey's Case, 1 Leon. 146. The
Undersheriff suffered a Prisoner to escape, and the Action was brought against
the Undersheriff: For (says the Book) it may be the Undersheriff himself had
not Notice of the matter, ( and I conceive, its no matter whether he had or
not, he having Security from his Undersheriff,) and the Writ was delivered to
the Undersheriff, and he took a Fee for it.

But this seems not to be Law: The Sheriff is the person in Court alone to
answer all Misdemeanors Where Action lies against the Undersheriff, or not.
of Under-sheriffs, or Bailiffs. As the Undersheriff lets one go that is
arrested upon a Latitat, and Retorns Non est inventus. No Action lies against
the Undersheriff; but the Sheriff shall not be Imprisoned nor Indicted for the
act of the Undersheriff, Latch. p. 187. Laycock's Case.

Yet quaere of the Principal Case, vid. supra sub tit. Under-sheriffs.

Cap. ad satisfaciend' is awarded to the Sheriff Action against the Bailiff of
a Franchise, and not against the Sheriff.
of Berkshire to arrest J. S. who was then in the Custody of the Mayor and
Burgesses of Windsor, and he awarded a Warrant to the Mayor, etc. to take him,
who did so, and after let him escape. Action of Debt for this Escape lies
against them, not against the Sheriff.

And the like Law of a Bailiff of a Franchise.

Action of Debt is maintainable against a Not against the Sheriffs or Gaolers
Executors.
Jailer or Sheriff for escape out of Execution: But it does not lie against his
Executors or Administrators. Vide supra, yet with this difference, Dyer 271,
322.

Where the Sheriff is chargable in his Lifetime Difference between a Tort and
Levying Money.
for a Personal Tort or Misfeasanze, there his Person is only chargable, and
actio moritur cum persona: But where he is chargable for levying Money on a
Fieri fac', and not paying it over; there, if he dies, his Executors are
chargable: It Is a Duty, Cro. Car. 539. Perkinson and Cullyford.

A Prisoner taken on mean Process upon plaint Against a Sergeant in London.
before the Sheriff in London, is in Custody of a Sergeant, and escapes, the
Action shall be brought against the Sergeant in this Case. Siderf. p. 318.

Action upon the Case, against Defendant being Sheriff of London on mean
Process, and after Issue and Trial by Nisiprius, and before the day in Banco,
one of them dies; tho they are reputed one Officer, yet they are 2 distinct
persons, and the Suit shall proceed against the other, Hard. 161. Harris versus
Phillips and Briggs.

Where Execution shall be after Execution upon Escape, or where an Escape shall
not be a Discharge of Execution, but that he may be taken again.
Note, If the party negligently Escape, the party and the Sheriff may take him
again; but if voluntarily, the only the party may take him again, but not the
Sheriff; but if the Sheriff let him go by the consent of the Plaintiff, then
neither can take him, 2 Keb. 206. Alenson and Butler.

But tho the party or Jailer on negligent escape, or the party on wilful escape
may take him again, yet not by a new Process or Capias after a Committitur, 2
Keb. 616. Wades Case. In case of Sheriffs death.


If one in Execution on Ca. Sa. escape of his ownwrong, yet the Plaintiff
cannot have other Execution, Hob p. 6.

If a Man taken in Execution by a Capias be put in Prison, and after escapes,
and after the Sheriff dies, a new Capias lies against him, otherwise the
Plaintiff would be without Remedy. But if a Man be in Prison, and the Marshall
die, and then the Prisoner escapes, there is no remedy but to take him again;
for if after the death of the old Sheriff, and before another is made Sheriff a
Prisoner go at large, this is no escape, for he is in Custody of the Law, and
may be retaken in Execution at any time, Hob. p. 60. 41. Ass. 15. Mod. Rep. 14.
3 Rep. Westbies Case.

On voluntary escape, the party does not lose his Interest, but may take him
again, and if the Sheriff die he may have a new Execution if he will.

So the Plaintiff Eexcutor brought a Sci. fac. on a Plea of permisit ire ad
Larg. how con strued.
Judgment in Debt for the Testator against the Defendant, Quare Execution.
habere non debet, Defendant pleads he was taken in Execution per Ca. Sa. upon
this Judgment, and committed to. the Fl^et, and that the Warden permitted him
ire (...). Plaintiff Demurs, and judgment giv^ (...) querente; and he may have
new Execution against the Defendant, who escapes out of Prison, by 3 Justices
cont' Vaughan And Alanson and Butler is full to the Point; Sir Thomas Jones p.
21. Allen and Winter.

2d Point, Whether permisit ire ad Larg. shall be employed negligenter or
voluntary, and it seems, 'its not voluntary, because the Plea shall be most
strongly taken against the pleader.

If A. be taken on Execution at the Suit of B. and voluntarily Escape by the
assent of the Sheriff, and after the Sheriff retakes him and keeps him in
Prison, he shall be in Execution to B. because tho B. may bring an Action
against the Sheriff on this voluntary Escape, yet this is at his Election, for
the party in Execution of his own wrong shall not put B. to his Action against
the Sheriff against his will, and it may be that the Sheriff is not able to
make him recompense, 10. Car. B. Trevillian and the Lord Roberts Case, Siderf'
p. 350 Allanson and Butler.

So it is said, though the Jailer be Liable to an Action of Trespass for the
retaking, yet the Prisoner is in Execution, and the Reason given is, The Body
is a Pledge, and the Execution must be effectual. 3 Keb. 453, 463. James and
Pierce.

Uoluntary Escape suffered only to gain Fees ought not to be countenanced, nor
is no Plea in Bar, that the party was intended to re^orn to Prison again at his
day, and the Plaintiff has an Interest, which is not discharged by the Escape.
But my Lord Hobart on a Trial at Guild Hall in the Sheriff of Essex's Case, was
of another Opinion, the Case was; The Prisoner having been in Execution, was
willingly let go out of Prison by the Jailer, and then came into the Gaol
again, and so remained in the Gaol till the time of another Sheriff, and then
Escaped, and an Action of Debt was brought against the Sheriff, This is since
denied for Law. By voluntary Escape suffered by the Jailer the Execution gone.
and he directed the Jury, that the Sheriff was not answerable to this Action,
for when he was suffered by the Jailer voluntarily to go abroad, the Execution
was utterly discharged, so as he could not lawfully be taken again, nor
adjudged in Execution by Law, tho the party would yield himself to it, or the
Creditor should allow it, 2 Leon. p. 169. 162.

If a Prisoner in Execution escape with the permission of the Jailer, the
Execution is utterly gone and extinguished, and the Plaintiff shall never
resort to him that escapes, but shall hold himself to the Jailer for his
remedy. Aliter if he escape voluntary, or of his own wrong, prout supra. But
the Law is now held otherwise against Ridgways Case, Dr. Drurys Case, and the
Earl of Essex Case. But 'its otherwise in case of a Rescous, Hob. p. 202.
Sheriff of Essex Case, 2 Leon. 117. 162. Phillips and Stone.

In Sci. fac. to have Execution on a Judgment Permissive Escape.
in Debt, Defendant pleads that at another time, the Plaintiff had sued
Execution by Capias ad satisfaciend. and the Defendant was taken in Execution.
Plaintiff replies, that true it is, he sued a Capias ad satisfaciend. and the
Defendant was taken thereupon, but he presently Rescued himself and escaped.
Per. Cur. the Replication is good, and it is no reason the Defendant should
take advantage of his own wrong; tho it is no good retorn upon a Capias ad
satisfaciend. that the Defendant Rescued himself, nor any Plea in Debt or
Rescous.
escape; and the Plaintiff may have as well his remedy against the party as
against the Sheriff, and the party has Liberty to begin again de novo by
Action on the Judgment, or against the Sheriff, Cro. Jac. 240. Robinson and
Clayton, 1. Keb. 660.

If a man upon a Capias ad satisfaciend be taken New Execution upon Rescous.
in Execution, and after Rescues himself from the Sheriff and Escapes, the
Plaintiff may have a new Capias against him and take him again, the first Writ
not being returned or filed, nor any Record made of the Award, and this on a
Sci. fac. after the year, because he shall not take advantage of his own wrong;
and so he may have Elegit or any other Writ: And so it is if the Sheriff had
returned the Writ and Rescous, the Plaintiff may have a new Capias against him.
1 Roll. Abr. 904. Mounson and Clayton, and Radford and Hopkins.

If one in Execution Escape, and the Sheriff Fresh suit.
makes fresh persuit after him and takes him again, although it be a long time
after, yet he shall be said to be in Execution again, because he shall not take
advantage in his own wrong. 3 Rep. Ridgways Case.

Where one is taken lawfully in Execution, and after discharged by Writ of
Error, and after the Judgment is affirmed, a new Capias lies not against him,
but Execution shall be awarded against his Sureties, if he will not render
himself. But if the Execution is reverst, because he was never lawfully taken
in Execution (as if he be taken after the year without any Sci. fac.) he may be
retaken again, Lach. p. 292. Sir W. Fish and Wiseman.

Escape. Laying the Action and Declaration.
Rule, Debt upon Escape ought always to pursue the first Action. Therefore,
where the Plaintiff as Executor brought Debt against the Sheriff of I. on
escape of E. B. against whom they recovered a Debt of 82l as Administrator of
I. S. reciting all the Record in Certain: It is erroneous. For the first
recovery was as Administrator of I. S. and the Debt on escape is as Executor of
I. S. which cannot be, that one should die Intestate, and have an Executor,
Cro. Jac. p. 394. Sir H. Slingsy verse. Lambert.

The Plaintiff declares against the Sheriff of Devon, for an Escape at Exeter,
which is a City and County it self, and not part of the County of Devon, yet
good after a Verdict, for it shall be intended the Defendant had the Custody of
his Prisoner in Exon' either by Hab. Corp. Action against one Sheriff of
London, and declares, he ^as in Custody of both.
or on fresh persuit, Sider. 364. Hopping and Holmes.

The Plaintiff declares that the party was in Custody of both the Sheriffs of
London, and the Action is brought against one of them, the Prisoner that
escaped being in Ludgate, in the Custody of the Defendant only, the Declaration
is good, for the Prisoner was in Custody of both the Sheriffs, tho he was in
the Custody of the Defendant; and it stands well enough with the Record, and
the words existen. in custod. is a good Averment that he was in Custody, and
the word ut prefertur do not hurt the Averment Styles, Rep. 297. Drinkwater and
Pack.

Declaration.
Rule. If the Party in his Declaration does show he has no Cause of Action, in
such Case if the Sheriff by force of a Capias to him directed, does Whether the
Sheriff shall take advantag^ of the insufficiency of the Count.
take the Party in Execution, and suffer him to Escape, no Action of Debt lies
against the Sheriff for this Escape. But in Dyer 67. a. 2 Bulst. 62. 9.

In Action on Escape against the Sheriff or Jailer, they shall not take
advantage of the Insufficiency of the Count, but shall answer to the Escape:
The same Law is of an Error in the Record or Discontinuance, because they are
Strangers to it; no more than a Stranger shall falsify a Recovery by matter
Dilatory, Dyer 67. a.

Rule. The Declaration in Escape ought to mention the first Judgment; or, the
Plaintiff ought to show he had recovered on Judgment. And it is not sufficient
to say, qd' recuperasset. The Case was, qd' cum the Plaintiff recuperasset
verse. J. S. etc. prout patet per Recordum, and that upon this a Capias issued
out, and J. S. was taken by the Defendant and Escaped. It is too general; for
non constat by the Declaration that any Judgment was ever given against him,
and then he was not well taken in Execution, 1 Sanders 38, 39. Jones and Pope.
Sider. p. 307. 2 Keb. 63. Mesme Case, 1 Sanders 34. Careswells Case. And though
the Sheriff be in Contempt if he let him Escape, yet no Debt arises unless
there were a Judgment; and though it be said the Sheriff took him in Execution,
and for Debt unde convict' est; yet this is but a recital of the Writ.

Declaration in Escape may be according to the Writ ( viz. that he Escaped out
of the Custody of the Sheriff or Bailiff,) this is in Action on the Case,
Siderfin p. 332.

In Case, Declaration, That the Sheriff, (the Defendant) had arrested L. at the
Suit of the Plaintiff by a Lat' sued out of the Court the 21 of January, and
that by the Escape the Plaintiff had lost his Debt of 119 l. Upon not Guilty
the Jury find, that the Writ was Test 28 of November. But revera sued out of
Court the 21 of Jan. and that Habeas Corpus was sued by the Plaintiff
retornable Mense Pasche, with intention to declare then against the said L. But
the Defendant upon another Writ of Habeas Corpus, without the assent or notice
of the Plaintiff, sued and retornable Tres Pasche duxit the said L. ad respond'
to the Plaintiff in Trespass ac etiam bille of 19 l. where the said L. was in
Custody of the Defendant ad respond' the Plaintiff in billa de 119 l. and so
the said L. was permitted to Escape. Moved in Arrest of Judgment, because the
Action is founded upon an Arrest at the Suit of the Plaintiff by virtue of
another Writ than the Writ found by the Jury; and the Plaintiff might have
declared otherwise ( videl') that he had sued a Lat. Test 28 November. But per
Cur. there is veritas Legis and veritas Facti, and the Declaration is according
to the verity of the fact, and by necessity of Law, the Test of the Writ ought
to be in Term, and so is the course. Judgment, pro Quer', Sir Thomas Jones Rep.
p. 149. Walbury and Saltonstal.

Though it be not shown that the Prisoner did It is not necessary to be showed
that he did not appear at the day.
not appear at the day, for if he did not appear then the Plaintiff was at no
loss, yet that is not Error in the Declaration, for though he did appear, yet the
Tort is not purged, Cro. El. 289. Appleton and Burr.

A Declaration is against a Sheriff, that he suffered his Prisoner to Escape,
and had returned Cepi Corpus and parat' habeo, whereas revera he had not the
Body at the Retorn of the Writ. Quaere if this Declaration was for the false
Retorn, or for the Escape, or for both, -- To this Declaration the Defendant
might have pleaded the Stat. of 23 H. 6. but he demurred generally, and so has
lost the advantage of the Statute, which is a private Statute, and the
Defendant has confessed the Escape by the Demurrer, vide supra. Sanders 154,
155. Benson and Welby.

So that if the Escape be well alleged, the Court will not countenance Error
in other Non Formalities.

The Declaration was, whereas he had brought a Writ of Debt against M. W. and
recovered, and shows all the matter of the Escape, etc. and then it is, (as
usually in the Common Bench) unde queritur qd' cum he brought a Writ of Debt
against M. W. etc. and says not the aforesaid M. VV. and so it may be a
Stranger, and therefore not good, Cro. Jac. 188. Burton and Air. But upon
Conference with the Prothonotaries, Course of Declaration C. B.
it is the common course in Actions on the Case after recital of the Writ, in
the unde queritur to begin de novo, and not to say praedict', etc. And Per
Curiam, both courses are well enough.

And so it is, though there be an Error in Fact. Error in Fact not to be assigned
on the Escape.
As in the Case of Jaques, Car. 2. which was,

On Non Omit as, Capias and Escape. The Capias was of 50 l. and to answer 5 l.
Alano Lockart Prothonotary: And the Judgment in Debt on the Escape by default
is 50 l. and this was assigned for Error; for the Judgment and Capias was but
of 50 l. as to the Party. But Non allocatur, for upon the whole the Judgment is
right, and but an Error in Fact, which cannot be assigned on the Escape, 2 Keb.
646. 2 Sanders 98. Jaques and Keble.

In Escape against the Marshal, the Plaintiff Declared, That whereas J. S. was
indebted to him by Bond, and thereupon arrested by Latitat, and put in Bail,
and the Plaintiff obtained a Judgment, who thereupon in Discharge of his Bail
did render himself to Sir John Lenthall in Execution, and afterward Sir John
Lenthall (the Marshal) suffered him to Escape. To this it was excepted, that he
rendered himself to the Marshal; whereas he ought to say he rendered himself to
the Court, for it is the act of the Court that turns him over to the
Marshalsea; and a Judge can only take and discharge the Bail. But its here,
that he rendered himself to Sir John Lenthall in Court. Which is well enough,
Styles Rep. 330. Child and Sir John Lenthall.

As to Declarations upon Escape, after delivery from the old Sheriff to the new
Sheriff, and the manner of declaring, I shall cite two Cases, Declaration as
the old and new Sheriff
which will much inform us in that point.

The Declaration was, That he was in Execution of the old Sheriff, and
delivered to the new Sheriff, and then committed to the Marshal by Habeas
Corpus, and then suffered to Escape, Cro. Jac. 587. Dowdswell and Sir G. Reynel.

This exception was taken to the Declaration, It must be showed that the old
Sheriff delivered him cum cause. to the new Sheriff.
because it was not showed, that the ancient Sheriffs delivered him in
Execution, with the Causes of Imprisonment to the new Sheriffs; for otherwise,
it is an Escape in them, and not in the Marshal, as in VVestbies Case. For it
may be he was delivered per Indenturam debito modo confectam for other Causes,
and this Cause was not mentioned. And a Declaration ought to be certain to
every intent; and though it be said virtute cujus, he was in Execution under the
new Sheriffs, yet that does not help it, for it is but the conclusion of the
Premises; and if the matter before does not show he was in Execution, that
pretextu cujus will not serve.

In Debt on Escape. The Original and Capias which was retornable Cras. Martin
in Michael' -- 78. was set forth: And that Sydly in exit' ab Officio in
December, after the Retorn delivered him over to C. and it appears not that the
Prisoner was ever in the Custody of Sydley. But by Windham he could not else
be turned over, and it is expressly said he was in Custody, and it may be no
Writ was returned by the Sheriff; and though in Law he cannot be in Custody till
the Retorn, yet that shall be now intended; neither need it be said, that the
Sheriff was continued in his Office above a year, 1 Keb. 632. Hargol and
Creamer.

Of Declaring in Escape upon Outlawry, there Declaring in Escape on Outlawry.
are also two Cases which will greatly direct us:

One was Outlawed by the Plaintiff, and by Habeas corpus he was delivered to
the Marshalsea, and escaped. Now the Declaration may be for the party only, and
it need not be an Action on the Case tam quam, though here is a Contempt to the
King, Brigdman's Rep. 8. Moor and Sir George Reynell.

The Plaintiff in Debt on Escape declares of a Recovery of 13, Utlawed 15. and
that he was taken by Cap. Utlegat. 18 Car. 2. after the year, and does not
Declare that he was in Custody, nor that he was ever charged in Execution at
the Suit of the party, by Prayer on the first Judgment, (in which Case, though an
Action on the Case will lie, yet not Action of Debt.)

And after Verdict pro Quer', Maynard moved in Arrest of Judgment, That this
taking after the Year, after the Recovery and Judgment on the Outlawry, does
not make the Prisoner in Execution at the Suit of the party, without Prayer;
because it may be Intended, that the party intended to have other Execution
than the Body. And relied on Frost's Case 5 Rep. 89. That until election made,
he is not in at the Suit of the party, Siderfin 380. Buckland and Kelland, 2
Keb. 408. mesme Case.

But upon Cro. El. 850. Shaw and Cutter's Case, Though the Capias Utlegat' be
after the year. yet Debt ^ies upon Escape, without any Prayer of the party
entered on Record. Declaration on Escapes in Inferior Courts.
and 706. Leighton and Garnon's Case, The Court inclined, that though the Capias
be after the year, yet Debt lies against the Sheriff for the escape, without
any Prayer of the party entered on Record; and that he which is taken upon a
Cap. Utlegat. is in Execution at the Suit of the party, till the party disclaim
it, 5 Rep. Frost's Case.

As to Leighton, and Garnon, and Shaw and Cutter's Cases, vide supra.

As to the manner of Declaring on Escapes in Inferior Courts, or upon Removal
out of Inferior Courts, it need not be showed how the Jurisdiction of the
Court was, and how it was held; this being but Inducement to the Action.

And so is 1 Cro. Moys and Hodges, 2 Kel. 219. Drinkwarter's Case, the Escape
being the material part; and though its said, the party was Committed debito
modo, and does not say, prout patet per Recordum, its good enough, the
Presidents being both ways.

But in Hodges's Case the difference is right. When the Jurisdiction ought to
be set forth, and when not.
When the Jurisdiction of the Court ought to be set forth, and when not. The
Declaration was:

Whereas the Plaintiff in such a Court of Pyepowders, held at Gloucester
secundum consue^ud' Civitatis illius, brought Action of Debt of 200 l. against
Hodges, and thereupon he was arrested, and under Custody of the Sheriffs of
Gloucester, who let him go at Large. Per Cur'. In pleading a Recovery in
Inferior Court, he ought to show by what Authority the Court is holden,
whether by Patent or Prescription: And this Court being styled a Court of
Pyepowders, (which is incident to Fairs and Markets, and is for Contracts
arising in them) shall not be intended to be a Court, unless it be showed to be
held by Charter or Prescription, and that the Sheriff who is to take advantage
thereby ought to show it. As Stewards, when they make any Certificate out of
Inferior Courts, ought to show therein how the said Courts are holden, for
they best know their own Authority. But otherwise in the Case of a Stranger, as
here, where the Style of the Court is but an Inducement to his Action, Cro.
Car. 58. Hodges and Moys.

So Action on Escape on Mean Process in Inferior Need not fet forth any Plaint
in Inferior Court.
Courts, by virtue whereof the Defendants as Bailiffs did duly arrest him, and
they set not forth any Plaint. And per Cur. this is but Inducement, and cured
by Appearance, the Escape being well set forth, 2 Keb. 209. Pepper and Some.

In Action on the Case for Escape, it was alleged Bailiff of a Franchise
delivered the person arrested to the Sheriff, and says not at what place.
in the Declaration, That the Sheriff directed his Warrant to the Bailiff of a
Franchise to arrest the party; who arrested him, and delivered him to the
Undersheriff in ca part authorizat', etc. and showed no place where the
Bailiff delivered the Prisoner; for it may be it was out of the County. Sed non
allocatur: For the showing the place was but Inducement to the Action, and when
he pleaded Not guilty, the Escape is the Matter material, Cro. Eliz. 289.
Appleton and Burr.

Debt upon Escape was brought against the Bailiff Its not alleged, that the
Sheriff made Warrant to the Bailiff of a Liberty.
of a Liberty, and it was excepted to the Declaration, that it was not alleged
the Sheriff made a Warrant to the Bailiff on Execution: But only that at A.
aforesaid, by virtue of the Warrant aforesaid, took the Prisoner, and says
not, within the Liberty aforesaid. Sed non allocatur.

Action on the Case on Escape brought, and Profert in Curia of the Will.
the Plaintiff declares, That the party was in Execution at the Suit of his
Testator; its good, without saying, profert in Curia of the Will, 1 Roll. Rep.
78.

Baron and Feme brought Escape; the Baron Escape brought by Baron and Feme.
arrests the Prisoner with a Latitat in his own name sole: And now he declares,
That he took out the L^titat ea intention to charge the Prisoner, upon a Bond
made to the Wife dum sola fuit; and by Three Justices, its good.

Action on the Case against a Bailiff of a Liberty on an Escape by a Clerk of
the Hanaper in Chancery; and declares, that for recovery of his Debt he
prosecuted an Attachment of Privilege, directed to the Sheriff of Middlesex ad
respond' placito Trans. ea intention, that he should put in Bail for recovery
of his Debt on Bond; the Sheriffs of Middlesex directed their Warrant to the
Bailiffs of Westminster, and he arrested him, and suffered him to escape, Cro.
Car. 329. Mynn and Hinton.

The Declaration is naught:

1. Because he does not say of what Liberty he was Bailiff, or whether he has
Execution or Retorn of Writs.

2. He alleges he had an Attachment of Privilege to arrest him in Trespass,
intending after his Appearance to Declare in Debt, which cannot be unless in B.
R.

And there the Reason is, because when he The Reason of of declaring in Debt on
Trespass in B. R.
appears and puts in Bail, he is supposed to be in custodia Marescall', etc.
and declares against him in Custody: But it is not so in any other Court.

Where the Sheriff shall have his Action against the Prisoner that Escapes, and
how he shall Declare against him.
Upon a Voluntary Escape the Sheriff shall not have an Action on the Case
against the Prisoner. Aliter upon a Negligent Escape, Mo. 597.

Sheriffs of N. bring Action on the Case, and Declare:

Whereas J. S. recovered against the Defendant in Debt of, etc. and a Capias ad
satisfaciend* was a warded against him, by force whereof they directed their
Warrant to three Sergeants, etc. to arrest him, who did arrest him 26 Febr.
etc. and he escaped, and afterward was not found in the same County, per quod
by reason of the same Escape they were bound to answer the Debt ad dampnum, etc.

The Jury, on Not Guilty, found that he was arrested about the 26th of Febr.
and to this Declaration it was excepted:

1. They allege they made a Certain Warrant, By Warrant, and not said sub
sigillo.
and say not sub sigillo sigillat', and a Warrant without a Seal is
insufficient. Per Cur'. It is the usual Form, and they do not say sub sigillo.

2. They say they are chargable with the Debt; but say not, that they were
charged or damnified, and if they be not damnified, they have no Cause of
Action: For perhaps the party will never sue them, or they may dye before suit,
and then the Suit is gone.

But per Cur. Action lies on this Escape before Sheriff may have the Action
before he is sued.
they are sued; for the party arrested did a wrong to them by the Escape and
Rescous, and they are always chargable to the other party; and if they stay
till they are sued, perhaps the party that escaped may dye, or fly the Country.

3. The Arrest and Rescue is supposed the Jury find the Rescue circa, etc.
26th of February, which is uncertain whether it were before or after that Day;
and if it were after the Day, it will not maintain the Declaration, for then it
cannot be a Rescue the 26th Day.

But per Cur. the Verdict is good before or after the Day, so as it was before
the Suit commenced, Cro. El. 53. Sheriffs of Norwich versus Bradshaw.

If Judgment be given in Debt against the Sheriff on Escape, he shall have an
Action on the Case against the party that escapes, although the Jailer Licenseth
him to escape, and the Jailer shall not plead this License, Mo. p. 404. n. 541.
Belchamber and Savage.

Sheriffs of London brought Action upon the Case against Pain, because that he
being in Execution under their Custody at Spicer's Suit, made Escape, etc. The
Defendant confessed all the Matter; but further pleaded, That after the Escape,
Spicer had acknowledged satisfaction (being after the Escape) upon Record of
the Sum recovered. Demurrer.

Per Cur', The Action is maintainable, though the Plaintiff in the first Action
had acknowledged satisfaction, the payment after does not take aw^^ the Action,
but mitigates the Damage only: For the act of a Third person shall not take
away an Action once vested, 1 Leon. 237. n. 321. Offley and Saltington versus
Pain; and Hills Case there cited.

Fitzh. N. B. 130. b. its said there, The Plaintiffs in this Action ought to
show, that they had been impleaded by him who recovered; for they cannot have
this Action before they are sued Qu.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Pleadings by the Sheriff to Actions brought for Escapes. What shall be said
a sufficient Freshpursuit, and where upon Fresh-pursuit made he may retake the
Prisoner, or not: And where the Prisoner, upon his being retaken, shall have
his Audita Querela, or not. Fresh-pursuit, how to be pleaded. Pleading the
Statute of Limitations. Pleading acknowledgment of Satisfaction on Record by
the Plaintiff, or accord with Satisfaction. Nultiel Record pleaded, and how.
Escape by the Plaintiffs Consent. By the Sheriff, License. Traverses,
Supersedeas, Protection, Privilege pleaded. Bar by the Voluntary Escape.
Venue, Issue, Evidence and Special Verdict. Of Escapes of Felons.

Of Pleadings.
AS for the Pleading to Escapes directly, the Defendant either denies the
Escape, and then he pleads Non permisit ire ad Largum, or else he confesses
the Escape; but pleads that he made Fresh-pursuit, or that he escaped by
License of the Plaintiff.

There are other Pleas common with other Actions, as Statutes of Limitations,
Satisfaction, Null tiel Record, etc. Nil debet.

But I shall first Treat of Pleading Freshpursuit: And as to the right
understanding of that I shall enquire,

What shall be a sufficient fresh persuit, or where upon a fresh persuit of the
Sheriff, he may retake the Prisoner or not, and where the Prisoner upon his
being retaken shall have his Audita Querela or not.
Tho the Prisoner that Escapes be out of the view, yet if he be taken in
recenti Executione, he shall be in Execution again; and tho he fly into another
County where the Sheriff had not Power, yet for as much as the escape was of
his own wrong (whereof he shall not take Advantage) the Sheriff may retake him
in another County, and he shall be in Execution. And fresh persuit is not that
he must have him always in his view, but if he makes fresh persuit, so that it
does not appear fully there was a default in the Sheriff in his persuit, tho he
be a day and a night out of his view, yet he shall be said to be in Execution
for the party against his will upon the retaking, as if the Prisoner escape to
an House, and the Sheriff sets a Watch and takes him when he comes out.

If the Jailer make a fresh persuit before any If the Sheriff retake him on
fresh persuit before Action brought he shall be excused.
Action commenced and he is retaken, the Jailer shall be excused, but 'its
otherwise if before the Prisoner be retaken the party brings his Action, for at
the time of the Action brought he had good cause of Action; but it seems by
VVinch. p. 35. that retaking upon fresh suit after Action is good, but not
after Issue joined. Cro. Jac. 657. Whiting and Sr. G. Reynells Case.

Stow Attorney of C. B. was in Execution in Norfolk for 1000l. and he by
Practice procured himself to be removed by Hab. Corp. before Coke Chief Justice
at the Assizes in Lent, and then escaped to London, and in Easter Term
following the Bailiff did retake him, the Opinion of the Court was, that the
fresh Suit made was good, tho he took him again at the end of the year, if
inquiry was made after him, and so by consequence Action for false Imprisonment
against the Bailiff did not lie. Mich. 8. Jac. B. C. Stones Case.

If the Plaintiff bring his Action before the Sheriff retake him, or if the
Sheriff does not If the Sheriff does not make fresh persuit. yet he may retake
him.
make fresh persuit, yet in both Cases the Sheriff may retake him, and keep his
Body in Custody till he agree with him, or he may have Action on the Case for
his Tortious escape: And where the Prisoner escapes of his own wrong, and is
retaken he shall never have an Audita Querel^ against the Sheriff, but if he
escapes with the consent of the Jailer he cannot retake him, and if he do the
party shall have Audita Querela: If one in Execution escape, the Sheriff may
not retake him but upon fresh persuit, but he shall Jailer makesfresh persuit,
and before he is taken the Prisoner dies yet Action lies against the Jailer.
have Action on the Case against him, or Trespass quare prisonam fregit. 3 Rep.
Ridgways Case. Poph. 41. mesme Case. Jones 145. Harvey and Reynels Case, Cro.
Jac. 657. VVhitneys Case, 2 Roll. Re^ 282, 283, mesme Case.

A Prisoner escapes, the Jailer makes fresh persuit, and before he has taken
him the Prisoner dies; this is the Act of God, and yet because it was once an
escape, the Action of escape lies against the Jailer. Poph. p. 186.

Upon escape, the Sheriff may not in fresh In fresh persuit Sheriff not ^o
break open a Chest.
persuit enter into the House of I. D. and break the Chest of I. N. to search
for the Prisoner, 2 Roll. Abrig. 564. Bennet and Gray.

If a man in Execution in the County of Devon, escapes into the County of
Somerset, where he is taken in Execution at another man's Suit, and after the
Sheriff of Devon, on fresh persuit finds him in Prison in Somersetshire, it is
made a Question, how he may charge the Sheriff of Somerset with the first
Execution, or put the party in Execution seeing he shall not retake him. 1
Rolls Abrig. 902.

Tho Information lies against the Sheriff for Information against the Sheriff
for escape
escape, yet it lies not on escape after taking by fresh persuit, no more
though the Information be depending before the taking, so that the Officers
diligence appear. 2 Keb. 384. the King against Sir J. Lenthall,

Fresh persuit Pleaded.
The Plaintiff counts of an escape in London, and the Defendant Justifies the
retaking in Devon; so that the escape at London is not answered, its naught
upon Demurrer; but when the Defendant P^ac^.
by his Replication denies not the fresh Suit, but by Protestation relies upon
this, that he was out of the view (which is not material, for it is not the
form of Pleading to say he had him in his view, etc.) it appears not to the
Court that he had cause of Action, now this Bar is sufficient for the matter,
but insufficent for the form, and there being no Demurrer, but a Replication,
no advantage shall be taken of the Bar for matter of form, 3 Rep. Ridgways
Case, Popham p. 41. Traverse. That he died after fresh persuit, ^ut says not
ante (...) bille.
mesme case.

Action on the Case for voluntary escape* Defendant Pleads, he escaped in
November by negligence and Traversed not voluntarily, and that he freshly
persued and took him, and that postea videlicet 27 Aug. he died, to which the
Plaintiff Demurred, because before the escape, and especially for the void
Traverse. But Per. Cur. the alleging the voluntary escape is immaterial, and
the Sheriff chargable without it, and he need not Traverse the voluntary
escape, but because he does not say he died ante exhibitionem billae, Judgment
for the Plaintiff, 3 Keb. 55. Read and Bovey.

The Plaintiff declared of an escape voluntary, the Defendant shows a negligent
escape, 'its good without a Traverse. Latch p. 200. Harvey and Reynell.

In Debt on escape, Plaintiff declares that the Defendant (Sheriff of Devon)
suffered one C. who was in Execution to escape in London, 18 December.
Defendant Pleads that the said C. escaped the 16 December in Com' Devon, and
that he freshly persued him and retook him the 17 December, and retained him
again in Execution absque ^^c, that he is guilty alit' vel alio modo. On
Defendant must answer to the Escape mentioned in the Declaration as to time,
etc. Traverse alit. vel how extend. alio modo. On nil debet in Escape which may
be given in Evidence.
this it is Demarred; because the escape is supposed to be the 18 December, and
he Pleads the escape 16 December, and the retaking the 17 December, and so he
answers not to the escape mentioned in the Declaration, for the Traverse aliter
vel alio modo does not answer to the Time, but to the manner of any thing
alleged, and Per Cur. the Plea is ill. Cro. Eliz. 439. Ridgways Case.

On nil debet Pleaded in escape, fresh persuit may be given in Evidence; so a
release or any thing that destroys the Duty. Vid. supra Tit. Evidence. 3 Keb.
308 Lutterel and Mosedell.

Now as to other Pleas, and the formality of pleading, what shall be good or
not, the Cases following are of great consideration to instruct us in that
useful Learning.

Debt for an escape is not within the Stat. of Statute of Limitations.
Limitations, tho Action on the Case is; the words of the Statute are, All
Actions of Debt grounded on any Lending or Contract, without special^^, shall
be brought within six years, 1 Siderf. 205, 206. 1 Sand. 38.

Now first, This Action is not founded on any Lending or Contract; here is a
Duty created by the Law without Lending or Contract, 2 Inst. 388.

2. This Action is founded on a Specialty, ( viz.) on a Statute Law; for at
Common Law no Debt on Escape lay against a Jailer, etc. of one out of
Execution, and the Statute of 1 R. 2. c. 12. gives the Action of Debt against
the Warden of the Fleet; and this Statute by Construction, extends to all other
Gaolers and Sheriffs, 1 Sand. 37, 38. Jones and Pope.

Acknowledgment of Satisfaction on Record is Acknowledgment of Satisfaction on
Record.
a good Plea.

The Sheriff brought an Action on the Case against J. for making his escape out
of Execution. Defendant pleads, Confessing all the Matter, and that after this
Escape he at whose Suit he was condemned, had acknowledged satisfaction on
Record. To which it was demurred. Per Cur. The Plea is good, because the
Defendant is to be charged; for that the Plaintiffs are chargable with the
Debt, and not otherwise; and the Defendant has pleaded Satisfaction
acknowledged on Record, which may by his means, and is not denied; for
otherwise the Plaintiff might have showed the Special Matter by Replication,
Cro. Eliz. 237. Salteston and Pain.

Accord with satisfaction, is no Plea. In Scire Accord with satisfaction.
fac. on Judgment in Escape, on Oyer, the Defendant pleads Executio non;
because that after the Judgment the Defendant assigned the Obligation of
Security of T. the party who escaped, which the Plaintiff received and
accepted. To which the Plaintiff Demurred. And per Cur. Accord with
Satisfaction is not pleadable after a Judgment, 3 Keb. 255. Poole and Mosedell.

Null tiel Record is a good Plea.

Debt on Escape against the Sheriff upon a Null tiel Record.
Capias Utlagat' after Judgment: Defendant pleads there was no such Record of
the Debt and Damages. It is a good Plea on Demurrer, 1 Brownl, 51. Maddox and
Young, Hob. page 209.

In Debt on Escape one may plead, That the Command of the Plaintiff.
Plaintiff commanded him to let him out of Execution, Cro. Car. 329. in Vesey's
Case.

In Scire fac. on a Recognizance, as Bail in a Escape by consent of the
Plaintiff pleaded
Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber. The Defendant pleads, That the
Plaintiff sued a Capias ad satisfaciendum out of the King's Bench to the Sheriff
of Middlesex, and he was taken in Execution thereon, and suffered to escape by
the Plaintiffs consent. The Plaintiff demurs, because they do not lay a place
where the Court was held, nor where the party escaped by Consent, 2 Keb. 567.
Mod. Rep. 19. Prinn and Smith.

Payment of the Money to the Marshal is no Bar; but payment to the Sheriff on a
Fieri fac. is good; for he is commanded to levy the Money, etc. but no such
Authority is given to the Sheriff, Sir Tho. Jones p. 97. Tailor and Baker.

In Escape the Defendant pleads a Release of him who recovered, to the
Prisoner, being in Execution; its holden no Plea. Nil debet in Debt on Escape,
19 H. 6. 14.

As to Traversing, and Forms of Pleading.
In Trespass and Imprisonment the Defendant That he escaped by the Sheriff
License, is good without a Traverse.
Justifies by virtue of a Capias, and the Plaintiff did afterward escape, and
he being Sheriff did follow him by virtue of the said Warrant, and took him
upon the Capias. The Plaintiff replied, He escaped by License of the Sheriff,
and Traverseth the latter taking by virtue of the Warrant. Per Cur. The
Traverse is idle, because the Plaintiff had sufficiently confessed and avoided;
and if he escaped by the Sheriffs License, that ought to be the thing put in
Issue, and not the Traverse, 1 Brownl. 197. Hatton and Hunn.

Action on the Case upon Escape was brought against a Sergeant of London. He
pleads that the Sheriff commanded him to deliver his Prisoner to him; which he
did, and Traversed, that he was guilty of the Escape, Aliter vel alio modo. Per
Cur. The Sergeant is an Officer of the Sheriff, and the usual manner of
Pleading is to plead, That the Prisoner was in custody of the Sheriff; and
Sheriffs in London may make their Houses their Prisons, as well as the
Counters, and the Bar was good, but the Traverse was ill, Siderfin Traverse,
That he is guilty of the Escape. Vid. supr.
p. 318. Husband and Cole, 2 Keb. 147. mesme Case.

This Plea is a Confession and avoidance, and the Traverse is ill. But per Cur.
here is no Escape confessed; and therefore Not guilty should have Not guilty.
been pleaded, and not to take a Traverse.

Debt against the Sheriffs of London upon Escape of A. The Plaintiff Declared
on an Execution by force of the Recovery, and that the party was in the Prison
of Ludgate, sub custod' J. S. and J. D. then Sheriffs, 1 H. 8. and that he so
continued sub custodia J. B. and J. G. 2 H. 8. and so continued sub custodia J.
N. and J. L. 3 H. 8. and then was suffered to escape. J. N. and J. L. pleaded,
That before the Escape at such a Day, Anno superius in Narratione specificato,
the said J. D. and J. S. adtunc Vicecomites suffered him to Escape.

Per Cur. It is no Plea, because there was three years specified in the
Declaration, and it shall be taken that it was the first or third of H. 8. Plea
to be precise as to time.
when they were out of their Office, yet it is merely induced by the adtunc
Vicecomites, which shall lead the Intendment to be in the year in which the
Defendant supposes they were Sheriffs.

But per Cur. that suffices not, but the Plea must be alleged in Fact; and
therefore the Defendants meaning, to discharge themselves by former Escape,
which was not in their time, should allege it precisely, Dyer 66. Sergeant
Minor's Case.

In Debt for an Escape of one in Execution. Defendant pleads Nil debet; and
after Issue, and the Cause entered for Trial, the Defendant would acknowledge
the Action with relicta verificatione. But per Cur. this he may not do without
the assent of the Plaintiff; for many defects are aided by Verdict, Sir Tho.
Jones Rep. 156. Marshall and Cooling's Case.

The Plaintiff charge the Defendant with an Escape, 13 Ap. 18. Jac. and the
Defendant pleades Escape, 29th Feb. 16 Jac. which was a year and two days
before the Escape alleged by the Plaintiff; to which the Defendant made no
answer, and although he concluded it was the same Where the time is material the
conclusion that it was the same Escape will not make it good.
Escape which makes the Plea good where the time is not material, yet in the
principal Case the time seems to be material; for the Defendant, (the Marshal)
Pleads, that the Prisoner was committed to him by Habeas Corpus, and that he
remained in his Custody from such a time till such a time, during all which
time the Plaintiff never prayed to have the said Prisoner in Execution,
Bridgmans Rep. p. 7. Moor. verse. Sir G. Reynel.

In an Escape, The Defendant confessed that Supersedeas pleaded but the Retorn
of the Wit mistaken.
H. was in his Custody by Latitat retornable Mercurij Crast. Animarum, but said
that a Supersedeas came to him (which varied from it) reciting a Writ
Retornable die Veneris Crastino Animarum, for which variance the Plaintiff
Demurred as being not the same Action, which the Court agreed, 1 Keb. 234. Earl
of Bedford against Austin.

In Action on Escape, in Debt on Judgment Protection.
Defendant Pleads, That after he was arrested he was discharged by Protection
showed to the Bailiff, as Servant to the Earl of Bath. Per Cur' the Plea is
naught, 1 Keb. 660. Cockman and Symonds.

In Action on the Case on Mean Process Sheriff Pleads, That a Writ of
Privilege came to him Test Marquess of Newcastle Retornable at Privilege of
Sessions pleaded.
Sessions: Which recites, that by the Law of England, persons shall be
privileged in going to and retorning from the Sessions. To which the Plaintiff
Demurrs, and the Court held the Plea to be ill; yet the Court were in doubt
upon a second motion, whether the Privilege shall extend to such inferior
Courts. Also it is ill pleaded, not showing where the Writ issued, nor where
the Sessions was, nor whether the Discharge were in Session, Siderfin p. 269.
Clark and Mollinuex, 3 Keb. 845. Mesme Case.

In Action on Case for Escape and false Retorn, The advantage of pleading the
Statute 23 H. 6. lost by Demurrer.
if the Sheriff Demurs generally upon the Declaration, he loses the advantage
of Pleading, Stat. 23 H. 6. c. 10. vide supra. Benson and Welby.

Venire.
In Action of Escape, Venire shall not be charged, nor in Debt: For these may
be all over England, 1 Keb. 65. Wright and Martin, Styles Rep. 341.

By the Marshals Privilege, the Jury on Escape were changed out of London into
Middlesex, 2 Keb. 818. Crook. and Mosedale.

Hale said, he knew him after Imparlance ousted of this Plea; but here the
Court would not put him to Plead it, but granted a Trial in Middlesex, and
Escape in London, being so every where, Cro. El. 625.

Venire is most proper to be from the place where the Escape was.

Action is brought against the Defendant as Sheriff for the Escape of R. in
Norfolk, and falsely retorning non est inventus in B. R. the false Retorn is
not the principal, but the Escape is the cause of Action; and the false Retorn
which is also made in Norfolk is but Aggravation, the Party may lay it in
either County, 2 Keb. 771. Russel and Sucklin.

Where the Venire and Retorn differ its not good, Hetly. 83.

Per Cur. No Cost shall be on Nonsuit in this Action, by the Stat. 32 H. 8.

Of Escape being pleading in Bar.
It has been adjudged as well on Scire fac. as in Debt, that to plead he was in
Execution, and contra voluntatem of the Sheriff escaped, is no Plea. No though it
were by permission, vid. ^ Keb. 305. Ridly and Morslee, Cro. Car. 24. Robinson
and Clapton, Vilner's Case, Allenson and Butler, Symonds and Cottmar.

To a Scire fac' on Recognizance as Bail in Escape by consent.
Error, Defendant Pleads, that the Plaintiff after Judgment sued a Capias ad
satisfaciend' out of the Kings Bench, and that the Defendant was thereupon
taken, and that he escaped by consent of the Plaintiff. Per Cur', The Plea is
Ill for want of Place, it is not said where the Court was held, nor whether the
Party escaped by consent, 2 Keb. 567. Moor. Rep. 19. Prin and Smith.

To Scire fac' on Judgment in Debt, Defendant Bar by volutarily Escape ill as
to party Plaintiff.
pleads a Capias ad satisfaciend issued out of the Court of Kings Bench, and
that he was taken thereupon, and on Habeas Corpus out of the Common Bench, he
was committed to the Custody of the Warden of the Fleet, and that the Warden
suffered him voluntarily to Escape. To this it was demurred, because he
concludes not aright: And per Cur', the Execution must be alleged by matter of
Record, and therefore he must conclude his Plea, prout patet per Recordum: The
difference is between Process that requires no Retorn, and the Record whereby
he is committed is showed. The Committitur in an Action of Escape is but
inducement, but in a justification it is substance. Upon a Capias or Latitat he
need not so conclude, but here is Matter of Record also, here the Matter of the
Bar is not the Matter of Fact, but the having sued out Execution on Record. And
Secondly, Its all one as to the Party, whether he Escape by the Sheriffs
negligence or voluntarily. If the Party negligently Escape, the Party and the
Sheriff may take him again, but if voluntarily, then only the Party may take
him again, but not the Sheriff; but if the Sheriff let him go by consent of the
Plaintiff, then neither can take him; and Bar by voluntary Escape is held Ill.
Judgment pro Quer', 2 Keb. p. 187, 206. Alenson and Butler, 2 Keb. 802. Vilner
and Allen.

Until of late time the Discharge of the Jailer was a good Discharge. As in 3
Co. Ridg. ways Case, Hob. Case of the Earl of Essex, 8 Rep. Dr. Drury's Case,
but now the Law is taken otherwise. Vide supra.

In Audita Querela, voluntary Escape in the Sheriff is no good surmise, but
that the Sheriff may retake him again. Vide supra. 1 Roll. Ab. 902. Trevillian's
Case, Hob. 202. Sheriff of Essex.

Escape. Of Issue, Evidence, Special Verdict,
In Debt for Escape on nil debet pleaded, the On nil debet, Fresh persuit.
Defendant may give Fresh persuit in Evidence. And by Hales, at a Trial at Bar
said, he always let them give in Evidence Fresh persuit on nil debet. And by
Wild, it is done generally, Mod. Rep. 116. 3 Keb. 305. Mosedell's Case.

In Action against a Jailer upon Escape of a Evidence in Fresh persuit.
Prisoner in Execution: If the Issue be, whether the Jailer immediately after
the Escape made Fresh suit after the Prisoner, etc. and the Evidence is given,
that a Prisoner escaped out of Prison by the negligence of the Keeper, and is
absent a day and a night, and the Keeper knows it not (having many other
Prisoners under his care) but when he had notice of it, he immediately makes
Fresh suit after him, and retook him: This is an immediate Fresh suit to Which
is a Fresh persuit.
maintain the Issue, for covnenient persuit is an immediate persuit in Law, 2
Roll. Ab. 681. Hin^on and Sir John Lenthal, and Elton and Sir John Lenthal, on
Evidence at the Bar, where the Evidence was that he escaped at nine a clock at
night, and the Notice and Fresh Suit on which he was retaken, was the next
Morning at nine a Clock.

Issue was, whether A. was taken by a Capias at the Suit of B. and Evidence was
taking by a Capias at the Suit of C. and th^^ a Delivery of a Capias at the
Suit of B. to the Sheriff, its good Evidence; for though he were taken before,
yet this is a new taking in Law as to this Execution. So if the Issue be of a
taking on a Capias ad satisfaciend', and Evidence be by a taking on a Capias
Utlegat', or pro fine with a prayer of the Plaintiff, that he may remain for
satisfaction.

Issue was, whether J. S. was taken with a Capias. Evidence was given by an
alias Capias. And good, Hob. p. 54.

In Debt on Escape against the Marshal, and Evidence by alias Capias. Evidence
of Fresh persuit.
Nil debet pleaded. The Plaintiff said, he could prove that the Prisoner was at
London three long Vacations. The Evidence was an Habeas Corpus ad Testificand'
and that the Prisoner went down too long beforehand, and stayed too long after
the Assizes were done at Wells, and that he went 60 Miles beyond Wells before
he returned again. Verdict pro Quer. for 620 l. Mod. Rep. 116. Mosedell's Case.

In Escape upon a Capias returned, ne unques Ne unques en son guard how tried.
The Prisal how tried on Cap. not Returned. Imprisonment on the Execution how to
be tried. How in the Case of Mayor of the Staple. Arrest in one County and
Escape in another where to be tried.
en son guard shall be tried by Record: But upon a Capias not Returned, the
prisal shall be tried per Pais, Rolls 2 Abr. 574.

The Imprisonment upon the Execution, and not for other cause in Escape shall
be tried by the Record. But in Escape against the Mayor of a Staple, for
suffering J. S. in Execution upon a Statute Staple to go at large, if the
Defendant say he was not in Prison upon the Execution, but upon plaint there,
this shall be tried per Pais, and not by Record; because it would be
unreasonable, the Defendant should certify a Record where he himself was
concerned.

In Escape upon Arrest in one County, and Escape in another County; upon not
Guilty this shall be tried, where the Escape is laid, for the Action is upon
the Escape, Roll. Ab. 602.

Action on the Case against a Sheriff upon Escape in London, and the Arrest
laid to be in Southampton. Per Cur. The Visne shall be where the Escape was,
because that is the ground of the Action, and not where the Arrest was, 3 Cro.
Richbel and Goddard.

Note, In Action on the Case for Escape or Deceit the Court will not charge
the Visne out of the County where the Plaintiff supposes the thing to be done,
Siderfin p. 87.

In Action on the Case against the Sheriff of York for an Escape, and declares
that he arrested Charging the Visne.
the Prisoner in the said County, and after suffered him to escape at D. in
Com' Nottingham. To which the Defendant pleads not Guilty, this Issue may be
tried by the County of Nottingham only, without joining the County of York; for
the Action and Issue is upon the Escape and not upon the Arrest, M. 40 and 41.
El. B. R. Bennion and Watson.

Debt against the Marshal for suffering T. B. in Execution at the Plaintiffs
Suit to Escape. Defendant Pleads, he did not suffer him to Escape. And gave in
Evidence, That T. B. brought Evidence on non per^isit ^re ad Larg.
Attaint to Reverse the Judgment, and upon his Prayer the Court bailed him,
that he might prosecute the Suit with effect. But this Bail was not entered of
Record. And the Court held it good Evidence. The Escape supposed here is for
Bailing is the Act of the Court.
letting him go by Bail, which is the act of the Court and not of the Marshal,
and may well be given in Evidence, Cro. El. p. 5. Vast and Gandy.

By Wray, upon Execution sued after Verdict, Bail upon Attaint.
although the Party Sues Attaint, the Court usually does not Bail him, for the
Verdict is intended true till reversed, but on good Considerations they may:
And though the Bail be not entered, yet the Plaintiff for his benefit may cause it
to be entered, and then he may have a Scire fac' on the Bail, and so is not at
any mischief.

The Party being charged in Mean Process when Committitur to be proved.
he was in Custody, the Evidence may be good without proving any Comittitur;
but if he were in Execution the Comittitur upon the Roll shall be proved,
Siderfin 237. the King and Povey.

In Debt sur Escape, if the Defendant Plead No Escape pleaded. Evidence no
Arrest which must be proved in Evidence on Escape for Mean Process.
null Escape, he cannot plead in Evidence no Arrest, Trial per Pais 174. Clayt.
34.

Verdict.
In Debt on Escape if the Plaintiff Declare of Escape against two and sound
against one only.
an Escape of two, and its found one only was in Execution; yet the Verdict is
good, and the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, Siderfin p. 5. Andrews's Case.

In Debt on Escape, if the Plaintiff Declare of the Escape of Baron and Feme
out of Execution On the Escape of Baron and Feme, the Jury find the Baron only
in Execution.
on Judgment for the Debt of the Wife dum sola, and the Jury find the Husband
only was in Execution; yet the Verdict is good, and the Plaintiff shall have
Judgment. The Jury found not that the Wife was taken in Execution (being for
Debt contracted before Coverture,) Siderfin p. 5. Roberts and Herbert. 1 Keb.
371. Mesme Case.

Though the Verdict find an Erroneous Process, Verdict finds an Erroneous
Process.
yet the Sheriff shall not take advantage thereof. As in Debt on Escape, and
special Verdict finds an alias into another County, without a Capias in the
proper County, and that I was in Execution and escaped. Judgment pro Quer. on 2
Cro. 1. Pl. 1. and Co. Dr. Druries's Case, because the Sheriff is a Stranger
and shall have no advantage thereof, 3 Keb. 629. Hide and Hillar.

One rescued himself and escaped, and the Verdict on Rescous before the day
laid, or after.
Sheriff brought Action on the Case. On not Guilty, The Jury sound he was
arrested circa the 26 of Feb. and then and there rescued himself. Per Cur' be
the Rescous before or after the day supposed in the Declaration its good
enough, so as it be before the Suit commenced, Cro. El. 53. Sheriff of Norwich
and Bradshaw.

Consideration on Assumpsit, about delivery of Prisoners in safe Custody, and
saving harmless of Escapes.
The Sheriff having one in Custody takes Assumpsit of J. S. to deliver the
Prisoner to the Bailiff in safe Custody, this is a good Assumpsit, and no
Escape. For the Court will not intend, that the Bailiff was absent from the
Prisoner, Siderfin p. 132. Benskin and French.

In consideration the Plaintiff (who sueth as Bailiff) would permit J. S. taken
in Execution to Rest in the House of N. till Friday next, if he Escape the
Defendant would pay the Debt:

By Hales, The Consideration is good in Mean Process, but being in Execution
its ill. But the Action must be brought by the Bailiff or nobody; but
consideration to make a Special Bailiff is sufficient to save harmless. This is
no Bond or Promise taken of the Prisoner, nor of any for him, therefore 'its
not within the Statute, 2 Keb. 805. Feake and Carter, 1 Leon p. 132. Palmer and
Smalbrook.

The Bailiff assumes to save the Sheriff harmless of all Escapes is not good.
The Declaration is, That a Ca. sa. on a Judgment was awarded against the
Defendant to the Sheriff of Suff. who directed his Warrant to the Plaintiff as
his Bailiff to serve it; and that the Plaintiff assumed to the Sheriff to save
him harmless of all Escapes, and that by force of the Warrant he arrested the
Defendant, and the Defendant intending to make the Plaintiff to be charged,
escaped; for which the Plaintiff in the first Action brought an Action against
J. C. the Sheriff, upon this Escape, and recovered, and J. C. brought this
Action on the Assumpsit. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that there is no
sufficient Cause in the Declaration to maintain an Action, for though the Sheriff
may have Action on the Case against the Prisoner that Escapes, yet the Bailiff
shall not have it. Per Cur'. For the Bailiff was not chargeable to the Sheriff
by Law but by Assumpsit, and this being his voluntary Act shall be no cause to
charge the Defendant, but shall only make himself chargable. But they agreed,
If the Bailiff had been chargable by Law, without such Promise, Action lay for
him against the Defendant, who caused him to be charged, Cro. El. 349. Allerton
and Harwood.

In Consideration he would permit him to go at Large, and of 2 s. paid he
promised to pay all the Money in which the Party was condemned in Execution. Per
Cur' the Consideration is not good, being contrary to the Statute of 23 H. 6.
and that a Promise and Obligation was all one, and though it be joined with
another Consideration of 2 s. yet being void, and against the Statute for part,
it is void in all, Cro. El. p. 199. Tetherstons's Case. Pl. Dive and Manningham.

Plaintiff declared, Whereas the Defendant was arrested at his Suit on Process,
the Defendant in Consideration that he should be permitted to go at Large,
promised that he would appear at the day of the Retorn of the Prisoner, or
would give him 10 l. and he did not appear at the day. Per Cur' Its a good
Assumpsit, being made to the Party which had Authority to dispense with his
appearance: Had it been made to the Sheriff, or to any other to his use, it had
been within the equity of the Statute of 23 H. 6. Cro. El. 190. Millward and
Clarke.

Of Escapes of Felons.
All Prisoners are such, either by Matter of Record, or Matter in Fact.

By Matter of Record, when one present in Court is committed to Prison by the
Court. There if the Jailer has not him ready, its an Escape without more
enquiry, (unless he had reasonable excuse) and the Judges will set the Fine
presently.

By Matter en fait, a Man is a Prisoner when he is arrested by Sheriff,
Bailiff, Constable, etc. and Escapes, there the Jury ought to find it, and
present it before the Justices, and the Justices assess the Fine.

Upon a Capias for Felony, the Sheriff Retorns Cepi Corpus, and has not the
Body at the day, and the Sheriff was amerced for the Escape at 50 l.

By some it is Felony in the Sheriff to suffer a Prisoner to Escape. vid. Stat.
de frang. Prisonam. If the Jailer suffer the Escape, its Felony in him, and
forfeiture of the Office, 6 H. 7. 11. 10 H. 7, 26. 9. Rep. 98. Co. on M.
Charta. Keil. 195, 196. vid. Dalt. 567.

The Statute of 4 Ed. 1. de frangentibus Prisonam mittigates the Rigor of the
Common Law; for before that Statute, the breaking of the Prison was Felony in
every Case, but now it is not Felony, but where the Party was committed to
Prison for Felony, 2 Leon. p. 161. in Borough and Holcrofts Case.

CHAP. XXIV.
What act of the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. shall amount to False Imprisonment,
or not. Pleading by Sheriffs to Actions of Trespass, False Imprisonment, etc.
The Rules of Pleading in such cases. Justification by Mean Process. As to the
Warrant, Time, Place, Quae est eadem transgressio, what it refers to. Traverse
of the Time, Place, Pleadings and Justification by Execution; by Process out of
an Inferior Court of Record, and how to be pleaded.

What acts of the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. shall amount to a False
Imprisonment, or not.
IF a Bailiff arrest one after the Writ is Returned, Arrest after the Writ
Returned. Precept from an Illegal Court. Erroneous Process.
False Imprisonment lies.

A Precept to arrest from an illegal Court will not save the Officer from an
Action of False Imprisonment, Hob. p. 61.

Trespass, etc. will not lie against the Sheriff, for executing Process, though
it were erroneous, Hob. p 48. Cox and Barnsly.

One asks another if his Name be J. S. who Arrest by a wrong Name.
said, Yes; on which he arrests him by a Warrant which he had to arrest J. S.
yet False Imprisonment lies, Mo. 457. Coot and Highworth.

One had a Capias ad satisfaciend' delivered Arrest after Supersedeas
to the Sheriff, who made a Warrant ^to his Bailiff to do Execution: Afterward
a Supersedeas was awarded and delivered by the Sheriff, the Defendant being his
Bailiff, who escaped, and the Defendant retook him and detained him in
Execution: This second is False Imprisonment; for though the first Imprisonment
was legal, he having taken him by virtue of a Warrant made before the
Supersedeas awarded and delivered, he not having notice of Supersedeas was
excusable. But the detainment in Prison was afterward a Wrong. For he being
the Sheriffs Servant, and by Intendment having time given him sufficient to
have Notice from his Master, ought at his peril to take notice thereof, Cro.
El. 918. Prince and Allington.

The Liberty of a man is so tender in the eye of the Law, that a small thing
amounts to False Imprisonment. As in a Case tried at York Assizes, one
Roberts's Case.

One in Execution in the County of Lancaster, One in Execution in Com. L.
desired to be carried into the County of Y and the Defendant stayed him, on Not
guilty its False Imprisonment.
desired to be brought to the County of York, to speak to his Friends; and
being there endeavored to make his escape; and the Defendant commanded to stay
him: He was held a principal Imprisoner, as well as those that laid hands on
him. The Defendant pleaded Not guilty. Otherwise had it been had he pleaded
specially, ( viz.) That the Prisoner was brought into another County at his own
desire. But the Jury honestly gave but 2d damage, Roberts's Case at York
Assizes.

If a man be in the hands of the Undersheriff in Execution for Debt, and the
Debtee tells the Sheriff, that the Prisoner has satisfied him, if the Sheriff
release not the Prisoner, its False Imprisonment to detain one after the
Plaintiff has commanded the Sheriff to deliver him. But this Case is more
fully reported in Bulstr. 3. 96, 97. Withers versus Henly Undersheriff.

A. is in Execution at the Suit of B. aftewards B. Plaintiff tells the Sheriff
he had made a Release.
came to the Sheriff, and told him he had made and sealed a Release of the Debt
to the Plaintiff, and that therefore he should deliver him out of Execution.
The Sheriff does not so, but after keeps him still in Prison. The Plaintiff
brings Action of False Imprisonment. It lies.

By the Stat. 1 R. 2. c. 12. One being in Execution shall not be* suffered to
go out of Prison by Mainprise, Bail or Baston, without making gree to the
parties, unless it be by Writ or other Commandment of the King; and the
detaining him after this amounts in Law to a New taking. For the restraining of
his Liberty where he ought to have it, is a Caption in Law. Here the Sheriff
ought to take notice of the party Plaintiff, and at whose Suit he is in Custody.

By Coke, Detainer after this by the space of one Hour is False Imprisonment,
(a Continuance of an Enclosure is a new Nuisance.) If he would have helped
himself here, he ought to have set forth that he knew him not to be the
Plaintiff, who told him of the Release. 3 Bulstr. 96, 97. Withers versus Henly
Undersheriff. The Case of 20 H. 7. 19. differs from this Case, because the
Debt, of the King was satisfied, 10 H. fo. 3. a. 1 Roll. 240. mesme Case, Cro.
El. 379. mesme Case.

It is said in 2 Keb. 33. the party who went with the Sheriff to show to him
where the Goods were ( in Execution) the Judgment being set aside afterward,
was a Trespassor ab initio; but that the Sheriff was not suable nor chargable,
2 Keb. 33. Turner and Felgate.

It was agreed in Olliet and Bessey's Case, Where Action to be brought against
him that levied a Plaint wrongfully, not against the Officer.
34. Car. 2. B. R. if one be arrested by Process out of an Inferior Court for
a Cause of Action, which does not arise within their Jurisdiction, the party
Plaintiff may well maintain his Action against him that levied the Plaint, or
the Officer who had executed it, Sir Tho. Jones Rep. p. 214. Olliet and Bessy.

Pleadings by the Sheriff, Bailiffs, Gaolers, etc.
I shall lay down two or three general Rules

If a Sheriff justify by force of a Capias to him directed, he shall say he
was Sheriff at the time of the arrest, as well as at the receipt of the Writ,
35 H. 6. 48, 49.

If the Bailiff justify by force of a Warrant, Warrant.
he ought to show the place where the Warrant was made, 5 H. 7. 24. Long 5.
101. b.

In Trespass, where one justifies as an Officer De son tort demesne.
to do Execution, De son tort demesne without answering to the Cause is no
Plea, 19 H. 6. 7. a.

In False Imprisonment the Defendant may show twenty Causes by way of
Justification, and it is not double, 7 Ed. 4. 20. Plowd. Comment. 86. a.

Where the Sheriff justifies by Execution, he Retorn of the Writ.
must plead that he returned the Writ, secus of a Bailiff, 1 Leon. p. 144.
Parkes and Moss.

If a Bailiff justify by force of a Warrant, he Warrant.
need not say hic in Cur' prolat'; for the Warrant does not continue in his
hands; but he retorns it to the Sheriff, 1 Roll. Rep. 327. Curtis and Dowty,
and p. 221. Bateman's Case.

Though the Proceedings in a Court be irregular, On Irregular proceedings in a
Court. Warrant.
yet if the Court has power to issue out a Capias, by this Warrant the Officer
may justify in False Imprisonment, Mod. Rep. 173.

If a Bailiff justify by reason of a Warrant, he ought to show the place where
the Warrant was made. It suffices if it be showed in the Rejoinder, 5 H. 7. 24.

Justification by Mean Process.
The Sheriff ought to Retorn his Writ, otherwise The immediate Officer must
show the Process Returned.
Justification is not good: But it is not so with the Servant.

False Imprisonment was brought against the Sheriffs Bailiff; he Justifies by
the Sheriffs Warrant on Latitat, who arrested the Plaintiff, and required the
Defendant to be aiding to him; but pleads not, That the Writ being Returned was
executed. Yet per Cur. its good; for the -- has no means to reinforce the
Sheriff to make Retorn thereof, Cro. Car. 446. Girling's Case.

In Action of False Imprisonment, the Defendant Justified by Process to the
Bailiff out of the Court of the Honor of P. and does not show any Process was
Returned, which (as Girling's Case is) being an immediate Officer, must be
showed; contra of an Under-Officer. And although he need not show forth the
Letters Patents, yet it must be specially pleaded such a Court was granted, and
that virtute, etc. 2 Keb. 156. Haywood and Wood.

If the Defendant in Justification of an Arrest pleads, That a Bill of
Middlesex was prosecuted against the Plaintiff, by which the Sheriff made and
directed a Warrant to arrest him; it shall Bill of Middlesex intended to be
delivered to the Sheriff before the Arrest.
be intended that the Bill was delivered to the Sheriff before the making of
the Warrant, till it be specially showed to the contrary. In this case he
Justifies by Writ to the Sheriff, and Warrant to himself, 1 Sand. 299. Green
and Jones.

The Causes of Demurrer were, because its not showed the Writ was delivered to
the Sheriff, nor the Warrant made before the Arrest; and also for that its not
averred that the Writ was Returned. But non allocantur, this is no essential
Matter, nor Traversable: And the Plaintiff might have Replied, That the Arrest
was before the delivery of the Writ, else the Court will intend it to be
delivered, being said that Virtute of a Writ directed to the Sheriff and
warrant the Defendant arrested; and the Writ needs not to be Returned by a
Bayliff-Errant, 2 Keb. 338. mesme Case, and p. 838. 844.

So in Scire fac. on Recovery in Action on the Case, the Defendant pleads no
Capias issued out against H. delivered to the Sheriff. Plaintiff Replies a
Capias issued out, and Non est inventus Returned; but says nothing of the
delivery to the Sheriff. Defendant Demurs, and Judgment pro Quer'; for the
Delivery to the Sheriff shall be intended, 3 Keb. 668. Holmes and Araker, Bail
for H.

The Time when a Latitat issued forth is As to the Time of the taking out the
Writ actually, and the Test of it.
Traversable, and may be averred otherwise than according to the Test, Per
totam Curiam; for a Relation shall not work a Wrong, 2 Keb. 173, 198. Bolton
and Johnson.

If a man be taken in the Vacation by a Warrant without a Writ, and a Latitat
be procured, Test in the Term, that Test shall not discharge the Wrong done
after the Test, and before the actual taking out of the Writ; but the
Plaintiff may take Issue that he prosecuted truly. But in Trespass and False
Imprisonment, the Defendant as Sheriffs-Bayliff Justified by a Latitat, Test
27 June, Trin. Term past.

The Plaintiff Replies, That the said Writ was really and actually prosecuted
out of B. R. on the 9th of August, which was after the Arrest of the Plaintiff.

Defendant Demurs: And per Cur. this is an Estoppel, especially in case of a
Bailiff, whose Warrant might be before the Arrest; and all Writs must be Test
as of the Term, and the Sheriffs not Retorning the Writ, or the not having any,
shall not prejudice his Under-Bayliff.

But per Cur. a good Action will lie against the Sheriff or Bailiff of a
Franchise in this Case.

But in Plunket and Green's Case, in the same Reporter:

In Trespass and False Imprisonment against the Sheriff and Bailiff, the
Defendant Justified by Warrant on Writ to the Sheriff, as Long and Bolton's
Case. The Plaintiff Replies, No Writ was then taken out. Defendant demurrs, and
Judgment pro Quer'; for though the Bailiff has Warrant and no Writ.
a Warrant, yet he is liable if there be no Writ; contra, if the Writ be void
and delivered, 2 Keb. 705. Plunket and Green.

And in Bennet and Filkin's Case, Trespass and False Imprisonment, the
Defendant Justifies by arrest on Latitat. Plaintiff Replies, The Writ was taken
out after the Arrest. Defendant demurs. Per Cur. the ante-date of the Writ will
not suffice, if the proceeding be after. And Judgment pro Quer. 3 Keb. Chancy
and Rutter.

And as to Pleading, as to the Time, Richardson and Pricket's Case is to be
observed. The Plaintiff supposed the Arrest and Imprisonment to be 10 December.
29 Eliz. Defendant pleads by virtue of a Warrant from the Sheriff he did arrest
and imprison him the 2d and 3d day of December before; absque hoc that he was
guilty before or after, etc. Plaintiff Replies, He was guilty of the Trespass,
etc. after the 3d day of December, prout in Narratione sua specificatur, and
Issue upon this, and well enough; though he says only, he was guilty after the
3d day; but says not, and before the Action brought. For when its said, He was
guilty after the 3d day, etc. prout, etc. it is to be intended to be the 3d
day, and the day of which he Counted, Cro. El. 95. Richardson and Pricket.

To all the Imprisonment, but 11 Hours, the Defendant pleads Not guilty, and to
the Imprisonment for 11 Hours he Justifies as Sheriff; for that the Plaintiff
hindered him in the Execution of his Office, and said nothing to the Vi and
armis, yet good, 1 Sand. 78. But this Case went further, 2 Keb. 237. the
Trespass and False Imprisonment was laid the 1st of April, the Defendant
Justifies at another day at Warw. as Sheriff, absque hoc that he was guilty the
1st of April, or at any time before or after, while he was Sheriff, or at any
other place. Per Cur. This Traverse is Traverse of the Time.
sufficient, and the Plaintiff must reply and show, if there were any other
Assault or Imprisonment. Also the Traversing the Time before and after, does
not lock up the Plaintiff from assigning another day and place, especially the
thing being Local, 1 Sand. 78. 2 Keb. 237. Law and King.

Justification in False Imprisonment by a Writ of Supplicavit de bono gestu out
of Chancery, and arresting him by the Sheriffs Warrant thereupon The
Justification being by an act in the same Time, quae est eadem Transgress.
County, and justifying all the Time in the Declaration, though it do not agree
with it in the Day, but concludes quae est eadem Transgressio is good enough,
the Day not being material; and the Replication is not good if it vary from the
Day in the Declaration, Cro. Car. 228. Tyler and Wall.

The Case was Trespass, etc. ultimo die October. 6 Car. and detaining him in
Prison for two days. Defendant justifies, because 13 Aug. 6 Car. a Writ of
Supplicavit issued, and by Warrant from the Sheriff to the Defendant, he
arrested the Plaintiff 21 Sept. and detained him two days, etc. quae est eadem
Transgressio, etc.

In False Imprisonment in London versus W. Place, quae est eadem Transgress.
Defendant justifies in Norfolk, by force of a Warrant to the Sheriff quae est
eadem Transgressio, absque hoc that he is guilty in London. Plaintiff demurrs
generally:

1. Because the Plea is double; for the Justification Traverse double.
in Norfolk, quae est eadem Transgressio, had been sufficient without more, and
then the Traverse makes it double. But per Cur. you shall not take advantage of
this upon a General Demurrer, General Demurrer.
1 Roll. Rep. 221. Bateman and Woodcock.

2. He Justifies by Warrant, and says not hic Warrant, hic in Cur. prolat.
in Curia prolat. Per Cur. They need not show this in Court; for it appears to
be executed, and that the Warrant is returned to the Sheriff. And so for this
last Point is 1 Roll. Rep. 327. Curti^ and Dowty's Case.

In False Imprisonment the Defendant justifies Justification local.
(as Sheriff) the taking the Plaintiff by force of a Capias directed to him at
D. within his County of G. where the Plaintiff declares of an Imprisonment in
another County; there the Traverse of the County is good. For the Defendant
cannot take the Plaintiff by force of the said Process in any other County than
where he is Sheriff, and so the Justification is Local, 3 Leon. 97. in
Partridge and Pool's Case.

The Defendant justifies the Arrest quousque, Justification.
Bond given to appear in B. R. absque hoc that at any time he did Arrest
without reasonable Cause, until he gave such Bond. Plaintiff demurrs generally.
Per Cur. The Justification is good, and the Plaintiff should have Traverst
absque hoc that Traverse.
he was arrested and detained till Obligation to appear in B. R. 3 Keb. 165.
Dawson and Rawlinson.

False Imprisonment. Defendant justifies by Arrest, De injuria sua propria to a
Justification by virtue of ^ Latitat and Warrant.
by virtue of a Warrant of the Sheriff on a Latitat. The Plaintiff replies, De
injuria sua propria absque tali causa. This is naught upon Demurrer, being
Matter of Record; but Issue being taken upon it, and being in the Affirmative,
its a Jeofail, and good after Verdict. Judgment pro Quer'. 1 Keb. 125, 164.
Beesly and Walker. So Osborn and Brook's Case.

The Defendant justifies in False Imprisonment, because a Writ of Vi Laica
removenda came to the Sheriff to remove the Force. The Plea need not say, they
found him resistentem in ea part. Vid. supra tit. Vi Laica removenda.

President,

Traverse, That the Defendant was in Custody by force of a Warrant made upon
one Writ, and not by Warrant upon another, 1 Sand. 19.

Pleading by the Sheriffs Baliffs. Justification in Trespass, Trover, etc. On
Execution.
Where the Sheriff justifies by Execution, he must plead, That he Returned the
Writ. Secus of a Bailiff, 1 Leon. 134. Parkes and Moss.

In Trover of 300 Sheep 1 Dec. 36 El. Defendant pleads, That he was Sheriff of
Com. Linc. and that J. S. recoverd against the Plaintiff 100 l. and upon that a
Fieri facias, which Writ was Retornable Crastin. animar. 35 Eliz. that this was
delivered to him 1 October. 30 El. that he on the 20th of October took the said
300 Sheep, and on 22 Oct. sold 104 Sheep for 40 l. and that the other Trover,
and no Conversion confessed in the Plea.
192 Sheep remained pro defectu emptorum; and at the same Day of Crastin.
animar. he Returned the said Writ, and all this Matter, the which is the same
Conversion, absque hoc that he Converted them aliter vel alio modo. Per Cur.
The Plea is insufficient;

1. Because by his Plea he does not confess any Conversion, and then the
Traverse is ill. He ought upon this Matter to have pleaded Not guilty, and
given it in Evidence.

2. Because the Declaration supposes the Trover Tr^verse.
and Conversion to be the 1st of Dec. 36 El. and he justifies the Conversion in
October. 35 El. so he meets not with the Plaintiff in time, and therefore he
ought to have Traversed it, and the Traverse aliter vel alio modo, to what it
^xtends.
Traverse aliter vel alio modo shall never answer to the time, but to the
manner of the Conversion.

3. He makes not any Justification for four of the Sheep, but that he seized
them; but he shows not what he did with them, Cro. El. 433. Ascue and Sanderson.

Scire fac. upon a Judgment in Debt. Defendant That the Sheriff levied the
Debt, a good Plea in Scire fac.
pleads a Fieri fac. directed to the Sheriff of L. for levying the Debt, and he
by force of it took diverse Sheep of the Defendants for the Debt, and yet
detains them. Per Cur. Its a good Plea, although he do not allege that the Writ
is Returned, and although the Writ is Conditional, Ita quod habeas denarios, etc.
for the Plaintiff has remedy against the Sheriff, and the Execution is ^awful,
which the Defendant cannot resist. So Rooke's Case, vid. ante.

If in False Imprisonment the Defendant justifies Where De injuria sua propria
is not a good Plea.
by a Capias of the Sheriff, and a Warrant of ^he Sheriff to himself, there De
injuria sua propria generally is not a good Plea; because a Matter of Record is
parcel of the Cause: But there he ^ught to say, De injuria sua propria, and
traverse ^he Warrant, which is Matter en fait, 8 Rep. ^rogat's Case.

D. brought Action of Assault, Battery and Execution.
^mprisonment of his Wife against W. and W. in ^. B. Defendants plead a Special
Justification, ( viz.) That in Nov. 2 Jac. Action of Trespass was brought by A.
against Julian G. and on General Issue found for Julian G. and Judgment ^or
her; and afterward, and before Execution, Julian G. marries the Plaintiff D.
and afterward Writ of Error was brought in B. R. and upon a Scire facias
against the said Julian, Judgment in C. B. was Reversed; and afterward Ca. sa.
was directed to W. and W. the Sheriff to take the said Julian G. and they took
her; with an Averment, That the said Julian G. and the Wife of the now
Plaintiff was one and the same person.

Plaintiff demurrs; because when the Warrant Trespass verse. A. and his Feme,
the Feme after marries, and her first Name continued in* all proceedings.
is against Julian G. there is no such Julian G. for by her marriage with the
Plaintiff she had another Name, and his Averment cannot help him, because it
agrees not with his Warrant: But aliter, had the Variance been in the Name of
Baptism only.

But per Cur. the Scire facias was according to the Judgment in the C. B. and
well then might all the subsequent Process be so: But if the Husband had come
upon the Scire facias, and showed how that she was Covert, then the Action
ought to be against both of them* And,

2. The parties themselves, in all the proceedings throughout, have all
admitted that she is the same person, and had the same Name, and they shall be
concluded from saying the contrary. And though the Sheriff had showed the
Marriage, this was but a bare Allegation and A bare Allegation of the Sheriff*
does not make a thing appear Judicially.
Suggestion of the Sheriff, and it appears no^ whether it were Judicially so or
not.

3. It would be dangerous for the Sheriff to Retorn a Non est inventus; for
because the parties have all admitted her Name to be so in all proceedings, the
Sheriff shall be Estopped also, 3 H. 7. 10. and then Action on the Case would
lie o^ the false Retorn, if the Woman should be in the company of the Sheriff,
and the party show her to the Sheriff, and she escape, 1 Brownl. 226* Doyley
and Webb, 2 Bulstrode 80. mesme Case.

In Trespass for taking Goods. Defendant pleads a Recovery in the Court of
Dorchester, in Debt against the Plaintiff, and Execution upon this by Fieri
fac: and Justifies the taking, appraising and sale (by Consent) of the
Plaintiff, in part of the satisfaction of the Judgment recovered, Quae est
eadem captio. Plaintiff demurs; because the Defendant varying in the time of
the taking, from the time alleged in the Declaration, he ought to traverse any
other Taking; for the same Goods may be taken at several times, and the Quae
est eadem captio is not sufficient; as Marshall and Dicken's Case, Sir Tho.
Jones p. 146. Allen and Chamming.

But per. Cur. the Averment suffices, Keilw. 27. 1 Bulstr. 138. Cro. Car. 228.

Justification in Trespass, Assault and Battery, by Process out of an Inferior
Court of Record, is not good without showing whether the Court was holden by
Charter or Prescription, Sir Tho. Jones p. 165. Strode and Deering.

In Trespass of Battery, the Defendant justifies the Process to arrest one
Wood, and the Plaintiff would have Rescued him, whereupon he did molliter manus
imponere.

The Plaintiff Replied, De injuria sua propria, De injuria sua proprt^ with a
special Traverse.
absque hoc that the Defendant had virtute of such a Warrant taken, as that by
which the Defendant Justified. Defendant demurs.

Per Cur. The Justification is sufficient, and better by the admittance in the
Replication, than if the Issue had been offered De injuria sua propria
generally without such Traverse, 2 Keb. 293. Haywood and Wood.

In Trespass and Imprisonment, the Defendant That which is confessed and
avoided, not to be traversed.
Justifies by a Capias, and that the Plaintiff did afterward Escape, and he
being Plaintiff did follow him by virtue of the said Warrant, taken out upon
the Capias.

Plaintiff Replies, He escaped by the License of the Sheriff, and traverseth
the Later taking by virtue of the Warrant.

Per Cur. The Traverse is idle* because the Plaintiff had sufficiently
confessed and avoided; and if he escaped by the Sheriffs License, that ought to
be the thing put in Issue, and not the Traverse, 1 Brownl. 197. Hatton and Hunn.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Attachments against the Sheriff; where and in what Cases it lies or not.
And where against him for a thing done out of his Office. Attachment of Money
in the Sheriffs hands. Of Attachments against others, and against the Goods,
and the Retorn. Of Amerciaments, where and in what Cases the Sheriff is to be
amerced.

Of Attachments against the Sheriff, where and in what Cases it Lies or not.
ATtachment shall not be granted against the Not for the Contempt of his
Bailiffs For frivolous retorn of an Hab. Corpus.
High Sheriff, for the Contempt of his Bailiff, March p. 54.

Attachment against the Sheriff for a frivolous Retorn of an Habeas Corpus. The
Retorn was, That the Committee for poor Prisoners ordered he should not bring
the Body till they had consulted with the Lord Chief Justices: And an alias
Habeas Corpus under pain of 80 l. Styles Rep. 422.

Attachmant against a Sheriff for refusing to For refusing to bring Money into
Court. Not retorn of Habeas Corpus. For executing Process against the Rule of
Court.
bring Money into Court.

Attachment lies by the Rules of the King's Bench, for not making a Retorn of
Habeas Corpus, upon a pluries Habeas Corpus issued forth, Pr. Reg. tit.
Attachment.

Attachment lies against a Bailiff, for executing a Process of this Court,
against a Rule of the Court having notice, Pr. Reg. ibid:

It was a doubt, whether Attachment lies Against a Sheriff when he was out of
his Office for a misdemeanor during his Office.
against a Sheriff when he was out of his Office for a Misdemeanor in his
Office. Capias was delivered to the Sheriff against J. S. and the Plaintiff
shows him to the Sheriff, and he saw him, but he turned about and said I cannot
see him, and after Retorns non est inventus, and then his Office determined.
Dodderidg and Jones granted an Attachment against him, though he was out of his
Office, for this Contempt during his Office, Latch p. 176. and p. 217. Dixons's
Case. But they two denied an Attachment against a late Sheriff, for retorning
non invenit emptores, and then his Office determins, and he detained the Goods
in his hands.

Note, Attachment of Money in the Sheriffs No attachment in the Sheriff hands.
hand is void, for the Sheriff at the Retorn of the Writ ought to answer for
the Money, 1 Leon. p. 264.

Attachment against others.
An Atatchment against a Man is a non omittas Attachment is a Non omittas.
in it self, and the Sheriff may break his House to take him, for the Writ is
for his person, 1 Roll. Rep. 339. Briggs's Case.

If the Party Defendant be Attached, or Distrained by Process out of any Court
of Record, or County by force of a Justicies, etc. Hundred Court, or any Court
Baron, and make default, the Goods or Issues are forfeited, and upon the
Attachment the Sheriff, or other Officer may take the Goods with them. On
Attachment the Sheriffs ought to Retorn the certainty of the Goods and why, and
the value.
And this is the Reason, that upon the Attachment the Sheriff or other Officer
ought to Retorn the certainty of the Goods and the value; and it is not
sufficient to Retorn, that he has Attached or Distrained the Defendant by
Goods to such a value, and so upon the Distress, the Issues must be returned in
certain, because they are upon default to be forfeited, vide supra tit.
original Process, 3 Inst. 228.

The Sheriff is to bring an Attachment upon the Writ of ne exeat regnum until
he finds Sureties, 1 Roll. Rep. 313.

Where and in what Cases the Sheriff is to be Amerced.
The Sheriff is to be amerced for the faults of For the faults of his Special
Bailiffs.
his Special Bailiffs, for the Sheriff is the Officer to the Court and not
they. But if the Sheriff Retorn quod mandavit ballivo, etc. qui respondit, etc.
if the Retorn is sufficient, and a default is for not doing according to the
Retorn, the Bailiff shall be amerceed and not the Sheriff. As if the Where the
Bailiff shall be amerced and not the Sheriff.
Sheriff Retorn quod mandavit ballivo Libertatis, etc. qui respondit qd' cepit
J. S. according to the Writ, and he shall be here at the day, if he bring him
not at the day, the Bailiff shall be amerced and not the Sheriff. But if the
Chamberlain of the County Palatin of Chester, makes an insufficient Retorn to
the Court of Common Pleas, upon a Writ issued out of that Court, the Sheriff
shall be amerced, because he is the Officer responsible to the Court. Now in
Palmer and Marshes Case, 1 Brownl. 36. If the Sheriff Retorn quod mandavit
ballivo Libertatis qui sic respondit, and retorn an insufficient Retorn in Law,
the Sheriff shall be amerced, for he might have returned, ballivus nullum
responsum dedit. Amerced for the insufficient Retorn of the Bailiff of a
Liberty.
If the Sheriff Retorn feci retornum istius brevis G. and L. [ ballivis
Libertatis G. qui habent retornum brevium and Executionem eorundem, qui mihi
re^^onderunt, qd' istud mandatum adeo tarde receperun^ per manus Attornat'
sequentis qd' nihil inde facere potuerunt; the Sheriff shall be amerced for
this Retorn, for he ought to have Returned it to the Bailiff time enough for
them to serve it, Trin. 39 El. B. R. Palmer and Marsh, 1 Ed. 1. 13. b.

If no Retorn be made for part by a Bailiff of a Liberty, the Sheriff shall be
amerced. As in a Praecipe qd' reddat, if at the grand Cape the Sheriff Retorn
quod mandavit J. Bailiff of a Franchise, etc. who returned, that he had taken
the Land into the Kings hands; and speaks nothing that he had summoned the
Tenant, as the Writ commands him, the Sheriff in this case shall be amerced,
for that no Retorn is made of part, 4 H. 6. 25. b.

By the Stat. of 27. H. 8. 24. Amerciaments for insufficient Retorns of Writs,
made by Baliffs of Liberties, shall be set upon the Heads of such Bailiffs, and
not upon the Sheriff, nor upon the Lord of the Franchise.

If the Sheriff be amerced by the Court for the Increase of Amerciaments.
not doing a thing belonging to his Office; and yet he continues to neglect to
do it contrary to the Rule of the Court, the Court may increase the
Amerciaments till he do his Duty therein. But Amerciaments set upon the Sheriff
upon the Amerciament estreated with a Respectuat.
motion of the Party, if they be not Estreated into the Exchequer, may be with
a Respectuat' (that is) be respited) if the Party grieved, who caused him to be
amerced will consent thereunto, otherwise not, Pract. Reg. p. 18.

If upon a Latitat the Sheriff do Retorn a Cepi Amerciament for not Retorn.
Corpus, and the Party arrested on this Process does not appear at the day of
the Retorn, the Sheriff may be amerced by the Court; yet though the Sheriff be
amerced, if the Party arrested do appear within a week after the day he ought
to have appeared, the Amerciament may be taken of the Sheriff, Pract. Reg. 18.

If a Debt be levied by Fieri fac' and delivered to the Plaintiff, and the Writ
is not returned, yet the Execution and Sale is good, but the Sheriff shall be
amerced for the Non-retorn of the Writ, 5 Rep. Hoes Case.

It was moved to have the Sheriff amerced for Not for retorning too small
Issues.
retorning too small Issues: Coke said we cannot do so, for (says he) it does
not lie in our Conisance, whether they are too small or not, but you are put to
your Amerciament, 1 Roll. Rep. 339. Goates's Case.

A Bishop shall be amerced for an Escape 100 l. Amerciaments for Escape of
persons convict.
a Jailer shall be amerced for a negligent Escape of a Person Attaint 100 l.
and if one convict 5 l. 2 Inst. 28.

An Exigent which was delivered of Record (to the Sheriff) was imbesilled, and
the Copy thereof was returned by the Sheriff, and he was amerced for the Retorn
of the Copy at 30 l. and for imbesilling the Exigent at 20 l. 5 H. 4. 5.

CHAP. XXVI.
Remedy against Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. for Male-feasance. As imbesilling an
Exigent, for entering into a Corporation which had Retorna Brevium. For not
delivering a Supersedeas to the new Sheriff. For concealing or substracting a
Writ. For refusing sufficient Bail, and forcing to find extraordinary Bail. For
taking sufficient Bail. For not bringing Money levied by Fieri fac' into Court.
And Stat. of Limitations pleaded.

Remedy against Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc.
IF the Sheriff in his Court quash an Essoyn Erroneously, For quashing an
Essoyn.
without the consent of the Suitors; Action on the Case lies against him, for
the Party cannot have his false Judgment on this, 26 Assize 45.

If a Distring as Issues to the Sheriff to Distrain the Defendant in the Action
by all his Lands and Chattels, etc. and the Sheriff Retorns trop petit Retorns
Trop petit Issues.
Issues, (too small Issues) although an Averment lies by the Stat. W. 2. c. 43.
Yet the Plaintiff may well have his Action on the Case against the Sheriff,
because it appears by the words of the Statute that this is a false Retorn,
and the words are qd' Distringeret, by all his Lands and Chattels, Ita qd' de
exitibus eorum, etc. so that if he do not Retorn all the Issues, he does not as
he is commanded. The Statute ordains that the King shall have the Issues, but
restrains not any Remedy that the Plaintiff had at Common Law, 3 Car. 1.
Dorothy Bennet against the Sheriff of London.

If the Sheriff imbesil an Exigent delivered to For imbesilling an Exigent.
him at my Suit, Action on the Case lies tam pro Dom' Rege quam pro meipso, 41
Assize 12.

A Knight for the County brought Action For not levying Expenses in Parliament.
against the Sheriff, for not levying 10 l. 4 s. for his expenses in attendance
in Parliament, 17 Ed. 3 B. R. Rot.

The Sheriff was punished in the Star Chamber, for neglecting to Execute a
Capias Utlagat' after Judgment, Hob. 264.

Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff, for For entering into a Corporation
which had retorna brevium.
entering a Corporation which had Retorna brevium, 1 Roll. 118, 119. The Town of
Darby verse. Foxhen.

J. S. recovered a Debt against Calthrop, and procured a Writ of Execution to
W. P. Sheriff of D. but before the Writ was executed, Calthrop procured a
Supersedeas to the said P. who when his time was out, delivered all the Writs
to the new Sheriff, but not this Supersedeas; so that J. S. procures a new Writ
of Execution to For not delivering a Supers^deas to the new Sheriff
the new Sheriff, upon which 18 of Calthrops Beasts were taken. And he brings
his Action against P. for not delivering over the Supersedeas. By the
Prothonotaries, the Course is to take a new Writ to the new Sheriff. But the
Court inclined that the Action lay; for the Writ to the old Sheriff is, quod
comitat' praed' una cum brevibus rotulis memorandis and omnibus officium illud
tangen. And an Action will lie, for not delivering some Writs to the new
Sheriff, which is not returned, as Estrepment, Mod. Rep. 222. Calthrop and
Phillips.

He at whose Suit the Party arrested Rescues himself and Escapes from a Special
Bailiff or Bailiff errant, shall have Action against the Sheriff only. Vid.
tit. Undersheriff, Atterton and Harwood.

Warrant on Fiere fac' is directed to the Undersheriff Against undersheriff
for concealing a W^it.
of a Liberty, and he levies the Debt but conceals the Writ; Action on the Case
lies against him, M. 12 Jac. B. R. Bell and Satesby.

If the Sheriffs Deputy substracts a Writ which Against the Sheriffs Deputy for
not substracting a Writ. Bailiff of Liberty chargable for his Servant.
is to be returned, Action lies against the Sheriff. And yet the Deputy may be
punished for this falsity by deceit, 19 H. 6. 71. b.

Servant of a Baliff of a Franchise, Sworn by Deputation to serve Process but
of such a Sum, and he serves Process of a greater Sum without Warrant, and
levies the Money, and parts with it, the Bailiff shall be chargable, Hetley p.
12.

Sir John Lenthal (his Prisoner having agreed For not discharging a Prisoner
without paying Action Money.
with his Creditors) would not discharge him, without paying to him
Action-Mony, By Glyn S. J. there are two Remedies against him. Action of false
Imprisonment, or Indictment for Extortion. Fees must be paid and no more,
Styles Rep. 454. Welberly and Sir John Lenthall.

Vid. tit. Fees.

But Bailiff of a Liberty is not chargable for the Jailer. Vid. supra.

As for what Remedy there is against the Sheriff for refusing sufficient Bail,
the Law stands thus.
If a Sheriff or Mayor refuse sufficient Bail, For refusing suffient Bail.
against the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. by which the Penalty of 40 l. is given,
one Moiety to the King, and the other to the Party who will Sue for it. In this
Case no Action lies by Bill in the Kings Bench against the Sheriff, etc.
Because the Statute of 18 Eliz. is, That no person shall Sue any Penal Statute
but by information, or original Action and not otherwise.

But Note, It is not limited by the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. how the Penalty
shall be recovered, but generally that he shall forfeit 40 l. one Moiety to the
King, and the other to him that Sues, 3 Inst. 194, 6 Rep. 17. Gregories's Case,
1 Rolls Ab. 537. Whidiston and Clerk.

Action on the Case does not lie against a Sheriff, For taking insufficient
Bail.
for suffering a Prisoner to go at large, upon the taking insufficient Bail.
vid. supra. pasc. 2 Jac. C. B. in the Case of the Lady Mounson against the
Sheriff of Lincoln, for taking insufficient security upon Stat. of 23 H. 6. It
was adjudged, That the death of one of the Sheriffs did not abate the Writ, 2
Sanders. 5. Postern and Hanson, Hutton p. 120. Metcalf and Hodyson p. 77.
Trevor and Michelbourn, 1 Keb. 56. Stalford and Bateman.

Action on the Case lies against the Sheriff, Action of the Case against the
Sheriff for not bringing Money into Cour^ levied by Scire fac. Statute of
Limitatitions pleaded.
for that he levied such a Sum of Money on a Fieri fac' at the Suit of the
Plaintiff, and brought not the Money into the Court at the day of the Re^orn.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitations 21 Jac. Its Ill. An
indebitatus Assumpsit would lie against the Sheriff in this Case, or against
his Executors, and then the Statute might be pleaded. If the Fieri fac' had
been returned, the Action would have been grounded upon the Record, and its the
Sheriffs fault that the Writ is not returned: But however Per Cur', the
Judgment in this Court is the Foundation of the Action. And so Judgment pro
Quer. that is not within the Statute of Limitations, Mod. Rep. 24.

Action on the Case against a Bailiff for concealing a Scire fac', after he had
levied the Money upon it, 1 Roll. Rep. 78.

One is Arrested for 600 l. and forced to find extraodinary Bail. Action on the
Case lies.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Sheriffs demeanor in Assignment of Dower, and the Retorn. The
Proclamations. The Sheriffs Office about Partition. His demeanor in the Writ De
Ventre inspiciendo. About Retorning a Force. About a Vi Laica removenda. How
the Sheriff shall demean himself in a Writ of Enquiry of Waste; and of the
Retorns thereof. Of the Writ of Estrepement, and the Retorn. The Sheriffs
Office in a Writ of De Excommunicato capiendo. Retorns of Sheriffs, as to
Clerks. Retorn of a Writ of Entry. Retorn of an Assize, Quare Impedit, De
Malefactoribus in parcis.

Of the Sheriffs demeanor in Assignment of Dower, and the Retorn.
THe Sheriff may not assign Dower against Common Right.

If the Sheriff assign one Manor upon Dower recovered of three Manors, its
not good; it Manor.
ought to be a Third part of each: But he may Assign all the Meadow, Pasture,
etc. Mo. 12. n. 47. -- 19. n. 66. 12 Ed. 4. 2. contra.

And if a Woman be dowab^e of a Manor, the Sheriff may assign the Third part
of the Manor in Common instead of Dower, without setting out by Metes and
Bounds; so assigned in Chancery, Anc. Ent. Qu. Imp. 529. 10.

If a Woman be endowed of an Advowson, she Advowson.
shall be assigned the Third part of the Advowson, and not only the 'shird part
of the profits, ( viz.) the Third presentation, 17 Ed. 3. 8. b.

If a Woman recover Dower of a Rectory Rectory Impropriate.
Impropriate where there is not any Glebe, the Sheriff shall put her in
possession of the Third part of the Tithes generally, and not of the Tithes of
the Land, which issue out of any Third part of the Land of the Parish in
certain, Mich. 9 Jac. B. per Cur.

The Writ of Drwer was de Tertia part Rectoriae de D. and upon that the Grand
Cape issued, Cape in manus nostr as tertiam partem Rectoriae, etc. and the
Sheriff by Color of this Writ took the Tithes, severed from the Nine parts,
etc. Its an ill Seizure, 1 Leon. p. 92. Mitchel and Hide.

The Sheriff may assign a Rent in lieu of Rent in lieu of Dower.
Dower, 20 Ass. 41. 7 H. 6. 34. So a Rent out of the same Land.

If the Sheriff assign Dower by Writ to him In Partition.
directed, and does not Retorn the Writ, yet she is Lawfully seized of Dower.
Aliter in a partition by Writ; for there a second Judgment ought to be given,
Cro. El. Ashborough's Case.

The Retorn of the Sheriff in Assignment of Certainty of the Retorn.
Dower need not have such precise Certainty, as Declarations and Indictments;
therefore the Retorn was, Quod habere fecit seisinam de 13 Messuagiis, sive
Tenement is, cum terris and pratis eisdem pertinentibus tune vel nuper in
tenura, etc. its good enough; and when he says in the end, he delivered them
all by Metes and Bounds, it is sufficient, Cro. Jac. 621. Sir Chapter Howard's Case.

It was moved for amendment of Assignment Amendment of Assignment of Dower.
of Dower, being Under-value, and on refusal of an equal division proffered to
him by the Dowager, with liberty to choose which two parts he would for the
Heir. Which the Court Ordered, and Committed the Sheriff for taking of 60l. of
the Lady Longvill, to execute his Writ of Execution; and Information was
brought against him, 1 Keb. 743. Longvill's Case.

As to Proclamations in Dower.
Where the Sheriff Returned, He had proclaimed the Contents of the Writ; this
was held insufficient, for he must Retorn, That he made Summons of the Land.

The Sheriff upon the Statute of 31 Eliz. if he make Proclamation at the most
usual Door of the Church, though part of the Land lie in another Town in the same
County its sufficient, though the words of the Statute are Parishes, or Chapels.
And though there be no actual Summons, but only the Names of the Summoners, its
good; for that is all the Form at Common Law, and the Statute alters not that,
Hob. p. 133. Allen and Walker.

The Forms of Retorns; as Proclamation at the Church-door, the Retorn of a Writ
of View, the Retorn of a Writ of Seisin in Dower, the Retorn of a Writ of
Enquiry of Damages in Dower, vid. Dalton c. 56.

In Dower of Freehold in M. magna and M. parva, the Sheriff returned pleg' de
prosequendo J. D. J. R. and the Names of the Summoners J. D. and R. F. and
after the Summons made, and by the space of 14 Days and more, before the Retorn
of the said Writ, at the most usual Church-door of M. magna, where part of the
Tenements lay, on the 27th of October. being the Lord's Day immediately after
Sermon in that Church, he publicly proclaimed all and singular things
contained in the Writ, to be proclaimed according to the form of the Statute in
that behalf made and provided, L. P. Armig. Vic.

Per. Cur. Its sufficient to make Proclamation at Proclamation at any of the
Churches where the Lands lie.
any of the Churches where the Lands lie, and he need not do it at all: But
because he said, He had caused to be proclaimed all and singular in that Writ
contained, and says not what, the Retorn was adjudged Insufficient, 1 Browl.
126. Allen and Walter.

Upon a Retorn of a Writ of Enquiry in Dower Retorn of a Writ of Enquiry in
Dower.
Errors were assigned:

1. The Original Writ appears not to be Returned according to the Statute; for
the year does not appear when it was Returned.

2. The Proclamation made by the Sheriff, appears not to be where the Land lies.

3. The Retorn does not mention that the Proclamation was after the Summons, as
it ought, Hob. Allen's Case.

4. It is not said, He did make Proclamation on the Land; but the words
secundum forma^^ Statuti extend far.

Quare, For the Certiorari was not well Returned in B. R. Styles Rep. p. 67.
T^yn and Thyn.

Note, No Error can be Assigned on the Sheriffs act in giving the Seisin, and
retorning thereof, except it is where Damages are to be Enquired; for if any of
them be ill, then the recovery of the Damages being entire, its ill for all,
Cro. Jac. 621. Sir Chapter Howard's Case.

If Summons be made in some part of the Summons made in some parts of the Land
within the Vill, is good.
Land within the Vill, its good; neither is it necessary to make the
Proclamation where the Summons is, Styles Rep. 91. Thyn.

Presidents.
Summons, Retorn of the Writ of Seisin, and Execution upon it in Dower, 2 Sand.
45, 92. Hesketh and Lee.

On Habere fac' seisinam, in a Writ of Dower of the Third part, the Sheriff
Returned, That he offered to the Demandants the Seisin of the Third part of the
Tenements aforesaid by Metes and Bounds in certain, according to the Tenor of
the Writ, and they refused to accept them of him. Per Cur. The Entry of the
Demandants is now lawful; and the Court refused to award Habere fac' seisinam
de novo, as a thing never known, Dyer 278.

A. brought Dower against the Son, to be endowed of Lands, of which her Husband
(the Father of the Defendant) died seized. A Writ issued forth to Enquire of
the Damages, and he made his Warrant to J. S. to take the Inquest. It was the
Opinion of the Justices, That he cannot in this case make a Deputy, because it
was a Judicial act, and he must do it in person, Noy 21. Randal's Case.

Sheriffs demeanor in the Writ De Ventre Inspiciendo.
Writ was directed to the Sheriff, That he should cause D. etc. to be viewed by
12 Knights, and searched by 12 Women in the presence of the 12 Knights; and ad
tractandum per ubera and ad ventrem inspiciend', whether she were with Child or
not, and to Certify the same into the Common-Bench; and if she were with
Child, to Certify how long time in their Judgments, and quando sit paritura:
The Sheriff Returned, That she was Twenty weeks gone with Child, and that
within Twenty weeks fuit paritura.

Whereupon another Writ issued out of the Common-Bench, commanding the Sheriff
safely to keep her in such an House, and that the Doors should be well guarded;
and that every day he would cause her to be viewed by some of the Women named
in the Writ (wherein they were named;) and that when she should be Delivered,
some of them should be with her to view her Birth, whether it be Male or Female.

Upon this the Sheriff Returned, He had caused her to be kept, etc. and that
such a day she was Delivered of a Daughter, Cro. El. 566. Willoughby's Case.

But in Theaker's Case, the Woman to be Inspected was a Feme Covert, (to a
second Husband) and she was with Child by the first; they took not the same
course, but left her with her Husband, he entering into Recognizance, that she
should not remove from the House wherein they inhabited, and that one or two of
the Women (Returned by the Sheriff) should see her every day, and that two or
three of them should be present at her Travail, Cro. Jac. 685, 686. Theaker's
Case.

The Sheriffs Office about Partition, and how he is to demean himself therein.
At the time of the Partition made, the Highsheriff He must be upon the Land in
person.
must be upon the Land in person: And if Exception be taken at the Bar before
the Writ be returned and filed, a New Writ shall be awarded; but if the Sheriff
in such case Retorneth, That he was there in proper person, No Averment against
the Retorn fil^d.
and this Retorn be received and the Writ filed, the party cannot Aver against
the Retorn, nor shall have Error, Cro. El. 9. Clay's Case.

In a Writ of Partition, if Judgment be given quod partitio fiat, and upon this
a Writ is directed to the Sheriff, to make partition; before that this is
Executed and Returned no Writ of Error lies upon the first Judgment, because
before the last When Writ of Error lies upon P^rtition, or not.
Judgment (which ought to be, Qd' partitio praed' foret forma and stabilis in
perpetuum) the Plaintiff may be Nonsuited; or he may upon the Sheriffs Retorn
suggest to the Court, That the Partition is not equal, and also have a New
Partition, 1 Rolls Abridgm. 750. The Lord Berkley and the Countess of Warwick.

The Form of the Retorn of a Writ of Partition, vide Dalt. c. 68.

Sheriffs Office about removing a Force.
The party grieved may have a Writ supon the Statute of Northampton, 2 Ed. 3.
cap. 3. directed to the Sheriff, to remove the Force; and upon this the Sheriff
may imprison and justify in False Imprisonment, as was Levett and Farrar's
Case; and so may the Undersheriff, as that Case was.

In False Imprisonment against the Sheriff, the Defendant Justifies, for that a
Writ upon the Statute of Northampton was awarded 30 July 32 Eliz. to the
Sheriff and Justices of the Peace, to remove a Force; and that he being
Undersheriff, by the Commandment of the Sheriff went to the place and found the
Force; and because he was not able to remove it, he made Proclamation, That
every one should depart, and leave their Weapons, etc. and afterward he
enquired of the Force; and it being found that the Plaintiff was one of them,
he arrested him, and imprisoned him, Cro. Eliz. 294. Levett and Farrar.

Per Cur. The Plea is good. And these Points Plea.
were Adjudged:

1. When the Writ is directed to the Sheriff by the name of his Office, and not
by a particular Name, nor does expressly Command him to do it in person, the
Undersheriff may do it; Done by the Undersheriff.
for its a Writ grounded on the Statute, and not a Commission, for then it had
been otherwise.

2. He may Arrest and Imprison at another time upon the Enquiry, though the Force
were removed before his coming; and he may Enquire who did it.

3. It shall be intended he continued Undersheriff, when in the same Plea it is
alleged he was Undersheriff, and the contrary is not showed, 2 Roll. Rep. 178.

If when the Sheriff comes to remove a Force, if then one hide himself in the
Corner of the House, to the intent, etc. this is Force.

The Sheriffs Office in a Vi Laica removenda.
In False Imprisonment the Defendant Justifies, Justifies in False Imprisonment.
because a Writ De vi Laica removenda came to the Sheriff, to remove the Force;
and that the Sheriff came to the House, and the Defendant in Assistance of him,
etc. and that there the Plaintiff in domibus praedict' ad pacem dom' Regis
disturband', etc. and eos residentes invenerit.

Plaintiff demurs,

1. The Writ is, Si aliquos in ea part resistentes invene^itis, and it is not
here pleaded, That he found him resisting in e^ part, i. e. to keep
possession. But per Cur. the words in e^ part ought to be necessarily
intended. For when he says, He came to the House to remove the Force, and the
Plaintiff resisted him, then sequitur that he resisted him in removing the
Force.

2. The Writ is, aliquos, and the Defendant had showed Resistance by one only.
But per Cur. aliquos includes aliquem.

3. He does not aver, that it was vis Laica and armata potestas. But per Cur.
it appears there was Force, and the very Resistance was a Force, 2 Roll. Rep.
177. Parson Clossey's Case.

Upon a Vi Laica removenda, if the Sheriff Retorn Non inveni vim Laicam nec
armatam potestatem, the Lessee shall have Restitution in B. R. Restitu^ion.
upon Affidavit that he was kept out with Force.

Upon this Writ the Sheriff ought not to remove the Incumbent, who is in
Possession of the Church, be it by right or wrong, for the Sheriff is only to
remove the force, and is to suffer the Incumbent to enjoy his Possession, More
462. Roberts and Agmondsham.

How Sheriff is to Demean himself in Proclamations.
In real Action. Vid' Dower.

As to Acts of Parliament in former times.

Proclamations ought to be with Writ to the Sheriff to Proclaim, 2 Rolls Rep.
172.

Yet, if a Statute be not proclaimed, the Offenses against it are punishable,
Dr. and Stud. 146. b.

How the Sheriff shall Demean himself in a Writ of Inquiry of Wast. And of the
Sheriffs Retorn thereupon. And of the Writ of Estprement.
In an Action of Wast upon Issue joined, a Jury is Summoned to try the Cause,
and in the interim to view the place wasted, and the Sheriff is to retorn the
view. As to the President, vid. 2 Sanders 254. Grene and Cole.

The Sheriff must go in person to the place The manner of the view.
wasted, by Stat. W. 2. c. 14. accedat ad Locum vastatum, together with the
Jurors, 2 Inst. 390.

Six Juors at the least ought to have the view. And the Jury may view the place
Wasted when the Officer is not present; and the Court upon the Trial ought to
examine, if the Jurors had the view or not. But though the Jury ought to have the
view, yet it is not necessary for the Not necessary to retorn the view.
Officer to Retorn it, 2 Sanders 254, 255. Grene and Cole.

In Action of Wast assigned in a Wood, the Jury viewed the Wood only without
entering into it: And it was held the same was sufficient. It would be too
tedious for a Jury to view every stub of a Tree that had been Felled. Yet, if
Wast be in several corners of a Wood, then the Jury is to have the view of
every Corner; aliter where Wast is assigned in the whole Wood. And if Wast be
assigned in every Room of an House, the view of the House generally is
sufficient. And by Dyer, if Wast be assigned in several places, and of some of
them the Jury had not the view, of that they may find no Wast done, 1 Leon. 276.

If an Issue arises in a Foreign County, the Jury examined of the view.
Jury shall not be examined of the view; and if the Jurors be not examined of
the view when they should be examined, its Error.

Retorn of the Writ of Enquiry in Wast.
VIirtute brevis Dom. Regis mihi direct' Ego A. B. Armig' Vic' Comitat' praed'
(tali die and anno) in propria persona mea accessi ad Locum vastatum in dicto
brevi nominat' Et apud S. (the Vill wherein the place lies) feci Inquisitionem,
etc. prout istud breve in se exigit and requirit.

Resid' Executionis istius brevis patet in quadam Inquisitione huic brevi
annex'.

Inquisitio Indentata capt' apud G. in Com', etc. (tali die and anno) Coram A.
B. Vic' Comit' praed' Virtute cujusdam brevis Domini Regis ei inde direct' and
huic Inquisitioni consut' per Sacramentum A B. etc. (ad numerum 12) qui dicunt
super Sacramentum suum qd' J. R. in brevi praed' nominat' fecit vastum
venditionem and destructionem in omnibus in eod' brevi specificat', viz.
permittend' duas cameras pretis 31. and unum stabulum pretii 20 s. esse
discoopertum pro defectis reparationum earundem domorum per qd' grossum marem'
eorundem Dom' per tempest' pluviales super illas descendentes putred' devenit.
Et dicunt super Sacramentum suum qd' praed. J. R. aliud neque plus vastum
venditionem seu destructionem fecit in domibus praed' In cujus rei Testimonium,
etc.

Of the Enquiry of Wast.
This Enquiry of Wast differs from other How differ from other Writs of Enquiry.
Writs of Enquiry, which are but mere Inquests of Office. But here its a
Verdict and in nature of a Verdict, and a Writ of Attaint lies: Therefore,
where upon a Writ of Enquiry of Wast, 13 Jurors were returned, where there
ought to be but 12, its Error. But in other Writs of Enquiry, it is usual to
have more than 12, at the Sheriffs pleasure, there must not be under 12 though it
be but an Enquest of Office, for it is taken sans mise des parties, id est,
without Issue joined. In a Writ of Enquiry of Wast upon Demurrer or nihil
dicit, the Sheriff may enquire of it at another place than where the Wast was
done, Cro. Car. 414. King and Frith. 2 Inst. 390. Cro. El. 290. Warriford and
Haddock.

Now as to the Juries finding Damages the Law is, That if Wast be assigned in
three Houses and two Gardens, etc. and upon the Writ of Enquiry, Wast was found
in the Houses and Gardens, and entire Damages given, its well, for it is the
usual course to find entire Damages, Damages entire.
and not several for every of them, Cro. Car. 414. King and Fitch. Lib. Intr.
620. 8 Rep. 61. But where the Writ of Wast and Count is in domibus boscis and
Gardinis, and upon the Writ of Enquiry the Wast is found in domibus and
Gardinis, and nothing in boscis, there the Plaintiff shall be in Misericordia;
because he counts for Wast, in places where no Wast was committed in one of
them. But where Wast was assigned in cutting down twenty Trees, and the Wast is
found in cutting down two Trees, aliter.

If the Jury find Damages only to 8 s. the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment,
for it ought to be above 40 s. Winch Rep. 5. Sir G. Topping and King.

If Wast be committed in two Villages, and Where excuted.
the Sheriff has executed his Office ill in one Village, and well in another,
all shall be enquired of denovo, because the whole Inquisition was but one
Inquest at one time: If VVast be assigned in diverse Towns, the Sheriff and Jury
must view all the places wasted in every Town, but he may enquire thereof in
any one of the Towns, 2 Inst. 390.

Note, Action of VVast lies not in ancient Action of Wast lies in Ancient
Demsne and why.
Demesne, because upon default at the grand Distress, there cannot be a Writ
to the Sheriff, to enquire of the VVast as the Statute appoints. So 2 Inst.
386. That the Court fails of the Incidents to an Action of VVast, to award a
Writ to the Sheriff to enquire of the VVast, 2 Sanders 254 Grenes's Case. 4
Rep. Fulwoods's Case.

What Retorn shall be good, or not.
A Writ to the Sheriff to enquire of VVast, This Writ is a non omitt^as.
who Returns mandavi Ballivo meo Libertatis, etc. qui nullum dedit responsum,
its an ill Retorn; and the Sheriff was amerced, and a sicut alias awarded;
because in the executing this Writ he is both Officer and Judge, which power
cannot be committed to a Bailiff of a Liberty, and this Writ is a non omittas
in it self, and he has power to retorn into the Franchise. But if after
Appearance.
the Party appears its good, 2 Brownl. Rep. 240. Trin. 11. H. 7. f. 42. F. H.
tit. retorn de Vic. 53. 11 H. 4. 21.

The place wasted, and treble value is to be Wastes to be recovered, and how.
recovered; now if VVast be made sparsim in a Close or VVood, the treble value
shall be levied by Fieri fac' or by Elegit, and not by Capias, because Capias
lies not upon the Original, 1 Brownl. 240.

The Sheriff makes a Precept to a Bailiff to Summon a Jury, who returned a
Panel which was parcel of the Record; and the Sheriff took the Inquest of some
not returned. It was the better Opinion, that the Retorn was good; though some
said the Sheriff may vary from the Retorn of the Bailiff, as he is one that
makes the Array and is Judge also, 8 Rep. 157. Ed. Althams's Case.

Estrepment.
The Writ of Estrepment is a Prohibition to do VVast and lies in two Points.
Where lies.


1. When a Man having an Action depending (as a Formedon, Writ of Right,
etc.) sues to inhibit, the Tenant for making VVast during the the Suit, and
this is either Original, and may be sued out of Chancery, or Judicial, granted
out of the Court where the Plea depends, 2 Inst. 328, 329.

2. When the Demand is to recover Seisin of the Land in Question, and before
Execution sued by Habere fac' Possessionem, for fear VVast be made before her
Possession, he Sues this Writ. And a Man can recover Damages, for no more than
is contained in his Count.

There is likewise, when fear is that Wast will be done to prevent it, a
Prohibition directed to the Sheriff, not to permit Wast to be done. And the
Form, vid. 2 Inst. 299.

The Sheriff may resist the committing of Wast, and may Imprison if he cannot
otherwise hinder it, 3 Bulst. 199. And he may take the Posse Comitatus to
hinder it. Posse comitatus.


In Wast Estrepment was awarded, and upon Affidavit that the Writ of Estrepment
was delivered to the Sheriff, and that he gave notice to the Party, and yet he
continues to make Wast; Attachment was awarded, 1 Brownl. 168. Attachment.


If the Tenants of the Land notwithstanding notice of a Writ of Estrepment
directed to the Sheriff commit Wast; this is no Contempt, and Contempt.
the Court will not commit them, because it was not immediately to them, as it
might have been, Hob. 85. Earl of Cumberland's Case.

Note, If the Sheriff be Plaintiff in the Action of Wast, the Writ of
Estrepment shall Issue to the Coroners.

But this Writ of Estrepment is rarely used, and in such cases, Injunctions out
of Chancery are frequently granted.

It seems Estrepment lies not in a Writ of Error, of a Judgment in Partition,
Siderfin 367.

The Sheriffs Office in the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo.
The Sheriff needs not bring the Body into the Kings Bench at the day of the
Retorn, but shall only Retorn the Writ thither with Declaration briefly, in
what manner he has served and executed the same, 5 El. c. 23.

If the Sheriff shall Retorn non est Inventus, then a Capias shall be awarded
with Proclmation therein, commanding the Sheriff in the County Court, or at the
Assizes or Quarter Sessions, to make open Proclamation ten days before the
Retorn at least, that the Party yield his Body to Prison in six days. And after
the six days the Sheriff, etc. shall make Retorn what he has done thereupon,
etc. (the Offender to forfeit 1 ol. for such default) and so a Capias shall go
infinite with like Proclamation: And a forfeiture of 20 l. for every other
default to be Estreated presently, Sat. 5 El. c. 23.

If the Offender yield his Body, the Sheriff shall presently commit him to
Prison without Bail.

If the Sheriff make an untrue Retorn, that the Party has not yielded his Body
on any Proclamation made, where indeed he has yielded, etc. he shall forfeit to
the party grieved 40 l.

The Writ of Excommunicat' Capiendo must be taken out of Chancery, and recorded
in the Kings Bench before it be delivered to the Sheriff, 1 Keb. 613. 5 Eliz.
c. 23. Jews versus Stephen son.

Neither a V^ Laica removenda nor Excommunicat' Capiendo were retornable before
the Statatute of 5 El. c. 23. 3 Bulst. 92.

He that is certified into the Chancery by the Bishop to be Excommunicated, and
after is taken by Force of the Kings Writ of Excommunicat' Capiendo is not
Bailable by the Sheriff. or Jailer by the Kings Writ. But if the Party offered
sufficient caution, de parendo mandatis Ecclesiae' in forma Juris, then should
the Party have the Kings Writ to the Bishop to accept his caution, and to cause
him to be delivered. And if the Bishop will not send to the Sheriff to deliver
him, then he shall have a Writ out of Chancery to the Sheriff to deliver him.
Or if he be Excommunicated for a Temperal cause, or for a matter whereof the
Ecclesiastical Court has no conusance, he shall be delivered by the Kings Writ
without any satisfaction, 2 Inst. 188; 189.

Retorn of Sheriff as to Clarks.
VIrtute istius brevis mihi direct' Justic' infra, script. certifico qd' infra
nominat' T. H. Clericus est beneficiat' in Episcopatu London, nullum habens
Laicum feodum in balliva mea ubi potest su^mon. nec est inventus inead.

A. B. Armig' Vic'.

The Sheriff Retorneth, That the Parson ante adventum brevis, or post
receptionem brevis, or before the Retorn of his Writ had resigned his Benefice.
Et qd' non habet nec habuit bona neque catalla infra, etc. Its a good Retorn.

In Trespass or Debt against a Clark, Nihil habet is a good Retorn.

In Action brought against one wherein a Capias lies ( Ex gr. in account) the
Sheriff Retorns quoth. est Clericus Beneficiat. nullum habens Laicum feodum in
which he may be summoned; In this Case the Plaintiff cannot have a Capias, to
take the Body of the person, but he shall have a Writ to the Bishop, to cause
the person to come and appear. But if he had returned qd' Clericus est nullum
habens Laicum feodum, then is a Capias to be granted to the Sheriff, because it
appeared not by the Retorn that he had any Benefice, so as he might be warned
by the Bishop his Diocesan, and no Man can be exempt from Justice. But in the
Case of the King where he is party, the Sheriff cannot Retorn Clericus
Beneficiat' nullum habens Laicum feodum, as on Distress for Issues lost on a
Juror, 2 Inst. 4, 627.

If a Scire fac' be brought upon a Recognizance, or upon a Judgment in a Writ
of Annuity, and the Sheriff Retorn, that the Defendant is Clericus and
Beneficiat' nullum habens Laicum feodum, etc. the Plaintiff shall have a Writ
to the Bishop to warn the Defendant, and upon warning, or two Nihils returned,
and default made, or if he appears and shows no matter wherefore Execution
should not be granted, then a Writ shall be awarded to the Bishop to levy
Execution de bonis Ecclesiasticis.

Retorn of a Writ of Entry.
The Count was of a third part of a Mesuage and one Stable. Petit cape was
awarded to the Sheriff, and he makes his VVarrant to a Bailiff of a Liberty; he
Retorns quod cepit in manus Domini Regis the said Mesuage, and says nothing of
the Stable: And for this cause Judgment was reversed, Jones Rep. p. 357. Taite
and Heynes.

In a Writ of Entry sur Dissesin, it was adjudged Error, because the Sheriff
returned not the Names of the Summoners or Veyors, Cro. Eliz. 557. Merris's
Case.

Retorn of a Writ of Assize.
The Defendant pleaded to the Writ of Assize, That the Writ was returned
coram nob' apud Westm' not saying ubicunque; sed non allocat. The Court being
here its well enough, and the Reason is, because it was for the Plaintiffs
convenience that it was ubicunque? 2. It was Summon' XII without an M. over
Which per Cur' is well enough in Numeral Letters. 3. It was qd' sint ibi And.
which should be ad Audiendum, as Reg. 198. b. But per Cur. This may be intended
Auditur', and so is well enough without ad. 4 It was Si fec. whereas it should
be Si fecerit. sed no allocat. and a Respondeas ouster awarded, 3 Keb. 326.
Creek and Norfolk.

Quare Impedit.
In a Quare Impedit, The Defendant must be Summoned by the Sheriff. And this
Summons may be made in Church, or to the Parson; the Sheriff Retorns Nihil upon
the Summons, and upon the Attachment, and upon the Distress, the Plaintiff
shall recover.

If the Defendant comes not at the Distress returned against him, the Plaintiff
shall have a Writ to the Bishop, without making any Title, Dyer 241.

A Writ of Enquiry of value in a Quare Impedit was executed the first day of
the Retorn, but the Jury did not give their Verdict till two days after.

Retorn of a quid Juris Clamat. Vid. Dalton c. 71.

The Sheriffs behavior in the Writ and Inquisition, and Retorn of
Malefactoribus in Parcis.
Vid. Cro. Car. 439 The King against the Inhabitants of Epworth, and 17 other
Villages, and Statute W. 2. c. 46. Co. Mag. Chart.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Retorns of Clericus Beneficiat'. Of other Retorns as to Clarks. The
Sheriffs Office in a Quare Impedit, Sessions of the Peace. The Sheriffs Office
as to Election, and retorning of Knights and Bugesses to the Parliament. The
Form of Indenture for the Knights of the Parliament and Burgesses. The Sheriffs
Retorn of the Writ for Electing Parliament Men.

Retorns of Clericus Beneficiat', etc.
AT the next County Court, after delivery of the Kings Writ to the Sheriff, for
the Electing Parliament Men, Proclamation shall be made by the Sheriff in full
County, of the day and place of Parliament, and all they who are present shall
attend, and in full County proceed to the Election of their Knights for the
same County; and after they are chosen, the Names of the persons chosen shall
be written in an Indenture under the Seals of the Electors, and tacked to the
said Writ of Parliament, Stat. 7. H. 4 15.

Upon any Retorn contrary to this Statute, of 8 H. 6. c. 7. the Sheriff shall
forfeit 100 l. to the King, and have one years Imprisonment; and shall forfeit
another 100 l. to the person chosen Knight of the Shire, and not duly Returned.
The chosers must have 40 s. per Annum Freehold within the said County.

The choice must be between 8 and a 11 of Clock in the Forenoon.

Every Sheriff, after receipt of the Kings Writ for Electing Knights of
Parliament, ought forthwith to make out his Warrants under the Seal of his
Office, to every Mayor and Baliff of Cities and Buroughs within the County;
reciting in his said Warrants the Writ of Parliament, commanding them thereby
to choose Citizens and Burgesses to come to the Parliament ( scil) if it be a
City, to choose Citizens for the same City by Citizens; and if it be a Borough
to choose Burgesses by Burgesses (or Freemen of the same Borough.) And those
Mayors and Bailiffs must make a lawful Retorn of that Precept to the Sheriff by
Indentures made between them and their Sheriff of their Election, and of their
Names which are elected, 23 H. 6. 15. And the Sheriff must set his Hand and
Seal of Office to one part of the Indentures, and then deliver it to them to be
kept, and to the other part the Mayor, or Citizens, or Burgesses must set their
Hands and Seals, and deliver it as their Deeds to the Sheriff, to be certified
and returned by him with the Writ of Summons to the Clerk of the Crown; and all
this under pain of 100 l. to the King, and Imprisonment for one year, and the
Party grieved (or other person in his default) shall recover another 100 l. But
they must commence their Action within 3 Months after the commencement of the
Parliament. and Mayor and Bailiffs shall pay 40 l. Dyer 113. Pl. 118.

Note, Action on the Case lies against a Sheriff, for Retorning other Knights
for the County than were elected, and it is against the Statute of 7 H. 4. for
false Retorn, and 23 H. 6. c. gives Debt in the Case, and its not in the
Negative, and so does not exclude from other Remedy, 2 Siderfin 168. Nevile and
Strowd.

Now the Names of the said Knights shall be Returned into the Chancery by
Indenture Sealed, between the Sheriff and the Chusers of the Knights in manner
following.

The Form of the Indenture for the Knights of Parliament.
Haec' Indentura facta in pleno Comitat' Warr' tent' apud Burgum de Warr' de
etc. Anno Wil^ielmi Tertij, etc. inter A. B. Mil. Vic. Comitat. praed. ex una
part and J. C. Mil. A. C. Armig. F. P. F. K. etc. and multas alias personas
Comitat. praed. and electores duorum Militum ad Parliamentum in Brevi huic
Indenturae consut. specificat. ex altera parts qui ut major pars totius
Communitatis praed. tunc ibid. existens Jurat. and examinat. secundum vim
formam and effectum diversorum Statutorum inde edit' and provisor. Eligerunt.
E. P. Mil. and J. C. Mil. infra Comitat. praed. commorantes Gladiis cinct'
milites habiles and magis idoneos and discret. dantes and concedentes praedict.
duobus Milit. plenam and sufficien. postestatem pro se and tot. Communitat.
Comitatis praedict. ad faciend and consentiend. jis que ad Parliaementum in
dicto Brevi content de Communi Consilio Regni dicti Domini Regis nunc Angliae
contingerit ordinari, super ne^otiis in dicto Brevi spec. In cujus rei
Testimonium uni parti hujus Indenture penes dictum Dominum Regem remanen.
parts praed. sigilla sua apposuerunt, alter vero parti ejusdem Indenturae
praed. Vic. sigillum suum apposuit. Dat' die Anno and Loco supradict. etc.

The Form of Indenture for the Citizens and Burgesses.
THis Indenture made, etc. (reciting the day and year, and the Kings Style at
Lage, prout supra.) Witnesses, That by Virtue of a Warrant to me directed from
Sir O. R. Knight, Sheriff of the County of Warwick, for the Electing and
Choosing of two Burgesses, Men of good Understanding, Wit, Knowledge and
Discretion, for Causes concerning the public Wealth of the Realm, to be at his
Majesty's High Court of Parliament, to be holden at Westminster, the day of
next coming. I E. L. Mayor of the Borough or Town of Warwick, with the whole
assent and consent of the rest of the Burgesses there, have made choice and
election of and of to be Burgesses of our said Borough of Warwick, to attend at
the Parliament, according to the Tenor of the said Warrant to me directed in
that behalf. In Witness whereof, I have to these Presents set our Common Seal
of our said Borough, the day and year first above written.

The Sheriffs Retorn of the Writ, for Electing a Parliament Man Knight of the
Shire.
VIrtute istius Brevis mihi direct Eligi feci duos milites Gladiis cinctos
magis idoneos and discret. de Commitat. meo praed. (videl.) W. F. and O. S. qui
quidem milites plen. and sufficien. potestat. pro se and Comunitat. Com. praed.
habeant ad faciend. and consentiend, iis quae ad diem and locum infra content.
de Communi Consilio Regni Regis Angliae ordinari contingerit. Et praed. W. F.
and J. S. Manucapt. sunt per J. P. W. B. R. D. and R. N. ad essend. ad
Parliamentum Domini Regis apud Westminster. ad diem infracontent. ad faciend. prout
istud Breve in se exigit and requirit Feci etiam praeceptum (to the Mayor or
Bailiff) de G. quoth. de Burgo de G. Elegi fecerint. duos Burgenses de discret.
and magis sufficien. quoth. sint ad Parliamentum dicti Domini Regis ad diem infra
content. ad faciend. and consentiend. ut praed. est qui quidem (Mayor, etc.)
sic mihi respond. quoth. Eligi fecer. de praed. W. Burgo de G. duos Burgenses
discret' and magis sufficien. ad essend. ad Parliamentum praed. (viz.) S. W. C.
R. W.

R. O. Armig. Vic.

The Sheriffs Office about the Sessions of the Peace.
As to the Precept of the Sheriff for Summoning the Sessions of the Peace, vid.
Lamb. 367. Impress. 1599. it ought to bear date under the names of two Justices
of Peace at least. And not of the Custos Rotulorum alone. It must be to Summon
24 Jurors, and to command all Constables, Bailiffs or Coroners, to give their
attendance upon the Justices. And the Form of the Retorn of the Summons, vide
Dalt. 198.

In some Cases the Sheriff is to join with the Justices as in Case of Riots,
etc. 13 H. 4. c. 7.

He is to attend and assist the Justices of the Peace, to Arrest such as shall
make any forceable Entries or Detainer, 15 R. 2. c. 1.

He is to Summon 24 to be of the Grand Inquest.

As to other sorts of Precepts, which the Sheriff is to execute, in respect of
Commissioners of Sewers, Commissioners of Bankrupts, and several other Acts of
Parliament, vid. Dalton. And the Acts themselves, all the Duties of his Office
being so various, and especially in many late Acts, its best to refer to the
Acts themselves, which no Gentleman ought to be without.

CHAP. XXIX.
Customs of London. Of their Officer, Prison, Court of the Sheriffs Court. How
to lay the Custom of the Sheriffs Court. The difference between the Mayors
Court and the Sheriffs Court. Sheriffs Court when kept. The manner of entering
Actions in the Country.

Customs of London, as to Officers, Courts, Process and Prisons, etc.
Vide 9 Rep. 62, 63, 67. tit. Arrest, and vid. Calthrop.

BOth the Sheriffs of London are in Law but one Sheriff, and the one is not of
London and the other of Middlesex, as is vulgarly supposed, Hob. p. 70, Lamb
and Wiseman.

And the Sheriff of London is known in Law to be two persons; therefore if one
Sheriff of London make his Retorn without his Fellow this cannot be helped by
Jeofail, it being as no Retorn at all, or a Retorn without the Sheriffs Name
subscribed: And London had no Sheriffs in the 13th of Ed. 1. 1 Leon. 284.

In London the Mayor and Comminalty have the Office of Sheriff of London and
Middlesex, and Two Sheriffs are yearly chosen, 3 Rep. Westby's Case.

Upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum to the Sheriff of Middlesex, to take J. S. if
the Sheriff take him and put him in Newgate, which is the Common Prison for
London and Middlesex, and after another Writ of Execution comes to the Sheriff
of London; although the Sheriffs of London are also Sheriffs of Middlesex, and
Newgate (where the Prison is) is the Prison for both Newgate a Prison for both
London and Middlesex.
Counties; yet the Prisoner shall not be said to be in Execution upon this New
Writ in London, nor may the Sheriff of London serve it upon him, because he is
in another County.

For when the Cemmitment is to Newgate by Commitment by Sheriff of Middlesex,
is not a Commitmitment in London, though the She^iffs of London and Middlesex are
one.
force of a Writ to the Sheriff of Middlesex, he may not be said in any respect
to be in the County of London; for the Counties continue several, and the
Prison several, in respect of the several Commitments: For there are two
several sides, and a partition between them, 1 Roll. Abr. 894. Coas's Case,
Trin. 16 Jac. B. R.

By the Custom of London, the Writ of Execution is directed to the Sheriffs of
London, and not to the Coroner, (who is the Mayor, 2 Roll. Abr. 806.

The Retorn of the Outlawry out of London in C. B. is generally made without
saying, Per judicium Coronatorum.

Sheriffs Court.
The Custom is, When a man is impleaded Court of Conscience
before the Sheriffs, the Mayor upon suggestion of the Defendant may send for
the parties, and for the Record, and Examine the parties upon their Pleas; and
if it be found upon his Examination that the party Plaintiff is satisfied, that
he may award that the Plaintiff shall be barred. And this is called, The Court
of Conscience, 4 Inst. c. 50. 8 Rep. City of London's Case.

The Plaintiff in Assault and Battery in his Replication says, The City of
London is an Ancient City, and have Pleas, and that there was a Plaint in such
a Court before F. M. by virtue of which Process the Plaintiff was taken. He
should have alleged a Custom to hold a How to Lay the Custom of the Sheriffs
Court.
Court before the Sheriffs, and that F. M. was then Sheriff: It is said, Coram
F. M. uno Vicecom', its well enough, there being two Courts, tho but one
Sheriff, 1 Keb. 564. Osborn and Parker.

As to the difference between the Sheriffs Court, and Mayors Court.
A Clerk of the Mayor's Court said, That the Figures Difference of the Entries
in the Mayors Court, and the Sheriffs Court.
264 (in their Entries) signify the 26th day of the 4th Month, 26 the Day and
4 the Month, accounting November (in which the Mayor is Chosen) the first, and
so the fourth Month is February.

But in the Sheriff's Court they count their Months in October.

And accordingly it was Ordered, That Ashfield the 20th day of February
commenced a Plaint, etc. 2 Roll. Rep. 380. Ashfield's Case.

If an Erroneous Judgment be given in any Writ of Error to be brought in the
Hustings.
of the Sheriffs Courts of the City of London, the Writ of Error to Reverse
this Judgment must be brought in the Court of the Hustings before the Lord
Mayor; for that is the Superior Court, Pract. Reg. 124. 4 Inst. 247.

Direction of Writs.
Quodlibet breve quod tangit liberum tenementum dirigitur Majori and
Vicecomitibus, and alia brevia tantum Vicecomitibus.

The Two Sheriffs of London do each of them Sheriffs Courts, when kept.
keep a Court of Record, where they hold Plea of all Personal Actions, and the
two Prisons (called the Compters) belong to them.

And they have two Court-Days in every Week apiece: For the Woodstreet-Compter,
on Wednesdays and Fridays; for the Poultry-Compter, on Thursdays and Saturdays.

In a Plaint of Debt levied before any of the Sheriffs, the Custom is, That the
said Sheriffs Ore tenus send to the Sergeants of the Compter, either to Summon
or Attach the Defendant without Warrant; and upon Nihil Returned within the
City, that then the Sergeants, and every of them, by the Commandment of the
Sheriff have used to Attach and Arrest the Defendant, to have his Body at the
next Court before the Sheriff at the Guild Hall, etc.

In this manner they certify their Records: But the usual practice is, to
Enter an Action in the Office for that purpose, at one of the Compters; which
Action must be Entered with Care: For it is the Original in that Court by which
you must Declare, and from whence there must be no Variance.

And when an Action is Entered, then any one Of Entering Actions in Crmpters.
of the Sergeants may Arrest the Defendant, and bring him into Custody until he
find Bail to Answer the Condemnation, which Bail is to be Bail.
taken by one of the Clerk-sitters.

The Defendant may be Arrested by the Custom Arresting by Sergeants.
of London, after Entry of the Plaint in the Porters-Book, before the Entry of
it in Court before the Sheriff: And after Plaint Entered, the Sergeant may
Arrest without Precept.

The Sergeant need not show his Mace, because Sergeant showing his Mace.
he is sworn and known, although not to the party; and a known Bailiff need not
show his Warrant, although demanded.

But in 6 Rep. 52. Countess of Rutland's Case, a General Arrest by a Sergeant
by showing the Mace, and touching his Body with it, and saying
Sir, I Arrest you, is insufficient; for he ought to show at whose Suit, out of
what Court, for what, and of what Retorn, etc. That the party may know, etc.

In Escape the Defendant pleads the Custom of Escape.
London, That the Mayor and Sheriffs of London have used to enlarge Prisoners
that were Arrested, in coming and retorning from their Courts, having Causes
there depending; and sets forth a Plaint in London against the Defendant, and
that hither the Court can discharge one arrested, who is coming and teturing to
the Court.
he was arrested, and appeared, and pleaded to Issue; and as he was coming to
Court, to defend that Action, he was arrested, as is supposed in the
Declaration. And per Cur. the Court cannot discharge one arrested, except he be
arrested in the Face of the Court, 1 Brownl. 15. Wilson and The Sheriffs of
London.

CHAP. XXX.
The Sheriffs Duty as to the Assizes. And as to Sessions of the Peace.

The Form of the Warrant made by the Sheriff, or Undersheriff for Summoning the
Assizes, vide Dalton 196. A Schedule may be Filed to the backside of the
Warrant; wherein he shall set down the names of the Grand Jury and Petty Jury
of Life and Death; to whom he must give warning by his Bailiff.

The High Sheriffs themselves are to attend the Judges at the Assizes: And also
Stewards Bailiffs, and other Ministers of any Liberties or Franchises, etc.
shall be attendant to the Justices of Assize and Gaol Delivery of the same
Counties, wherein such Liberties and Franchises shall be. And shall be fined by
the Judges in case of failure.

Every Sheriff (and all other persons) which have the Custody of the Gaols (or
Prisoners for Felony) ought to certify the names of every of their Prisoners,
which are in their Custody for Felony, to the Justices of the next Gaol
Delivery, upon pain of 5 l. for every default.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Sheriffs and Officers Fees. Remedy and Security for Fees. Extortion
Punishable. What Assumpsit good, as to paying Fees, or not.

Of Sheriffs and Officers Fee.
AT Common Law a Sheriff might not take any Fees, but it was Extortion: But now
he may take the Fees allowed by the Statute, Cro. El. p. 654. Stanton and
Sullyard.

The Statute is 29 El. c. 4. No Sheriff, Undersheriff, Sta. 29 El. c. 4. of 12
d. in the Pound.
Bailiff of a Liberty, or any of their Deputies* shall either directly or
indirectly, take more for serving an Extent or Execution, than after the Rate
of 12 d. in the Pound for every 10 l. and 6 d. for every Pound above 100 l. on
pain to forfeit treble Damages to the party grieved; and besides, 40 l. between
the Queen and the Prosecutor. This Act not to extend to Fees of Executions
within Cities or Corporations.

Yet the Sheriff, by the Equity of Stat. 23 H. 6. c. 10. he shall take 4 d. for
every Warrant, Winch. 21.

Upon the words of this Statute it was a Question much Argued in Latch. 17. 51.
Welden and Vesey, Jones 307. Lister and Bromley, Cro. El. 335. Gurney's Case,
Cro. Car. 286. Lister's Case, Winch. p. 21, 50. Empson's Case, where the
Statute gives 12 d. in the Pound for the first 100 l. and if exceeds that, then
but 6 d. Whether this shall be taken, but only 6 d. in the Pound for all that
exceeds 100 l. or whether he shall have 12 d. for the first 100 l. and Six
pence for the rest? And it was Adjudged that he shall have 12 d. for every
Pound of the first Hundred, and 6 d. for every other Pound above the Hundred:
And so is the constant practice. Though Hobart (in Winch. 50. Empson's Case) was
strong against it, and that the Sheriff shall have but 6 d. in the Pound.

As to the Proviso, That it shall not extend to Executions within Cities or
Corporations, it was held, That it was only to be intended for the executing
Judgments given in the Courts of the said Corporation, and not to the Sheriffs
of Cities or Corporations, for executing Judgments out of Superior Courts,
Jesson. Sheriff of Coventry's Case, cited in Lister and Bromley, Cro. Car. 287.

Vide Latch. 17, 52. Poph. 173. Welden and Vesey, The Case Argued.
In an Action upon this Statute of 29 Eliz. against the Sheriff for excessive
Fees, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, because it said ad Parliament' tent'
per prorogat' 15 Febr. 29 El. Stat. 29 El. when began.
and the Rolls appeared (by Copy sworn) 29 Oct. 28 Eliz the Parliament began,
and an Adjornment to 17 Nov. 6. and no Prorogation at all.

So 35 El. 1. Sect. 11. it said 29 El. 6.

Vide 1 Anders. 294. Rast. Abr. Elenchus Parliam. and Keb. 3. 742. Sprig and
Eve.
Quaere, When one Sheriff shall make the Extent, and the other Sheriff the
Liberate, who shall have the Fees given by the Statute.

Note, The Fees shall be paid by him that sets him at work, and not by the
Prisoner. Of whom the Bailiff on Arrest having taken 7 s. for Attorneys Fees,
was convicted of Extortion, 1 Keb. 623. Le Roy. versus Wade.

Poundage was allowed the Sheriff out of 100 l. (Fine imposed after Conviction
on Indictment of Battery in B. R.) levied upon a Fieri fac', and it was allowed
out of the Money, in the hands of the Clerk of the Crown paid by the Sheriff.
Though there was no President in B. R. for it. But the Barons always make such
allowance in the Exchequer, after the Moneys paid in* there by the Clerk of the
Crown, Sir Thomas Jones 185. Le Roy versus Wade.

Of Sheriffs Security and Remedy for Fees, and what Fees they may take or not,
and what shall be Extortion in them or not, and how punishable.
What Security the Sheriff may take for his Fees or not.
The Warden of the Fleet, and the Warden of the Palace of Westminster, may
take Bond for Diet and due Fees of the Office, Hetly 176. Harris and Lea.

The Sheriff may take a single Bill for his The Sheriff shall take single Bill,
for his Fees but not with a penalty.
Fees, and that is the ordinary course, but not with a Penalty. To this purpose
there is a notable Case, Empson and Bathurst, Winch 22.

The Condition of a Bond to the Sheriff is to pay 20 l. That is, for Money
which is given to him for his Fees, which are due by the Stat. of 29 Eliz.
Defendant pleads the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. the Case was; A Statute of 200
^ was acknowledged to the Defendant by J. S. and this was extended by the
Plaintiff being Undersheriff, and it was agreed between C. E. Brother to the
Plaintiff, and the Undersheriff before the Liberate excecuted, That the
Defendant should enter into the said Bond to the use of the Plaintiff. Three
Points were resolved per Curiam.

1. This Bond is not within the Statute of 23 Statute 23 H. 6.
H. 6. for the Party was not within the Ward of the Sheriff. And so was
Beaufage's Case.

2. The Sheriff may not take his Salary appointed by the Statute till a
complete Execution, i. e. till the Liberate, for the words of the Statute are
in the Negative, and does not establish the Fees, but only tolerates them. And
by Hobart, Action is by Sheriff.
if the Conisee sue an Extent, and then refuse to sue the Liberate, to the
intent to defraud the Sheriff of his Fees; the Sheriff shall have his remedy by
Action on the Case.

3. This Obligation is void by the Common Law, and Extortion, as Dive and
Manningham Case is, Plowd. 65. The Sheriff may take a Bond with a great
Penalty, for the appearance of the Party, but not for his Fees, by the 23 of H.
6. for that Statute as to Fees is not repealed by 29 Eliz.

What Remedy the Sheriff shall have for his Fees.
Action of Debt lies for a Sheriff upon the Statute of 29 Eliz. c. 4. for
Execution Fees, al* though the Statute does not say he shall have the Fees, nor
any Action for them; but only says, he shall not take for any Execution made,
any Consideration or Recompense, besides what is therein mentioned, which it
shall be lawful for him to take ( viz.) 12 d. for 20 s. where the Sum does not
exceed 100 l. and 6 d. above 100 l. 1 Rolls Abr. 598 Proby and Lumly versus
Mitchel, 1 Rolls Rep. 404.

The Sheriff shall have Action on the Case, but not debt upon Assumpsit, to pay
his Fees due by the Law of the Realm, for to execute an Execution. Moor 699.
But he shall have Debt for his Fees not prohibited by the Statute of 29 Eliz.
Moor 853. Staunton and Proby, Moor 667. Mor. 667. S^llyard and Stamp.

Where and in what Actions the Sheriff shall not take Fees.
The giving of Money to a Sheriff to Arrest a Man is against the Law, 1 Rolls
Rep. 313.

A Sheriff cannot take Money for Fees upon delivery of Warrants to his own
Bailiff, but must stay till the Money is levied, aliter if it be to Special
Bailiff, Moor p. 468. ^. 669. Sullyard and Stamp.

No Fee is due to the Sheriff for Executing a Cap. Utlag*
Cap. Utlegat. either for VVarrant to Execute i^, or for the Retorn of it.
Sheriff took 200 l. to Execute Hab. fac. Possessionem, Hetly p. 52. Wildsheres
Hab' fac. Possession.
Case, Litt. Rep. 65. Mesme Case.

Per Cur' Its great oppression to the Subjects, that the Sheriffs (to whom the
Statute had given so much in the Pound, in Case of Execution against a personal
Estate) should take such Fees in case of a real Estate; and it was said, it was
not to be found that they have any legal Fee upon this Execution, but the usual
Fee which they ought to take is 2 s. 4 d. 2 Siderfin 155.

What shall be said Extortion in Sheriffs and Gaolers, etc. and how punishable.
As to the Sheriffs taking Bonds, Extorsive, Vid. supra in tit. Stat. 23. H. 6.
c. 10.

By W. 1. c. 26. no Sheriff or any Minster of the King, shall take any reward
for doing his Office, but only that which the King allows, upon pain that he
shall render double to the Party, etc. but later Statutes have permitted them
to take, in some Cases. But yet, such reasonable Fees as have been allowed by
Courts of Justice of old to inferior Ministers and Attendants on Courts, if
they be demanded, its no Extortion, Co. 1 Ins^. 368. Shirly and Packer. 10 Rep.
101.

If any Bailiff or other Sheriffs Officer, shall take any thing of any person,
to spare them for appearing at the Assizes, Sessions of the Peace or the like,
it is Extortion.

If the Sheriff, or any of his Officers shall take any Money, or other reward
for the omitting of any Arrest or Attachment to be made; it is Extortion, and
the Sh^riff o^ Officer so offending, shall forfeit for every such offense 10 l.
to the King and Informer, 32 H. 6. c. 10.

As to the Punishment of Sheriffs for Extortion, its either by Indictment,
Information, Imprisonment, Commitment. As to Indictments, what is good or not.

Indictment of Extortion against a Bailiff of Indictment.
an Hundred, qd' Color Officij he took Extorsive Money, and shows not for what
matter or cause. Per Curiam, Its well enough, the Officer being Bailiff of an
Hundred, Especially being after a Verdict. But Quaere of this, 1 Keb. 557. the
King and Gover.

By 23 H. 6. c. 20. on Extortion treble Damages Treble damages.
are given to the Party, and the Justices of Peace may Assess them; but they
ought first to enquire of the Damages by a Jury. Therefore in Bumpsteads Case,
Cro. Car. 488. Indictment was against the Sheriff for Extortious Fees, on two
several Indictments; They awarded to the one treble Damages; That is, where he
took of one 20 l. Extorsive, they awarded to the Party 3 l. and 40 l. to the
King. And on the other where it was found he took 8 s. 8 d. Extorsive, they
awarded he should pay to the Party 26 s. 8 d. So a quadruple value, and 20 Fine
to the King. And it was adjudged Error, causa qua supra.

The Indictment must be contra formam Statuti, Contra formam Stat. 23 H. 6.
if they will proceed upon the Statute of 23 H. 6. id. ibid. The Court were
doubtful, if this Statute extend to Extortions, unless taken upon Arrest. And
Judgment was reversed.

The Sheriffs Bailiffs were indicted at the Indictment at Quarter Sessions.
Information, Informers have the 3 l.
Quarter Sessions for Extortion, Jones 379. The King against Lamfern.

An Informer on Conviction of a Prisoner for Extortion, or other Penal Law, may
have the third part of the Fine, according to the Kings privy Seal for that
purpose. And he had so of 10 l. set on a Bailiff for 3 l. taken for Execution
done to his person, 1 Keb. 357. and page 487.

Information was brought against the Keeper of the Gaol, or Prison of the
Castle of Maidstone, for Extortion on the Statute of 23 H. 8. And it was found
by Special Verdict, that there is not any Castle at Maidstone but a Gaol, and
the Defendant was Jailer there. Per Curiam, Judgment pro Querente, 2 Rolls Abr.
211. Goodwin and May.

In 2 Brownl. 283. The Sheriff was committed to the Fleet for taking Illegal
Fees, 2 Browl. 283.

A Sergeant of London was committed in Execution Commitment for taking illegal
Fees. Mitigation of F^^e.
for a Fine in Extorting Fees on an Arrest, and a third part was allotted to
the Prosecutor. His Wife petitioned the Court to mitigate the Fine, but they
could not, 3 Keb. 328. the King and VVelson.

The Sheriff of Suffolk was imprisoned for taking a Guinea, there being only 2
s. due to him, and he returned two Guineas to the Plaintiff, being double of
what he had taken, on the 3 Ed. 1. cap. 26. and so he was discharged, 3 Keb.
714. Butlers Case.

Assumpsit and Consideration about paying Fees, what shall be good or not.
If a Man assume for Money given to serve certain Process, this is not a good
consideration, as being against Law. For it is Extortion in the Sheriff to take
it, and unlawful for the other to give it, H. 10. Jac. Boothby and Alport, 1
Rolls Abr. 16. Shirley and Parker. Ergo Cro. El. 654. is not Law, Stamp and
Sullyard. Executor Sues Execution by Elegit, and B. an Estranger as a friend to
the Executor, in consideration that the Sheriff will Execute the said Elegit
presently, and of 6 d. paid him by the Sheriff assumes to pay 60 l. to him;
whereupon the Sheriff Executes the Writ. This Consideration is against Law;
for the Sheriff ought to do his Duty without reward; and this 60 l. is not any
discharge of Sheriffs Fees, due by the Statute being given by a Stranger, and
not expressed for them, 1 Roll. Ab. By a Stranger.
16. Bird and Cage, and though it was alleged, that this Sum promised him is no
more than what the Statute of 29 Eliz. allows him to take for his Fees; yet
that helps not the Case, for that Statute only excuses him for his taking
Fees, whereas the Common Law did not permit him to take any thing for the
executing Writs. And the giving of 6 d. is no sufficient Consideration being
joined with the other that is unlawful, Cro. Jac. 103. Mesme Case.

A. is Outlawed at the Suit of B. for Debt, and B. Assumes in Consideration,
that C. an Estranger In consideration that C. an Estranger will arrest a Man.
will Arrest A. upon a Cap. Utlag', that he will pay him 40s. This is no good
Consideration, although he shows in his Declaration that he was after made a
Special Bailiff to the Sheriff, to Arrest him by a VVarrant directed to him.
This is Extortion, and the Sheriff by such means may extort great sums for
doing his Office: And the Bailiff is the Officer of the Sheriff and his
Servant, 1 Roll. Abr. ib. Faldoe and Salter. Jones Promise to a Stranger to
procur^ the Sheriff to arrest J. S. is good.
65. Mesme Case, Latch 54. Mesme Case. But if a Promise be made to a mere
Stranger to go to the Sheriff, and procure him to Arrest S. J. this is a good
Consideration; so if one pray me to go with the Sheriff to Assist him, in
making Execution, and Promises me, etc. its good.

CHAP. XXXII.
Bonds, or Covenant between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff, or other
Officers. What shall be good in Law, or not: And when said to be forfeited, or
not.

Bonds, Covenants, etc.
IF the Undersheriff Covenant with his Highsheriff, Difference between a
Co^enant and a Bond.
to save him harmless from all Fines and Amerciaments for any Escape; and
Covenants also, That he will not execute any Writ of Execution above the Sum of
20 l. without Warrant from the High Sheriff: This last Covenant is against Law,
and void; yet the other is good, (but a Bond in such case is void in all.) For
by the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 12. the Undersheriff takes Oath to execute all
Process, Hob. 15. Norton and Sims, 2 Roll. Abridgm. 30. mesme Case.

Vide supra tit. Undersheriff.

The Keeper of Ludgate gives Bond to the To save Sheriff harmless from Escapes.
Sheriffs of London, That he should safely-keep the Prisoners committed to his
Charge, and should save the Sheriff harmless from all Escapes. The Bond is
good. ( Quaere as to the last part.) Cro. El. 466. Hector and Genn^t. Escape on
Cap. Utlag. being void, because Returned 10 years after, it was awarded.


But it is not forfeited by Escape of one taken by a Capias Utlagat' in Debt;
because the Capias Utlagat' was awarded the 25th of Eliz. and was Retornable
the 35th of Eliz. and so merely void. For every Capias ought to be Retornable
the ensuing Term; because of the mischief that otherwise might befall the
Prisoner to be kept always in Prison, and he might well let him at Large, 21.
H. 7. 16. 8. Ed. 4. 4. Dyer 175.

Though peradventure this Arrest, by force of this Process, is excusable in False
Imprisonment by the Sheriff, yet clearly its no lawful Imprisonment: and as to
the prejudice or benefit of a Stranger, he shall never be said to be a
Prisoner, 14 H. 8. 16. 11 H. 4. 36.

Debt on Bond to perform Covenants; which Defendant not to let at large any
Prisoner arrested in Debt. Need not show the time and place of the Arrest.
was, That the Defendant should not let at Large any Prisoner arrested, without
the Sheriffs Warrant. The Plaintiff shows, the Defendant had let such a
Prisoner at Large at Westminster, etc. it is good without showing the time and
place of the Arrest. For the Escape is the Material part of the Covenant, and
the manner of the Arrest is not in Question, and whether he were legally taken
or imprisoned, was not material, when he was suffered to go at Large, Siderfin
p. 30. Jenkin's Case.

The Condition of the Bond was, Whereas For a Bailiff of an Hundred to make
true Retorn of all his Writs. Pleading.
S. was Sheriff of Surrey, and made T. Bailiff of the Hundred of B. Now if he
should execute his Office, etc. and make true Retorn of all Writs directed to
him, then, etc. Defendant pleads on Oyer particularly, performance to all.
Plaintiff Replies, Process was directed to him, to levy Issues on J. S. and
that he made his Warrant to T. to Execute the same, which Warrant he did not
Retorn.

On Demurrer, Judgment was against the Plaintiff; because he did not show that
the Issues were to be Levied in the Hundred of B. For though the words are
general, to make Retorn of all Warrants directed to him, yet it was to be
understood of such only as were to be Executed in his own Hundred, of which he
was Bailiff, Allen p. 10. Slaughter and Day, 2 Sand. 414, 415. mesme Case cited
there.

Debt on Bond by Undersheriff, to defray the Expense of the High Sheriff; and
Performance To pay the Expense of the Highsheriff.
pleaded. Plaintiff Replies, J. S. recovered in Charges in carrying the
Prisoner from Chelmsford to London, not showing it was done by virtue of Habeas
corpus. Defendant Rejoyns, This was by private Agreement. Plaintiff Demurs,
because it was not Concluded to the Country. Per Cur', There must be a
Compulsion showed by Habeas corpus to the Sheriff of Essex, without which he
cannot deliver him over to another Sheriff; and then there is an Allowance upon
the Account in the Exchequer, in case of Transporting, being Signed by the
Judges. And the Court gave leave to Discontinue, 3 Keb. 448 Lewen and Allcock.

As to the Form of the Indentures and Covenants between the High Sheriff and
Undersheriff, vide Dalton, Greenwood of Courts, and several other President
Books.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Sheriffs Accounts.
AS for the Periods of Time wherein the manner of the Sheriffs Accompting to
the King have been altered by Acts of Parliament and Practice, you may peruse a
Learned Treatise of the late Lord Chief Justice Hales touching Sheriffs
Accounts. You find there how the King's Farms were anciently Answered by the
Sheriffs, and the manner of the Collecting of the Kings Revenues of the County.

Now that which was Firmi Comitatus, were the Vicountiel Rents, and they came
under various denominations, ( viz.) Blanch-Rents, Albo firmae Praestatio pro
pulchre placitando, Visus Frankpledg', Redditus ad Turnum, Certum Letae; and
these were in time contracted to a sort of Annual Revenues.

And the uncertain Annual Revenue was called Proficuum Comitatus, which in
ancient Times was considerable, when most Lawsuits were Transacted in Counties
and in Hundred Courts, Fines, Issues and Amerciaments in those Courts; and in
those elder Times they were considerable.

The Farm of the Bailywick of one County was let at 100 l. per Annum temp. H.
3. but by Stat. 27. H. 6. c. 10. the Sheriff is restrained from Letting his
Bailywick to Farm.

But these were formerly, and now are answered at two Terms in the year,
Michaelmass and Easter, and are called proferae Vicecomitis, or Sheriffs
proffers. But it is as it were a Mock-payment (now being so inconsiderable,
most Causes being tried in Superior Courts) for upon Account he generally has
all his Proffers paid and allowed to him again.

Vide ^he Statute of 4 H. 5. 2. and 34 H. 8. c. 16.

Since the Statute of 34 H. 8. c. 16. the Sheriffs might discharge themselves
of the Casual Charges, or Annual uncertain Charges, and most ordinarily after
this Statute did discharge themselves of the entire Firmae de proficuis
Comitatus; and they ascertained to the Court, that there were no such profits
beyond the charge in collecting them, or that the charge of keeping the County
Court, the Tourn and Hundred Courts, which were the things that made up the
Firma de proficuis surmounted the benefit: And this Making appear, was no other
than the Oath of the Sheriff, and the Statute gives him that benefit.

Yet though the Sheriffs did use to discharge themselves by their Oaths of the
entire Fermae de proficuis Comitatus, and of a great part of the Vicountiels;
yet till Anno Dom. 1650. these entire Farms were constantly written out in
Charge to the Sheriff upon the Summons of the Pipe, though it was but a piece of
Formality.

But now the Firmae de proficuo Comisat' is wholly put out of the Charge of the
summons of the Pipe, by an Order made in the Exchequer 1650, which is followed
to this day.

By the Act in Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for the preventing the unnecessary
delays of Sheriffs in passing their Accounts. No Sheriff shall be charged in
Account to answer any illeviable Seizure, Farm, Rent or Debt, or other thing,
which was not writ in Process to him or them to be levied, wherein the persons
of whom, or the Lands or Tenements out of which, together with the Cause for
which the same shall be so levied, shall be plainly and particularly expressed;
but shall be thereof wholly discharged, without Petition, Plea, or other
trouble or charge whatsoever.

If the Sheriff shall seize the Goods of one that is Outlawed, etc. and does
not account for the same, the Owner of the Goods may have Action of Trespass
upon such Seizure; and shall recover the Goods, or the value thereof in
Damages. For the Sheriff must plead that he has accounted for them; otherwise
he shall be a Trespassor ab initio.

Note, The Sheriff is Accountable in respect of his Office; but if he be made
sine Computo, he has by this the Profits to his own use, 1 Roll. Rep. 183.

O. N. in the Exchequer makes the Sheriff Debtor to the King, and the Debtor
himself Debtor to the Sheriff, Hob. 206. Speak and Richard's Case.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Coroners. How the Coroners must be chosen, and the Credit the Law gives to
them; and how when they shall be discharged. The Demeanours as to Outlawries.
Coroners Inquest.

Of Coroners, etc.
THe Office of Coroner ever was, and yet is 4 Rep. 41. Heydon. 8 Rep. 41.
Gr^nly's Case. 5 Rep. Specot's Case. 4 Rep. 45. Wrote's Case. 9 Rep. 31. Strat.
Mar. 5 Rep. 108. de Wreck. 10 Rep. Denband. St. 28 Ed. 3. c. 6. Elect. of
^oroners. Vid. 4 Inst. 271. Mag. Chapter 17. cap. W. 1. c. ^0. Artic. super Chart.
c. 3.
Eligible in full County by the Freeholders, by the Kings Writ De Coronatore
Eligendo. And so was the Sheriff in former times Eligible, and the Sheriff was
chosen by Writ directed to the Coroners.

The Coroner, because he is Elected by the Freeholders of the County by Writ,
and returned of Record in the Chancery, albeit the King dies, remains.

Now seeing the Coroners are Elected by the County, if they be insufficient and
not able to answer such Fines and other Duties, in respect of their Office, the
Country as their Superior shall answer for the same.

If a Certiorari be directed to the Sheriff only in case of Appeal, or
Indictment of Death, it is not sufficient to remove the Cause; for the Coroner
is Judge of the Cause, and not the Sheriff; only the Sheriffs have Counter
Rolls with the Coroners.

3 H. 7. c. 1. gives to the Coroner a Fee of 13 s. 4 d. upon the View of the
Body, and of the Goods of the Murderers: But nothing on Misadventure, 1 H. 8.
c. 7. and W. 1. c. 10.

Coroner is an Officer for the King; but he is not an Officer when he comes
between the parties; and the Court will not suffer Examination* when the
Testimony may be viva voce, 2 Roll. Rep. 461.

Although the Coroner takes Examination, yet in the Case of the King it is at the
discretion of the Judges, if he will allow them or take them viva voce, 2 Roll.
Rep. ibid.

Before the Stat' Artic super Cler. 3. the Coroner of the Verge by himself
might Enquire of Murder: But because the King's Court often removed into
another County, by reason whereof no Enquiry could be made, that Statute was
made to remedy it, and one person may be Coroner of the King's Household and
Coroner of the County; and yet they are two Coroners, etc. Quando duo jura
concurrunt, etc. 2 Leon. p. 160. Borow and Holcroft.

Where Process shall be awarded to the Coroners, or not.
When the Sheriff is Plaintiff in Action of Waste, Election shall go to the
Coroners, Hob. 85.

Vide Plowd. Wimbish and Willoughby.

Where Writs shall be directed to the Coroners, and where not.
A Sheriffs Bond for Appearance is sued; the Writ upon it ought to be directed
to the Coroner, because the Bond is to be sued in the Sheriffs Name, Pract. Reg.

Upon a Venire fac' awarded to Coroners, and Retorn.
two Coroners Retorn this, and two Coroners Retorn the Distringas, where at the
time of the Retorn there were four Coroners; this is not good, because all the
Coroners ought to make the Retorn and join in it, they being Ministers and not
Judges, Hob. Rep. Lamb and Wiesman.

This Case is Reported by Cro. Jac. 383. (in the Exchequer-Chamber.) The Venire
fac' being awarded to the Coroners, was Returned by T. B. and T. R. Coroners;
whereas at the time of the Writ awarded and returned there were two other
Coroners, ( viz.) VV. S. and T. P. and the Retorn ought to have been in the
Name of the four Coroners.

Per Cur. It Is not Error.

1. Because it ought to have been taken by way of Challenge at the time of the
Trial; and forasmuch as he has not challenged it, he shall not now assign it
for Error.

2. Admitting it were Error assignable at Common Law, yet now (being after
Verdict) is aided by the Stat^te, which aids Mis-Retorns and Insufficient
Retorns, and this is but a Mis-Retorn.

Upon the Venire fac. Returned by Coroners. their Names were writ A. and B.
Coronatores, and upon the Hab' corpora the Names of A. and B. were written, but
not the Name of Coroners. Per Cur. It Is no Error: But if their Names ought to
have been here, then it is not aided per Stat. 32 H. 8. nor 18 Eliz. Cro. Eliz.
703. S^r^ggs's Case.

Where a Jury is Returned by a Coroner, where it ought to be by the Sheriff,
and e converso, this is not redressed by the Statute Anno 32 H. 8. 18 Eliz.
(Vide the late Stat.)

Writ of Covenant was directed to the Coroners of Chester, with a claim at the
end of the Writ Quia praed' J. D. miles est Vicecomes Commit. Cestriae fiat
Executio brevis praed. per Coronatores ita quoth. Vicecomes s^ non intromittat.
Per Cur. If the Writ be directed to the Sheriff and he is Party it is, good to
avoid the doubt to take a Writ to the Coroners: For if the Defendant appears
and accepts thereof, and comes in and levies the Fine, he shall never after
assign it for Error, Cro. Car. Done and Smith.

If a Writ be directed to the Coroners, if Where and what matters done and
executed by one Coroner where there are more shall be good and what not. 4 Rep.
41, 45, 46, 47. 5 Rep. Longs Case 10 Rep. 103.
there be three they ought all to execute this VVarrant, for the same is to be
executed according to the direction. And by Coke the difference is, If it be in
judicial matters any two of them may do it, if in ministerial, all are to do
it, 3 Bulst. 77, 78. Phelps and VVinch^omb. so Hob p. 70.

The Plaintiff for the expedition of his Trial, surmised that he was Servant to
the Sheriff of Cornwall, where the Action was brought, and prayed a Venire to
the Coroners. And the Defendant non dedixit. Per Cur. Forasmuch, as if the
Sheriff had returned this Panel, it had been a good Cause to quash the Array
for favor, that the Plaintiff to avoid that delay might well show it, and have
Process to the Coroners; and the rather, for that this is a judicial Writ,
Plow. 74. Cro. Eliz. 581. Cham. and Matthew. so in Ejectment verse. 4. who Plead
non cul. if the Plaintiff suggest, that the Sheriff is of Affinity to one of
the Defendants, showing how; and upon this prays a Venire fac' to the Coroners,
and the Defendant Be a great delay ^ Rolls Abr. 668. Fox and Shepard.
denies it not, and the Venire fac' is awarded to the Coroners; Its well
awarded: For though none of the Defendants may challeng the Array, for that the
Sheriff is of Affinity with one of the Defendants; yet the Plaintiff ought at
the Trial either challeng the Array and so delay himself, or he ought not to
Try this during the time that he is Sheriff, which he would. If the Sheriff
levy a Fine, the Writ of Covenant must be directed to the Coroners, 1 Roll.
Ab. 797. Done and Simthart. Cro. Car. 416. Mesme Case, Jones p. 343. Mesme Case
and this Clause was in the end of the Writ, quia praed. Johannes Done miles
est Vicecomes Commit. Cestriae fiat Execut. brevis praed. per Coronatores ita
quoth. Vicecomes non se intromittat.

In a thing which concerns the Sheriff, and his Interest, Venire fac. ought to
be awarded to the Coroners, Cro. Jac. 551. Loader and Samuel.

The Sheriff who was Lessor to the Plaintiff was Master to one of the Coroners
in Ejectment; the cause was alleged and confessed, and Venire fac' issued to
the Coroners ita quoth. the Servant should not intermeddle, Moor 625. no. 853.

A Retorn of a Venire by three Coroners, where are four, its Error at Common
Law, but helped by the Statute, Hob. p. 70.

Venire fac' was awarded to the Sheriff, which was quasht for favor of the
Undersheriff, who retorns the Panel and a new Venire fac' awarded to the
Sheriff ita qd' le Undersheriff ne se intromittat. Its no Error, though it be
not directed to the Coroners, 1 Roll. Rep. 272. Walters Case.

Venire fac' not to be awarded to the Coroner, till there be a default in the
Sheriff, 1 Rolls Rep. 364.

Venire fac' may be awarded, if the first be quasht for favor in the
Undersheriff, 1 Rolls Rep. 272.

The Authority of a Coroner, and of what things he may enquire, etc. and the
Order of such Enquiry, and of what not, 4 Rep. 41. Walkers Case, Heydon 45.
Vauxe's Case, and Wig's Case, 5 Rep. 109. Foxly's Case.

The Coroner may on Estrepment provide against Wast by taking the Posse Commit.
Hob. 85. in Wast brought by the Sheriff, Earl of Cumberland verse. Countess
Dowager.

As the Sheriff in his Tourn may enquire of all Felonies by the Common Law,
saving the death of a Man; so the Coroner can enquire of no Felony, but of the
death of a Man, and that super visum Corporis. He shall also enquire of the
Escape of the Murderer, of Treasure Trove, Deodands, and Wreks of the Sea. He
ought to deliver the Inquisition of death taken by him at the next Gaol
delivery, or certify the same into B. R. He has power to bind over Witnesses
to the next Gaol delivery in that County: Besides the Judicial place, he has
Office ministerial as a Sheriff, viz. when there is a just exception taken to
the Sheriffs, judicial Process shall be awarded to the Coroner to execute the
Kings Writs.

The Sheriff put in his Challeng to have a Venire fac' to the Coroners, because
the Sheriff was his Master, and concludes not and issint favorable. Yet its
good, Moor. p. 470. no. 853.

The Parties being at Issue a Venire fac. was awarded to the Sheriff, and
afterward upon Entry quod vicecomes non misit berve, a Venire fac' was prayed
and awarded to the Sheriff, the Plaintiff had admitted him to be a person
qualified to make the Retorn. But per Cur', Because that being awarded upon the
Roll is but as a Continuance, and there was not any Venire fac. taken forth,
and its but matter of Form to make such a Continuance, It was held well enough,
Cro. Jac. 35. Willoughby and Egerton, Cro. El. 853. Cro. Jac. 35.

Upon Challeng to the Sheriff a Venire fac. was awarded to the Coroners and
returned, and at the Nis. Prius, a Tales granted by the new Sheriff, its Error,
Mo. p. 356. n. 482. Morgan and Wye, it was held a manifest Error, Cro. El. 894.
Corn and Paslow, and not aided by the Statute of Misconveyance of Process: For
its a Mistryal.

Process once directed to the Coroners, shall never after in the same Cause be
directed to the Sheriff, though the same Sheriff which first was be removed, Mor.
356. n. 422. But a Quaere is made of this in Hob. 64. Web's Case.

Demeanor of Coroners as to Outlawrys.
Outlawry was reversed, because the Names of the Coroners was not put to the
Judgment, 1 Rolls Rep. 266.

In Outlawry the Judgment was Ideo per judicium A. B. etc. Coronat. Utlegat'
est, and says not Coronat' Comit' praed', and for this the Outlawry reversed,
2 Rolls Rep. 82.

Coroners are Judges in Outlawries in County, Courts, 4 Rep. 72. Mitton Case, 9
Rep. 119. Lord Sanchar's Case.

The Statute of 4 Ed. 1. de Officio Coronatoris, provides that such Inquest
shall be villarum proxim' adjacent. Per Cur. its not requisite to show they are
the next Vills, it shall be intended if the contrary appear not. At the Common
Law it is villarum adjacent. and this Statute has no negative words, and so
the Trial at Common Law remains, 2 Siderfin 144. Barclay's Case.

Where a Man shall not have Averment against what the Coroner affirms upon his
Examination.

The Court agreed a melius inquirend. after an Office post mortem which is
originally to the Sheriff. But after an Inquest of a Coroner super visum
Corporis, etc. that he died of a Megrim, no melius inquirend' can go, the
Original not being before the Sheriff, especially not until the Inquest be
quasht. And there its but ad informand' Conscientiam Traversable, as Barclays
Case, who drowned himself, and the Coroner refused to hear the Kings Witness;
and thus in case of miscarriage and quashing the former Inquest, they will
grant a new one, 1 Keb. 859. the King against Stanlack.

Coroners Inquest.
A flight found by the Coroners Inquest is final as to Forfeiture of Goods, and
cannot be tried again, Hob. p. 318.

If one is killed in a Village, and the Coroners make no Inquest, the Village
must be amerced, 1 Keb. 278. Lord Buckhurst, and if there were an Inquest, it
must be returned per Certiorari; the Coroner is to Retorn his Inquisition at
the next Gaol delivery, and because he did not, the Court Discharged him, and
set 100 l. upon his Head, they having found it Murder, 280.

The Coroner ought to sit upon the Body of every Prisoner that dies in Prison,
3 Instit. 52, 91.

Where the Body of a Felo de se cannot be found, and trait devant les Coroners,
his Goods shall be Forfeit and found before the Justices of Peace, 1 Roll. Rep.
272.

Melius Inquirend' upon the death of a Man directed to the Coroner and not to
the Sheriff, because none but Coroners can enquire super visum Corporis. But
for the Misdemeanor of the Sheriff, it may be quasht and a new one granted; the
Coroner must take the Evidence in Writing, and must bring his Examination into
Court upon occasion, Mod. Rep. p. 82.

Process may be awarded against a Coroner, to come in to mend the Inquisition,
or may be served with a Rule to attend to amend matters of Form, but not
matterr of substance, as the Inquest found G. Felonice seipsum submers. fuit,
but says not he cast himself into the Water. But Felonice submersus is the
Substance, Siderfin p. 209. the King and Glover. 225. verse. King and Harrison.

Inquisition before a Coroner, without saying Legal. homin. Villar. prox
adjacent. but Legal. homin' Paroch. de A. yet good.

Commission to the Sheriff (in the nature of a Melius Inquirendum) to enquire
of the death of a Man when it had been found before the Coroner before is
against the Statute of 28 Ed. 4. 9. But there are diverse Presidents since that
Statute of such Commissions awarded.

The Court was moved for a Melius Inquirendum) to be directed to the Coroner of
N. to enquire what Goods T. Felo de se died possessed of, because the Inquisiton
returned did only find the Goods he was possessed of in London. Per Glyn, Take
it, but it must be directed to the Sheriff, because the Coroner has done his
Office already, Styles 461. Blackwell's Case, and so was Toomes Case.

The Coroner may find such a Nuisance as occasions the death of a Man. Allen. p.
51. and the Township shall be amerced thereupon, as a breach in a Bridge
whereby a Man falls into a River and was drowned.

How a Coroner shall be discharged of his Office, and what shall be a
sufficient Cause to discharge him, or not, vide 5 Rep. 57. Specot's Case, 8
Rep. 41. Greisly's Case, 9 Rep. Sir George Reynell's Case.

The Mayor is Coroner in the City of London, 4 Inst. 250.

But He does not pronounce Judgment upon Outlawry; but the Recorder, 8 Rep.
City of London.

The Authority and Credit the Law gives to the Rolls and Records of the
Coroner, vide supra.

Retorns upon a Capias in Process.
VIrtute istius Brevis cepi J. W. infrascriptum cujus corpus coram Justic'
infrascript' ad diem and locum interius content' habeo parat' prout breve istud
exigit and requirit, etc. Lib. Intr. 109. c. R. S. infranominat' non est
invent' in balliva mea, and quoad cap' J. F. infranom' mandavi J. S. ballivo
Libert' de F. S. qui plenum retorn' habet omnium Brev' and execution' eorundem
cui executio istius brevis totalit' pertinet faciend' extra quam Libertatem
nulla execut' istius brevis inde per me fieri potest, qui quidem ballivus mihi
sic respondit quod cepit corpus praed' J. F. cujus corpus praed' R. S. coram
Justiciar' dom Regis infrascript' ad diem and locum infra content' habebit, Vel
sic, qui quidem ballivus null' mihi dedit respons. Lib. Intr. ibid. VIrtute
istius brevis A. B. infrascript' captus est per corpus suum and in (tali
Prisona) sive Gaola adeo Languidus detent' quod corpus ejus ad diem and locum
interius content' habere non possum absque mortis periculo. VIrtute istius
brevis Certifico, quod postquam istud breve mihi liberat' fuit ad capiend' R.
T. (and alios Defendentes) in isto brevi specificat' idem R. and alii
infranominat' protulerunt mihi breve dom' Regis de supersed. quod huic brevi
est consut' virtute cujus supersed. omnino. These Writs usually are Returned by
the Attorneys themselves, by the consent of the Sheriff.

Nota, Upon a Capias ad respond. Tarde is no good Retorn.

Retorn' sur Capias ad satisfaciend'.
VIrtute istius brevis mihi direct' cepi corpus infranominat' A. B. cujus
quidem corpus coram Justic' infrascript' (vel coram dom' Rege) ad diem and
locum infracontent' parat' habeo satisfaciend' infranominat' C. D. de debito
and damnis infraspecificat' prout interius mihi Praecipitur, Lib. Intr. 109.
Non est inventus.

Nihil, ibid.

Quod captus est per praecept' dom' Regis.

Quod captus est super Recogn' fait in Concellar'.

Quod est in Prisona per Cap. ad sat. en Det.

QUod ante adventum brevis istius praed' R. D. captus fuit, etc. and in
prisona, etc. detentus virtute cujusdam querelae verse. ipsum per nomen R. D. in
placito' debiti super demand' 20 l. in Curia, etc. ad sectam J. G. levat'.
Retorn' de Levari fac'.
VIrtute brevis istius cepi in manus dom' Regis quoddam hospitium cum tribus
Shopis (in tali loco) ipsius J. T. infrascript' quae valent per annum ultra
reprisas 10 l. Et quod praedict' hospitium cum Shopis praed' salvo custod'
donec aliud a vobis inde habeo in mandatum. Retorn of Liberate.
VIrtute istius brevis (tali die and anno) liberavi L. S. infranominat'
manerium infraspec' cum prat' tenend. sibi and assignat' suis ut liberum
tenementum suum quousque sibi de debito infrascript' una cum damnis misis and
expensis quae in hac part rationabilit' sustinuit plenar' satisfact' fuerit
prout istud breve exigit and requirit, Lib. Intr. 598. Retorn of a Praemunire,
vid. Dalt. c. 70.

Retorn' de Recogn' extra Canc. Dalt. c. 81.

Retorn' de Supplicavit, id. ibid.

Presidents of Retorns extra Scaccarium, vide Dalt. c. 82. W. Wilkinson.

The Form of a Bond for Appearance.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. Warw. gen' E. F. de
L. etc. and H. T. de, etc. teneri and firmit. obligari A. B. Mil. Vic. Com.
praedict. in quadragint. libris bonae and legalis monetae, etc. solvend. eidem
Vicecomiti aut suo certo Attornat', etc. (as in other double Bonds.) COnditio
istius Obligationis talis est, Quod si supra Obligatus A. B. compareat
personalit' coram dom' Rege (or, coram Justiciariis dom' Regis) apud Westm' (a
die Paschae in quindecim dies) ad respond. K. W. de placito debiti (transgress.
ac etiam billae, etc. detentionis, etc.) [as in the Writ] quod tunc praesens
Obligatio vacua and pro nulla habeatur, alioquin in suo robore permanere and
vigore. A Condition to pass an Account, to procure a Discharge for a Sheriff.
THe Condition of, etc. That if the aboveo bounden T. F. his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, do make a true and perfect Account of and for the
abovenamed T. T. his Heirs and Executors, in the Exchequer of our Sovereign
Lord the King, of, for and upon all Issues, Charges, Sum and Sums, which be or
shall be charged or demanded, of or upon the said T. as late Sheriff of the
said County; and do get and procure a sufficient Quietus est thereof for the
said T. T. his Heirs and Executors. And moreover, do well and truly discharge,
save and keep harmless the said T. T. his Heirs, etc. against our said
Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, and all other person and
persons, of, for and concerning the said Office of Sheriff, and all the
Receipts and Charges thereof; That then, etc.

A Condition for a Bailiff of an Hundred to enter into to the Sheriff, vid.
Presidents in Dalt. c. 115.

A Condition for a Jailer to enter into, for the safe keeping of his Prisoner,
vid. Dalt. ibid.

THE TABLE.
A
ACced^^ ad Curiam, the Nature of it, and Retorns, p. 69, Accounts of the
Sheriff 427 Acres, where to be estimated [according to the Custom of the
Country 238 Amercement: Where and what cases the Sheriff shall be amerced 377
Of Appearance on Bail Bond, 92, 93 What Appearance to a Sheriffs Bond good 99,
110 Appearance of the party cures the Retorn of one that was not Sheriff, 110
Arrest: What Arrest is good or not, as to the manner of doing it 80 What is
good in respect of the time of the Arrest 81 In respect of the Warrant, ( vide
Warrant) 86 In respect of the persons Arrested, and who are privileged, or not
82 Arrest after a Supersedeas 360 Attachment: The Nature of it 375 Against the
Sheriff, in what cases, ibid. Against others 376 On Attachment the Sheriff
ought to Retorn the certainty of the Goods, and why ibid. On Attachment of
Money in the Sheriffs hand, 376 Assize: Retorn of the Writ 402 Assumpfit, and
Consideration about paying Fees, What shall be godo or not 121 Promise to
procure Goods, to be found by Inquisition 255 One part of a Promise unlawful
makes all vicious ibid. In Consideratin of making one especial Bailiff, a
Promise to save harmless from Escapes 8, 57 Assumpsit for paying the Sheriffs
Fees, what good, or not 422 Sheriffs Duty as to the Assizes and Sessions 211
Audita Querela: Writ of Audita Querela, as to the Form, 244 Where Audita
Querela lies on Escape out of Execution, or not ibid. Outlawry pleaded to
Audita Querela 245 Where it lies on Escape, as to Mean Process 311 Delivery
upon a void Audita Querela, whether it be an Escape, or not 302 Averment
against the Sheriffs Retorn, where good or not 157
B
BAil: The Custom of the Court as to putting in Bail 92 Bailing is the Act of
the Court, and the Consequence ibid. One in Execution in the Custody of the
Marshal, not compellable to find Bail if another Action be brought against him.
Aliter as to the Fleet 93 Who to take Bail in London ibid. Bail for one taken
by Cap' Excommunicat* ib. Scire fac' on the Escape of the Bail, vid. Escape
Scire fac' and Retorn of it against the Bail 93 Bail de been esse what 95 The
Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. of Bail Bonds explained ibid. The Form therein to be
observed ibid What Bond good within that Statute or not 97, 98 Pleadings upon
that Statute 105 The advantage of Pleading this Statute lost by Demurrer 113 Of
Sheriffs Retorns on Bayl Bonds 111 Of Sureties on Bail Bonds 103 Of Bail Bonds
being Discharged or Assigned 114 The Sheriff not to take above 40 l. Bail how
understood 122 In what Cases the Sheriff may Bail or not ibid. Actions on the
Case against the Sheriff, for holding to extrordinary Bail ibid. Bailiffs of
Hundred, their Nature and Office 43 Not to be prejudiced by the Non Retorn of
the Sheriff ibid. To take the Oath of Allegiance 44 Special Bailiff: What and
how they stand in Eye of the Law 45 Bailiff of Franchises 46 What Bonds for
appearance they may take ibid. To what their Office extends not 47 Of their
Retorns to the Sheriff 48 Where and in what Cases the Sheriff may enter their
Franchise 49 Bailiff of a Franchise not to take benefit of his own Liberty 49
Pleadings by Bailiffs of Franchises ibid. Bailiffs of Fee or Guildable, vid.
Retorn 51, 52 Bonds Bail Bonds, vide supra Other Bonds and Covenants entered in
to the Sheriffs, what shall be good or not 116 Bond to be a true Prisoner, and
the Pleading, 117 For Chamber Rent 121 Bonds or Covenants between the
High Sheriff and his Officers 424 Baron and Feme: How the Husband is to be
charged on the Conversion of the Wife, upon a Special Verdict 303 Debt lies on
Escape of the Wife
C.
Capias ad Satisfaciend' what 211 Against whom and for what it Lies ibid. Of
the Sheriffs Demeanor therein ibid. Of the Retorns upon it 212 Ca. sa. after a
Fieri fac' ibid. Of Escape of one in Execution by Ca. sa: vid. tit. Escape. 10
Cap' ad Sat. against the Kings Debtor in Execution 212 Retorn on Fieri fac',
Quod* Clericus est beneficiatus 114, 211 Where a Ca. sa. shall be after an
Elegit 252 Of the Retorn of Clericus Benificiat' 401, 404 Courts: Diversity
where a Court has Jurisdiction of the Cause, and where not 308 Cause of Action
must be alleged to arise in an Inferior Jurisdiction 309 Where and how the
Jurisdiction ought to be set forth or not 175 Where one is arrested in an
Infetior Court, when Cause of Action does not arise there, Action lies against
him that levied the Plaint and not against the Officer, 363 Justification by
Process out of an Inferior Court of Record, how to be pleaded 364 Retorns from
inferior Courts, vid. Retorn County: When the Kingdom divided into Counties 2
Notatio Nominis. Viscounts of two sorts, and the Original 2, 3 County Court
incident to the Office of Sheriff, the Style of it, who are Judges 53
Jurisdiction of it, 54 As to the Sums it holds Plea of 55 As to the time ibid.
As to the place 96 The Process in the County Court ibid. Of the County Clark 58
Color Officij how to be taken 104 Challenge. The several sorts 184 What Is a
good Cause of Challeng or not 185 Difference between a Covenant and a Bond
Covenants entered in to the Sheriff 424 Of Coroners: How chosen and their
Demeanor, etc. 430 Action on the Case: Against the Sheriff on Escapes 382
Against the Sheriff for holding to unreasonable Bail 381 For imbesiling an
Exigent ibid. For entering into a Franchise or Corporation which had Retorna
Brevium ibid. For not delivering a Super sedeas to the New Sheriff ibid.
Against an Undersheriff, for concealing a Writ 382 Against the Sheriffs Deputy
for Substracting a Writ ibid. For refusing sufficient Bail 383 For not bringing
Money into Court levied by Fieri fac' 383 Pro vicount' if the Conusee sue an
Extent, and refuse a Liberate, to the intent to defraud him of his Fees 217
Vide Retorn, Vide Rescous
D.
THE Form and Manner of the Sheriffs Discharge 20, 23 Delivery of Prisoners,
and of the Old and New Sheriff 21, 22 Delivery of Prisoners, and Writs by the
Old Sheriff to the New, and how to be made ibid. Till what time the Old Sheriff
or his Officers may act 20, 25 The Form of the Indenture for setting over
Prisoners 24 What Acts may or must the Old Sheriff do after he is discharged
25, 26 What remedy against him for a Misdemeanor in his Office after his Office
26 Of the Sale of Goods on Fieri fac' after the Old Sheriffs Discharge ibid.
The Form of Pleading, the Removal of one Sheriff, and the Election of another,
ibid. Sheriffs Deputy 27, 33 Pleading by him ibid. Of Rescue from him ibid.
Distringas Juratores 167 Declaration in Action on the Case for the Sheriffs
Fraudulent omission of Execution of Goods 219 The Course of Declaring in B. C.
Declaration on Escape or Cap. Utlegat' 312, 313 Daclaration in Action on
Escape, vid. Escape Where and in what Cases the Sheriffs Retorn of a
Devastravit shall be good, and the late practice in Cases 190 The Party may
Discharge himself of a Devastavit by Plea, That the Sheriff levied the Money by
Fieri fac' 193 Sheriffs Demeanor in a Writ of Dower 384
E,
ELegit. The nature of it as to Land and Goods 247 What things may be extended
or not 248 Inquisition on Elegit, when void or not 249 Where a new Elegit or
re-extent may ibid. Be or not 254, 256 Of Capias ad Sat. after an Elegit. 255
The Sheriff not to deliver a Lease at another value than the Jury find it 250
The Sheriff to set out the Moieties distinctly ibid. On a second Elegit, the
Sheriff can only deliver a Moiety of a Moiety ibid. The Sheriff to deliver the
Moieties, and not the Jury 253 There must be an Inquisition, and the Sheriff
himself cannot extend it 255 Actual possession not to be delivered on Elegit.
only to enable one to bring Eject' Firm 251 The Retorns on Elegit, what are
good or not 252 The Entry of the Retorn of Elegit on the Roll ibid. Extent by
the Bailiff of a Liberty and Inquisition by him 253 Of Elegits and Testatums
into London, Lancashire and other Counties 258 Extent of a Term, vid. Fieri
fac' Sergeant at Mace may execute an Elegit. Escape: Not to be judged strictly
7 Diversities of Escapes 295 What shall be said an Escape of a Prisoner out of
Execution in Debt or not 297 On the Sheriffs removing the Prisoner, what favor
shall a mount to an Escape or not 298 Debt lies on Escape of the Wife 303 Of
Escapes in respect of the Committitur entered ibid: Scire fac' on the Escape of
Bail 304 Execution served upon one that is Prisoner for Felony and then Escape
302 Of Escapes as to the Old and New Sheriff 305, 306 What thing or act shall
excuse the Sheriff from an Escapes* 307 Escape on Cap. Utlegat. and the
Declaration 212, 313, 315 How far Erroneous Process shall excuse an Escape in
the Sheriff or not 308 Where the Escape of one shall be the discharge ^ of
another or not 311 Escape of one in Joint Execution 312 Variance between the
Test of the Writ, and finding by the Jury in Escape 317 Laying Execution and
Declaration in Escapes 328 Declaration as to the delivery of the Old Sheriff in
Escape 332 Declaration on Escape in Inferiors Courts, 334 Where the Sheriff
shall have an Action against the Prisoner that escaped, and how to declare
against him 337 Escape brought after the Plaintiff in the first Action
acknowledged Satisfaction 339, 345 Information against the Sheriff for an
Escape Pleadings on Escape: Fresh persuit 340, 341 Permisit ire ad Largum 325
Acknowledgment of Satisfaction pleaded 345 Stat. Limitations pleaded ibid.
Supersedeas, Protection pleaded 249 Nula tiel Record 346 Of Escape being
pleaded in Bar 351 Escape by permission no Plea ibid. By consent of the
Plaintiff a good Plea, 346 Bar by voluntary Escape, ill as to the Party
Plaintiff 326 Discharge by the Jailer, is not a good Discharge, though formerly
adjudged otherwise ibid. Issue, Evidence, Verdict in Escape, what good or not
352 Escape brought against Baron and Feme 356 Venue in Escape 350 Debt or Case
against the Sheriff for Escape out of Execution 315 For Escape on Mean Process
314 Who shall have Action of Debt on Escape, and to whom it shall be said an
Escape at Election 316 Executor shall have Action on the Case against the
Shereiff for Escape out of Execution, or Mean Process, and how to be brought
319 Action on the Case, if it lies against the Undersheriff for Escape 322
Where against the Bailiff of a Franchise 323 Not against the Sheriff or Gaolers
Executors, ib. Against a Sergeant in London on Mean Process 324 Where Escape
shall not be a Discharge of Execution, but that he may be retaken again or not
324 if one be in Prison and the Marshal die, and the Prisoner Escape, there is
no remedy, but to take him again 325 If the Prisoner Rescue himself, the Party
may sue the Sheriff, or begin de novo upon the Judgment 327 Of Escape of Felons
359 Where Executor on Nonsuit shall not pay Costs ibid. Execution: Where one
shall be said to be in Execution, or not without prayer of the Party 203, 204
Where the Court may commit in Execution, though the Record be removed 205 How and
in what Cases the Sheriff may break open an House to do Execution ibid. To what
Sheriff of what place or County shall Execution be awarded 209 Execution by the
Sheriff after a Supersedeas 242, 243 Retorn of a Writ of Elegit. 402
F.
What Fees the Sheriff is to take 415 Sheriffs Fees by whom to be paid 417
Poundage allowed the Sheriff out of a Fine on Conviction on Indictment of
Barretry, levied as a Fieri fac', and how, and by whom allowed ibid. What
security the Sheriff may take for Fees or not ibid. What remedy shall the
Sheriff have for his Fees 419 Where and in what Action the Sheriff shall not
take Fees ibid. What shall be said Extortions in Sheriffs and Gaolers, and how
punishable 420 Consideration in Assumpsit for paying Fees 422 Fieri fac' what
215 The Form of the Retorn of a Fieri fac' 227 Whether a Fieri fac' on a
Judgment in the Kings Bench shall go into Wales 260 Property of the Goods not
in the Plaintiff before Liberate 260 What Goods, and of whom shall be taken in
Execution by Fieri fac. 261 What Action the Sheriff shall have for the Tortious
taking away of Goods after he has seized them 217 Where and what Remedy against
the Sheriff for the Money to the value of the Goods taken in Execution 219 The
Sheriff cannot deliver Goods in Satisfaction of the Debt 221 Sheriff sells the
Goods of J. S. a Stranger on Fieri fac. ibid. What is the Sheriffs best way to
save themselves from seizing and selling the Goods of a Stranger in Execution
ibid. Where the Plaintiff shall have a new Fieri fac. or not 222 Of the
Sheriffs selling Goods on the Fieri fac. and of the Venditioni exponas 223 What
shall be a good Retorn of the Sheriff on a Fieri fac' or not 225 The Form of
the Retorn of a Fieri fac. 227 Where it shall be in the Election of the Sheriff
on a Fieri fac. to sell a Term or deliver it in extent 231 Difference between
the extent of a Term on Elegit, and a sale by Fieri fac. 232 What is the safest
way for the Sheriff to sell a Term ibid. What Term is not extendible 233 Force:
The Sheriffs Office about removing it, etc. ibid. Fraud not to be intended
except it be exresly found ibid. Fresh persuit: What shall be a sufficient
Fresh persuit, and where upon Fresh persuit he may be retaken 341, 342 Jailer
makes Fresh persuit, and before he is taken the Prisoner dies, yet Action lies
against the Jailer 342 Fresh persuit pleaded, and how 343 What is good Evidence
of Fresh persuit or not 353 Franchise: Vid. Bailiff. vide Retorn Action on the
Case lies against a Sheriff for entering a Franchise, or Corporation which had
Retorna Brevium 381
G.
Gaols, Prisons: To whom they belong 195 The place where to be kept ibid.
Sheriff of London's Prison 196 The Sheriffs Demeanor toward Prisoners 198
Payment of a Debt of one in Execution to a Jailer, if Good 201 Prisoner not to
be delivered till he pay his due Fees ibid.
H.
Habeas Corpus Jurat. 167 Hebeas Corpus, the several sorts and their Retorns
169 Who to pay the charge of Habeas Corpus 173 Forms of the Retorns of Habeas
Corpus 174 Habere fac. Possession, vid. Possession
I
JUsticies; the Nature of it, and the Retorn 70 Jurors of two sorts 175 Retorns
of Jurors 176 Who are exempt from Juries 177 And how they shall be discharged
178 Their remedy for being Impannelled ibid. Of levying Issues, and when 180
Supersedeas restrains a Sheriff from Retorning a Jury 182 What Estate Jurors
must have 183 Jeofails 161 Where Trespass and False Imprisonment lies against
the Sheriff, or what acts of the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. shall amount to a
false Imprisonment 360, 361 Inquisition on Elegit, vid. Elegit. Information
against the Sheriff for Escape 343
K
THe Sheriffs Office about Execution for the King's Debt 259 The King cannot
License a Prisoner to go at Large
L
LAtitat; the Nature of it Statute of Limitations pleaded in Escape 345 --
pleaded to Action on the Case, for not bringing Money into Court levied by Fi.
fac. London: Customs as to Officers, Courts 409 Sheriffs of London, their
Courts their Prison How to lay the Custom of the Sheriffs Court in Pleading 410
Difference of the Entries in the Mayors Court and Sheriffs Court 411 Of Entering
Actions in the Compter 412 Liberate: Property of the Goods not in the Plaintiff
before Liberate
N
NOn obstante: Dispensation 10 Where Notice ought to be specially alleged
Notice whose Goods they are in Execution 111 Notice of Executions to the New
Sheriff 21
O
THe Form of the Sheriffs Oath 15 Before whom, and how to be taken ibid.
Undersheriff and Bailiffs Oath 30, 31 One may be Officer and Judge diversis
respectibus 30 Outlawry pleaded in Bar to Audita Querela
P
PArliament: The Sheriffs Office as to Electing Knights and Burgesses of
Parliament 406 The Form of the Indenture for Knights and Burgesses ibid. The
Form of the Sheriffs Retorn of the Writ, for Electing Parliament Men ib.
Partition: The Sheriffs demeanor in a Writ of Partition 390 Pleadings: Pleading
to Audita Querela 342 Pleading on the Stat. 23 H. 6. c. 10. by the Prisoner, or
by the Sheriff 105 Pleadings by Bailiffs of Franchises 49 Justification by
Process out of a^ Inferior Court of Record, how to be pleaded, vid. supr. The
Form of Pleading the removing of one Sheriff, and the Election of another 23
Pleading by the Sheriffs Deputy 33 Pleading of the Stat. of Limitations in
Escape Pleading by the Sheriffs Bailiffs, Gaolers, and how Justification must
be in Action of Trespass or False Imprisonment, by Process, Warrant, etc. and
how to be pleaded as to the time of taking out the Writ, place Traverse 361,
362, 363 Justification by Execution, how to be pleaded 370 Pleading in Trover
on Fi. fac. and how ibid. Pleading to Trespass, by taking Goods by Recovery 363
Pleadings in Escape, vid. Escape. Pleading the Jurisdiction of the Court, and
how, vid. supra. Pleading in Replevin ( vide Replevin) 59 Piedges, vid.
Replevin. Posse Comitatus, sparsim. Possession: In Habere fac' possession' the
Sheriff is to make Execution of the right thing at his peril 236 Trespass
against the Sheriff for wrong Executing possession 237 Action on the Case
against the Sheriff, for delivering more Acres than are in the Writ ibid. Where
possession of some in the name of all, is good, or not ibid. Riotous possession
delivered by the Undersheriff, how to be enquired of 238 For Ouster after
possession delivered, what Remedy 239 Where the Plaintiff shall have a new
Habere fac' possession' 240 Of the Retorn of Habere fac' possess. and the Form
241 Process: Original Process in real and personal Actions, and the Forms of
the Retorns 76 Of Mean Process 80 Privilege from Arrests, vide Arrests.
Prisons, vide Gaols.
Q
THe Sheriffs demeanor in a Quare Impedit 403
R
REcognisance, vide Statute. Recordare fac' loquelam 61 Replevin: The several
sorts 59 The manner of Replevying 60 Retorno Habendo 61 Retorns in Replevin 61,
62, 63 -- property pleaded 63 Gager deliverance 64 Two sorts of Pledges in
Replevin ibid. The Form of a Precept in Replevin 67 The Form of the Bond for
Security, 68 Rescous: Where and in what Cases Action lies against the Sheriff
for a Rescous, or not 277 Where the Sheriff makes himself chargable by his
Retorn of Rescous 226 Action on the Case lies against the party that Rescoused,
and against the Sheriff 274 Remedy against the Rescouser by Indictment, and how
to be laid 278 Of Retorns of Rescous, what are good, or not 280 Rescue from the
Bailiff of a Liberty, how to be Returned 287 Of laying the Action and
Declaration in Resc. 288 Difference between Actions on the Case, and Retorns
and Indictments of Rescous 151 Diversity between pleading Rescous en Det on
Escape, and Action on the Case in Escape 290 Pleading in Rescous 292 Venue in
Rescous 293 Where a man may rescue himself, and where not ibid. New Execution
upon a Rescous Verdict on Rescous before the Day laid, or after, good, if
before the Suit commenced 293 Rescue pleaded by the Bailiff of a Liberty 50
Retorns of Writs: When may be made 124 General Rules of Retorns 125 Languidus
in Prisona 129 What must come in by way of Retorn, and not by way of Surmize
ibid. What Writs must be Returned, and what need not 129 What shall be a good
Retorn or not, in respect of the person Retorning 131 Of the new Sheriffs
retorning the Writ, executed in the time of the old Sheriff 131 What Retorn
shall be good in respect of the Form, or not 135 Retorn void for uncertainty or
repugnancy 137 What shall excuse the Sheriff for not Retorning Writs 140 What
shall be a good Retorn against the Admittance of the party 139 How Retorns must
be made if Supersedeas comes to the Sheriff 141 Retorns from Inferior Courts
140 Amendment of Sheriffs Retorns 141 What Action, Process or Appearance shall
be good before the Retorn of the Writ 142 Penalty of the Sheriff by the Court,
for not Retorning 143 Actions brought for a False Retorn 144, 145 Against the
Bailiff of a Franchise, for a False Retorn 148 The Sheriffs Duty, as to the
Retorns of Bailiff of Franchises ibid. The Sheriffs submission to a Fine, no
Conclusion to the parties to bring a False Retorn 149 Action on the Case, and
not Debt, for a False Retorn 159 Where the Action to be brought, and how to
Declare ibid. Action against the old Sheriff for a False Ret' 152 Action
against the Sheriff, for not Retorning the Writ 154 If it may be against the
Bayliff-Errant ibid. The Sheriff not to file the Retorn, depending the Action
on the Case against him 156 Of Laying the Action, and Decla^ation for not
Retorning ibid. Where a man may Traverse or Aver against the Sheriffs Retorn,
or not 157 A Retorn not amendable after it is filed ib. Of the Retorn of Cepi
corpus and parat' habeo when the party is bailed, and the reason of it 145 Vide
more of Retorns under their proper Titles, as Scire facias, etc. Restitution:
Of Goods taken in Execution restored in specie 224 Of Restitution of Lands or
Goods seized by the Sheriff after Judgment Reversed 228 -- and the Form of the
Retorn in such case ib. On sale of a Term, where the Term shall be restored, or
not 228
S
SCire facias: For the Sheriff, upon a Retorn of a Nihil of the Pledges 89
Scire fac', and Retorn against the Bail 93 Scire fac' de bonis propriis, not to
be awarded on surmize of the party, but on the Retorn of the Sheriff upon a
Devastavit 192 Scire fac' to the Sheriff of London or Middlesex, on a
Recognizance for Bail Scire fac' against the old Sheriff, to pay the Money
levied in Execution 220 Of Retorns of Scire fac' what are good or not 9, 268
Sheriffs: In Ancient times how Eligible, and how at this day 3 His power and
privilege 4 Favored in the Execution of his Office 6 His Office not
apportionable ibid. Not punishable for executing Erroneous Process 7 Fine for
Nonassistance of the Sheriff 8 His power to break open Houses, vid. Execution 9
In what cases his Officers are excused from doing wrong ibid. In what things
his Power is restrained 10 Not to be chosen a Parliament man ibid. Not to serve
above one year ibid. The Sheriffs Power in another County 11 Of his Execution
of Felons 12 What he must do at the entrance into his Office 13 Vide Oath 14
The Cities and Towns of England which have Sheriffs, and how many 19 How the
Sheriffs Office may be determined before his year is out 27 In what Cases the
High sheriff must execute the Office in person 30 Sheriff not to dispute the
Jurisdiction of the Court Of the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, v. London.
Sheriffs Office about the Sessions of the Peace 408 Seisin of Rent or Common,
how to be delivered in Execution 238 Supersedeas: What amounts to a Supersedeas
241 Where a Writ of Error is a Supersedeas or not, and when ibid. Of Execution
by the Sheriff after a Supersed. 243 Where a Supersedeas shall stay the sale of
Goods, or not ibid. Statute-Merchant, etc. The Writ of Execution on a
Statute-Merchant and a Statute-Staple, and the difference 260 The manner of
Execution on a Statute-Merchant, Staple, or Recognizance ibid. Difference
between the proceedings on a Statute-Staple and Statute-Merchant 263, 264 Form
of the Retorn on a Recogn' or Stat. ibid.
T
TRespass against the Sheriff, for wrong Executing possession 273 Trespass and
false Imprisonment, v. Imprisonment. Tourn of the Sheriff: Jurisdisdiction,
etc. 71, 72 Inquisition taken in the Sheriffs Tourn, 72 Pleadings as to the
Tourn 75 Who shall be Amerced for not coming to the Sheriffs Tourn ibid.
Trials: By the Sheriffs Certificate, or by the Record 42 Trial shall be where
the Cause of Action arises 309
V
VEnditioni exponas, (v. Fieri fac* and Supersed.) 223 Sh^riffs demeanor in a
Writ of De Ventre^ Inspiciend. 388 Sheriffs demeanor in a Vi Laica removenda
209 Ven^re fac. and what Retorn thereof shall be good or not 392 Amendment of
Venire 165 Undersheriff: His Nature, Antiquity, Office 28 What Bonds,
Covenants, etc. are good between the High Sheriff and Undersheriff, or not,
and the Pleadings 33 What Acts the Undersheriff, Bailiff, Jailer, and the
High Sheriff are answerable for, and the Rule of Respondeat Superior 35, 36
W
WIthernam 62, 65 Warrant: What Arrest shall be justified by force of a
VVarrant* 86 Where the Bailiff must show his VVarrant, and when 87 Writ of
Enquiry of Damages: By whom to be Executed or not 188 The time of Executing it
ibid. The Form of the Retorn 189 The Sheriffs Office in a Writ of Enquiry of
Waste 394 The View; how the Enquiry to be made ibid. Of the Retorn, and of
Damages in Waste, and the Writ to levy them, to whom to be directed 396 Writ
of Estrepement; where it lies, and the Sheriffs Office about it 398
FINIS.

