A LECTURE AND SERMON Preached at Different Times by that Faithful and
Painful Minister of the Gospel, and now Glorified Martyr

Mr. Donald Gargill.

Concerning Jehosophat his Association with Achab, and the Difficulty where to
make Recourse, when Staged before the Tribunal of GOD.

2 Chronicles 19. Chapter. 1, and 2. Verses, and downwards. And Jehosophat the
King of Judah Returned to his House in Peace to Jerusalem.

And Jehu the Son of Hanani the Seer, went out to Meet him, and said to King
Jehosophat, should thou Help the Ungodly, and Love them that Hate the LORD,
etc.

A LECTURE
Upon 2 Chronicles 19: Chapter, first and second Verses. And Jehosophat the
King of Judah returned to his House in Peace to Jerusalem.

And Jehu the Son of Hanani the Seer, went out to Meet him, and said to King
Jehosophat, should thou Help the Ungodly, and Love them that Hate the LORD?
etc:


THE Goodness of GOD does not always leave Man, when he staps out of GODs Way;
Indeed it might do so: And when we Depart from GOD, GOD might say now, go Good
Providence and Leave them. But what does the Goodness of GOD, it stays and
bides until it bring some Folk back again to GOD; and then when they are
Returned, the more that the Goodness of GOD has been with them, it makes them
the more to Mourn when they Return again! We have an Instance of this in this
Chapter: We have here a King, and a Good King, and he has gone out of GODs Way;
and yet GODs Goodness has not left him, but it stayed, even after his sinful
Accession in Association with Achab. It Is said, he returned in Peace to his
House to Jerusalem.

Now in this Chapter, there are several Things spoken of him; For this Chapter
speaks not only of his Fall, and sets out all his Goodness; But it speaks,
First, Of his Deliverance, and then of the rest. First, And he came to his
House at Jerusalem in Peace.

Secondly, It speaks of the Sharp Reproof he meets with from the Prophet upon
the very entry. Any Body would have thought they should have gone and met their
King with Praise, and Flattery; Nay, but the Prophet of GOD goes to meet with
him with a Sharp Rebuke: Sharp Rebukes were meetest for him, meeter nor any
other thing, even the best of them all: But here the Holy Ghost marks the Sharp
Rebuke he gate from the Prophet. We hear nothing of what Return he gave to the
Prophet; but he took with it. It is a Rare Thing to see a Mean Person to take
with a Reproof from a Prophet: But much more to see a King acknowledge and say,
Indeed I am Guilty. I say it is a Rare Thing to see a Mean Person to take with a
Reproof; But here a King takes with a Rebuke, Them that stands out against GODs
Reproof, GOD will give over to Reprove them till the Day of Judgment, and then
the Lybel will be altogether put in their Hand, and see who will Refuse then.
But here he takes a Reproof Sweetly from GOD. O bless him that he is Wairing a
Reproof uupon You, and bid him now tell on, and say, What more has he now to
Reprove me of? O! the Heart of Man is so Proud that it will not take with
Conviction and Reproof. We say it again, The Heart of Man is so Proud that it
will not take with Conviction, and the Reproof of GOD, without Humbling Grace.

But, Thirdly, The Third Thing shown of him, is this, He takes with his
Reproof, and that is a Token of it, for he goes on to the Work of GOD,
notwithstanding of the Prophets Reproving of him, he goes on I say, to the Work
of Reformation: We shall say this General, where ever there is an Association
with Wicked Men, they will forget Reformation, until Association be broken
again: Here he forgets Reformation, till the Association with Achab be broken,
and then he goes on to Reformation. We shall say that one Word, our Sinful
Association with the Malignant-Party in Scotland, not only has made us forget
the Work of Reformation, but has shut the Door altogether, that none should go
foreward in a National Reformation: And till this Association be quate,
Ministers nor People will never set foreward in Reformation again. And wad ye
know when the Reformation began to be at a stand or stay, it was that Day when
we took the Malignant-Party by the Hand; and it has stood all this time; and
till that be quate again, it will never be set foreward, and when it is quate,
it will set foreward, and that by every one of you in your several Places and
Stations; And then it will be said, them that did most withstand is now Removed
out of the Way, and made to fly away; and then ye shall see nothing but
Reformation going on. O if it were come to that.

But, Fourthly, There is the Reformation it self, which is set out in these
Three. (1.) It is set out in the Body of the Land the Generality, or Body of
the Land: What does he to them? Verse 4 He went throw the People and brought
them back to the LORD GOD of their Fathers: They were like Run-away-Servants;
yea not only so, but like the Levit's Concubine that had Departed from her
Husband and had played the Whore; And so he brings them back again to the Lord.
But now you see what is the Duty or Office of a King, to bring back the People
of GOD to GOD. Wa, What has the King done, and these Rulers? Wa, Their Exercise
in these Kingdoms has been to Debauch Folk from their Obedience to GOD; And in
a word, it has been to Exauterate that Authority of GOD, and Introduce and
Heighten Man's Authority; and has not that been that which all of them has been
Carrying on? Let the Commands of Men be Great with you, and the Commands of GOD
be Small; This they have Employed themselves all into: But never a word of the
Commands of GOD, nor his Authority. But, I say, this is the Work and Matter he
Imploys himself into; He goes throw Judah, and he brings the People back
again to GOD, like Run-away-Servants, or the Levit's Concubine. They had been
away: But now this Holy King, he Imploys all his Power to bring them back again
to GOD; and he thinks them Good Subjects, if they be Good Saints. But what is
Obedience to him in regard of Obedience to GOD; But the contrary is said and
done by the Men of this Generation: We are sure we see this plain from the
Scripture, or Word of GOD, that this is a part of the Office of a King: And he
that has no Regard to this, ought no more to be Esteemed a King, but a Tyrrant
and Enemy to GOD.

But, Secondly, A second part of Reformation is done upon the Civil State, What
does he there? He sets Judges in every City of Judah etc. We will get Customers
anew in all the Cities of Judah: But few Judges, more for Exactions and
Customs, nor for Judgment. Now undoubtedly as he was a Holy Man himself, so
he set Holy and Good Judges in every City. For every King will choose out such
Judges as himself is. Officers and Judges will tell you what a Nature the Kings
are of. Soldiers and Curats shows what is the Disposition their Prince is of.
Then we may know what is the Nature of the King and Court. A Holy King will
have Holy Judges that will give Justice and Equity to all; But now we need not
look for Equity and Justice; if they would let us alone with their Injuries,
Now I say, that is the second part of Reformation (viz.) in the Civil or State,
he gives Holy Judges, and he has a particular Exhortation to them, when he puts
them in their Office, Verse 6. And, 1. It is Remarkable, that he says to them
in the Entry of their Office: Any Body wade have thought that he wade have
said, See well to my Prerogatives and Privileges, let not them be Wronged; Let
not the Royal-Rents be Decreased; See that the Crown-Rights be no Way
Diminished. These and the like ordinarily Kings Recommend at first. But what
says he? He said to the Judges, Take heed what Ye do, for Ye judge not for Man,
but for GOD the LORD, Who is with You in Judgment. Remember this, I commit
Judgment to You, but the Judgment is not mine, it is the LORDs; and Remember
what ye do, is for GOD; Then do it as if GOD Himself would do it; Do it as if
He were Sitting there. Now where is there any Judges that does this Way? And
where is there a King that Desires them to do so, or to do this Way? Says Kings
now, Ye man Judge for Me, ye have your Office of Me, and therefore Judge for
Me. But says he, I give you Authority of Judging; but Remember ye must Answer
to GOD for your Judgment, for GOD is with you in Judgment; That is to say, He
is present with you to Help you if ye do Right, and to be Displeased with you
if ye Judge Wrong; He is Present to Protect you, if ye do Right: But to be a
Witness, and to Punish you, if ye do Wrong: That Is the Thing he Commends unto
them. Now I have given you Power, and set you in a Capacity to Judge Matters
Rightly; Then see ye well to it: For the Judgment is not Mine, but the LORDs;
And if ye Judge Rightly, GOD will be with you in it; GOD he will Preserve you
and Protect you: But if otherways, no. But there is one word in the Exhortation
before we proceed to the Third Thing, Wherefore let the Fear of GOD be on you,
for there is no Respect of Persons with GOD, etc. O but this were Necessary, if
every King when he puts a Judge upon the Bench, wade give him such an
Exhortation as this when he Sits down, saying, Take heed to your Selves, let
the Fear of GOD be upon you. It is even but in Vain to speak to Men, if there
be not some thing of the Fear of GOD on them to make them do Rightly and Well;
So if there be a Principle of the Fear of GOD in them, then an Exhortation may
be Useful, and Profitable: But let the Fear of the LORD prevail, and if that
make you not do Right, it will not be all the Exhortations of Men will do it
otherways, or if that be not, ye will slip evermore when ye have the
Opportunity, and ye will never be Sicker in Good.

But now let the Fear of the LORD be on you, for there is no Iniquity in GOD;
He will do no Iniquity himself, and the Unjust Counsel he will not allow of; So
this is one Thing that every one wade Remember and look to. There is no
Iniquity in our GOD, and ye need not think that when ye do Wrong in Judgment
that he will allow of it: For all Processes and Judgments that have been given
out by Men, will be seen by GOD at the long run; For He is like a Great King
that must Survey every Thing. It Is true Kings now never looks to the Judgments
that Inferior Officers does, if they be according to Law. So then, he says to
them, see to it, GOD will be with you in Judgment; It will be seen by GOD how
ye have judged, and according to the Judgment that ye have given, GOD will
give you Judgment. Now GOD is no Accepter of Persons. What is that? Give every
one his Due, for GOD will give every one his Due. Think you GOD will spare a
King more nor a Beggar? No, for all are his Creatures, he has set up a King
there: Therefore Kings are more bound to him than others. Said Christ who ought
to Love most? It was answered, He to whom GOD has given most. So he that has
gotten most Tokens of GODs Love, he should be most Holy; And they to whom less
has been given, less is expected of: And so they should be most Holy who
Command others; For with GGD there is no Respect of Persons, and so there ought
to be no Respect of Persons with Judges, Folk thinks that Kings are above Laws:
But let any Man show us that Kings are above Laws, either from Scripture or
Reason. GOD has said it, that with him there is no Respect of Persons; So this
will bring a King in under Law, as well as others. Then he who Judges for GOD
must say that if he say Rightly: Even this with us, there ought to be no
Respect of Persons. Indeed we will add this one Word, which is necessary to be
added in this Case: There is no Body that Rules, but they will be liable to
Failings in Ruling: And therefore if all Faults of Rulers should be exactly
looked to, there would be none who would Rule a Day to an end, but we might
find Faults in them, for which to Depose them ere Night: But we will say this,
it is one thing to be a Failing in Infirmity, and another thing to be in a
constant Course of Wickedness, and Enmity against GOD. The first may be spared;
but not the last. Then look where we are now: But whatever ye think of this, it
is the Truth of GOD which we are Declaring unto you at this time.

But, Thirdly, The Third Thing in the Reformation is anent the Priesthood; So
that in effect he takes up the whole Land. (1.) The Body of the People, (2.)
The State, or Civil-Magistrate. (3.) The Priesthood, or the Ministry: And so a
Perfect Reformation should go on throw the Three altogether. Let every one
bring it to his own Heart, Kings and Rulers must Reform without in the Land,
under, or in a time of Reformation: But will ye not Reform your Selves, Verse
8. He appointed Levits and Priests in every City, and the Chief of the Fathers
for the Judgment of the LORD, and for Controversies, when they Returned to
Jerusalem. Verse 9. He Charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the Fear of
the LORD Faithfully, and with a Perfect Heart. This was the Great Judicatory
that they had in the Land; It was made up with Priests and Law-men; There was
some Priests in it, and some Civil-men, and they judged together in the LORD's
Matters; The Matters of the LORD belonged to them, to wit, The Priests. And the
Kings Matters belonged to the others: But all was to judge according to the
Word of GOD. We shall say this one word more, there is one Great Thing Folk
stumbles at in that Paper that Kings ought to Rule or Judge according to the
Judicial Law; and that these Laws Kings ought to Rule by, ought to be according
to the Word of GOD, And think ye this a Great Wrong? The People of GOD was
ruled Two Hundred Years and upwards by this Law only, and can any be fitter to
be a Lawgiver than GOD? Have we Laws, have we them from Men or of GOD? If of
Men, then they had them of GOD. Then the GOD of Nature, or the GOD that Created
All is far better to Teach Laws than Man that is under GOD. We say stumble not
that it is said, the Laws of GOD ought to be the Laws of the Land; For it will
never be Well with you (especially the Mein of the Land) till the Laws of GOD
be the Laws of the Land; Then we will not be fashed with Great Ones to Oppress:
For when they have Laws to make, they never do thing but Oppress the Poor. But
when the Law of GOD speaks, it will give Right to the Poor as well as to the
Great. So the Law of GOD should be our Law. Where the Law of GOD is received
where Christians are; Let Christians go to the Law which GOD has found out; And
let Heathens and Turks go to the Law that Nature finds out. Now they Judge in
the Matters of the LORD, and in Controversies, etc. For Understanding this
better; There was a Great Court at Jerusalem, and all the Difficult Matters
came there. There were Courts and Judicatories throw the Land, and there was
Judges of Hundreds, and other Officers; and Judges of Thousands throughout the
Land. But all Hard Matters they brought to Jerusalem. And now he sets Judges to
receive these Hard Matters that they could not Judge among themselves, and they
gave Judgment in these Matters.

Now the Last Thing (and we will not go to speak any more) is their Charge he
gives them. Verse 9. And he Charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the Fear
of the LORD. There is great Necessity to be Earnest with them that Kings commit
Judgment too, that they be Faithful; There is much need for it now: For if
Kings Laws be seen too, there will be little Regard what come of the Law of
GOD; We know this by Experience; All the Supplications of this Poor Land has
been Rejected, and the Laws of Man well seen too. We thought to begin to speak
to all these particularly; But First, A Word of his Delivery; He comes in Peace
to his House. Why does the Holy Ghost Mark this? If ye Observe the Chapter
before, he was in a Dangerous Battle, where he had a Sore Assault; They set
upon him for the King of Israel, and the LORD Delivered him out of that. And so
the Holy Ghost Marks this, He came Home in Peace. And the Holy Ghost will have
us to Mark this of it, that notwithstanding of this Sinful Plight he was in,
in Associating with Achab, yet GOD Graciously brought him off. He Associated
with Achab, and GOD might have letten him fall with him; Yet Achab fell, and he
is safe; The Battle is Lost, and he Returns in Peace. We shall say this one
Word, Who ever has gotten such special Deliverances from GOD (especially when
under Slips) they wade consider Narrowly in their Hearts what they have been
Doing: Wherefore they have met with such Deliverances. But ye will say to us,
We were not in a Sinful Association; We were not Associated with Sinful,
Wicked and Profane Men. But we shall say this one Word, We were Associate in a
Sinful Union; And so there was as Sinful. Association with an Evil Course.
Now that many Fell, was it not Just and Holy Dealing in GOD that some were
preserved in such a Fall as that. O! Consider well wherefore it was that GOD
has so Remarkably preserved you, especially when He might have taken away your
Life. Now there are severals here that have had a part of such a Deliverance as
this, not only once, but once and again. O! Great Deliverances has He given to
some, even when they were Associate with a Sinful Cause: Then Mind now and
Remember wherefore it is, that GOD has preserved you; It is to Repent of Sin:
Yet more, it is that ye may be ready at a Good Turn again when He calls for it
at your Hands; But beware of this, though He let you go in a Sinful Action once,
beware of the next time by no more joining in Sinful Associations; For Sinful
Associations is ever Dangerous. Whatever the Ungodly meet with in them, yet
certainly the Godly never Thrives in such Associations. Now this is the Thing
that we wade say, Let every Man that has a part in such Remarkable
Deliverances, say, Wherefore has Thou preserved me? Wherefore is it that I have
Life? Is it a Blessing? But I think not so much of it as I should, that I have
it so wonderfully. Is it not for some End, even that I may Employ it some Way
for GODs Glory; Go back and ask, Wherefore it is so Remarkable He gave you your
Life when in Danger, and while ye were in a backsliding Course, and while ye
were associated in a Sinful Way; and when ye were involved in a Course with
the Deadly and Destroying Enemies. Consider this therefore, Wherefore has GOD
given you this Life? Say, Wherefore has Thou preserved this Life? Is it that I
may be for Thee? and Employ it for Thee?

The next Thing to be considered is, The Prophet's Reproof: He is an Misleard
Prophet, Wade any Body think that he should speak so to a King? Ay, but we must
be Faithful in Reproving Kings as well as others. Modesty is Ruin here.
Modesty in such a Case is Ruin to Rulers: For if we had ^one and told them
their Sins, they had not gone on in ^uch a Course as they did. Silence or
Modesty here, it is ^ot a Virtue but a Vice: It is but Unfaithfulness to GOD ^d
Man, might he not have letten him come Home: Nay, ^hy? Will he make him Sad?
Why will he make him Sader ^d Sader? There is a most be. Why are you Sad? If it
be Affliction you are Sad for, ye must not be so, that is not the thing ^e
ought to be Sad for: There is Sin you must be Sad for: So ye would think Folk
should be spared that is in Affliction; Nay, but spare them not, for then they
will best hear Reproofs when under Affliction, never better nor then. Now the
thing ^e says to him is this, Should thou Help the Ungodly, and Love them
that Hate the LORD? How fit is this to be applied to our Times? See hence who
ever Helps the Ungodly is in the Fault. They now talk Good Men are upon both
Parties, Whom shall we Condemn or Follow? We shall say this one word, be they
Good or Evil, if they Love them that Hate the LORD, and Help the Ungodly, they
are to be reproved; See who does such are on the Wrong Side, and to be
reproved. Should thou Help the Ungodly, and Love them that Hate the LORD?
Should ye Help them Higher for all the Little Good they have done with their
Power which they have gotten already; They have too much of it already. O! that
all the Ungodly in the World, were many steps Lower nor they are. What will
they do then when ye have set them up? They will set up Wickedness with it. O!
Help GOD and the Godly; But beware to Help up the Ungodly; They are High enough
already, and there is none who will Help to Raise or Hold them up: But GOD will
Reprove them; for they can do Nothing when they are raised up, but Wickedness.
This Scripture speaks plainly, Should thou Help the Ungodly? We shall say no
more of it but this, Whoever has Helped the Ungodly at this Time, are worthy of
a Reproof. We are in Two Parties now: There is one Party, the LORD and the
Godly; And the other Party, the Ungodly. See what Party ye will take now.
Should thou Love them that Hate the LORD, and Help the Ungodly? Be what he
will to you. Jehosophat was joined in Affinity with Achab, and so came of it.
But be who he will, Father, or Mother, or your King, should ye Love and Help
him that Hates the LORD? We shall only say this word, and take heed to it, for
it is the Word of Truth, Enmity and Hatred against GOD, cuts off all
Obligation. Indeed we will say that, though we were in the nearest Obligation,
that is to say, even in that Relation betwixt a Father and a Son; Yet in this
Case it is cut off: The Holy Ghost says, That his Father and Mother shall
thrust him throw while he is Prophesying. We say this, then Hatred of GOD takes
away all near and far off Obligation, for if they go on to Hate the LORD, and
to Blaspheme the Name of GOD afrontedly, and Oppose the Truths of GOD, and with
Malice and Hostility Oppress the Work of GOD; We may not Help and Join with
them: If any Man can give better Doctrine nor this, he may; But he cannot: But
Remember he brings it not from the Scriptures of GOD, if he give you that which
is contrare to this; but we shall leave it.

Amen.
A SERMON
BY Mr. Donald Gargill.
Isaiah 10. Chapter, 3. Verse. And what will ye do in the Day of Visitation,
and the Desolation that shall come from far, to whom will ye Flee for Help, and
where will you Leave your Glory.


WE see here, the Feast is done, and the Reckoning is come. The most part of us
that is here, has gotten already that which Sin can give us. I say the Feast is
Small, and there is no Body, but they will say so, when it is over. O! but I
have gotten Little. There are some Woeful Creatures that thinks they shall have
their Penny-worths of Sin: But there was never a Man yet that got a Pennyworth
at the Devils Hand, and so it is in his Hand now. Have ye gotten your Wills
out? There are some Folk who must have out their Wills, cost what it will.
Well, it shall cost you Dear enough. Has the Great Ones gotten their Wills out?
Nay, They have not gotten it out yet; They have gotten out some of it, and some
of it no yet; They will be kept always short of it: For when they shall be
raised and reckoned with, they will begin and say then, I have not gotten my
Will. And ye got your Will, the Earth would be made like a Hell. Now we must
consider whom he is speaking this of, Whom is he speaking it of? He speaks it
of Men like ours; that had made many a Sinful Act. We call them ours. We
desire in the Sight of GOD to retract that word: But he speaks to Men that had
done many Sinful Acts. In the first Verse it is said, Woe to them that Decree
Unrighteous Decrees, and that Write Grievousness that they have prescribed. And
if they have not Decreed Unrighteous Decrees, and prescribed Grievousness, let
their Act of Council and Parliament Testify. The Generation afterward will
Wonder that ever Men made such Acts. It may be thought, there has been as Ill
Acts made before. There was an Abominable Act made by a King in Scotland, that
all the World counted Abominable: But they have over-passed that Filthy Law of
King Kenneth: For their Laws are more Abominable, nor if they should have
Enacted Public Whoredoms and Stew-Houses. We shall say that one word, The
first of Sinful Laws lights on the Subjects; But the last and the heaviest
lights upon the Makers; I say the last: and the heaviest. Now it has been heavy
and sad to us to Obey* But it has been sader and heavier for us to Suffer; That
was the first: But what will come of the last and the heaviest? And what will
come of you when you come to Reckon for your Laws and Grievances. Shortly their
words shows that Great Lawmakers on Earth will be put to their Questions. Yet
Kings must come down off their Thrones, and stand at the Bar of the Tribunal of
GOD, and their Laws; Which they have made will be laid down before them, and it
will be said to them, Will ye own them? Own them we must: He that will own
them, must Disown GOD, and that Intaills him to the Wrath of GOD; and they own
their Laws before GOD, as they own them now, it will be a strange thing: But
this is the thing that we are saying, and which we see here, that the Greatest
upon Earth, upon the account of their Laws which they have made, will be put to
their Questions before GOD, and there are Three Questions in their words. O! that
every one of us where at a Point, and could give an Answer and Solution to them.

The first Question is, What will ye do in the Day of Visitation? What you is
this? Even you that made Laws What more these nor other Folk? Because they made
Evil Laws: How so? Ye did set up a direct contrary Judicatory to GOD. When Laws
is directly a conrrare Judicatory to GOD, it says, Ye take upon you to give out
Laws, and Laws that are contrare to GODs Laws. Now what will ye do? O! but this
Question will put to Silence and Amazement the great part of Men. What, we have
nothing to do with their Sinful Laws, we never made the Laws; Well,
nevertheless, ye did give Obedience to their Laws: It will be, here the Law
Maker, and the Law Obeyer. What will ye do in the Day of Visitation? If ye
Consented to their Laws; Is there Nothing that you Fear? Dare you boldly come
before GOD? Mind this, but till you get the Book of Items, it Concerns you all
that you can give an Answer to this Question, What will you do in the Day of
Visitation? GOD will be through you all, He will be through us all; and ere
long the Lowest of us all will give an Account of his Doings. Now, What will ye
do in the Day of Visitation? Says some, I have done else. What have ye done
else? I have Compted, I have Paid, I am Discharged: That Is well, if you can
say these Three. I have Reckoned, I have Judged my Self, I have Paid, not by
my Self, but by another, viz. The Cautioner came in and told down for me, and
GOD Reckoned it up in my behalf. Have you Paid then? I have Reckoned, I have
Paid, Thirdly, I am Discharged. Where is it? We have it in a Common Proverb,
such a Man is evident, that is to say, it is not Subscribed, that is a Fools
Evidence. Many says they have the Evidences, but they want the Subscription. O
to have the Seal of the Living GOD to every Discharge. There was Wrestling
before I got it, and I have laid it up, and kept it well, and when I take it
out at the Great Day, He will acknowledge that it is His own Hand. Now see to
it. Then Woe to him that Ventures upon the Tribunal of GOD, unless he have these
Three; I have Reckoned, I have Paid, I am Discharged.

But now, What will ye do in the Day of Visitation? Consider it; It will put
you sore to it. Sin will seek out and find you out; Justice will Pursue you:
And if ye let it come to that, Remember this, they that come to the Judgment
of God Unpardoned, never goes without Condemnation. They use to say of some
Prisoners, they that Enter by such a Gate comes out to the Scaffold again: So
they that Venture upon the Tribunal of GOD Unpardoned, What will come of them?
They never come out Uncondemned. What will you do then? Even this, if you
answer rightly; I must go to Hell. And what have I for that?

A Second Question is this, To whom will ye Flee for Help? That Imports this,
Is there any in the World can Shelter you against GOD? Ye have GOD your
Pursuer, remember that. Where will ye get a Sheltet? Where will ye Flee to? Is
any Stronger nor GOD? Can any Hide you from GOD? Can any come between you and
GOD? and take off your Reproof from of your Hand, and say here I am to Answer
for him, I bade him do so: Nay, nay, ye will have enough to do to Answer for
your own. Your bidding is sinful, and his obeying is sinful, and both shall
Suffer. We shall say this one word, Let every Man look to what Obedience he
gives to Powers, to Rulers, to Tyrrants; They are no Rulers but Tyrrants. It Is
true they are Powers; but not Powers ordained of GOD, that is a Terror to Evil
Works, and a Praise to Good. Well, let every Man look to what Obedience he
gives to Wicked Laws: It will not be that it is the King's Law; It will not be
Kings-Courts, nor Councils, or Parliament; They must be looked over, if they
have not the Character of Justice and Equity, there must none of them be
Obeyed. They will speak of a Sacred Character on them; There is no Sacred
Character on any: There must be another kind of a Stamp. But Laws must be
Stamped with this, with Justice and Equity, and so they have the Authority of
Heaven, as well as the Authority of Men; And if ye Obey them without
considering whether or no they have this Mark, in Obeying of them, ye Disobey
GOD; and Remember this, stand to it. Now ye see the many Orders that has gone
forth, so that ye cannot do so much as give a Soldier Provenent for his Beast,
but ye Displease GOD. Let them take what they will, and be answerable to GOD
for it; but my Hand shall not give it. There are many who thinks nothing of it.
Woeful Creatures, think you nothing to Uphold Soldiers, all whose Works is to
Fight against GOD and Religion. Now see if ever there was an other Turn in
their Hand. But before we proceed to the next Question, we shall speak a few
words, To whom will ye Flee? Who will Shelter you against GOD? There was never
a Man so Great, but there was ay some fleeing from him, and there was some
Power to which we might have joined our selves that would be able to Defend us
from him. But where will you Flee? GOD is the Pursuer, Who can be the Defender?
We shall say that one word, There would not be such ready Obedience to the
Sinful Commandments of Men, if the Greatness of GOD were Considered. It is a
Dreadful Thing to fall into the Hands of the Living GOD. I put my self in the
Hands of Justice by giving Obedience to Sinful Laws. I Homologate their Deed,
and my Obedience is as if I Consented to their Deed; So they come to every Man's
Door, obey, or not obey: He who obeys, Consents to their Laws; and he that
disobeys, Dissents, and Protests: But the Thing that is evidently held out,
(for we will not return again) is this, in all the World against Justice and
the Strokes of GOD, Where will ye Flee, to whom will ye Flee for Help? Go your
way, and do as ye will: But Remember, this you shall have, the Justice of GOD
to pursue you. Next, and to whom will you Flee?

But now the next and last Question, is this, And where will ye leave your
Glory? What means he by this? They would hide their Glory that it should not be
Stained. Nay, there is more in it nor that; There Glory shall be, as it were, a
Sting. How are ye therein? It will be said to Kings and Rulers, How got ye that
Glory? Then they would gladly be quite of all their Ill-gotten Glory, lest the
Just Judgment of GOD come on them when they are upon their Thrones, because
they got them Ill, and used them Worse. Now where will ye leave your Glory?
Well then, Remember that the Day is coming when these Things that Men boast
of, they would gladly hide them, because it will be their Ruin, when GOD is
Judge, Verse 4. Without me they shall bow down under the Prisoners, and shall
fall under the Slain, etc. We shall say this one word from it; It is enough to
want GOD, but it is more to have GOD. One Enemy (without me) if Judgment come,
ye shall fall under them, though they were Prisoners and Slain-Men, they shall be
enough to Slay you; without me, ye cannot bide nor bear Judgments; but much
less can ye able to bear, when I am not only absent from you, but turned to be
your Enemy. We shall now hasten to an end.

The first Thing Observable, is this, There is a time of Visitation coming, and
all has need to Prepare for it: For it will put all Sore to it. What Sin have
ye? What Debt have ye Paid? What Discharge have ye? There is a Twofold
Visitation, (to wit) Of Mercy and Judgment. First, Of Visitation in Mercy;
These words are spoken. We heard that GOD had Visited his People by giving
them Bread. But, Secondly, There is another Visitation of Judgment: The
Justice of GOD will go about and hold his Court; It will go about, and through
all the Land and keep its Court, and Arraign all Subjects, all Kings, and
Rulers are as well Subjects here, as the Meanest Beggar. O but it is wonderful
to hear tell that the Ministers of the Gospel should Talk at such a Rate.
Where was ever such a Thing as that heard? What Scripture can you get (say
they) for to Excommunicat Kings. Are they not Creatures and Subjects to GOD?
And are they not bound to be Holy as well as the Meanest. This word we shall
say, Unworthy are they that ever they should be Clothed with Authority that
follows not GOD with it. Will not GOD Judge Kings? And should not the
Ministers of the Gospel Excommunicate Kings? But the Scripture that says, Kings
ought to be Excommunicat; says, put away the Wicked Person from amongst you.
And if a King be a Wicked Person, it says, put him away. But the Ministers of
Scotland has woefully perverted the Power which GOD has given them; For they
have Excommunicat Godly and Holy-Men; and the Excommunication of Godly, and
Worthy, and Valiant Strachan, is lying upon the Church of Scotland, and they
have neglected the Excommunication of the most Vile and Profligate Persons. Are
Kings excemed then? There ^ a Visitation of Judgment, we say, and it is of Two
or Thre^ Kinds. There is a Temporal Visitation: GOD sits a while in one Land,
as it were, and a while in another Land, an^ He Judges, and executes Judgment,
and makes the Pestilence sometimes to be the Rope, sometimes the Sword,
sometimes the Famine; So that all these are Visitations of Judgment. Scotland
has been long Unvisited; now the Long^ the Sorer; it will have a Sore
Visitation. O! for Wisdom O! for Tenderness to Tremble: For Wisdom to Foresee,
an^ for Grace to Prepare against the Day of Visitation, and a Severe GOD. But
next, There is a Great Visitation of the whole when all the World shall be
Visited; and this is such a Narrow Net that None will go throw: Ye may Escape
Visitations on Earth, and win by the sides of that Net one Way o^ another by
Providence: But there is a Net coming that wi^ Catch all. What will ye do? Though
ye should win by all Things ^ye will never win by the Judgment of GOD, and the
Tribunal of GOD. What will ye do then when you come there?

Let us Pray.

