THE Complete Solemnity Of St. GEORGES Day: Consisting in the MORNING
PREPARATION, And MAGNIFICENT PROCEEDING, The Solemn CORONATION And Coronation
Oath: WITH THE Solemnities of Serving The KINGS Table At the ROYAL Feast: And
Ceremonies of the Challenge made by the Champion In Westminster Hall.

All Described In a Perfect Narrative of the Coronation of his Late Sacred
MAJESTY Charles the Second, On Saint Georges Day, April the 23th.

London, Printed by W. M. and Sold by Walter Davis in Amen Corner, 1685.

THE NARRATIVE OF HIS MAJESTY's CORONATION, With his Magnificent Proceeding and
Feast, in Westminster Hall. April the 23th. 1661.
UPon the 23th. of April, being S. Georges day, about seven in the morning, the
King took water from the Privy Stairs at Whitehal, and landed at the Parliament
Stairs, from whence he went up to the Princes Lodgings; where, after he had
reposed himself, he was arrayd in Royal Robes of Crimson velvet furred with
Ermine, by which time the Nobility, being come together, Robed themselves in
the Lords House and Painted Chamber.

The Judges also with those of the long Robe, the Knights of the Bath (then in
their Robes of Purple Satin lined with white Taffity) and Gentlemen of the
Privy Chamber, met in the Court of Request, and being drawn down into
Westminster Hall, where this great Solemnity (ordered by the Officers at Arms)
began, The Nobility, in their proper Robes carrying their Coronets in their
hands, proceeded according to their several dignities and degrees, before His
Majesty up to his Throne of State, which was raised at the West end of the
Hall, placing themselves upon each side thereof.

The King being set in a rich Chair under a Glorious Cloth of State, Sir
Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of the Jewel House, presented the Sword of State,
as also the Sword called Curtana, and two other Swords, to the Lord high
Constable, who took and delivered them to the Lord high Chamberlain, and he
laid them upon the Table before the King, and in the like manner the Spurs.

Immediately after, the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, by whom the Regalia
had been brought in Procession from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, being vested
in rich Copes, came up from the lower end thereof in manner following.

First, The Sergeant of the Vestry in a Scarlet mantle.

Then the Children of the Kings Chapel in Scarlet mantles

Then the Quire of Westminster in Surplices.

Then the Gentlemen of the Kings Chapple in Scarlet mantles.

Next the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings at Arms.

Then the Dean carrying Saint Edwards Crown.

And after him five of the Prebends of that Church.

The first carrying the Scepter with the Cross.

The Second the Scepter with the Dove. The third the Orb with the Cross.

The fourth King Edwards Staff. The Fifth the Chalice and Patena.

Who passing thus through the Hall, and making their due Reverences in three
places, and toward the upper end, the Quires and Officers at Arms falling off
on each side, the Dean and Prebends ascended the Steps, at the top whereof,
Garter Principal King at Arms standing, conducted them to the Table placed
before the Throne, where mak^ng their last Reverence, the Dean first presented
the Crown, which was by the Lord-high Constable, and Lord Great Chamberlain, set
upon the Table, who likewise received from the Prebends the Regalia, which they
carried, and said them also by the Crown.

Then the Lord Great Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the King,
His Majesty disposed of them to the Noble Men which carried them in the
proceeding, viz, Saint Edwards Staff to the Earl of Sandwich.

The Spurs to the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. The Scepter with the Cross
to the Earl of Bedford. The pointed Sword (born on the left hand of Curtana) to
the Earl of Derby. The pointed Sword (born on the Right hand thereof) to the
Earl of Shrewsbury. The Sword called Curtana to the Earl of Oxford. The Sword
of State to the Earl of Manchester. The Scepter with the Dove to the Duke of
Albemarle. The Orb with the Cross to the Duke of Buckingham. Saint Edwards
Crown to the Duke of Ormond. The Patena to the Bishop of Exeter. and lastly,
The Chalice to the Bishop of London.
All things thus prepared about ten a Clock the proceeding began, from the Hall
in the Palace Yard, through the Gate House, along the great Sanctuary, to the
West end of the Abbey, upon blew Cloth, which was spread upon the ground from
the Throne in Westminster Hall, to the great steps in the Church, by Sir George
Carteret Knight his Majesty's Vice Chamberlain, as Almoner that day by special
appointment.

The proceeding to the Coronation was in this following Order.
THe Drums four, the Trumpets sixteen in four classes. The Sergeant Porter, and
the Sergeant of the Vestry. The Six Clerks of the Chancery. The Children and
Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel. Ten of the Kings Chapplains having dignities.
The Prebends of Westminster. The Aldermen of London. The Master of the
Jewel-House. The Kings Learned Council at Law. The Knights of the Privy
Council. The Kings Solicitour and the Kings Attorney. Portcullis Pursuivant at
Arms. The Kings eldest Sergeant at Law. The Barons in their Robes two and two,
carrying their Caps of Crimson Velvet turned up with Minever in their hands.
The Esquiers of the Body. The Masters of Request. The Gentelmen of the Privy
Chamber. The Bishops two and two according to their Dignities and
Consecrations. Rouge Croix, Blew Mantle. Pursuivants The Knights of the Bath in
their Purple Robes. The Viscounts two and two in their Robes with their
Coronets in their hands. The Barons of the Exchecquer and Justices of both
Benches. Somerset. Chester. Heralds The Lord chief Baron, and the Lord
Chief Justice of the Common pleas. The Earls two and two in their Robes holding
their Coronets in their hands. The Master of the Rolls, and the Lord chief
Justice of the Kings Bench. Richmond. Windsor. Heralds The Marquess of
Dorchester. Lancaster, York. Heralds The Marquess of Worcester. Norroy,
Clarencieux. Provincial Kings carrying their Coronets in their Hands. In their
Robes with their Coronets in their Hands. The Lord high Treasurer. The Lord
high Chancellor. St. Edwards Staff born by the Earl of Sandwich. The Spurs
born by the Earl of Pembroke and Montgommery. St. Edwards Scepter born by the
Earl of Bedford. The third Sword drawn, and born by the Earl of Derby. The
Sword called Curtana, drawn, and born by the Earl of Oxford. The Pointed Sword
drawn, and born by the Earl of Shrewsbury. The Lord Mayor of London, with the
City Mace. Garter Principal King at Arms. The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod.
The Earl of Lindsey, Lord great Chamberlain of England. Serjants at Arms The
Earl of Suffolk, Earl Marshal for this present occasion. The Sword of State in
the Scabbard, born by the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of the
Household. The Earl of Northumberland, Lord Constable of England for this
present occasion. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. The Scepter with the
Dove born by the Duke of Albemarle. St. Edwards Crown born by the Duke of
Ormond, Lord High Steward for this present occasion. The Orb born by the Duke
of Buckingham. The Patena, born by the Bishop of Exeter in his Cope. The Regale
or Chalice, born by the Bishop of London in his Cope. The Pensioners with their
Pole Axes. Barons of the Cinque Ports, their whole number XVI. Habited in
Doublets of Crimson Satin, Scarlet Hose Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson
Satin, black Velvet Caps, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying the Canopy. The KING
The Pensioners with their Pole Axes. Barons of the Cinque Ports, their whole
Number XVI. Habited in Doublets of Crimson Satin, Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns,
lined with Crimson Satin, black Velvet Caps, and black Velvet Shoes, carrying
the Canopy. Supported by the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Bishop of Duresm His
Train born by the Lords Mandevile, Cavendish, Ossory, and Percy, Assisted by
the Lord Mansfield Master of the Robes. The Earl of Lauderdale One of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. Mr. Seamour, and Mr. Ashburnham, Both Grooms of
the Bedchamber. The Captain of the Guard. The Captain of the Pensioners. The
Yeomen of the Guard in their Coats.

The proceeding passing through the Quire went up the Stairs toward the great
Theater, and as they came to the top thereof were disposed by the Heralds into
two Galleries, built on either side the upper end of the Quire. On the North
side the Aldermen of London, the Judges, and others of the long Robe, as also
the Quire of Westminster, with the Gentlemen and Children of the Kings Chapel;
and on the South side the Knights of the Bath, and Gentlemen of the privy
Chamber.

Near the Pulpit stood the Master of the Jewel-house, and the Lord Mayor of
London.

The Nobility were seated on Forms round about the inside of the Theater: On
the corner whereof, nearest to the Altar, stood the Provincial Kings, Heralds,
and Pursuivants at Arms.

Within the rails, on either side of the entrance of the Theater from the
Quire, stood the Sergeants at Arms, with their Mares, and over the door, at the
West end of the Quire, stood the Drums and Trumpets.

The King, being entered the West door of the Church, was received with an
Anthem: And here his Majesty kneeled down, and after some short Ejaculations,
he proceeded to the Theater, between the Quire and the Altar,, on which the
Throne of Estate was placed; on the East side whereof was set a Chair,
Footstool, and Cushion, covered with Cloth of Gold, whereon for a while he
reposed himself. Immediately after, the Bishop of London (who was appointed to
officiate, in part, for the Archbishop of Canterbury) with the Lord High
Constable, the Earl Marshal, the Lord great Chamberlain, the Lord High
Chancellor, and Lord Chamberlain of the Household, went to the South, the West,
and North sides of the Theater, and acquainted the People, that he presented to
them King Charles the Rightful inheritour of the Crown of this Realm; and asked
them if they were willing to do their Homage, Service, and bounden Duty to him.
As this was doing the King rose up, looking toward the people to whom the
Bishop spoke: Who by their shouts signified their Consent, the like question
was put to the Nobility.

And while an Anthem was sung by the Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel, a Carpet
was spread by the Officers of the removing Wardrobe, and over that was laid,
by the Usher of the Black Rod, assisted by the Yeomen of the Wardrobe, a Silk
Carpet and Cushion, and then the Bishop of London went and placed himself on
the North side of the Altar.

Then the King descending from his Throne, proceeded toward the Altar,
supported by the Bishops of Duresm, and Bath and Wells; the four Swords, and
grand Officers, and the Noble Men, and Bishops that carried the Regalia, going
before him. At the steps of the Altar he kneeled down, and offered a Cloth of
Gold Pall, and an Ingot of Gold of a pound weight, and retired to his Chair of
State, on the South side of the Altar, and the Bishop of London receiving the
Regalia, and placing them on the Altar, the Bishops and Noble Men, that carried
them, retired to their Seats, and the King kneeled at a fald-stool on the right
side of his Chair of State, whill'st the Bishop of London said the Prayer, O
God that do visit those that are Humble, etc. which ended the Bishop of
Worcester preached, on the 2. ver. of the 28. of Proverbs. On the Kings right
hand stood the Bishop of Duresme, and beyond him the Noble Men with the Swords
naked and erect, the Duke of York sat on his left hand, and by him stood the
Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the Lord great Chamberlain. On a Form behind the
Duke, sat the Lord High Chancellor, and Lord High Treasurer, and in a Gallery
the Duchess of York, where were also placed the Ambassadors and Foreign
Ministers. The Bishop of Londen sat in the Archbishops Chair, on the
North-side of the Altar, and the rest of the Bishops on Forms behind him, and
toward St. Edwards Chapel stood Garter principal King at Arms, the Officers
of the Wardrobe in Scarlet Gowns, the Sergeant of the Vestrey and Vergers, with
some of the Grooms and Pages of the Bed Chamber to do service as occasion
required. Opposite to those on the South side stood the Dean and Prebends of
Westminster Between the Kings Chair of State and the Pulpit, but more to the
North side, was placed St. Edwards Chair, covered with Cloth of Gold.

Sermon ended the Bishop of London came near, and asked the King if he would
take the Oath of his Progenitors, to confirm the Laws, to the People and
Franchises to the Clergy, granted by St. Edward the Confessor, to maintain the
Gospel established in the Kingdom, etc. The Bishop of Rochester also reading
the Bishops Petition, praying, that they and the Churches under their
Government might be protected, etc. All which his Majesty promised to perform,
and assisted by the Bishops of Duresm, and Bath and Wells with the Sword of
State born before him, and the Lord great Chamberlain attending, went to the
Altar, and took an Oath to perform what he had promised, and in like manner
returned to his Chair of State, where kneeling at the Fald-stool, while the
Bishop of London and the Bishops of Peterborough, and Gloucester, performed
divine service. toward the end whereof, the Archbishop of Canterbury came out
of St. Edwards Chapel concluding the service. Then the King arose and assisted
by the Bishops of Duresm, and Bath and Wells, went to the Altar, His Royal
Robes being taken of by the Lord great Chamberlain, and carried into St.
Edwards Chapple, mean while the Chair was removed from the entrance of the
Theater, and set on the North side, betwixt the Altar and St. Edwards Chair,
where the King sitting (the Dean of Westminster holding the Ampulla and pouring
out the Oil) he was anointed by the Archbishop, his Grace saying the Prayers,
and the Quire singing the Anthem, appointed for that Solemn occasion. The Dukes
of Buckingham and Albermarle, with the Earls of Berks and Sandwich, holding a
Cloth of Gold pall over the Kings head. The anointing being dried up, the Dean
of Westminster closes the loops of his Shirt and the Archbishop receiving the
Coise from the Lord great Chamberlain put it on the Kings head. The Dean of
Westminster having put on the Surplice, The Tissue Hose and Sandals, and the
close Pall, (being Cloth of Gold,) fetched the spurs from the Altar, delivering
them to the Lord great Chamberlain, who having with them touched the Kings
Heels, sent them back.

Then the Archbishop receiving the Sword of State from the Lord Chamberlain of
the Household laid it upon the Altar, and having said the Prayers delivered it
to the King, which was girded on by the Lord great Chamberlain,

Then the Dean of Westminster put on the Armil made of Cloth of Tissue, and
next the Mantle or open Pall, being made of Cloth of gold lined with red
Taffaty.

In this time S. Edwards Chair was set in the middle of the Isle right against
the Altar, wherein the King being set the Archbishop brought S. Edwards Crown
from the Altar, and put it on the Kings Head, whereupon all the People cried,
God save the King, and the Bishop said, God Crown thee with a Crown of Glory,
etc. and several Prayers proper to this Great Solemnity, and an Anthem being
sung by the Quires; the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts put on their
Coronets, the Barons their Caps, and the Kings at Arms their Coronets. Then the
Master of the Jewel House delivered the Ring to the Archbishop, who put it on
the fourth finger of the Kings right hand, and after the Prayers, the Linen
Gloves were delivered to the King by the Lord Great Chamberlain, then the King
went to the Altar and offered his Sword, which being redeemed by the Lord
Chamberlain of the Household, was by him drawn, and so carried by him all the
rest of the Solemnity. -- Then the Archbishop took the Scepter with the Cross
from the Altar, and Mr. Henry Howard (Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk) by
virtue of the tonure of his Manor of Wirksop, in the County of Norfolk,
delivered to the King a rich Glove for his right hand, which the King having
put on, received the Scepter from the Archbishop, and during the Prayer, the
said Mr. Howard performed the service of supporting the Kings right Arm, --
Next the Archbishop delivered to the King the Scepter with the Dove, who then
kneeled, with both the Scepters in his hands, whilst the Archbishop pronounced
the blessing. Then the King arose and sat in St. Edwards Chair whilst the
Archbishop and Bishops kneeled, and were kissed by him, after which the King
returned to the Chair placed on the Theater behind his Throne, where he reposed
himself while Prayers were said, and Te Deum sung, which ended the King
ascended his Throne, in the midst of the Theater, the Swords, great Officers,
and Bishops standing on each side, while a Prayer was said. After which the
Bishops and Nobility did their Homage. First the Arch Bishop kneeling before
the King said, I William Archbishop of Canterbury, shall be faithful and true,
and faith and truth bear unto you, our Sovereign Lord, and your Heirs Kings of
England, and shall do, and truly acknowledge the Service of the Land which I
claim to hold of you in right of the Church, So help me God, after which He and
all the Bishops kissed the Kings left check.

Then came up the Duke of York, with Garter principal King at Arms before him,
and his Train born by two Gentlemen, when being come to the Throne he kneeled
down, put off his Coronet, and did Homage in these words, I James Duke of York
become your Liege man, of life and Limb, and of Earthly Worship: and Faith and
Truth I shall bear unto you, to live and dye against all manner of Folk, So
help me God; At which the Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, and the People
shouted. The like did the Dukes of Buckingham and Albemarle for themselves, and
the rest of the Dukes.

Then the Marquisses of Worcester and Dorchester, next the Earl of Oxford
atended by the rest of the Earls to signify their Consents. Then Vicount
Hereford for the Vicounts, and then the Drums beat, Trumpets sounded, and the
People shouted. Lastly the Baron Audly did the like Homage, being attended by
the rest of the Barons, which was followed with beating of Drums, sounding of
Trumpets and the Peoples shouts, after which the Duke of York and all the
Nobility singly ascended the Throne, and touched the Kings Crown, promising
thereby to be always ready with all their power to support it. During which
Solemn Ceremony the Lord High Chancellor went to the South, West, and North
sides of the Stage, and proclaimed to the People the Kings General pardon,
being attended by Mr. Garter to the South Side, and by a Gentleman Usher, and
two Heralds to the other two sides, the Lord Cornwallis Treasurer of the
Household, at the same time throwing amongst the people Medals of Gold and
Silver.

The King being thus enthroned, the Gentlemen of the Chapel sung the Anthem,
Behold O Lord our Defender, and look upon the face of thine anointed, etc. at
the end whereof the Drums and Trumpets beat and founded. After which the Bishop
of London begun the communion service, which being ended, the King descended
from his Throne with his Crown on his Head and the Scepters in his hands, (the
rest of the Regalia being carried before him,) and thence proceeded into St.
Edwards Chapple, where he took off St. Edwards Crown, and delivered it to the
Bishop of London, who placed it on St. Edwards Altar, the rest of the Regalia
being given to the Dean of Westminster, and by him laid there also. Then he
retired into a Traverse, where he was disrobed of the Robes he was Crowned in
(which were delivered to the Dean of Westminster to be laid up with the rest of
the Regalia) and being invested with his Royal Robes of Purple Velvet, he came
near to St. Edwards Altar, where the Bishop of London standing ready with the
Imperial Crown in his hands, set that upon his Head. After which he took the
two Scepters, and proceeded to Westminster Hall, the same way that he came, and
attended after the same manner, saving that the Noblemen and Bishops, that
brought the Regalia to the Abbey, went not now immediately before him as they
did then, but went according to their degrees: All the Noblemen having their
Coronets and Caps on their heads and the Kings at Arms their Coronets.

The proceeding being entered the Hall; the Nobility and others, who had places
assined them, went and placed themselves, but the King, attended with the Great
Officers, withdrew into the Inner Court of Wards, and in the mean time all the
Tables in the body of the Hall were served.

On the Right hand were set two Tables one beneath the other, at the upper end
of the first sat the Bishops, and below them the Judges, with the rest of the
Long Robe.

At the second Table sat the Masters of the Chancery and the six Clerks, at
which likewise the Barons of the Cinque Ports were then necessitated to sit (by
reason of a Disturbance which some of the Kings Footmen made in offering to
take the Canopy from them) although the upper end of the first Table was
appointed for them.

On the other side of the Hall was placed likewise a long Table, which reached
down near to the Common Pleas Court whereat the Nobility dined, and behind this
close to the wall sat the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder and twelve chief
Citizens of London.

Lastly within the Court of Common Pleas was a Table set for the Officers at
Arms, each Table being furnished with three Courses answerable to that of the
Kings, besides the Banquet.

At the upper end of the Hall (where upon an Ascent of steps a Theater was
raised for his Majesty's Royal Seat at this great Solemnity) a large Table
being placed, the Sergeant of the Ewry two Sergeants at Arms with their Maces
going before him, brought up the Covering, which was spread by the Gentelmen
Ushers and Sergeants of the Ewry.

This being done the Officers of the Pantry, with two Sergeants at Arms also
before them, brought up the Salt of State and Caddinet.

A little before the King returned to dinner two Esquires of the Body took
their Seats upon two little foot-stools on either side of the foot of the Kings
Chair (placed opposite to the middle of the Table) and there sat until the
King came in to Dinner, when Rising and performing their Duty in placing the
Kings Robes for his better convenience of sitting, they sat down again at the
Kings feet, until the King gave them leave to rise.

On the right side of the Throne was erected a Gallery for the Officers at
Arms, and opposite to that on the other side, another for the Music, and below
on the old Scaffold next the Court of Common Pleas, stood the Kings Trumpets.

The proceeding at the carrying up of the first Course to the Kings Table.
THe two Clerks Comptrollers. The two Clerks of the Green Cloth. And the
Cofferer of his Majesty's Household. All in Black Velvet Gowns, trimmed with
black Silk and Gold Lace, with Velvet Caps raised in the Head. Six Sergeants at
Arms, two and two. The Earl Marshal on the Left Hand The Lord High Steward. The
Lord High Constable on the Right. All three mounted on Horseback in their
Robes, and with their Coronets on their Heads, having their Hors^^ richly
trapped, Six Sejeants (...) two and two. The Comptroller of the Household. The
Treasurer of the Household, With their white Staves. The Earl of Dorset Sewer.
The Earl of Chesterfield his assistant. The Knights of the Bath carrying up the
Service, two and two to a Dish, which was set upon the Table by the Earl of
Lincoln Carver, assisted by the Earls Sewers. In the Rear came up the three
Clerks of his Majesty's Kitchen, all suited in Black Figured Satin Gowns, and
Velvet Caps, in fashion like those worn by the Clerks Comptrollers.

Dinner being set on the Table the King came forth from the Inner Court of
Wards, in his Royal Robes with the Crown on his Head, and Scepter in his hand,
having the three Swords born naked before him, and having washed, sat down to
din^^^* the Bishop of London saying Grace.

On the Kings Right hand stood the Noble men that carried the three Swords
holding them naked and erected all the Dinner while; at his left hand stood the
Lord high Chamberlain, to whom the King had given the Scepter to hold, and at
the Tables end on the Kings left hand sat the Duke of York in his Robes and
Coronet.

Soon after Dinner was begun, the Lord Allington, by virtue of his Tenure of
the Manor of Wymundley in the County of Hertford, served the King of his first
Cup, (which was of Silver Gilt) and after the King had drank he had the Cup for
his fee.

Next Thomas Leigh Esquire was brought up to the Table with a Mess of Pottage
called Dilegrout, by reason of his Tenure of the Manner of Addington in the
County of Surrey.

Afterward (a little before the second Course was ready) Sir Edward Dymock
Knight (being the Kings Champion, as being seized of the Man^r of Scrivelsby in
the County of Lincoln) entered the Hall, on a goodly White Courser, armed at
all points, and there having made a stand for sometime, advanced in manner
following.

First two Trumpets. Then the Sergeant Trumpeter with his Mace. After him two
Sergeants at Arms with their Maces. Then one Esquire carrying his Target,
having his Arms depicted thereon. And another Esquire carrying the Champions
Lance upright. After them York Herald at Arms. The Earl Marshal on his Left
Hand on Horseback. The Champion. The Lord High Constable on his Right Hand on
Horseback.

Being come some few Steps he made a stand, whereupon the said Herald
proclaimed his Challenge in the following words.

If any Person of what Degree soever, high or low, shall deny, or gainsay our
Sovereign Lord KING CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Son and next Heir to our Sovereign Lord CHARLES
the First, the last King deceased, to be Right Heir to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm of England, or that he ought not to enjoy the same, here is his
Champion, who says that he lies, and is a False Traitor, being ready in
Person to Combat with him, and in this Quarrel wild adventure his Life against
him on what day soever he shall be appointed.

Whereupon the Champion threw down his Gantlet, which lying some small time,
and no body taking it up, it was delivered to him again by the same Herald,
then he advanced further forward till he came to the Middle of the Hall. And
lastly to the foot of the Steps going up to the Throne of State.

This being done, the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery (assisted as before)
presented, on the Knee; to the King, a Gilt Cup (with a Cover) full of Wine,
who drank to the Champion, and by the said Earl sent him the Cup, which having
received he after three Reverences drank it all off, went a little backward,
and so departed out of the Hall; taking the said Cup for his Fee.

After which Garter principal King at Arms, with the two provincial Kings,
having their Coronets on, with the Heralds and Pursuivants at Arms, came down
from the Gallery, and went to the lower end of the Tables, where they first
made their Obeisance to his Majesty, then advancing up to the midst of the Hall
they did the like, and afterward at the foot of the steps to his Majesty's
Throne, where Garter being ascended, proclaimed his Majesty's Style in Latin,
French and English, according to ancient sage, crying Largess thrice, which
done they all retired into the midst of the Hall, and there after crying
Largess again thrice, he proclaimed the Kings Style as before. And lastly, they
went to the end of the Noble men's Table, and did the same again, and from
thence into the Common Pleas Court to Dinner.

Immedidiately after this the second Course was brought up by the Gentlemen
Pensioners, with the former Solemnity, the last dish being carried up by
Erasmus Smith Esquire, who then presented the King with three Maple Cups on the
behalf of Robert Barnham Esquire, in respect of his Tenure of the Manor of
Nether Bilsington, in the County of Kent.

Lastly, the Lord Mayor of London then presented the King with Wine in a Golden
Cup, having a Cover, of which the King having drank, the said Lord Mayor
received it for his Fee.

By this time the day being far spent, the King (having water brought him by
the Earl of Pembrook and his Assistants) washed and rose from Dinner before the
third Course was brought in; and retiring into the Inner Court of Wards, he
there disrobed himself, and from thence went privately to his Barge which
waited for him at the Parliament Stairs, and so to the Privy Stairs at
White Hall, where he landed.

FINIS.
The CORONATION OATH.
Archbishop. Sir, will you grant, and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
People of England the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England,
Vid. Rushworths Col. part. 1. Fol. 200.
your Lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs and
Franchises, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King, St. Edward your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings thereof,
and the Ancient Customs of the Realm.


KING. I grant and promise to keep them.


Archbishop. Sir, will you keep peace and godly agreement (according to your
power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People.


KING. I will keep it.


Archbishop. Sir, will you to your power cause Law, Justice and Discretion in
Mercy and Truth to be executed to your judgment.


KING. I will.


Archbishop. Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful
Customs, which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend
and uphold them to the Honor of God as much as in you lies.


KING. I grant and promise so to do.


Advertisement.
THe four Triumphal Arches built by the City of London, for the entertainment
of our late most gracious Sovereign Charles the second, in his Passage from the
Tower to Whitehall on the 22th of April, 1661. being the day before his
Coronation.

The Inside of Westminster-Abby, describing the Places of the Nobility and
great Officers, with the manner of the Kings Coronation, on St. Georges day,
proper to be added to this Book.

THe Complete Map of the Survey of all London, Westminster and Southwark, with
a Prospect of London and Westminster.

The Pocket Book of the Roads, with the computed and measured distance between
each Village and Town.

Sheet Maps describing the several Roads, with the Towns, Churches, Houses, and
other things remarkable in the Road, and on each side, with the turnings that
lead to them and other distant places, both pleasant and useful for Travelers,
the price 6 d. a sheet, or 10 d. each 100 Mile, fitted for a Pocket Book.

Sold by William Morgan, next the Blew Boar in Ludgate Street.


