HINC ILLAE LACRYMAE; OR, AN EPITOME OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sir William
Courten AND Sir Paul Pyndar Late of London Knts. Deceased. With their great
Services and Sufferings under the Crown of ENGLAND. Together with a Brief
NARRATIVE of the Case and Trial of certain Persons for Pyracy and Felony on the
10th. of February 1680. Upon a Special Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
grounded upon the Statute of the 28 of Henry the 8.

Faithfully and Modestly Collected by Thomas Carew Gent. with some Remarques
thereupon.

LONDON, Printed for the Persons Interessed, Anno Dom. MDCLXXXI.

To the Honorable Sir John Nicholas Knight of the Bath, One of the Clerks of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
AT the Instance and Importunity of the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of
Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, and several of their most considerable
Creditors, for whom I have been an Agent almost these forty years last past; am
now constrained to write this brief Narrative of their Services and Sufferings
for the Crown and Kingdom of England: Wherein so many Orphans and Widows have
long Groaned (under the misfortune of those two most Eminent Merchants in the
World of their time) whose Tears are not yet wiped away.

Its held for an Opinion amongst the Casuists, that although a Trespassor*
should be Iudicially acquitted and discharged of a particular Injury done unto
his Neighbor, without giving him satisfaction: Yet he stands obliged in Equity
and good Conscience to make him Restitution and Reparation for the Wrong and
Damages sustained.

The Arguments are far stronger against those that have Spoiled Courten and
Pyndar in the East and West Indies with a Continuando. Although their Rights
and Properties were Invaded at Home and Abroad, no Power could divest the
Proprietors and Interessed in this Case, of their Senses and Reason: In all
Revolutions of Government, nothing could make them Disloyal to their Prince,
nor Unfaithful to their Country; they never appeared otherwise then with their
Humble Addresses for some Seasonable Satisfaction to their Just Demands.

The Substance of the whole matters contained in this History, with the
Prosecution thereupon, are reduced into the following Abstracts (only the Scire
Facias brought by His Majesty, and the Plea thereupon, recited at large, as
they remain upon Record, and Humbly represented Methodically to the Right
Honorable Viscount Hyde, which will naturally fall under the Consideration of
the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury) being all contracted at last into
three several Petitions, the one relating to the Barbados, and the Products
thereof, the second to the Disbursements for the Crown before the year 1641.
the third to the Debts and Damages due from the East India Company of the
Netherlands, and some particular Inhabitants in Amsterdam and Middleburgh, to
the Estates of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, wherein the Honor and
Interest of the King and Kingdom are concerned to see Right done to the
Petitioners respectively, who had many kind Offices done for them in the
Premises by your Father, and have all of them a great Confidence in your Zeal
to Justice, and your readiness to do them all Lawful Favors in the duty of
your Office, and with that assurance I remain

SIR, Your most Obliged Friend and Servant THOMAS CAREW.
July 12th. 1681.
To the Right Honorable Lawrence Lord Hyde, Viscount Killingworth, Baron of
Wooten Basset, Primier Commissioner of the Treasury; and one of the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
IT was thought necessary and expedient by the late King Charles* and the Lords
and others of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in the year 1635.
upon the decay of the East India Trade, and His Majesty's Customs in the Port
of London: (The Merchants Trading to the East Indies, having wasted several
great Joint Stocks, being undermined and beaten out of Commerce by the Dutch,)
to give Command and encouragement to Sir William Courten and his Partners, by a
new Charter and Grant under the Great Seal of England, to undertake Trading
Uoyages to Goa, the parts of Mallabar, Chyna, Japan, etc. Upon whose
Foundations and Discoveries the present East India Company have taken such
Methods and Measures, whereby they have Trebled their Principal Actions,
Increased Navigation, and brought Honor and Wealth to this Kingdom.

But Sir William Courten and his Part^ers (as i^ most enterprises for the
public good) (...) great Difficulties, Losses and Damages, after they had
settled several Fact (...) in places of Strength, and Se^urity, at their vast
Expense and Charges, upon hopes of Protection from the Crown of England; which
pr^^ed otherwise (pro tempore) by reason of the late Intestine Troubles in
England, Scotland, and Ireland that gave opportunity to the Hollanders to spoil
those Noble undertakings of Sir William Courten and his Associates.

The King of Great* Britain having granted the Privilege and Favor to Sir
William Courten and his Partners in the said Charter, (as an Ensign that they
were employed by His Majesty,) to carry i^ all their Ships the same Colors
commonly called the Jack o^ English Fl^gg* Whereby Captain Proud, and other Old
Officers (yet Living) of the East India Companies Ships, upon the Command of a
great Gun Struck their Flaggs and Lowered their Lop-Sails at Goa iii view of
the^ Portugals and Dutch; such a respect was paid to the Kings Colors, when he
was in Prosperity; that soon afterward in the year 1643. were taken down from
the Bona Esperanza, and dragged a^out the Streets by the Hollanders in
Battavia, when they had spoiled Courten of his Ships and Goods.

My Lord, It would seem a great piece of Folly to make any impertinent
Repetitions, in a Case so well known to the World; wherein every Paragraph is
an Abstract out of Matters of Record: Only I am bound to acquaint Your Honor,
that the late Lord High Chancellor of England Your Father, was much concerned
in several Transactions thereof, who I presume (if he were now Living) would
Study all ways and means possible to compose the Differences and Controversies
in this Case, rather then suffer those things to be Argued publicly in the
Highest Court of Judicature, and there to remain unto Posterity; wherein the
Kings Honor and Justice would be exposed, by recriminating diverse persons that
lie under such Circumstances of Grand Mistakes and Oppression.

The Memory of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, who had so deeply
suffered in the East and West Indies, and of their great Services otherwise for
the Crown of England, readily Inclined His now Majesty and the Ministers of
State in the year 1660. to recommend their Cases more especially for
Satisfaction and Reparation, which were Solicited several years together with
great Industry and Expense, both at Home and Abroad, without any effect,
otherwise then some preparatory means toward relief in two of their Demands as
follows, (that is to say.) First, Concerning Sir William Courten's Title to the
Barbados. wherein he was Absolute Proprietor by Original Right of Discovery
and Possession, which was referred to the Committee of Foreign Plantations, who
found that by the Laws of Nations, and of this Kingdom, the Heirs and Assigns
of Sir William Courten retained a Freehold in the said Island, having no ways
forfeited the same for any Offense: And that the Patent to James Earl of
Carlisle, mentioning him to be Lord Proprietor of the said Island, was declared
void; and against Law. The Council of Courten further affirming, that no
Sovereign Prince or State could Disseize a person of a Uacancy possessed by him
at his own proper Costs and Charges, without manifest Injustice: And that it
was against the Honor and Prudence, as well as the Justice of a Nation, to
despoil any Subject that laid out himself for the good of his Country: Yet no
Restitution has been made for the said Island and Plantations to the Heirs and
Creditors of Courten, either by the King or the Planters, out of the Old
Servile Rents of Sugar, Cotton or Tobacco for every head, due to the Original
Proprietor, or out of the four and half per Cent of all Goods Exported, granted
by the General Assembly of Barbados in lieu thereof to the Lord Willoughby,
and since Assigned to the King.

Secondly, Concerning the Spoils and Depredations upon the two Ships, the Bona
Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura in the East Indies, particularly excepted
for Reparation by the 15 th. Article of the Treaty concluded at London the 4
th. September 1662. (no ways performed:) It was therefore thought necessary and
convenient upon the farther Applications, (of the persons Interessed and
Injured) to the King, and to the Parliament; that a War should be declared
against the States General of the United Provinces, which was carried on at the
vast Charge of the Kingdom: His Majesty being Graciously pleased upon the
entrance into that War, to express himself in a Speech to both Houses of
Parliament as follows.

The 24th. of November 1664.
Mr. Speaker,

ANd you Gentlemen of the House of Commons; I know not whether it be worth My
pains, to endeavor to remove a vile Jealousy, which Ill men scatter abroad,
and which I am sure will never sink into the breast of any Man who is worthy to
^it upon your Benches; that when you have given me a Noble and proportionable
Supply for the support of a War, I may be induced by some evil Counselors (for
they will be thought to think very respectively of my own person) to make a
sudden Peace, and get all that Money for my own private occasions.

But let me tell you, and you may be most confident of it, That when I am
compelled to enter into a War, for the Protection, Honor, and Benefit of my
Subjects: I will (God Willing) not make a Peace, but upon the obtaining and
securing those ends for which the War is entered into; and when that can be
done, no good man will be sorry for the determination of it.

IN the Month of May following, His Majesty out of a Just sense of Sir William
Courten's, Sir Paul Pyndar's and their Partners Injuries, Damages and Losses in
their Shipe, Goods and Commerce; did in pursuance of His own Authority and
Prerogative-Royal, Grant a Special Commission for Reprizals under the Great
Seal of England, grounded upon the Law of Nations, and the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, to continue effectual in Law at all times, until the sum of 151612
l. Sterling Money, with incident Costs and Charges, should be Recovered, and
Received, as by the Letters Patents recited in the Plea to His Majesty's Scire
Facias brought in the High Court of Chancery remaining upon Record in the
Petty-Bagg-Office, hereafter set forth at large more plainly appears.

It is to be remarked, that during the War, several Dutch East India Ships, and
other Merchant Ships were taken by the Kings Men of War, and made Free Prize;
but no part thereof given toward the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura,
although earnestly sought after: Those Spoils of War (the Sacred Returns due to
the Injured and Oppressed) the price of much Blood and Treasure spent in the
Expeditions of Courten and his Partners, were otherwise employed; Which lies
heavy at the Doors of those that have eaten the Bread of the Fatherless and
Widows, for whom the Land Mourns.

IT is to be considered, when the said Letters of Reprizal were put in
Execution by Mr. Carew and his Associates, in the beginning of the year 1666.
The prosecution thereof was Arbitrarily suspended by Proclamation on the Tenth
of August following, without any Judicial hearing, their Seamen frequently
taken away for the Kings Ships; His Royal Highness and His Secretary also
pretending that it was prejudicial to their Interest in obstructing ordinary
Letters of Marque during the War; Carew Committed to the Fleet by Order of the
Council Board, and Enlarged by the Dreadful Flames on the 2 of September
following; so that instead of a Remedy it proved a Grievance, the Ships and
Goods Reprized being not sufficient to repair one half of the Costs and Charges
in Equipping out Frigots toward recovery of the Debt: The Iniquity and
Corruption of the Proctors and Common Claimers being such, that discouraged all
men concerned in that Affair of Reprizals, which in the Nations of old were
esteemed as Chattels Real, and Sacred Decrees, like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians.

Nevertheless, in the Month of June 1667. a Treaty was concluded at Breda,
wherein it was mentioned (as it is said) that all Offenses, Injuries, Losses and
Damages should be buried in Oblivion; and all Letters of Reprizal Revoked,
which Peace and Alliance continued for the space of four years: The Dutch
Trading in English Bottoms, having a War with the French King: Then His Majesty
declared a second War in Conjunction with France against the States General,
which continued for the space of two years.

DUring which time the Proprietors and Creditors Revived their Demands, and
made fresh Applications to His Majesty in Council to be Relieved in a public
way, whereupon several Orders were made at the Council Board: That Instructions
should be sent to the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries for that purpose: Which
being delivered to the said George Carew* with the Kings Letter to the said
Ambassadors, in the Month of June 1672. Intimating that the Obligations of all
past Treaties being Cancelled, it was just and seasonable that provision should
be made in the next Treaty for entire satisfaction of the Spoils and Damages of
the two Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura, according to the
Liquidation in the Letters Patents; wherein the Debt was stated and confirmed
under the Great Seal for Reparation as aforesaid.

But in the Month of August, the States of Holland Apprehended the said Carew
at the Hague, notwithstanding his Passport (from the Dutch Commissioners or
Ambassadors at Hampton Court) to Travel all parts of the United Netherlands,
and committed him and John Sherland to Prison, and Condemned the said Carew for
a Spy and an Enemy of their Country, in obstructing the Good Intelligence and
Understanding between the Ministers of State of both Nations; and would have
Executed the said Sentence, if Mr. John Van Watchtendunck Commissioner of the
States General, and Advocate Sass, had not been Prisoners in the Tower, for
Crimes of a very High Nature; where they continued Prisoners, even as Carew and
Shirland did during the War, which ended in a Separate Peace, (excluding
France) concluded at London Feb. 9. 1663/4. Whereby the States General were to
pay 800000 Pattacoons to the King of Great Britain for Damages, at four equal
Payments in four years; The first whereof was paid to Alderman Backwell, upon
Ratification of the Treaty, to the Kings use, and the other three were Assigned
to the Prince of Orange, for old Debts contracted between His Father and
Grandfather, and the late King Charles; The Bona Esperanza being left in Statu
quo, without any other regard.

WHereupon several Questions were propounded concerning the special Grant
aforesaid for Reprizals.

Frist, Whether in such a Case, under those Circumstances, the Debt of 151612
l. and Damages were extinguished or discharged. Secondly, Whether the Remedy
could be taken away, or the Patent made null and void, without any Satisfaction
or Reparation to the Persons Interessed and Injured.
Which Being Resolved by Council Learned in the Laws on the Negative, as
follows.

As to the first, That no Act of State, unless by Parliament, can bind the
particular Right of the Subject, without satisfaction first made; and that the
King could not Release or Discharge any one that had done a private Injury, to
a particular person, but that still be might pursue his Right by way of Law.
Secondly, That Letters of Reprizal granted of Common Right, and not of Grace
and Favor; when once the Power is vested in the Subject, pursuant to the Law,
without any other Limitation, then until the Debt and Damages shall be
Recovered and Received: The same cannot be bound or suspended by any subsequent
Act of the King without Reparation; the Laws of England having so secured the
Subject, that it is not in the Kings power to dispose of His Subjects Goods.
THe Arguments they used to make good their Assertions (inter alia) were, that
the Letters Patents beforementioned was a Judicial Act, whereby there was
granted and confirmed such a permanent and Legal Authority, vested with an
Interest in Law for satisfaction of the Debt of 151612 l. (and not a bare
Ambulatory and Temporary Authority or Commission recoverable at pleasure,) for
that such special Grants are required in due form of Law after diverse
Proceedings, Citations, Admonitions and Chargable Process in making out the
Debt and Damages that oftentimes exceed the demands before they can attain
unto Letters of Reprizal, Iudicially to remain upon Record until satisfaction
and Reparation, otherwise the Consequences in Cases of Spoils might prove
dangerous and destructive to Civil Society and Commerce, there being no other
way or Remedy under Heaven left for Recovery and Reparations for Injuries,
Spoils and Depredations done to the particular Subjects of England, since the
old Writs, De Arresto Facto super bonis Mercatorum alieni genium pro Transgr'
etc. in the Register, and F. N. B. were taken away by the Statute Laws of the
Realm, whereby Reprizals were to Issue forth without delay in lieu thereof, for
satisfaction of Wrongs, Losses and Damages, and the Law must not in any Case
be rendered ineffectual.

However, upon these Considerations several Addresses were made by the
Proprietors and Interessed Creditors to the King, and the States General
Respectively, not omitting the Prince of Orange, whose Fortunes were raised by
the last War, when he was restored to the Offices, Honors and Profits of his
Father and Grandfather (through the Sweat; Blood and Labors of English men,)
to have some satisfaction out of the Eight hundred thousand Pattacoons, or any
other ways as might seem most expedient.

But nothing could be obtained, no not so much as a Hearing of their Cause.
Then least a failer of Justice in this Case should be urged by the Foraign
Creditors of Courten in France and Flanders, or brought as a President against
England, where there was always the severest profession of Justice: Three Ships
were entered into the Admiralty Court by the Proprietors, with the Commanders
Names, number of Men, Guns and Provision, to Reprize what they could of the
said Debt and Damages, according to the purport and intent of the said Letters
Patents: But upon notice thereof to the States General, they Interposed by
their Ambassador to obstruct the prosecution; then a pretended Super Sedeas
issued forth, afterward a Proclamation to hinder the due Proceedings at Law;
yet all this while no offer was made of any Satisfaction, either by the States
General, or the Prince of Orange, or by the King of England, or any of their
Ministers of State respectively.

Afterward a Dutch Ship being Laden with Wine and Prunes, was taken by one of
the said Commanders, near the Isle of Wight, in the Mouth of December 1680. in
order to a Condemnation toward the Debt and Damages aforesaid: Yet several
persons were so Blood Thirsty, Malicious and Ignorant in the Laws of England;
as to prosecute the said Commander and his Seamen, apprehending them with
Warrants, which they procured in the Kings Name, whereby they were Arrested as
Pirates and Felons; the said Warrants being as follows in haec verba.

CHarles the second, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To our Marshal of our High Court of
Admiralty of England: And also to Daniel Giles Marshal of our Vice Admiralty of
the Isle of Wight in the County of Southampton, and to all Mayors, Justices of
Peace, Sheriffs, Constables and other our Officers and Ministers whatsoever
Greeting; Whereas it has appeared to Us in Council, by the Examination and
Confessions taken in the Isle of Wight, before two of our Deputy Vice-Admirals,
and a public Notary there, That Compton Gwyther Commander of a small Vessel,
called the George Bona Adventura of about six and twenty Tons burden, Manned
with Eleven men, furnished with small Arms, and Equipped for taking any Ships,
Goods, Moneys Merchandises of the States General of the United Provinces by way
of Reprizal, by virtue of pretended Letters of Marque or Reprizal,
heretofore granted to Sir Edward Turnor Knight Deceased, and George Carew Esquire,
Did on the third or fourth of December instant, near Dungeness in the dead of
the Night, and in a violent and Hostile manner Seiza on a Galliot Hoy, called
the Love of Rotterdam, Burden a hundred and sixty Tons, Bastean Johnson
Master, laden with Wine and Prunes at Bourdeaux, bound for Dort; and by Force
and Arms carried her into our said Isle of Wight, where she now remains: And
that the said Daniel Giles our said Marshal hearing thereof, in pursuance of
our late Proclamation, stopped the said Galliot Hoy, and secured the said Compton
Cwyther and his Company, until he should receive directions how to proceed in
the matter: And whereas the said Letters of Marque or Reprizal, have not only
been vacated by a Treaty of Peace made at Breda in the year one thousand six
hundred sixty seven between Us and the States General; But also superseded
lately in due form under our Great Seal of England, and since so declared by
our Proclamation, dated the six and twentieth day of August last: We have
thereupon amongst other things, the fifteenth instant, by and with Assent of
our Privy Council, ordered that our Trusty and welbeloved Sir Robert Holmes
Knight, Governor and Vice Admiral of our said Island, should cause the said
Compton Gwyther, and such of his Crew as are now in Custody, to be brought up
and delivered to our said Marshal of our said Court of Admiralty, that they may
be legally proceeded against as Pirates: These are therefore straightly to
Charge and Command you, that you forthwith receive and take into your Custody
the Bodies of the said Compton Gwyther and his Company, and them, and every of
them safely Conduct to our said Marshal of the said High Court of Admiralty;
whom we hereby straightly Charge and Command to receive and take into his
Custody, and him, and them in such Custody safely to detain and keep, until
they shall thence by due Course and Order of our said Court of Admiralty, be
Delivered and set at Large: And for so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant, Dated under Seal of our said Vice Admiral, the three and twentieth of
December, in the two and thirtieth year of our Reign, etc.

To Mr. Daniel Gyles Marshal of the Vice Admiralty of Hampshire.

John Bowls Register.

This is a true Copy of the Warrant, whereby I did on the first of this Month
of January receive into my Custody from the forementioned Mr. Daniel Giles the
Bodies of Captain Compton Gwyther, William Coats, Joseph Bullivant, John
Baxter, Francis Wansell, Francis Martin. John Gibson, and William Jones, now
Prisoners in the Marshal^eas, Witness my Hand the 5 th. of January, 1680.

William Joins.

Carolus secundus dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensor, etc. Gulielmo Ioynes gen' Supremae Curiae nostrae Admiralitatis Angl'
Marescal ejusque Deputato cuicunque, ac omnibus aliis Officiariis and Ministris
nostris and little militibus salutem; vobis conjunctim and divisim Committimus
ac firmiter injungendo Mandamus stricteque precipimus quatenus non omittatis
propter aliquod libertatem vel Francheiss, quin realiter Arrestatis seu
Arrestari faciatis (ubicunque invenientis) quosdam Capitaneum Compton Gwyther,
Gulielmum Coats, Iosephum Bullivant, Iohannens Baxter, Franciscum Wansell,
Franciscum Martin, Iohannem Gibson and Gulielmum Jones and eorum Accomplices
fautores and Socios pro Nantis in Navicula quadam sive Hoy a Angl' a Hoy (cujus
dictus Compton Gwyther est Capitanens) se gerentis Piraticae suspectos Actae
scilicet and perpetratae super quadam Navicula sive Galliotta vocat' the Love
de Rotterdamo (cujus Bastiansen Johnson Denhinc est Magister) Ad Williemum
Bastiansen subditum Dominor' ordinum Generalium Foederatraum Belgii
Provinciarum spectan' and pertinen' e Portu de Burdegalia in Regno Franciae
versus Portum de Dodraco in Hollandia cum bon^s and Mercibus pro Computo
quorundam Mercatorum de Dordrato predict' subditorum Dominor' Ordinum pred' vel
Incolarum Provinciarum uniti Belgii tendenum: sed in Cursu suo mense Decembris
ultimo preterit' super alto mari dum erat in pace Dei optimi maximi and nostra
predict' Capitaneum Compton Gwyther and socios Piratice spoliata (uti sub
jurament' in debita Juris forma prestit' asleritur) and in Insula nostra vectis
Modo existen' dictosque Capitaneum Compton Gwyther, Gulielmum Coats, Iosephum
Bullivant, Iohannem Baxter, Franciscum Wansell, Franciscum Martin, Iohannem,
Gibson and Wilielmum Jones and little Accomplices sub sul^^ and securo Custodiatis
seu Custodiri faclatis arresto super Piratici Criminis predict' suspitione
donec and quousque little corpora habeantur coram nobis and Justiciariis nostris
Admiralitatis Angliae predict' ad omnia and singula Proditiones Felonias,
Murdra, Homicidia, Piratices Depredationes and alia offensa and delicta
Maritima quaecunque audiend' and terminand' assign' prox' Sessione Generali pro
nobis, and Admiralitate nostra pred' in Burgo de Southwark in Comitat' nostra
Surriae tenend' His quae ex part nostri cum venerint objicienter personaliter
respo^sur' ulteriusque factur' and receptur' quod justum fuerit in hac part
Mandantes in super omnibus and singulis proceribus Justiciariis ad pacem,
Majoribus, vici Comitibus Ballivis Marescallis aliisque Officiciariis and
Ministris nostris quibuscunque quodivobis and verum cujuslibet in Executione
praemissorum sint Auxiliantes, in tendent' faven^es, pariter and obedientes, in
omnibus and per omnia prout decet, sub paena Juris and periculo incumben^ Dat'
Londim in Curia nostra predict' sub sigillo ejusdem magno quinto die Menfi^
Ianuarii Anno Domini (Stylo Angl') 1680. Reginque nostri Tricesimo secundo.

Orlando Gee Regist.

THis is a true Copy of the Warrant under the great Seal of the Admiralty,
which I received after Examination of some Witnesses here upon Oath.

William Joins Marshal of the High Court of Admiralty.

THe Captain and Seamen being so Committed to Prison, and Irons put upon them,
Sir Lyonel Jenkins, at the instance of the Dutch Ambassador, ordered Mr.
Bedford to bind the Dutch Skipper in a Recoganizance of 500 l. to prosecute
them as Felons and Pirates, upon the Statute of the 28 of Henry the 8 th.
Whereupon the Commission of Oyer and ^erminer was Granted under the Great Seal
of England, directed to the persons hereafter named for Trying of Criminals in
the Admiralty dated 24 January 1680.

The Names and Titles of the Judges in the said Commission of Oyer and Terminer.
PRocharissimo Consanguineo and Concilar' nostro Principi Ruperto Comiti
Palatini Rheni duci and Cambrie etc. Vice Admiralla nostr' Angl'. Predilect^
and fideli Conciliar nostr' Daniel Finch Ar'. Comissariis nostris ad exequend
and exercend' dict' Officium and locum Domini magni Admirali Angl' Respective
Assignat' and Deputat' Charissimo Consanguineo nostro Willielmo Vice Comiti
Brunchard, Comissariis nostris ad exequend and exercend' dict' Officium and
locum Domini magni Admirali Angl' Respective Assignat' and Deputat' Prelectis
and fidelibus nostris Thomae Littleton Baronetto. Comissariis nostris ad
exequend and exercend' dict' Officium and locum Domini magni Admirali Angl'
Respective Assignat' and Deputat' Thomae Meres Militi. Comissariis nostris ad
exequend and exercend' dict' Officium and locum Domini magni Admirali Angl'
Respective Assignat' and Deputat' Et Edwardo Hales Armigero. Comissariis
nostris ad exequend and exercend' dict' Officium and locum Domini magni
Admirali Angl' Respective Assignat' and Deputat' Nec non Commissariis nostris
ad exequend' and excercend' Dictum officium and Locum dicti Magni Admir' Angl'
Assignat' and Deputat' pro tempore existen' and eorum quibuslibet. Predilectis
and fidelibus Consiliariis nostris Leolino Ienkins Militi Legum Doctori in
suprema Curia Admiralitatis nostr' Angl' Locum Tenenti Generali and Commissario
dicte Curi nostre Iudici and Presidenti Ac primar' Secretarior nostr' uni.
Francisco North Militi Capital' Iusticiario nostro de Banco. Edwardo Seymer
Armigero Classis nostre Thesauario Ac dilectis and fidelibus nostris. Capitali
Iusticiario nostro ad placita etc. Pro tempore existen'. Harbottle Grimston
Baronetto Magistro Rotul' Cur' Cancellar'. Willielmo Mountague Capitali Baroni
Scacarii nostri. Hugoni Wyndham Mil' uni Iustic' de Banco. Thomae Jones Mil'
uni Iustic' Ad placita etc. Willielmo Dolbin Mil' alteri Iustic' nostrorum Ad
placita. Thomae Raymond Mil alteri Iustic' nostrorum Ad Placita. Edwardo Atkins
Mil' uni Baronum Scacarii nostri. Willielmo Gregory Mil' alteri Baronum
Scacarii nostri. Job Charleton Mil' alteri Iustic' de Banco. Richardo Weston
Mil' alteri Baron' Scacarii nostri. Roberto Wiseman Mil' ac Legum Doctor' Alme
Curie Cant' de Arcubus London Officiali Principali. Thomae Exton Mil' Legum
Doctor' Advocato nostro Generali. Iacobo Butler. Mil' uni (...) Concill' nostro
Erudito in lege ac precharissime Consortis nostre Regine Attornato. Iohanni
Bramston Mil' Balnei Vice Admirallo nostro Com' nostri Essexie. Samueli Baldwin
Mil' uni servien' nostror' ad legem. Robertus Wright Mil' alteri servien'
nostror' Francisco Brampston servien' Ad legem. Iohanni Coel Mil' Cancellari
nostri res^^^tive Magistris. Tymotheo Baldwin Mil' Cancellari nostri res^^^tive
Magistris. Edwardo Low Mil' Cancellari nostri res^^^tive Magistris. Samueli
Clerk Mil' Cancellari nostri res^^^tive Magistris. Willielmo Cook Mil'
Cancellari nostri res^^^tive Magistris. Adamo Oatley Mil' Cancellari nostri
res^^^tive Magistris. Iohanni Werden Mil' and Baronetto, Roberto Southwell Mil'
Thomae Hayter Armiger' 1 Classis nostro Rege Controtulatori Iohanni Tippetts
Mil' Classis nostri Commis'. Richardo Haddock Mil' Classis nostri Commis'.
Iohanni Narborrough Mil' Classis nostri Commis'. Phineas Pett Mil' Classis
nostri Commis'. Iacobo Southern Ar' Classis nostri Commis'. Willielmo Hickman
Barron' Ordinationum nostrar' Commis' Iohanni Chichley Mil' Ordinationum
nostrar' Commis' Christopohro Musgrave M. Ordinationum nostrar' Commis' Georgio
Leg Ar' Ordinationum nostrar' Commis' Thomae Allen Mil' and Baroneto. Roberto
Holmes Militibus. Iohanni Holmes Militibus. Iohanni Berry Militibus. Iohanni
Wetwang. Militibus. Willielmo Ienings Militibus. Arthuro Herbert Armigero.
Willielmo Turnor Militibus and Aldermanis Civitat' nostr' London. Iosepho
Sheldon Militibus and Aldermanis Civitat' nostr' London. Iacobo Edwards
Militibus and Aldermanis Civitat' nostr' London. Iacobo Smith Militibus and
Aldermanis Civitat' nostr' London. Georgio Treby Mil' Civitatis nostri London
Recordatori. Edwardo Master Legum respective Doctoribus. Willielmo Trumbal
Legum respective Doctoribus. Henric^ Falconberge Legum respective Doctoribus.
Thomae Pinfold Legum respective Doctoribus. Richardo Raynes Legum respective
Doctoribus. Willielmo Oldiis Legum respective Doctoribus. Carolo Perrot Legum
respective Doctoribus. Roberto Thompson Legum respective Doctoribus. Iohanni
Edisbury Legum respective Doctoribus. Carol^ Hedges Legum respective
Doctoribus. Stephano Brick Legum respective Doctoribus. Iohanni Brisba^e
Armiger and singulis vestrum salutum. Iacobo Hoare Armiger and singulis vestrum
salutum. Petro Prich. Armiger and singulis vestrum salutum. Rich Lloyd. Finch
C.
The Precepts to the Sheriff of Surrey being Returned, and the Juries Summoned,
appearing accordingly at the New-Hall on the 18th. of February 1680. in the
Court of the Marshalsea in Southwark.
SIR Lyonel Jenkins as President of the Court, accompanied with Judge Wyndham
Judge Jones, Judge Charleton, and Judge Raymond, and Twenty six of the other
persons nominated as Judges in the said Commission: Which being Read, and the
Charge given by Sir Lyonel Jenkins to the Jurors; The Bill of Indictment was
brought in against the said Prisoners for Piracy and Felony, and found Billa
vera by the Grand-Iury, upon the Evidence of the Dutch Master and two of his
Ships Company: Then the Prisoners being all Arraigned, pleaded severally not
Guilty, and put themselves upon God and their Country for Trial.

The matters of Fact in Issue were proved that they had taken such a Ship and
Goods in the said Warrants mentioned; and it was insisted upon by the Advocate
General, and Council for the King, That the said Ship and Goods were taken
Pyratically and Feloniously, without any Legal Authority or Commission, after
two Treaties of State, whereby they pretended the Letters Patents for Reprizal
were extinguished, and made null and void, being so recited in a pretended
Supersedeas under the Great Seal of England; and likewise in the Kings
Proclamation, mentioning that the said Letters Patents and Commission for
Reprizals were revoked before the said Ship was Seized.

It was also alleged, that there was not a due Entry made with Mr. Bedford
the Register of the Admiralty of the Captains Ship, Named the George Bona
Adventura, with the number of Men, Guns and Provis^on; and that Bulk was broken
before Daniel Gyles the Marshal had Seized and taken the Galliot Hoy into his
Custody, and so insinuated to the Jury that they were to find the Piracy and
Felony accordingly.

Unto which the Prisoners at the Bar (and Mr. Carew, who gave the Captain his
Commission) pleaded the Legality of the same, with the Entry in due Form: Which
Commission being read in Court, Ca^ew Justified that he Subscribed his Name,
and fixed his Seal under the appointment and Deputation following (Indorsed
upon an Authentic Copy, on exemplification of the Letters Patents, viz.)

I The within Named George Carew, by virtue of the Power and Authority unto me
given by the Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, of which this is
an Authentic Copy: Do for my self, and on the behalf of all other persons
Interessed therein, Constitute and Assign, Nominate and Appoint Compton Gwyther
Gentleman, to be Captain and Commander of the good Ship Named the George Bona
Adventura, of the Burden of Eighty Tuns or thereabouts, Equipped and furnished
with Ten Guns and Sixty Men, Victualled and to be Victualled from time to time,
during the space of Twelve Months, by the Owners and Proprietors of the said
Ship, for the said Captain Gwyther to do, execute and perform all such Acts and
Things as the said Captain by Strength and Force of the said Ship and men, by
virtue, and in pursuance of the said Letters Patents, and the Commission hereby
given, may lawfully do in such manner and Form, as by the said Letters Patents
is limited, expressed and declared; In witness whereof, the said George Carew
has hereunto set his Hand and Seal, the 14 th. day of June, in the Two and
Thirtieth year of the Reign of our Soverain Lord King Charles the second, Anno
Dom. 1680.

George Carew.

NOtwithstanding the said Letters Patent were read in Court (hereafter recited
at large in the Plea to the Seire Facias;) Sir Lyonel Jenkins persisted to the
Jury, that by the Laws of Nations, the Treaty at Breda had made null and void
all Letters of Reprizal: That the Kings Proclamation was of a sufficient
Authority to bind all His Subjects; and that His Majesty having the power of
Peace and War, all people were to take notice thereof: Unto which the Prisoners
replied, that the putting the Letters of Reprizal into Execution, was no breach
of the Peace, neither was any thing done Felo Animo in prosecution of the said
Commission, or Piratically in pursuance of that Authority contained in the
Letters Patents, and that they had used the Dutch Master and Seamen with all
Kindness and Humanity, set them on Shore with all their Apparel, and what else
they pleased to take with them.

Then one of the Learned Judges insisted, that the Commission was voidable at
the Kings pleasure, being but a bare Authority, and determinable at the Kings
Will.

Whereupon the Prisoners at the Bar Craved to be heard by Mr. Wallup, Mr.
Molloy, and others their Council, to those points in Law; who replied that the
King had by His Graut vested the Subjects in this Case, with a^ Interest
coupled with an Authority for Recovery of their Debt and Damages, and
especially provided for the continuance thereof, until satisfaction of the
Principal Debt, withal Casts and Charges, or a Composition for the same, with
the Parties Interessed and Injured, Pro ut' etc. vide the Grant.

Sir Lyonel Jenkins then further urged (erroniously) that the Hollanders had
not any notice of the Monition for Examination of Witnesses that made proof of
the Spoils and Depredation: And that the said Letters Patents for Peprizal
being Granted in time of War, the East India Company of the Netherlands could
make no defense against it: Which was otherwise, the Monition being fixed upon
a Pillar of the Exchange in the year 1644. and partecular notice given to the
Dutch Ambassador to Cross Examine the said Deponents (if he pleased.) And that
the East India Company had sufficient notice and warning two years together, by
Memorials that the Grant for Reprizals would pass in that nature for Reparation
of the Debt and Damages, being so recited in the body of the Record. Several
other Arguments were used, and the Major part of the Judges seemed satisfied
therewith.

Then Judge Raymond and Judge Wyndham urged that the Jury might find the Matter
Specially, which was opposed by diverse of the Judges; Sir Job Charleton sayi^g,
he would not wash his Hands in the Blood of those persons: Besides, Mr. Carew
having observed that the Treaties mentioned in the pretended Supersedeas and
Proclamation, were not Enrolled, and therefore the Printed Copies thereof
offered as Evidence were impertinent: So upon the whole matter, the Jury
brought in their Uerdict, that the Prisoners were neither Guilty of Felony nor
Pyracy.

Whereupon Sir Lyonel Jenkins bound over Mr. Carew in a Recognizance, under a
great Penalty, with Caution to answer to an Information at the Kings-Bench-Bar
the first day of Easter Term following; and would have kept his Original Patent
under the Great Seal of England, which was Exhibited and read in Court as an
Evidence on the behalf of the Prisoners at the Bar upon their Trial; Sir Lyonel
pretending that it ought to be detained by way of prevention, for that Mr.
Carew intended to set forth other Ships upon the like occasion: But several of
the Judges answered, that the Patent being brought into Court as Evidence by
Mr. Carew, it ought to be returned to him; Sir George Treby alleging it as a
very unreasonable thing, that they who came to give Judgment in Cases of
Depredation, should be guilty of it themselves, so the Patent was retur^^d to
Carew accordingly.

But before Easter Term, a Scire Fac^as Issued forth of the High Court of
Chancery in the Kings Name, directed to the Sheriff of Middlesex, to Summon Sir
Edmond Turnor and the said George Garew to show Cause why the said Letters
Patents should not be brought into His Majesty's said Court of Chancery, there
to be Cancelled and made void, with the Inrollment thereof, who were summoned
to appear qu^ndena Paschae 1681. which they did according to the said Summons,
the Scire Facias and return thereof being contained in hec verba, as follows,
with the Plea thereunto annexed, both remaining of Record in the Petty-bagg
Office.

The Scire Facias.
Dom. Rex con' Turnor and Carew.
CArolus secundus Dei gratia Angl' Scoc' Franc' and Hibern' Rex Fidei Defensor'
etc. vic' Midd* salutem cum per quasdem literas nostras Patentes magno sigillo
nostro Angl' sigillat' geren' dat' apud Westm' decimo nono die Maii Anno regni
nostri decimo septimo pro restitut' saciend' Carolo tunc Comiti Salop and al'
in eisdem liieris Paten* nominatis Participibus cum quodam Willielmo Courten
Armigero modo defunct, pro quibusdam Navibus bonis and Merchandizis in eisdem
literis Paten' spicificat' ejusdem Willielmi Courten and participum suorum
predict. per subditos statuum General Provinciar' Belgii unitar' aute tunc in
partibus exteriis ab eis minus just capt' and detent' Dedimus licent' and
authorit' quibusd' Edmundo Turnor Mil' and Georgio Carew Ar' duobus participium
predictor' in eisdem Literis Patentibus nominatis Execut' Administ' vel Assign.
suis ex part sua and aliar' pers^^^r' supradict' armandi comeatu instruendi
Anglice furnishing and ad mare emittendi Anglice (...) to Sea tot' and tales
naves and naviculas Anglice Pinnaces quot sibi vellent Ac cum eisdem aggrediend
Anglice setting upon capiendi and seisiendi omnes naves bona m^net' and
Merchandiz. eorund. Statuum General' and subditor' suorum infra aliqua Dominia
and Territor' sua quecunque inhabitan' and cujuslibet particular' Stat' infra
Provincias supraedict' ubicunque eadem invent' fuerint extra aliquem Portum
Angliae sive Hiberniae and eadem custodiend and in little sive alicujus eorum
possession' retinend' ac ut bona sua propria post adjudicationem in suprema
Curia Admiralitatis Angliae pro preda legittima vendendi and disponendi
quousque sibi prefat' Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carew and Particibus suis
predictis de damnis and summa monete in eisdem literis Paten' eis fore debit'
et solubil' computat' unacum misis and expensis suis que in ea part
rationabilit' sustinent plenare fuer' satisfact' pro ut per easdem Luteras
Patentes unacum seperal' Clausul and Provision' in eisdem content' and
specificat' relatione inde habit a before Liquet and apparet cumque per
Articulos pacis and Confederationis inter nos and Celsos ac Prepotentes Dominos
ordines generales federatorum Belgii Provinciar' apud Bredam^ icesimo primo die
Iulii Anno regno nostri decimo nono and sub magno sigillo nostro Anglie
ratificat' ac infra hoc Regnum nostrum Anglie public and solempnit' Proclamat'
vicesinio quarto die Augusti in eodem Anno inter alia conventum concordatum and
provisum existit' quod omnes ^itere Reprizal Marque and Contramarque tam
general' quam special' sunt inhibite and revocat' quodque non erit permissum
subditis utrinque suis hostilitatem aut violentiam alt' partum infer aut mari
aut terra pretextu aut Color quocunque cumque per al' Articulos pacis and
amicitiae inter nos and predictos ordines generales federatarum Belgii
Provinciarum predict' conclus' apud Westm' nono die Feb^^arii Anno regni nostri
vicesimo sexto and sub magno sigillo nostro Anglie ratificat' ac infra hoc
regnum nostrum Angliae public and solempnit' proclamat' vicesimo octavo die
dicti mensis Februarii Anno regni nostri vicesimo sexto supradicto Articul'
predict pacis and amicitie conclus' apud Bredam predict' confirment, renovent,
and maneant in plena vi ac vigore omnesque Articuli predict int' al. ratifieat
and confirmat' existunt Cumque nos ulterius per literas nostras Patentes sub
magno sigillo nostro Anglie Geren' dat' decimo sexto die Iunii Anno regni
nostri tricesimo secundo supersedimus revocavimus adnullavimus and evacuavimus
predictas Litras Patentes geren' dat' pred' decimo nono die Maii Anno regni
nostri decimo septimo supradicto Ac omnes and singulas Potestates and
authoritates Clausul' Commission' Concession' and licentias in eisdem content'
Cumque da^' sit nobis intelligi quod quamvis ratione premissorum predictorum
litere Panten' sic ut prefertur ^isdem Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carew
confect' vacue and nullius vigoris seu effectus in Lege suerint. quodque omnis
licentia and authoritas per easdem concess' penitus adnullat' and revocat'
fuerint and existunt Color tamen literarum Paten' pred' iisdem Edmundo Turnor
and Georgio Carew confest' quamplurimum subditorum Statuum general' predictorum
fuerint and indies sunt injuste and contra tractatus pacis and Amicitiae
predict' multifariam inquietati gravati et molestati ad grave dampnum
subditorum predictorum and magnum dedecus and contemptum nostrum and ad
infringendam pacem illam int' nos and Status generales predict' quam firmam
esse volumus nos volentes remedium in hac part congruum providere tantisque
malis in futurum obviam ire ac in permissis fieri quodest justum Tibi igitur
precipimus quod per probos and legales homines de Balliva tua scire fac'
prefat' Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carew quod sint coram nobis in Cancellar'
nostra predict' in quindena Pasche prox' futur' ubicunque tunc suerit ad
ostendend' si quid pro se habeant vel dicere sciant quare dictae Leterae
Patentes sic ut prefertur eisdem Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carew confect' ac
Irrotulamen' eorundem occasionibus predictis cancellari evacuari damnari ac
frustari ac nobis in Cancellar' nostram predict' restitui ibidem cancelland*
non debeant and ad faciend' ulterius and recipiend' quod dicta Cur' nostra
consideravit in hac part and habeas ibi nomina illorum per quos eis scire
feceris and hoc breve Test meipsos apud Westm' duodecimo die Februarii Anno
regni nostri tricesimo tertio Grimston Pengry.

Virtute istius brevis mihi direct' per Samuelem Packer and Samuelem Gardener
probos and legales homines de Balliva mea scire feci infra nominat' Edmundo
Turnor and Georgio Carew quod sint coram Domino Rege infra script' ad diem and
locum infra content' ad ostended etc. prout interius mihi precipitur.

Respons' Slingsby Bethel Ar' Vic' and Henr' Cornish Ar' Vic'

The Plea to the Scire Facias.
Pyndar
ET predictus Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew per Matheum Pyndar Ar' Attorn'
suum ven' and defend' vim and injur' quando and (...) pet' Audit Irrotulament'
Literarum Patent in brevi de Scirifas' predict' mentionat and eis Legitur in
haec verba. Charles the second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Christian People to whom
these Presents shall come Greeting: Whereas our loving Subject William Courten
Esquire Deceased, and his Partners, in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred forty and three, by the Depredation and Hostile Act of one Geland,
Commander in chief of two Ships belonging to the East India Company of the
Netherlands, was between Goa and Maccao in the Straights of Malacca, deprived
and most injuriously spoiled of a certain Ship named the Bona Esperanza, and of
her Tackle, Apparel, and Furniture, and all the Goods and Lading in her, upon a
very hopeful Trading Voyage to China, which were carried to Battavia, and there
all de facto, without due Process of Law Confiscated: And that also in the said
year, another Laden Ship of Our said Subject, called the Bona Henry Adventura,
being come on ground on the Island Mauritius, was there both Ship and Goods
seized upon by some of the Officers and Ministers, and others under the command
of the said East India Company, and utterly detained from the right Owners. And
whereas the said William Courten, and his Assigns in his life time, used all
possible endeavors to recover the said Ships and Goods, and to procure further
Justice against the Malefactors, and yet could obtain no Restitution or
Satisfaction, whereby they became to be much Distressed and utterly undone in
their Estate and Credit: And that thereupon, and upon the most humble
Supplication and Addresses of Francis Earl of Shrewsbury, and William Courten
Esquire, Son and Heir of the said William Deceased, Sir John Ayton, and Sir Edmond
Turnor Knights, George Carew and Charles Whitaker Esquires, on the behalf of
themselves and diverse others Interessed in the said two Ships Bona Esperanza
and Henry Bona Adventura, and in the Estates of the said William Courten
Deceased, Sir Edward Littleton Baronet, and Sir Paul Pyndar Knight Deceased,
that We would take their Case into Our Princely consideration. We out of the
just sense We then had, and still have of their unjust Sufferings in that
business, both by Our own Letters under our Sign Manual to the States General
of the United Provinces, and by Sir George Downing Knight and Baronet, Our
Envoy Extraordinary, to whom We gave Especial Command so to do, required
satisfaction to be made according to the Rules of Justice, and the Amity and
good Correspondence, which We then desired to conserve with them firm and
Inviolable. And whereas after several Addresses made to the said States General
by Our said Envoy, and nothing granted effectual for relief of Our said
Subjects, (whom We take Our selves, in Honor and Justice, concerned to be
satisfied and repaired) We lately commanded the said Sir George Downing to
intimate and signify to the said States, that We expected their final Answer,
concerning satisfaction to be made for the said Ships and Goods by a time then
prefixed, and since elapsed, that We might so govern Our selves thereupon, that
Our aforesaid Subjects might be Relieved according to Right and Justice: And
yet no Satisfactory Answer has been given, so that We cannot but apprehend it
to be, not only a fruitless endeavor, but a prostituting of Our Honor and
Dignity, to make further Application, after so many Denials and Slightings. And
whereas John Exton, Doctor of Laws, Judge of Our High Court of Admiralty of
England, upon Our Command, to certify to Us the value of the Losses, and
Damages sustained by the said William Courten and Partners, whose Interest is
now vested in Our loving Subjects, Sir Edmond Turnor Knt. and George Carew Esquire
and Partners, has upon full Examination and Proofs thereof made by Witnesses
in Our High Court of Admiralty, Reported and Certified under his Hand, that the
same do amount to the sum of one Hundred fifty one thousand six hundred and
twelve Pounds.

Now know ye, That for a full Restitntion to be made to them for their Ships,
Goods and Merchandises; of which the said William Courten, and the Assigns of
the said William Courten and Partners, were so Despoiled as aforesaid, with all
such Costs and Charges, as they shall be at for recovery of the same: We by
Advice of our Privy Council have thought fit, and by these Presents do Grant
License and Authority under Our Great Seal of England, unto Our said Subjects
Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns* for and on the behalf of themselves, and other persons Interessed as
aforesaid, to Equip, Victual, Furnish, and set to Sea from time to time, such
and so many Ships and Pinaces as they shall think fit: Provided always that
there be an Entry made and Recorded in the Admiralty-Court of the Names of all
Ships and Vessels, and of their Burden and Ammunition, and for how long time
they are Victualled: And also of the Name of the Commander thereof, before the
same, or any of them be set forth to Sea; And with the said Ships and Pinaces
by Force of Arms to set upon, take and apprehend any of the Ships, Goods,
Moneys and Merchandises of the said States General or of any of their Subjects,
inhabiting within any their Dominions or Territories whatsoever, of any
particular Estate within those Provinces, and the Inhabitants thereof;
wheresoever the same shall be found, and not in any Port or Harbor of England
or Ireland, unless it be the Ships and Goods of the Parties that did the wrong.
And the said Ships, Goods, Moneys and Merchandises, being so taken and brought
into some Port of Our Realms or Dominions, an Inventory thereof shall be taken
by Authority of Our Court of Admiralty, and Judgment shall be given in Our
Court of Admiralty by the Judge or Judges thereof, for the time being, upon
Proof made before him, or them, that the same Ships, Goods, Wares,
Merchandises, or Money, did belong to the States General, or any of their
Subjects as aforesaid. That they shall be lawful Prize to the said Sir Edmond
Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as
aforesaid, to keep and retain in their or any of their Possession, and to make
Sale, and dispose thereof in open Market or howsoever else, to their and every
of their best Advantage and Benefit, in as ample manner, as at any time
heretofore has been accustomed by way of Reprizal, and to have and enjoy the
same as lawful Prize, and as their own proper Goods: So that neither the
Captain, Master, nor any of the Company, that shall serve in his own person, or
shall promote and advance the said enterprise in manner and form aforesaid
shall, in any manner of wise be Reputed or Challenged for any Offender against
any of Our Laws. And that also it shall be lawful for all manner of persons, as
well Our Subjects, as any other, to buy the said Ships, Goods and Merchandises
so taken, and apprehended by the said Captains, Masters and others, and
adjudged as aforesaid, without any Damage, Loss, Hindrance, Trouble,
Molestation, or Encumbrance, to befall the said Buyers, or any of them, in as
ample and lawful manner, as if the said Ships, Goods, Wares and Merchandise,
had been come and gotten by the lawful Traffic of Merchants, or of just
Prizes in the time of open War. Provided always, that all Ships, Goods, and
Merchandise, taken by virtue of this Our Commission shall be kept in safety,
and no part of them spoiled, wasted or diminished, nor the Bulk thereof broken,
until Judgment have first past as aforesaid, that they are the Ships and
Merchandises of the States General, or some of their Subjects as aforesaid. And
if by color of this Our Commission, there shall be taken any Ships, Goods, or
Merchandises of any of Our loving Subjects, or the Subjects of any Prince, or
State in good League, or Amity with Us ( except the States General) or their
Subjects as aforesaid, and the Goods therein Laden, Sold Embezled or
Diminished, or the Bulk thereof broken in any Place, before they shall be
adjudged to belong to the said States General, or to some of their Subjects as
aforesaid; that then this Commission shall be of no sufficient Authority to
take the said Ships, Goods, and Merchandises, or to warrant, and save harmeless
such as shall Receive, Buy or Intermedle therein; but that both the Prizes so
taken, and the said Ship of War, shall be confiscated to Our use. And further,
We do hereby declare that it is Our Will and Pleasure, that this Our Commission
shall remain in full Force and Power, to all intents and purposes, until the
said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, as aforesaid, shall by virtue thereof have by Force of Arms
Apprehended, Taken, Seized, Recovered and Received from the said States
General, or their Subjects, one hundred fifty one thousand six hundred and
twelve Pounds, according to Appraisement to be made by sufficient Appraisers
upon Oath Nominated and Authorized in Our said Court of Admiralty, of all such
Ships, Goods, Wares and Merchandises, as shall be taken from the said States
General, or any of their Subjects, by virtue of this Commission, or shall
otherwise receive satisfaction of the Debt aforesaid, by Composition to be made
between those of the East India Company of the Netherlands, and the said Sir
Edmond Turnor, and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns
aforesaid. Notwithstanding it may so happen, the present difference between Us,
and the States General depending upon general Reprisals, may be agreed and
composed, and that in the interim a Peace and good Correspondence may be
renewed between us and the said States General: In which case nevertheless, it
is Our Will and Pleasure, that in the execution of this Our Commission, no
violence shall be done to the Persons of the said Subjects of the said States
General, but only in Case of Resistance, and that after in Cold Blood, the said
Subjects of the said Sttates General, if hurt or wounded* shall be used with
all convenient office of humanity and kindness. And Further Our Will and
Pleasure is, that although it shall happen that all Hostility between Us and
the States General, and Our respective Subjects shall cease, yet this Our
Commission shall remain, and be in full Force and Power, to the said Sir Edmond
Turnor and George Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns as
aforesaid, by virtue thereof to apprehend, take, and Seize by Force of Arms, so
many more of the said Ships and Goods of the said States General, or any of
their said Subjucts, as besides the said sum before mentioned shall
countervail, satisfy, and pay all such Costs and Charges as the said Sir
Edmond Turnor and George Garew, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, as
aforesaid, shall from time to time make proof to have disbursed and paid
toward the Equipping, Manning, Paying, Furnishing and Victualing of the said
Ships, so Licensed and Authorized as aforesaid, by this Our said Commission to
be Equipped, Manned, Paid, Furnished, and Victualled by the said Sir Edmond
Turnor and George Carew, their Executors Administrators and Assigns, as
foresaid, for the purpose aforesaid. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do
hereby require Our Judge or Judges of Our High Court of Admiralty, for the time
being, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all other Our Judge, or
Judges, Officers, Ministers, and Subjects whatsoever, to be Aiding and
Assisting to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew, their Executors*
Administrators and Assigns as aforesaid, in all points in the due Execution of
this Our Royal Commission, and to proceed to Adjudication, and to Adjudge all
Ships, Merchandises, Moneys and Goods by virtue thereof to be taken and proved
to belong to the said States General or any of their Subjects, to be lawful
Prize to the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns as aforesaid, according to Our Princely intention,
hereby signified and expressed, and to take care that this Our Royal Commission
be duly executed, and favorably Interpreted and Construed in all respects, to
the benefit and best advantage of the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, as aforesaid. In Witness whereof,
We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents. Witness Our self at
Westminster the 19 day of May, in the 17 year of Our Reign, Per ipsum Regem.
Quo lecto and Auditu udem Edmundus and Georgius dicunt quod Litere Paten?
predict and eis sic ut prefertu^ consect' ac Irrotulament' eorundem evacuari
cancellari dampnar' ac frustrari ac dicto Domino Regi in Cancellar' suam
predict' restitui ibidem Cancelland' non debent; Quia dicunt quod Dominus
Carolus primus nuper Rex Angl' per Literas suas Patentes sub magno sigillo suo
Angl' geren' dat' apud Westm' pred' vicesimo die Decembris Anno reg^i sui
undecimo Annoque Domini millesimo sextent^simo tricesimo quinto Et de Recordo
hic in Cur' Cancellar' ^^rotulam' pro se and successori^^^s suis pro ration'
and Consideration' in eisdem mentionat' and content' concessisset' licentiam
potestat' and Authoritat' Ac etiam express' mandat' dedisset' Willielmo Courten
nuper de London Mil' and participibus secuus associat' ad emittend' Anglice to
set forth diversa Naves and Navicul' bon' and Merchandiz' comercia ad Goa and
parts de Malabarr and Oras de China and Iapan in Indiis Oriental' ad
inveniend' fortificand' and sese confirmand' Anglice settle in locis Covenien'
pro Commerc' and Coloniis Quodque in prosecution' and execution' inde diversa
factoria and Repositaria erect' and confirmat* fuer' prope Maritima Ora ad
grand' expens' and sumpto predicti Willielmi Courten and perticip' apud
Carrwarr Mac^ao and al' parts in Indiis Orien' and partibus Maritin' de China
and Iapan pred^ quodque dictus nuper Rex Carolus primus ex mero motu and gra'
suis post mortem dicti Willielmi Courten Mil' Anno regni sui decimo tertio apud
Westm' predict' per al' Literas suas Paten' sub magno sigillo suo Angl' quas
iidem Edmundus and Georgius hic in cur' proferunt concessisset and confirmasset
dictas concession' cuidam Willielmo Courten Ar' fil' and hered' and soli
executer' dicti Willielmi Courten Mil' and participibus suis contin' omnes
recitationes Instructiones Navigia Anglice Shipping potestat' privileg'
Authoritat' and benefic' in dictis Literis Paten' prementionat^ pro incitament
and profectu in Confirmatione and prosecutione Commercii pro spacio
quatuordecim Annorum Commens' ab and post expiration' dict' Literar' Paten' ut
presertur Et ulterius iidem Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew dicunt quod
quidam Paulus Pindar nuper de London Mil' modo defunct' accomodasset eidem
Willielmo Courten patri summ^m triginta and quinque Mill librarum legalis
monete Angl' super primum expedition' and inceptum dicti Commercii ut
prefertur, quequidem summa tempore mortis dicti Willielmi Courten Mil' in
manibus ipsius Willielmi remansit, Et eidem Paulo omnino insolui' and
insatisfact' fuit quodque dictus Willielmus Courten fil' and perticipes sui
Anno Domini Millessimo sextentesimo quadragesimo primo emisissent Anglice set
out duas Naves scilicet unam vocut' Bona Esperanza and alteram vocat' Henry
Bona adventura onerat' cum pecun' bonis and Merchandizis inter al' pro Indiis
Oriental' and partibus transm^rin' pred ad manuteneud' Comer^' Anglice
Intercourse of Trade, and supplementum factoriorum and Colon' pred' quodque
septem parts peculii Anglice Stock and omnis Anglice Lading, in dictis Navibus
vocat' Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura in oc^o Parts dividend'
existen' propr' effecti' and interesse dicti Willielmi Courten fil' Idem
Willielmus per quandam Indenturam suam sub manu and ^igil' suis factam geren'
dat' apud Westm' pred' vicesimo sexto die Aprilis Anno Domini Millisimo
sexcentesimo quadragesimo secundo, quam quidem Indenturam ^igillo ipsius
Willielmi sigillat' iidem Edmundus and Georgius in Cur' proferunt' cujus dat'
est eisdem die and Anno concessit assignavit transtulit and transmisit Anglice
set over dictas Naves vocat' Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura inter al'
simul cum tot' suis septem partibus pred' dictorum bon' and Merchandiz' in
eisdem content' and profect' Anglice Proceed earundem cuidam Edwardo Littleton
de Pilleton Hall in Com' Staff' Baronet nuper defunct' ad conservand' and
indempnem' prestand' eund' Edwardum Littleton a diversis obligat' and
assumptionibus quas predict Edwardus Littleton intrasset Anglice entered in to
pro debitis propriis pred' Willielmi Courten fil' and postea scilicet decimo
nono die Decembris Anno regni dicti nuper Regis Caroli primi decimo octavo per
indenturam suam sub sigill' suis factam quamquidem Indentur' sigill' ipsorum
Edwardi Littleton and Willielmi Courten sigiltat iidem Edmundus and Georgius
hic in Cur' proferunt cujus dat' est eisdem die and Anno ipsi predict' Edwardus
Littleton and Willielmus Courten fil' absolute concesser' ^ssignaver'
transtuler' and transmiser' dictas Naves Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona
Adventura cum oneribus and profect' eorundem prefact' Paulo Pindar pro and in
satisfaction' and solution' vigint' and octo Mill and Quidringent' lib' Sterl'
tunc remaneud' insolut' de predicti' triginta and quinque Mill libris ut
presertur sub hac tamen Condition quod superflu' Anglice the surplus super and
ultra dict. summam vigint. and octo Mill and Quadringent. libr' and Interesse
Anglice the Interest thereof solvi forit dicto Willielmo Courten fil' Executor'
Administrator. seu Assign. suis Et iidem Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew
ulteriu^ di^unt quod postea scilicet die Anno Domini Millissimo sextentesimo
Quadragesimo tertio per depredation' and hostilitat' and vim Armatam cujusdam
Geland Gubernator Capital' Anglice Commander in Chief duarum Navium ad
Societat' Ind' Oriental Provinciar' Belgii federator' Anglice to the East India
Company of the United Neterlands, and ol' subdit' statuum ^ive Ordinum general'
dictorum federatorum Belgii Provinciar' partium in Goa and Maccao pred' in
Insula de Malacco in Indiis Oriental' pred' predict' N^vis vocat Bona Esperanza
simul cum Armament' Anglice Amonition apparat' and ornat' suis ac omnibus bonis
Merchandizis and oneribus Anglice Lading in eadam content' injuste and
injuriose depredat' and spoliat' fuit, Quequidem Navis bon' and Merchandiz'
pred' postea per dictum Geland and al' subdit' ordinum General' dictarum
federatorum Belgiorum Provinciarum pred' ad Battaviam in partibus transmorinis
Navigat' and transportat' fuit Anglice carried (eadem Battavia in possessione
and subditione dict' Stat' sive Ordinum tunc existen') Et dicta Navis ac bone
and Merchandiz' pred' illicite and injuriose and sine aliquo processu legali
contra voluntat. dict. perti^ipium and contra jus Gentium and leges hujus regni
tunc and ibidem consiscat. vendit. and disposit' fuer. Quodque etiam die and
Anno ult. mentionat. Altera Navis. predict. vocat. Henry Bona Adventura in
litt' discenden. Anglice coming on Ground prope Insul. Mauricii in partibus
transmarin. unacum bon. Merchandiz. Armament ornat. et omnibus oneribus in
eadem content. illicite et injuriose contra voluntat. dicti Willielmi Courten
fil' et perticip. dicte Navis et contra jus Gentium et leges hujus regni Anglie
per officiar. Minister. et al. subdit. dictor' ordin' general. federator.
Belgii Provinciar. pred. spoliat. depredat. et. seisit. fuit et per Officiar
Ministr. et. al: subdit, dictorum ordinum general. ad ipsorum propr. opus et
usumconvers. suit. Et pred: Edmundus Turnor et Georgius Carew ulterius dicunt,
quod predictus Willielmus Courten fil' pred. legittimo modo Jurat. existen.
super' Sacrum. suum declaravit Injurias sibi et perticipibus suis sic ut
prefertur commiss. et fact. Ac etiam dictus Willielmus Courten fill. et
participes sui in debita juris forma per Sacrum. proborum et legal. restim' in
ca part fide dignorum Jurat. probavit quod ipsi iidem Willielmus Courten et
perticipes sui dictorum Stat. et Ordinum general. federat. Belgii Provinciar.
apud Bataviam pred. in partibus transmarin. prosecut. suer. Malefactores
predict. in modo ligittimo Quodque Communis Iustitia et satisfaction. pro
depredation and spolieationibus pred' ipsi prefat' Willielmo Courten and
participibus suis adtunc and ibidem omnino denegat' and interdict' fuissent
contra jus Gentium and Leges hujus regni Anglie, postea pred' Willielmus
Courten fil' (viz.) in and super vicesimum quintum diem Ianuarii Millissimo
sextentesimo quinquagesimo quinto apud London in Parochia beatae Marie de
Arcubus in Warda de Cheap obiit intestat' post cujus mortem Administratio
omnium and singulorum bonorum and Catallorum Iurium and Creditorum que fuerent
pred' Willielmi Courten Mil' tempore mortis sue per Williemi Courten fil' and
Executor' dicti Willielmi Courten Mil' non Administrat' eidem Georgio Carew cum
testamen' ejusdem Willielmi Courten Mil' annex' debito modo and forma Commiss'
suit, Quodque etiam predict' Paulus Pindar postea scilicet quarto die Iunii
Anno regni dicti nuper Regis Caroli primi vicesimo secundo apud London predict'
in Paroch' and Warda Predict' Condidit Testament' et ult' voluntat' suam in
scriptis et per ^andem voluntat' constituit quendam Willielmi Toomes Executor,
suum et postea videlicet die Anno Domini Millessim o sextentesims quinquagesimo
apud London predict' in Parochia et Warda predict' obiit post cujus quidem
mortem (viz.) Anno Domini Millessimo sextentesimo quinquagesimo quinto pred.
Willielmus Toomes apud London predict' in Parochia et Warda predict' obiit,
intestat. post cujus quidem mortem (vid.) vicesimo primo die Marcii Anno Domini
Millessimo sextentesimo saxagesimo secundo apud London predict. Administratio
omnium et singulorum bonorum Iurum et Creditorum dict. Pauli non Administrat.
per dictum Willielmi Toomes cuidam Willielmo Powel Bar. cum Testamento ejusdem
Pauli Pind^r annex. commissa fuit in debita juris forma Quodque postea predict'
Georgins Carew solvit predicto Willielmo Powel Barronet' et Iohanni Whitfield
Ar. et Henr. Soame gen' summam trium Mill librarum bone et legalis monete
Anglie per predict' Paulum Pindar eidem Willielmo Powel et Edwardo Powel Milit.
tempore mortis sue debit, et adtunc insolut. et in consideratione inde, idem
Willielmus Powel dictam Administrationem pred. omnio apud London predictam in
Parochia et Warda predict' renunciavit post quam quidem renunciat'
Administratio, omnium et singulorum bonorum Iurium et Creditorum dicti Pauli
Pindar per presat. Willielm' Powel Bar. non adtune administrat. prefat. Georgio
Carew debito modo et forma ibidem Commissa fuit Quodque participes et
proprietarii octave partis resid. peculii and oneris ^n dict. Navibus vocat.
Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura fiduciam habentes in predicto Edmundo
Turnor eundem Edmundum Turnor nominaver. appuntuaver. et Constituer. Attornat.
et Commissionar. suum ad prosequend. and recuperand' pred. jus et interesse
pred. perticip' et proprietat. Et. sic iidem Edmundus et Georgius modo ut
prefertur respective intitulat inde existen. postea scilicet vicesimo tertio
die Aprilis Anno regni dict' Domini Regis nunc decimo nono apud Paroch' S.
Martini in Campis in Com. Midd. iidem. Edmundus Turnor et Georgius Carew
simulcum quibusdam prehonerabil. Francisco nuper Com. Shrewsbury Willielmo
Courten Ar. fill et hered. Willielmi Courten fill. et Executor. Willielmi Courten
Mil. Iohanni Ayten Mil. et Carolo Whitaker Ar. person. Credit. et legatar
clamant. interesse et satisfact. pro dictis Injuriis depredationibus et
spoliationibus eisdem Navibus Bona Esperanza et Henry Bona Adventura sic ut
prefertur fact. humillime supplicaver. et petier. illustrisimum Dominum Region
nunc tam pro seipsis quam al. person' interesse habentibus et dampnificat. per
pred. depredationem et spoliationem sic ut prefertur quod idem Dominus Rex nunc
satisfaction. et restitution pro Injuriis predictis eis fieri causaret secundum
legem super quod dictus Dominus Rex nunc postea scilicet eisdem die et Anno
apud Parochiam S. Martini predict per Literas Requisitionum Anglice of Request
sub sigill. manual. suo facto in debita Iuris forma et direct. celsis ac
prepotentibus Dominis Ordinibus general. federator. Belgii Provinciar. in
quibus pred. depredationes et spoliationes sic fact. et Commiss. ut prefertur
plene et perticulariter mentionat. existen. requisivit et postulavit satisfact.
fieri secundum regulas Iusticie Amicitie et bone Concordanc. Anglice
Correspondence quas idem Rex tunc voluit et desideravit observare et conservare
omnino firmit. et inviolabil. quequidem litere requisition. postea scilicet
apud le Hagne in Parochia S. Martini pred. in Com. pred. ^uidam Georgio Downing
Mil. et Bar. ad^nne legate. extraordinar. dict' Domini Regis nunc eisdem
ordinibus general. existen per special. mandat. dicti Domini Regit eisdem
deliberrat fuit Et predictus Edmundus Turn^r et Georgius Carew ulterius dic.
quod predictus Georgius Downing tunc ex^en. et contin. Legatum ut prefertur
dictis ordin' general in prosecution dictarum litrarum requisition' frequenter
solicitavit dict' ordinum general' sed tamen nullum efficax' et sussiciens
relevin' predict' Edmundo Turnor et Georgio Carew et al' person' cum eisdem
interess' claman' obtineri potuisset super quo dict' Dominus Rex nunc accipion'
et observend. quod predict. Dominus Rex tam honor et Iusticia quam secundum
legem et Statut. hujus regni et de Communi Iure debuit efficere et Causare
plenas satisfaction. et reparationes fieri prefat. Edmundo Turnor et Georgio
Carew et al. person. interesse claman. ut prefertur postea apud le Hague pred.
in Parochia S. Martini pred' and Com. pred' per special' mandat. and
authoritat. sua prefat. Georgio Downing tuuc existen. legate. dicti Domini Regis
prefat. Ordinibus general. federator. Belgii provinciar. direct. mandavit and
authorizavit ipsum pred. Georgium Downing ad requirend. public final. respons.
dictorum ordinum general. pred pro and concern. satisfact. fore faciend. pro
depredatione and spoliacon. sic illicite and injuriose Commiss. nuper eisdem
Navibus and bonis ut prefertur ad and infra certum tempus tunc mentionat. and
appuntuat. Et pred. Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew ulterius dic. quod
(tempore tunc prefix. and appunctuat. elaps. existen and nulla satisfact'
habita and facta) dictus Dominus Rex in Regalisua considerantion. ponderan.
conditionem ipsorum Edmundi Turnor and Georgii Carew and al^ person. interesse
habent et claman. et dampnisicat ut prefertur quodque dicti subditi sui
relevari deb^issent secundum rectum et Iusticiam et secundum leges et Statut.
hujus regni Angl. Quodque nulla satisfactio seu Responsio haberi seu ob^ineri
potuisset a pred. ordin. general. per quod manifest visum fuit eidem Regi non
solum sore conat. vanum Anglice a fruitless endeavor verum etiam
prostitutionem honoris et dignitat. sui et Imperial. Coron' hujus Regni ad
faciend vel appunctuand' ullas aliquas al. ulterior' applicationes post tot. et
tal. denegationes et negligenc. Anglice Slightings. Et pred. Edmundus Turnor et
Georgius Carew ulterius die. quod postea scilicet duodecimo die Novembris Anno
regni sui decimo sexto apud Parochiam St. Martint pred. in Com. pred' idem
Dominus Rex in debita forma Legis mandavit cuidam Iohanni Exton Legum doctor'
ad^unc Iudic' alte Cur Admiralitat' Angl' vel surrogat' ejusdem super plen'
examinationem and probationem testium in dict' Cur' Admiralitat fide dignorum
habend' and fiend' ad relation' faciend' Anglice Report and Certificand' sub'
manu sua plen' valor dampnum and detriment' sic sustent' per prefat' Willielmi
Courten and participes suos ut prefertur. Quiquidem Johannes Exton adtunc
existen' Iudex dicte Cur' Admiral' vel surrogat' ejusdem in debita jurisforma
sub manu sua super plen' examination' and probationem fact' per testes in ead^m
Cur' Admiralit' fide digu' relationem fecit and Certificavit quod dampnum and
determent' sic sustent' per pedict Willielm' Courten and perticipes suus ut
prefertur attingebat ad summam Centum qumquagint' and mum mill sexcent' and
duodecim librarum legalis monete Angl' Et predictus Edmundus Turnor and
Georgius Carew ulterius dic' quod pro plen' restitution and satisfactione
eisdem and predict' al' person interesse ut prefertur fiend' pro predict'
navibus bonis and Merchandiz' sic spoliat ut prefertur simul cum omnibus
custag' and impens' qual' acciderent pro recuparatione inde dict' Dominus Rex
per advisament' Honourabil Domminor' and al' de secret Consil suis and secundum
leges and Statut' hujus regni Angl' concessit prefat' Edmundo Turnor Mil' and
Georgio Carew per pred' Literas Paten' Irrotulat ut prefertur pred' potestat'
authoritat' Iur' titul' and Interesse Et pred' Edmundus Turnor et Georgius
Carew ulterius dicunt quod ipsi legalit' intitulat' existen' pro recuperation'
plen' satisfaction' eisdem fiend' de predict' Centum quinquagint' et unum Mill
sexcent et duodecim libris ultra Custag' et expens' sua quoddam inviolabil jus
et interesse in lege transivit et remanet in ipsis Edmundo Turnor et Gorgio
Carew quodque pred' Litere Patent' et omnia et omnimod' potestat' Concession'
authoritat. et res quecunque in et per predict. Literas Paten. concess. at
prefertur secundum legem et Statut. hujus regni Angl. et secundum express.
concess. et intention dictarum literarum Paten. reman. in plen' vigor' et
potestat. ad omnia intentiones et proposita quecunque quousque pred. Edmundus
Turnor et Georgius Carew executor. Administrator. vel Assign. sui virtute
earundum ceperint seisivint trecuperaverint receperint a dictis ordinibus
general. vel eorum subdit. Centum quinquagint un' mill sexcent et duodecim
libr' secunaum appraizament. fore fiend. per sufficien. appriciament' secundum
tenor. et effect. pred literarum Paten. in Cur. Admiralitat. hujus regni Anglie
de omnibus tal. Navibus bonis mercibus et Merchandiz. que capt. forent a
predict. Ordin. General Belgii Provinciar. unitar. sive aliquibus subdit.
dictorum ordin. general. ratione et virtute literarum Paten. pred sive quousque
pred. Edmundus Turnor et Georgius Carew sui eorum alter recipient sive recepit
et satisfaction. de debito predicto per composition. sore fiend. int. Societat.
Ind. oriental. federator. Belgii Provinciar. pred et eosdem Edmundum Turnor et
Georgium Carew Et iidem Edmundus Turnor et Georgius Carew ulterius dic quod non
obstan aliquod Actum Hostilitat. Bellum sive Bella habit. fact. perpetrat. sive
Commiss. post Concession. pred. Litrarum Paten ut prefertur int. dictum Dominum
Regem et dict. ordin. general federator. Belgii Provinciar. sive aliquos
subdit. eorundem respective cessarent quodque non obstant. aliquibus feder.
tractat' vel Articul' quibuscunque and non obstan' pred' tractat' apud Breda in
dicto brevi de scir' fac' mentionat' and conclus. and publicat' sive dict.
tractat' apud Westmin' mentionat' and supposit' fore fact' conclus' and
publicat' in tal' modo and forma qual' in predict' brevi de scir' fac' scil'
montionat' Quodabque; non obstan' pred' brevi de supersed' sub magno sigill'
Angl' mentionat' and supposit' fier^ ad supersedend' revocand' ad nihiland' and
evitand' dictas Literas Paten' Reprizal' sic mentionat' fore concess. ut
prefertur. in tal' modo and forma qual' in predicto brevi de scir' fac'
mentionat' eadem Litere Paten' dicto Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carcw sic ut
prefertur concess. adhuc reman' in plen' robore vigore and virtute existunt and
quod virtute earundem Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew de jure potuerint
capere and seisire vi and Armis tot' and tal' Naves bon' and Merchandiz' pred'
ordin' general' sive aliquor' subdit' eorum unde poterint' satisfecisse tam de
pred' summa Centum quinquagint' and un' mill sexcent' and duodecim libr' quam
de tal' Custag' and expens' qual' predict' Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew a
tempore in tempus legaliter probare poterint per ipsos fore expend' and salut'
in and circa Armand' solvend' supplend' and commeat' instruend' tal' naves
qual' ration' and vigore pred' literarum Paten' Armar' solver' suppl' and
instruer' pro recuperatione and satisfact' pred' debit and Custag' and impens'
pred' ut prefertur Et iidem Edmundus Turnor and Georgius Carew in facto dic'
quod ipsi nec eorum alter nec aliquis claman' de per vel subter eos vel eorum
alter ceperunt vel eepit Seizior' vel seizivit recuperaverunt vel recuperavit
vel receper' vel recepit a tempore consection' literarum Paten' iisdem Edmundo
Turnor and Georgio Carew fact' vel ad aliquod tempus huc usque a dictis
ordinibus general predict' vel eorum subdit' vel a predict' Societate Iudiarum
Oriental' federatur' Belgii Provinciar' pred' summam Centum quinquaginta un.
Mill sexcent' and duodecim libr' sive aliquam partem inde dict' Original'
debit' neque aliud quid cujuscunque valor attingen' sive equivalen' medietat'
dampna Custag' and expens. in prosecutione per predict' Ed' mundum Turnor and
Georgium Carew vel eorum alt' impens' and sustent' Et Ideo iidem
Edmundus-Turnor and Georgius Carew dicunt quod quousque satisfactio fact' and
habit' foret eisdem Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carew de debito dampnis and
custag predict' per predict' Ordines Generales Provinciar' Belgii unit' vel
subdit' suorum vel per dictam societat' Indiar' Oriental. Netherlandie
federatar. Belgii Provinciar: vel per tot. vel parcel. pecun* Octingent Mill
Pattacoones Anglice Pieces of Eight mentionat. in decimo Articulo Tractat apud
Westminster. ut prefertur in dicto brevi de scir. fac. mentionat dicto Domino Regi
pro satisfaction. dampn. and detriment* que ipsi and subdit. sui sustin. vel
per satisfaction. per ipsum Dominum Regem eisdem Edmundo Turnor and Georgio
Carew prius fact. and dat. eedem dicte Litere Paten. sue sic. ut prefertur
eisdem Edmundo Turnor and Georgio Carew concess. and Irrotulamen. eorundem fore
Cancella evitat. condempnat. and frustrat, and easdem in dicta Cur. Cancellar,
restaurat. and ibidem Cancellat. non debent cum hoc quod omnia and singula in
eisdem literis Patentibus recitando content. sunt and predic^o tempore
consectionis and Concessionis earundem fuer. vera quodqae de nullo quocunque
perinde concess. vel in eisdem m^ntionat, dictus Dominus Rex nunc unquam seu
aliqualiter. fuit deceptus.

Rich. Wallapp. R. Powell. Edm. Saunders. J. Summers. Charles Molloy.


ON the first day of Easter-Term the said George Carew appeared in person at
the Kings-Bench-Bar, and moved the Court by Mr. Saunders, his Council, that his
Appearance might be Recorded, which was done accordingly; But no Information
was brought in against the said Carew all that Term: Then in Trinity-Term
following, the said Carew ordered his Clerk in the Petty-bagg to give Rules
that the Attorney General might Reply to the said Plea, that Issue might be
joined in that Affair, to make all things ripe for a final determination in
Parliament; either upon a Writ of Error, or otherwise as occasion should offer:
But to this day no further Prosecution is made at the Kings Instance concerning
the Scire Facias.

Wherefore several of the persons Interessed, in pursuance of an Assignment
indented, and made the 14 th. day of July 1666. between the said George Carew
of the one part, and John Graham Esquire and John Brown Gent. of the other part;
agreed to make a new Entry of five Ships and Pinnaces in due Form, with the
Register of the Admiralty Court (de been esse) the week after Trinity Term; and
to set forth the same to Sea from time to time, until the said Debt and Damages
should be Recovered, or a Composition made for the same, according to the true
intent and meaning of the said Letters Patents, recited in the Plea to the
Scire Facias aforesaid, which they entered accordingly.

The Statutes of England, in several Acts of Parliament are very positive in
it; that persons spoiled at Sea, shall have the Law of Reprizals for their
relief: By the Laws of Moses, Goods taken wrongfully away were to be restored
fourfold, which employed the Damages sustained, and the Costs in acquiring
restitution: By all Christian Precepts and Examples, since Christianity came
into the World; it was practiced in all Ages, that Restitution was enjoined
before any Absolution where the persons were of ability to do it.

To enforce the Argument in this Case something further, it may be observed,
(in the Patent recited in the Plea) that the King foreseeing it was against all
Natural Justice to mention any Pardon, without a Restitution and Compensation
to the Parties Injured; the Hand points at the words. That notwithstanding any
Peace concerning General Reprizals, yet this Remedy remains until satisfaction,
etc. Which imploys, that although he remits the Crimen Lasae Majestatis, the
particular Injury relates to particular Persons: Nothing is more usual then
Appeals of private persons after Sovereign Pardons; whereby the Criminals have
suffered for not making their Peace with the particular persons next of Blood.

But some will object, that a Sovereign Prince may pro bono publico, give away
a particular Debt of his Subject, although ascertained under the greatest
circumstances: But whether that assertion be consistent with the Law of
England, or that the particular should be satisfied out of the public Purse,
or left to the proper Remedy granted. I leave it to better Judgments upon
Arguing the Plea.

It is remarkable, that the said Daniel Gyles made a Contract with the
Dutch-Skipper, that he should give him the said Gyles 100. l. Sterling to Seize
the said Captain Gwyther and his men, who lay at Anchor near Cows-Castle, with
two of the Dutch Seamen on Board in the Prize-Ship, and an English Pilot, that
the Captain had Hired in the Isle of Wight to bring the said Prize-Ship to
London, in order to her Condemnation.

And that the said Daniel Gyles, in pursuance of his Contract, Hired several
Boats with Soldiers, and came on board the said Prize-Ship, called the Love of
Rotterdam, and there demanded ( ex officio, as he pretended) the Captains
Commission, and took it from him, and the Money he had; and Secured the said
Captain and Seamen in Cows-Castle about the 9 th. of December 1680. then took
away the Prize-Ship, wherein were seven pair of Pistols, Swords and Pole-Axes
of the Captains, with all the English men's Bedding and Provisions that Boarded
the said Ship, which the said Gyles Seized and kept, and alleged he might do
it by virtue of the Kings Proclamation.

THat in Hillary-Term following the said Gyles appearing upon the Exchange in
London, several Actions were brought against him in the King's Bench for the
said Ship, Wine and other Goods; whereupon he was Arrested, and carried into
the Powltry-Compter: Who after several days Confinement, being not able to give
Bail, moved the Court he might be Discharged upon Common Bail; notwithstanding
the Actious were for Trover and Conversion, and Actions for Trespass on the
Case, at the Suits of the Proprietors, the Captain and Seamen respectively, to
the Damages of 5000 l. and upwards: Nevertheless the said Gyles was Discharged
by Rule of Court upon Common Bail; then the Ship and Goods were delivered in an
Arbitrary way, by Order of the Council Table to the Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty, and to Sir Robert Holmes, who dispossessed the English Interessed
persons of their Ship and Goods, contrary to the Laws of Property, and the
Established Laws of England, to the great Dishonor of the Government, and the
Damages of the persons Interessed and Injured as aforesaid; who are in
prosecution of their Right in the ordinary course of Justice, against the said
Daniel Gyles and Sir Robert Holmes for the Ship and her Lading; as also for
False Imprisonment of the Men, and detainng their Arms and other Goods from
them.

A short Narrative of the Life and Death of Sir William Courten.
SIR William Courten was born in the Parish of St. Mary-Hill in London; his
Father and Mother in the time of Persecution (under the Duke de Alva) in
Flanders, having fled from Menen in the year 1567. into England for Protection,
having Transported all their Goods and Moneys to the City of London, dealt in
Silks and Fine Linen during their Lives; and left three Children, Named
William, Peter and Margaret, unto whom they gave plentiful Estats.

Sir Willlam being the Eldest Son was Bred a Merchant, and his Fathers Factor
sometime at Harlem, and other while at Corterick, where he Married his first
Wife the Daughter of Peter Cromeling, with whom he had sixty thousand Pounds
Sterling.

In the year 1606. the said Sir William Courten entered into a Trade in
Partnership with a Joint Stock, in Company with Peter Courten his Brother, and
John Mon^y his Brother in Law, that Married his only Sister, the Widow of
Matthias Boudaen her first Husband: Two parts, or the Moiety of the said Stock
in Company belonging to Sir William, and to each of the other a fourth part:
This Trade was carried on Jointly in Silks and Linnens until the year 1631.
wherein was returned Communibus Annis, one hundred and fifty thousand Pounds
Sterling. But besides that Trade in Company to Holland, France and Flanders,
Sir William carried on his own particular Trade to Guinea, Portugal, Spain and
the West Indies, wherein he had raised a vast Estate: His Lands in the year
1633. being of the value of 6500 l. per annum, besides a Personal of 128000 l.
Sterling, at which time he had a vast Credit; which afterward he Engaged in the
East India Expeditions as aforesaid, and Died infinitely in Debt upon that
account.

It would swell a Volume to a vast Magnitude to write all the Passages and
Transactions of the Lives and Deaths of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul
Pyndar: Wherefore I give you here Abstracts of their Last Wills and Testaments
Registered in the Prerogative Court, whereby you may make a conjectu^e of what
Misfortunes their Estates fell under, after their Lives, there being not a Foot
of Land left in England, nor any considerable Personal Estate to their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators out of those two large Inheritances and
Possessions, which they were once Masters of in the Kingdom of England.

An Abstract of Sir William Courtens's Last Will and Testament, Dated 22. Maii
1636. who died in June following.
Imprimis --

I Will that 64 Gowns being the number of the Years of my Age may be bestowed
upon so many poor men; As to my worldly Estate, (viz.) all my Manors, Lands,
etc I leave them wholly to descend to my Son William Courten and his Heirs,
except the Manor of Wingham Barton alias Barton Wingham in Com, Kent. and all
other M^ssuages, etc. and other things granted by King James to Sir Tho.
Harfleet, Sir Edward Boys the Elder, Knt. Edward Hadds, Chr. Mann, William
Alcock Esquire and Walter Drury Gent. and their Heirs by Letters Patents under the
great Seal of England dated at Westminster the 3 of January, in the 11 th. year
of his Reign, and except such part thereof as the said Patentees were entrusted
with for Sir Dudley Diggs Knt. which Manor of Barton Wingham alias Wingham
Barton and other the premises are settled upon my daughter M^ry Courten and
her Heirs.

Item I give and bequeath to my loving Daughter Dame Hester Littleton Wife of
Sir Edward Littleton Baronet 4000 l. and to each of her children living at my
decease 100 l. a piece.

To my daughter Anne Devereux Wife of Essex Devereux Esquire 1000 l.

Also to my said Daughter Mary for her better preferment 2000 l.

To my Sons in Law Sir Edward Littleton Baronet and Essex Devereux Esquire each of
them a Diamond Ring sealed up in a Box and their Names on the Boxes.

To my Daughter in Law the Lady Catharine Courten (my said Sons Wife) A Jewel
of Diamonds sealed up in a Box with my Seal at Arms and her name written
thereon.

To my Sister Margaret Mon^y one Diamond Ring sealed up in a Box with my Seal
at Arms, and directed to her.

To Mr. Peter Boudaen my Nephew, and to his Wife a Ring and a Jewel.

To Mr. James Pergens Merchant a Ring.

To Mr. James Casere Merchant and to his Sister Mrs. Andrews, to each of them
50 l.

To Mr. Iooes and John de Batts Merchants 50 l. Flemish to each of them.

To Mr. John Casteele Merchant 50 l. Sterling.

To Fisher Littleton Esquire, I acquit him of the Debts he owes me.

To his Brother William Littleton 25 l.

To Mr. James Tryon 100 Marks.

To Mary Casere daughter to Mr. John Casere aforesaid 20 l.

To my Book-keeper or Accomptant David Goubard 100. l. and 50 l. per Annum so
long as he continues with my son William Courten.

To my servant Samuel Bonnei 50 l. per Annum, so long as he continues with my
son William Courten.

To Mr. John Moon 10 l. To my servant Allen Edmondson 10 l.

To my servant John White 25 l. To my servants Geo. Iackson and Will. Gorley 15
l. a piece.

To my servants Sampson Iackson and John Standford, Toby Bonnet, Abraham
Gorley, Moses Gorley and Peter Vandam to each of them 10 l.

To my servant Thomas Gent 20 l. and for term of his life certain Acres of Land
lying in the Manor of Totnam High Cross in Com. Middlesex.

To my servant Michael Hunt 15 l. and for term of his life 20 l. yearly to be
settled upon some Lands which should be charged therewith.

To my servant Andrew Symonds and William Curtis to each 3 l.

To John Prince 40 s. and to Thomas Davies the boy 20 Nobles.

To Mrs. Judith Folliot a Ring. To Tabitha Wingfield 20 l.

To Susan Pear 40 l. To Margaret Moore 20 l. To Elizabeth Kendall 5 l.

To my said Sons servants ( viz) to Edward Roberts 5 l. To Elizabeth Fowler 5
l. To William Oswel 10 l. To Humphry Baker 20 Nobles. And to the rest of his
servants in and about the House to each of them 40 s.

Toward the reparation of St. Paul's Church in London over and above what I
have given and delivered to that use 500 Marks. To Christs-Church-Hospital and
St. Thomas Hospital 100 l. a piece.

To the Ministers of St. Gabriel Fauchur^h by name Mr. Palmer and Mr Saxby to
each of them 20 l. and to the poor of the said Parish 30 l.

To the Minister of St. Andrew Hubbard where I desire to be buried, 5 l. And to
the poor of the same Parish 10 l.

To the poor of the Dutch Congregations in London 50 l. And to and amongst the
younger Students maintained abroad at Universities by the said Congregation, 20
l.

To the Poor of St. Mary-hill in London 15 l.

To Monsieur Marmott Preacher of the French Congregation in London 20 l. And to
the Poor of that Congregation 20 l.

To the Poor of the Dutch and French Congregation in Norwich, Colchester,
Sandwich, Canterbury, Maidstone and Yarmouth, to each of them 10 l.

To the Poor of the several Parishes of Laxston and Kneesall in the County of
Nottingham, St. Nicholas Atwade in the Isle of Thaunet and County of Kent, and
to the Poor of the Parish of Westham in the County of Essex, to each Parish 10
l.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of Bridgewater a Ring.

To my respected Friends Mr. Endymion Porter Mr. James Maxwell and Mr. Henry
Murray of His Majesty's Bedchamber, to each a Ring, and to Mrs. Jane Murray a
Ring.

To Edward Nicholas Esquire one of the Clerks of His Majesty's most honorable
privy Council, a Ring.

To Nicholas Pay Esquire one of the Kings Majesty's Clerks of His Kitchen a Ring.

To Mr. Daniel and Mr. Eliab Harvey Merchants, to each a Ring. To Mr. William
Curtins, a Ring. To Mr. Anthony Low Councellor at Law a Ring. And to Mr. John
Rushont and to Mr. Tho. Kynaston Merchants each a Ring.

To Mr. Garret Collent, Mr. Nathaniel Andrews, Mr. Leonard Houtman, Mr. William
Bo^t, Mr. Nathaniel Mountney Merchants to each of them a Ring of the Value of 5
Marks a plece:

To Capt. John Weddell, Capt. Robert Moulton, and to every Capt. and Master of
all and every my Ships and Pynaces or of any Ships whereof I have any part, a
Gold Ring of the value of 3 l.

To each and every the children of William Darkin or of his Widow procreated by
her second Husband to each child 5 l.

To Mrs. Bridget Stephens I acquit the debt which her Husband or she owes and
to every of them a Gold Ring of the value of 3 l. a piece. All which Legacies
and Bequests I desire should be delivered and paid with as much convenient
speed as may be.

All the rest and residue of my Estate as well as other personal Estate
whatsoever (my Debts and Legacies paid and Funeral performed) I give to my
Loving and dearly beloved Son William Courten whom I make and ordain sole
Executor.

Memorandum. That the Rings and Jewels which are mentioned herein without
values amounted to the sum of seven thousand five hundred Pounds, Sir William
Courten having the Diamonds ready by him in his House (inter alia) at the time
of his Death.

An Abstract of Sir Paul Pyndar's Last Will and Testament, Dated the 24th. Day
of June 1646. who died in the year 1650.
Imprimis I give --

ONe third part of my whole Estate unto and amongst the Children of my Nephew
Paul Pyndar deceased, to be divided amongst them; that is to say, one half of
that third part to Paul his Eldest Son, and the other half of that third part
to Ralph Pyndar and Mary Pyndar to be divided equally and paid at their Ages of
21 years or Marriage, And in case of death to the Survivor; the other full
third part to my Kinsman William Toomes. And the last third part for payment of
such Legacies as are expressed in the Schedule annexed, and the Overplus
thereof to be disposed by my Executors and Overseers to such charitable uses as
are mentioned therein, And make William Toomes and Matthew Pyndar Executors.

The Legacies to be paid, out of the said third Part of the Estate, (viz.)
To my Niece Elizabeth Speight Widow and her children 2000 l. To my Niece Anne
Graves and her children 2000 To my Niece Dorothy Bampford and her children 1000
To my Niece Anne Cock Widow and her Daughter Heart 0500 To my Niece Judith
Batchellor Widow 0300 To Lawrence Speight 1000 To Emmanuel Michael, and his
children 1000 To my Kinswoman Susan Pyndar 1000 To my Friend Anthony Withers
0300 To the two Sons of my Friend Mr. William Turnor deceased 0400 All which
Legacies do amount to the Sum of 9500 l.
And whatever shall amount unto more than the said Legacies out of the last
third part I app^olut to be disposed to good uses by my Executors, to be
divided into seven parts, ( viz) To Christ's Church Hospital in London one
seventh part. To St. Bartholomew Hospital in London one seventh part. To St.
Thomas Hospital in Southwarke one seventh part. To Bridewell and Bethlehem in
London one seventh part: To the Prisons in and about London one seventh part.
To St. Botolph without Bishopsgate one seventh part. To the Town of
Wellingbrough, where I was born* one seventh part.


A short Narrative of the Life and Death of Sir Paul Pyndar.
That Sir Paul Pyndars Estate in the Year 1639 was valued and cast up by Sir
Paul's appointment, which then amounted to 236000 l. Sterling, besides desperate
Debts, and that two parts of the same was then imbarqued with the King upon
several assignments out of diverse branches of the Revenue toward the ordinary
charge of the Crown, the greatest part whereof remains at this time
unsatisfied, being charged upon the collections of the late Earl of Strafford
out of the Fines and Compositions of Popish Recusants Estates, in the Northern
Countles, the Allom-Farm Sugar-Farm, pretermitted Customs and several Charges
upon the Soap-Boylers and Dyars Companies and other persons as by the several
Records thereof enrolled in Chancery appears.

Sir Paul Pyndar was born at Wellingbrough in the County of Northampton, bred
up at school there, until the age of sixteen years, then put forth by his
Father to be an Apprentice to Mr. Parvish an Italian Merchant who sent him as
his Factor at 18. years old to Venice where he resided several years and had
diverse Commissions from several Nations. At his return for England, the Turkey
Company having received many kind Offices and Advertisements of Trade in his
transactions abroad, and knowing him to be well learned in the Italian and
Turkish Languages, made their applications to King James in the year 1611. that
his Majesty would be pleased at the said Companies Request to send him
Ambassador to the Grand Seignior at Constantinople, where he resided for the
space of Eleven years and upwards to the great satisfaction of the King and the
Turkey Company by his improving the Levant Trade.

Soon after his return in the year 1623. King James having Knighted him,
offered him as a Reward of his Services to make him his Lieutenant of the
Tower, which Sir Paul humbly refused, and the rather in regard his Majesty
desired to purchase Sir Paul's Diamond Jewel of Thirty Thousand Pound value upon
Credit, that he brought home from Turkey, which he lent King James to wear at
diverse times on days of great sol^mnity on opening of Parliaments and Audiences
given to Foreign Ambassadors. Which afterward was sold to King Charles the
first, (In regard there was an Imbargo upon that Jewel against any
Transportation) and other Jewels of the Crown, which are not paid for to this
day: The Allome Farm, and other Branches of the Revenue Assigned for
satisfaction, being diverted to other uses.

King Charles the first made him one of the Farmers of his Customs in company
with Sir John Wolstenholme, Sir Abraham Dawes and others, who by Covenants in
their contract gave exact yearly Accounts of their Profits, whereby that Branch
of the Revenue, was exactly known, to the end that the Farmers Gains were not
to be exorbitant, to the prejudice of the Crown, or the damage of the Subjects.

Sir Paul Pyndar having in his Lifetime, given ten thousand Pounds toward the
repair of St. Paul's Church, dyed in the year 1650. much lamented of the Poor,
who wanted not his charity all his life time. William Toomes made Probate of
his Will, and took upon him the sole Execution thereof, and dyed a Felo de se
in the Year 1655: having wasted most of the Estate, and paid none of the Debts
or Legacies.

Then Administration with the Will annexed being granted to Sir William Powel
alias Hinson Baronet, he got only the Sum of 500 l. from James Earl of
Northampton Son and Heir and Executor of Spencer Earl of Northampton in part of
a Debt of 2000 l. due from the said Earl, Spencer, and Sir Henry Compton his
Brother, to the Estate of Sir Paul Pyndar. The remainder of the said Debt being
yet owing and standing out upon bond; The Sons and Heirs of both the Obligors
who enjoy their Fathers Lands refusing to pay the said Debt (which their
Ancestors contracted in the year 1639. being ready Money lent them at Interest
for their necessary occasions) and suffer themselves to be sued at Law for the
same, while others want their bread that they eat.

Afterward Administration was granted to the said George Carew in the Letters
patents for Reprizals before mentioned, wherein the most visible part of Sir
Paul Pyndar's Estate remains, yet many difficulties and obstructions are laid
in the way from coming to that poor remainder in this age of Forgetfulness. Yet
I hope it will not be in these our days as it was in the times of old when the
Prophet Isaiah complained that Judgment is turned backward, and Justice
Stands far off, for Truth is fallen in the Street and Equity cannot enter.
Yea, Truth fails, and he that refraineth from Evil makes himself a Prey, and
the Text says, that the Lord was displeased that there was no Judgment, and
when he saw that there was no man, he wondered that none would offer himself.
From whence it may be inferred, that they who suffer Injuries and Oppressions
without Process and Appeal for Justice, do not only betray themselves and their
Cause, but the Interest of their Country and the Laws of the Realm under which
they have, or ought to have protection.

There is one Remarkable and Fraudulent Case, not to be Omitted in this
Narrative.
ADmiral de Ruiter of Holland having taken a Fly-Boat of 200 Tun in Burden,
called the Mary of Bristol, belonging to Merchants of that City. Laden with
Sugar, Cotton and Indigo from Barbados; the said Ship and Goods were Condemned
as free Prize to the States of Holland, by the Admiralty of Amsterdam in the
year 1665. Then the said Ship was sent from Amsterdam by the Name of the
Godilive of Bruges, and bound for France, where she was Laden with Wine, Salt
and Vinegar, under Spanish Colors, as belonging to Jacob Neitz, Michael Vander
Planthem, and other Subjects of the King of Spain, which said Fly-Boat being
taken by Captain Tyrance Byrne, about the Month of July 1666. and carried into
the Port of Chichester, in pursuance of a Commission by force of the Letters
Patents for Rep^izal granted to Turnor and Carew as aforesaid, against the
States of the United Province* Upon Examination whereof, it appearing that the
Ship was Dutch Built, Sailed from a Port in Holland to a Port in France, the
Seamen Hollanders and Zelanders Born, and the Goods Consigned to Merchants of
Amsterdam: Sir Lyonel Ienkin: Decreed that there was good cause of Seizure, and
Condemned the Master of the said Ship in Expenses; but in regard one Peter
Gerrarda French man, and common claimer of Prize-Ships, appeared and claimed
the said Godilive and her Lading in the Names of the said Jacob Neitz and
others, Subjects of Spain in Amity with the King* It was ordered by the Judge,
that upon payment of the Costs, and giving Bail to abide the Sentence of the
Court upon hearing the Cause, the Ship and Goods should be restored: But the
said Gerrard refusing so to do, Arrested the said Captain Byrne in an Action of
1000 l. upon a Writ out of the Admiralty Court, unto which he gave good Bail;
yet the said Gerrard made no Prosecution thereupon: But upon Examination Ex
part and Certificates procured out of Flanders, that the said Ship was
Assigned to the said Neitz and others, Mer^hants of Brugis: The Ship and goods
were restored by the Court, and delivered by the Vice Admiral of Suss^x
accordingly.

Afterward the Proctor and Advocate of the common claimour Exhibits a Lybel in
the Names of Neitz, Vander Plancken and others, in the year 1667. against Sir
Edmond Turnor and George Carew jointly, with Captain Tyrence Byrne and Jonathan
Frost his Owner, upon pretense that part of the Lading was Imbeaziled in the
Port of Chichester, and some of the Wines Perished with Lying: Whereupon Sir
Lyonel Ienkins pronounced a Sentence against Turnor, Carew, Byrne and Frost for
1800 l. Damages for spoiling their Voyage, although the Ship and Goods were
restored under all those Circumstances aforesaid, from which Erroneous and
Unjust Sentence Turnor and Carew Appealed by themselves to Judges, Deligates
and Adjuncts, who confirmed the said Sentence, although against the Statute
Laws of the Realm, and the Common Law of England* Turnor and Carew being
neither Particeps Criminis nec mun^ris, and that no man in the Cases of
Personal Injuries, ought to suffer for the default of another; for that by
their own showing in their Libel, the Imbezlements being done in Chichester in
the body of the County where they were to be Tried by the Common Law, Vive
voce, it being without the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty (a Court of no Record)
Wherefore they Appealed to the King, and obtained a Commission of review,
leaving the pretended Claimers, and Byrne to dispute the matter; Turnor and
Carew being concerned no further, then that their Names were used in the
Process toward Condemnation: Nothing of proof appearing to the contrary in all
the Process transmitted in the said Cause.

The Humble Proposals of William Courten Esquire Grandchild and Heir of Sir
William Courten Knight. Deceased, Charles Earl of Shrewsbury, Richard Powell Esquire
Thomas Coppin Esquire and others here under-named, (on the behalf of themselves,
and other persons Interessed by Subscription to the said Proposals) to His
Majesty and the Lords and others of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Ann. 1626
WHereas Sir William Courten at his own Costs and Charges set forth two Ships
well provided with Men, Ammunition, and all Necessaries fit for Settling a
Plantation. They were bound for the West Indies, where they discovered an
Island, Landed and possessed it, and called it the Barbados. And in the same
year Captain John Powell and Henry his Brother, upon Sir William Courten's
Account, and at his Costs, came thither with other Ships Freighted with Men,
Women, Servants, and all sorts of Provisions for carrying on the Plantation,
designed and Fetched several Indians from the main Land, Built Houses, Raised
Fortifications, and set up the Kings Colors; made several Plantations of
Cottons, Tobacco, Indigo, etc. Peopled the Island with English, Indians and
others, to the number of 1850 Persons, or thereabouts; and Settled John Powel
Junior, Governor there, and the Planters paid Sir William Courten several
Servile Rents of Sugar, Cotton, Tobacco, etc. as Original Proprietor.

25th. of February 1627.
King Charles the first by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
granted the Government thereof to the Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery in
Trust; and at the Request of Sir William Courten, with power to Settle a
Collony there, according to the Laws of England, who gave John Powell a
Commission to continue Governor there: And Sir William Courten borrowed
several great sums of Money, and became much Indebted for carrying on the said
Plantation.

2d. of July 1627.
Then James late Earl of Carlisle obtained a Patent for the Propriety,
Inheritance and Government of the Caribbee Islands: But doubting it would not
reach Barbados, he surrendered it, and obtained a second Patent (rejecting the
former) containing a Grant of the Propriety and Inheritance of the Barbados to
the said Earl and his Heirs: 7th. of April 1628.
By color of which Patent, great Violence was offered to Sir William Courten's
Governor and People; and in Fine, they were Dispossessed.

Ann. 1662
That the Consideration of Sir William Courten's Title was referred to the
Committee of Foreign Plantations; who found that the Heirs and Assigns of Sir
William Courten retained a Freehold in the said Island, having not any way
forfeited the same.

1^th. June 1663.
That Your Majesty in Council having heard the several Pretensions of the Lord
Willougby of Parham, and others who claim Title to the Caribbee Islands, under
some Grant from his late Majesty to the Earl of Carlisle, was pleased to
declare, That you might legally avoid the Grant made to the said Earl of
Carlisle, (as you were advised by your Learned Council of the Law) whereby all
Grants made by the said Earl of Carlisle, and those who claim under him, would
also be avoided.

That the Servile Rents of Sugar, etc. payable to Sir William Courten, as
absolute Proprietor by Original right of Discovery and Possession of the said
Island, are now changed into a Duty of 4 and per Cent, payable by all Planters
there to Your Majesty, and Your Grantees, and reduced under a certain Rent of
7000 l. per Annum, or thereabouts: But the Charge in mannaging the same, does
consume the greatest part of the said Revenue.

That Sir William Courten, his Heirs and Creditors, and others claiming under
him, have not as yet obtained any Satisfaction for their Right and Interest
therein.

Ann. 1635
That Sir William Courten since Deceased, Thomas Kynaston Merchant, (still
living) and others their Partners and Co-Adventurers, by Virtue of other
Letters Patents from His late Majesty under the Great Seal of England,
undertook several Trading Voyages to Goa, China, the parts of Mallabar, and
other places in the East Indies.

Ann. 1643
That t^o Ships, one called the Bona Esperanza, and the other the Henry Bona
Adventura, belonging to the said Courten and Co-Adventurers, being Richly
Laden, and bound Homewards from the East Indies, were set upon by some Ships
belonging to the Dutch East India Company, Seized, and Injuriously taken, and
converted to their own use, to the Damage of the Proprietors and Adventurers,
to the value of 151612 l. as appeared upon due Examination thereof in Your
Majesty's High Court of Admiralty, and was accordingly so certified to Your
Majesty by the Judge of the said Court.

That Kynaston the surviving Partner, and those also who claimed under Sir
William Courten, and his Son and Heir, and sole Executor, made their
Applications for satisfaction of their said Damages upon all occasions of
Treaties and otherwise, but could not obtain any Reparations.

Ann. 1665
That Your Majesty Granted Letters of Marque and Reprizals of Common Right under
the Great Seal of England, unto Sir Edmond Turnor Knt. and George Carew Esquire, in
Right of the Proprietors, and others claiming under Courten and Sir Paul
Pyndar, for Recovery of the said 151612 l. with all Incident Costs and Charges
concerning the same; with particular Provision that they should continue in
Force, as well in time of Peace as War, until satisfaction obtained for the
said Debt and Damages.

Ann. 1667
That in a Treaty at Breda in the year 1667. an Article was mentioned and agreed
upon for Amortizing and Extinguishing the said Damages and Demands.

Ann. 1671
That afterward upon a Petition from the said Kynaston, Carew and other persons
Interessed as aforesaid presented to Your Majesty, and by Your Majesty referred
to certain Lords of the Privy Council, their Lordships upon Hearing and
Examination of the Matters to them referred, did humbly Certify and Report to
Your Majesty, that (for the Reasons in their said Certificate and Report
expressed) all Obligations of past Treaties were Cancelled, and that it was
Just and Seasonable for Your Majesty to Insist upon Entire Reparation for your
said Injured Subjects in the next Treaty between Your Majesty and the
States General.

Ann. 1672
That Your Majesty was Graciously pleased to send Your Letters to Your then
Plenipotentiaries at Cologne, to Insist upon Satisfaction accordingly.

Ann. 1673
That a Treaty was afterward Concluded at London, in the Month of February, in
the Year 1673. wherein it is mentioned, (as is alleged) that all Offenses,
Losses, and Damages should be buried in Oblivion, and all Letters of Reprizals
Revoked by renewing the said Treaty at Breda, in the 7th. Article of the said
Treaty concluded at London as aforesaid.

Wherein a Separate Peace (excluding France) was concluded between England and
Holland, whereby the States General were to pay Your Majesty 800000 Pattacoons
for Damages, at four equal payments in four years: But the Ships Bona Esperanza
and Henry Bona Adventura were left wholly unprovided for.

Ann. 1680
The persons Interessed with, and under Sir William Courten, made several
Applications to Your Majesty and Council, but all in vain: Thereupon the
Letters of Reprizal were put in Execution, and the Captain and Mariners were
taken and Committed to Prison by Warrants from the Council* directed to the
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and afterward Tried for Felony and
Piracy, and Acquitted by the Petty-Iury.

Ann 1681
That in Hillary-Term last Mr. Attorney General brought a Scire Facias against
the said Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew to Reverse the Letters Patents for
Reprizal, whereunto they appeared and pleaded; But Mr. Attorney has not
proceeded thereupon.

That 125000 l. and upwards, is justly due and owing to the Estates of Sir
William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, by the Heirs and Executors of Peter
Boudaen, Jacob Pergens and David Goubert Merchants of Holland, upon particular
Accounts in Trade, Bills of Exchange and Obligations, no ways relating to the
Letters of Reprizal, for which they have been Sued in the ordinary Courts of
Judicature in Amsterdam and Middleburgh, but the Magistrates there denied
Justice to the Prosecutors.

Ann. 1678
That Sir Paul Pyndar having lent and advanced the sum of 80000 l. and upwards
before the year 1640. which was to have been repayed to him out of the Fines
and Compositions of Papists Convict, and other Assignments which are legally
vested in the said Richard Powel and Nath. Hill Gentleman; they did for the
obtaining thereof exhibit their humble Petition to Your Majesty in the Month of
May 1678, which was referred to the Lords Commissioners of your Treasury, where
it still depends.

THat the said William Courten Grandchild and Heir of Sir William Courten
Deceased, Charles Earl of Shrewsbu^y. George Carew Esquire Administrator of the
Goods and Chattels of Sir William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar Knt. Deceased,
with their Wills annexed: Richard Powell Esquire Thomas Townsend, Thomas Coppin
Esquires, Richard Cresset and Robert Alyeway Gent. and Thomas Coleman Esquire on
the behalf of themselves and others Interessed in the Premises, do most humbly
propose

THat in consideration Your Majesty shall be Graciously pleased to Grant (as
much as in Your Majesty lies,) the said Duty of 4 and per Cent arising out of
the Goods Exported from the Island of Barbados and the Caribbee-Islands, and
the Lands that are Escheated to the Crown within those Islands unto the
Proposers, or such others as they shall nominate, and their Heirs for ever;
toward satisfaction of the Original Right and Propriety of Sir William Courten
in the Barbados; and also of the said great Loss and Damages sustained by the
Proposers, and other Proprietors and Interessed in the Ships Bona Esperanza,
and Henry Bona Adventura, and the Factories settled by Sir William Courten and
his Partners, by the Dutch Depredations.

That then the said William Courten and George Carew, unto whom Sir William
Courten's Title and Interest in the Barbados is legally come: Will by any
Lawful Act and Deed Ratify and Confirm the Estates and Possessions of the
present Planters there. And also deliver up the said Letter; Patents for
Reprizal against the States General and their Subjects, into the Hands of Your
Majesty, to be disposed of as Your Majesty shall think fit.

NEvertheless it is most humbly prayed, that for the more Effectual Relief of
the Creditors of Sir William and his Son, and Sir Paul Pyndar respectively,
according to their several Interests and Capacities: That Your Majesty would be
most Graciously pleased to use all effectual means with the States of Holland
and Zeland, for obtaining Satisfaction from the said Jacob Pergens, and the
Heirs and Executors of Peter B^udaen and David Goubart, for the aforesaid Sums
of Money, which do not in any sort relate to the said Letters of Reprizals. And
lastly, that Your Mjesty will be pleased to give Directions to the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury for an Effectual proceeding upon the said
Petition and Reference concerning the Fines and Compositions of Papists,
depending before the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury as aforesaid.

The Conclusion.
THe Petitions mentioned in the Preface concerning the Barbados and Products
thereof, the Dutch Depredations, Debts of the Crown, and particular Demands
from several persons Inhabitants in Holland and Zeland, being all Contracted
into the Proposals aforesaid; there needs no Recitals of them at large,
especially since they were reduced into Orders of the Councel-Board Dated the
24 th. of July 1677. and other References from the King to the Principal
Ministers of State for Releif of the Respective Petitioners, who humbly present
this Epitome to some few and proper Hands. The Old Maxim in the Law of England
is, That the King can do no wrong: From whence the Demonstration is very plain
and obvious, that the Officers and Ministers of the Crown, have not only been
wanting to the King and His Subjects, in the due Administration of Justice, but
have Exposed the Honor and Interest of the Kingdom to Reproach in Foreign
Nations, where once the Government of England had the Glory and Reputation
above all Soveraignties in the World, for Executing Righteous Judgment and
Equity.

The Law being a tender point, and Property the same, ought to be warily and
circumspectly handled: Wherefore he that voucheth any thing for Truth, (that is
False) upon Record in Cases of this Nature, ought to suffer the greatest
punishment imaginable; for that not only the Judicature, but the Policy and
Prudence of a Nation are all called into question from one Generation to
another.

Upon the Agreement in the Treaty between the King of England and the
States General, so Solemnly made at London in the year 1662. the Spoils
concerning the Ships Bona Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura were to be
entirely Satisfied and Repaired, with the Restitution of Polleroon. Whereupon
the said George Carew putting great Confidence in the said Stipulation,
Satisfied and paid the persons mentioned in his Plea to the Scire Facias
aforesaid, by Sale of his Land in Worcestershire to Mr. Thomas Foley for 3800
l. and Mortgaged his other Estate in London and Richmond for the further
Prosecution of his Right, whereby he has paid Interest 13 years last past;
and now the remainder of his Estate being like to be Torn in pieces by Sir
James Butler and the said Thomas Coleman for 4680 l. due upon the said
Mortgages respectively after great Fines formerly Exacted by Lords of the Manor
and their Agents in the said Carew's Absence for non-payment of Interest at the
days certain. Notwithstanding all the Advantages made by some persons out of
the vast Sums of Money given by the Commons in Parliament (for Protection of
the Subjects) in maintaining the Wars against Holland; the Effects whereof
applicable to Carew, were Assigned to Strangers: While other Creditors of a
different nature were calling upon him in his quality as Administrator, for
Debts amounting unto two hundred and fourscore thousand Pounds Sterling, ready
Money Lent to Courten and Pyndar, some now wanting Bread, others Necessaries
and Moneys, all crying out that their Reparations are in Prospect by one means
or other, diverse prompting on the Proposals, others the Reprizals: Under all
those sad Circumstances aforesaid, yet none of them despairing, but that at
last the Eyes and Ears of all persons in Power and Authority to do Justice and
Equity will be open, (after all the Addresses made to His Majesty throughout
the Land, and His most Gracious answers thereunto) to relieve the Injured and
Oppressed, according to the Rules of Law.

^iat Iustitia, ruat Coelum.
FINIS.

