SCOTLAND'S RIGHT to CALEDONIA (Formerly called DARIEN) And the Legality of its
Settlement, asserted in Three several Memorials presented to His Majesty in May
1699.

BY The Lord President of the Session and Lord Advocate, on behalf of the
Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies.

Quod enim est nullius, per occupationem acquiritur ejus Dominium. Puffend. de
Jur. Not. and Gent. Printed in the Year, 1700.

The Three following Memorials were presented to His Majesty in May 1699. by
the Lord President of the Session, and Lord Advocat, on behalf of the Company
of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies, asserting the Legality of their
Settlement in Darien.
1st. MEMORIAL.
THe Establishment of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the
Indies, was first prepared by an Act of Parliament 1693. Inviting and
Encouraging Persons in General, to enter into Societies, and Companies, for
carrying on a Trade to whatsoever Kingdoms, Country or parts of the World, not
being in War with His Majesty, and thereafter perfected by the Act of
Parliament 1695, and a Charter thereon under the Great Seal, whereby the said
Company was fully Settled with all the Powers, Privileges, and Immunities in
use to be granted in such cases, and particularly with Power to plant Colonies,
and build Cities, Towns, and Forts in Asia, Africa, or America, upon Places not
Inhabited, or upon any other Place, by Consent of the Natives, and Inhabitants
thereof, and not possessed by any European Prince or State.

The Settling of this Company was so acceptable to the whole Kingdom, abounding
always with Men, and of late Years, very desirous to enlarge Trade and
Commerce, That the Company's Books being once opened, Subscriptions for a vast
Sum were completed long before the Day prefixed by the Act of Parliament, and
there were few Persons or Families of any Account within the Kingdom, who were
not therein particularly concerned.

But though the Subscriptions were soon completed, and the Advances made, as
readily as proposed; yet the Directors and Managers, did proceed with great
Deliberation, not being more Cautious to Conceal the Place where they were
designed for, than Careful to make such a Choice, as might be exactly in the
Terms of their Act and Patent, To wit, Either not Inhabited, or freely
Consented to, by the Natives, and not possessed by any European Prince or
State, and so liable to no Exception.

In pursuance of these Resolutions, The Company prepared Men, and Provisions,
and set out their Ships, and in the Month of November School, arrived on the
Noth-side of the Isthmus of Darien in America, they pitched upon a Place never
before possessed by the Spaniards; and after formal and distinct Treaties,
obtained the Consent and Good Will of all the Neighboring Natives and People.

The Spaniards and French raise a Clamor against the Settlement, as an
Invasion of the Spanish Possessions and Dominions, in as much as the Place
where the Company has fixed, lies as it were in the Middle and Bosom of the
Spanish Countries, having Carthagenae on the East, and Porto-Bello on the West,
and Panama on the South, which is also alleged to be contrary to the Treaties
betwixt the King of Great Britain and the King of Spain, whereby all these
Countrie's are yielded and conformed to the Spaniards

If these parts of America had been wholly Void and Uninhabited, when the
Spaniards made their first Discoveries, and Plantations there, the Question had
certainly proceeded upon the head of Occupation, the only Ground acknowledged
by all Lawyers to determine the Property of all Waste and Uninhabited
Countries, where a formal Division has not Interveened, as Grotius in
particular, in his Second Book de jure Belli does abundantly clear, and then
the Spaniards must have further Subsumed, That as they found these Countries
Waste, so they were the Occupiers and Possessors thereof; and in Special, that
they were the first Occupiers and Possessors of the Isthmus of Darien, and the
Place where the Company has Settled, it being most certain, that Occupation
gives no Right, save in so far as the Real and Actual Possession extends.

But seeing on the other hand, it is Nottour, and by all Acknowledged, That the
Spaniards did not find these Parts Waste, and Uninhabited, this Argument must
necessarly fall; and all that the Spaniards can now Plead, is either present
Possession, which the Company's Patent owns to be a sufficient Right to any
European Prince or State, or the abovementioned Treaties, as exclusive of the
King of Great Brittain's Subjects.

For clearing then the Claim and Point of Possession, The Company denies that
ever the Spaniard had any Possession of the Place where they have Planted; and
its obviously Incumbent to the Spaniard, if they allege Possession, to prove
and instruct their Alledgance for the Company's Argument being Negative, viz.
That the Spaniards did never Possess the Country where the Company has
Settled, it Undeniably proves it self, as all Lawiers affirm, unless the
contrary, to wit, The Spaniards Possession, be evidently made out and proved,
which is impossible; Nor do the Spaniards pretend to prove the same; But their
Alledgance is, That in these large Countries of America, it were plainly
Capricious to require the Actual Possession of every particular Place; But
since they have the Uncontraverted Right and Possession of Carthagena,
Porto-Bello, and Panama, which are the Extremities that in a manner environ the
Isthmus of Darien, their Possession of these Places, must infer a Possession of
the Interjacent Country in which the Company has Settled, and consequently,
that the Company has Encroached upon, and Invaded their Right: And further,
its said, That the Spaniards have actually possessed Gold and Silver Mines in
Darien, much nearer to the Company's Settlement than Carthgena, or these other
Places, and have constantly been in use to Seize and make Prize of all Ships
coming upon the Coast, betwixt Porto-Bello and Carthagena, as Invaders of their
Possessions, though these Ships did really pertain to Friends and Allies:

To all which, It is answered, 1mo. That the abovementioned Places belonging
to the Spaniard, are very far distant from the Settlement of the Company,
Carthagena above Fifty, and Porto-bello and Panama above Thirty Leagues, which
Distances are more then sufficient to render Countries distinct, both as to
Right and Possession. 2do. It Is certain, that Carthagena, Porto-bello or
Panama, cannot be understood to have unlimited Territories; if then their
Territories be limited, it belongs to the makers of the Objection to show, that
the Limits of these places do reach to, and comprehend the Place possessed by
the Company, which neither the Spaniards, nor any for them, will ever be able
to prove, by the Law of Nations, or any known Rule, or Custom in such Cases.

It has already been Notic'd, That though these Countries had been wholly Void,
when the Spaniards begun to Plant there, they could only by their Possession
have appropriat as far as they did possess, and that what was not possessed,
would have remained free, to be appropriated by the Occupation, and possession
of any other People, a Rule Uncontraverted amongst all Nations on the Face of
the Earth.

But the Case of America being, That before any Plantations were Settled there,
by the Spaniards, the Natives were undoubtedly the Possessors and Proprietors.
It follows necessarly, That Colonies coming to Settle among them, must derive
Right from them, and that either by Consent, Surrender, or Conquest, it being
impossible in the case of Countries inhabited, there can be any other Manner or
Mean of Acquisition; But so it is, That the Spaniards acquiring after this
manner, neither could, nor can pretend to have Right to more than did pertain
to the People where they Settled, whether by Consent, Surrender or Conquest.

Whence it necessarly follows, That since Darien was a distinct Country, and
the Inhabitants thereof a distinct People, from those Countries and Nations,
where the Spaniards have hitherto Settled whether by Consent, Surrender, or
Conquest; The Spaniards cannot pretend to extend their Right beyond that of
their Predecessors, and the People and Country of Darien must still be as free
from the Spaniards, as they were from their Predecessors; and consequently,
that the Company coming to possess with the Dariens Consent, and by their
Right, must be in the like Condition, and noways liable to either the Claim, or
Complaint of the Spaniards, That the Country and Natives of Darien did never
submit to, or were conquered by the Spaniards, must stand as a sure Position,
unless the contrary be proven: But further, it is also certain, That the
Dariens were never Repute to have any Dependency even on the great Empires of
Mexico and Peru, much less upon the little places of Carthagena, Porto-bello,
or Panama: Besides, The Dariens have been in frequent War with the Spaniards,
since their first arrival into these Parts, and were never to this day
Conquered: All which being attested by the English, and other Travelers, who
have Written on this Subject; It appears to be beyond Controversy, That the
Company having Settled with the Consent of these Dariens, must have the same
Right, with the same Privileges and Freedom of Trade which the Dariens had,
and that both are equally free from all the Spanish Pretensions.

It is a known Case that an English Man one Sharp, having joined with the
Dariens against the Spaniards, invaded their Territories; he was accused by the
Spaniards in England, as guilty of Robbery and Piracy, but was acquitted,
because he acted by Commission from one of the Darien Princes, which is an
undeniable Evidence, that this Prince and his Country were judged to be
independent on the Spaniards.

The Spaniards may also have wrought Mines of Gold and Silver within the
Isthmus; but no such possession can support their Complaint: The nearest
possession of Mines that they can pretend was in Captain Diego's Country, on
the Gulf of Darien, more than 15 Leagues distant from the Company's Settlement:
Neither did the Spaniard get these Mines by Conquest, or Purchase, but by a
plain stipulate Permission from Captain Diego, and his people, which changed
not the Property; And upon Breach of Conditions, the Spaniards were quickly
cast out, so that when the Company came to settle on the Isthmus, it was fully
cleared of the Spaniards and all their pretenses.

Carthagena, Portobello and Panama, are adjacent to, and do in a manner environ
the Isthmus of Darien; But that this Vicinity gives to the Spaniards no Claim
of Right, is evident from many Instances; Tangier, Cheuta and Mamora, ly in the
Bosom of the Empire of Morocco, and yet belong to European Princes; The English
and French have Neighboring Settlements upon the River Gambo in Africa, and
all along the Coast of Africa the English and other European Princes have their
Settlements intermixed and contiguous, where they Trade with all Freedom,
without any mutual Impeachment. The English and French have both Plantations
upon the Island of Newfoundland, and the Dutch in time of Peace settled upon
Long Island, and the adjacent Country environed on all hands by the English
Plantations, and yet no War ensued, but the Dutch continued their possession
till the Exchange was made for Suranam.

The Spanish Fleets do necessarly pass betwixt the Cape of Florida belonging to
the Spaniards, and the Bahama Islands, yet the English possess themselves of
the said Islands, and have also several times settled at Port Royal in the
bottom of the Bay of Campiechy in the Gulf of Mexico, for cutting of Logwood,
and have thence removed and settled again at their pleasure. The French have
also endeavored to settle in the Bay of Mexico, and lately and more closely in
the Samblas Islands on the Coast of Darien; They likewise settled a Colony in
Petitguavis in Hispaniola, and in Guiana on the Continent, notwithstanding of
the Vicinity of the Spaniards. The Dutch and Portuguese have their Respective
Plantations on the Coast of Brasil, to which the Spaniards pretend Right as
well as to the Isthmus of Darien, such as the Islands of Curasao, and Bowane,
near to Carthagena on the East, and Suranam and others upon the Continent, and
yet never quarrelled. It is granted that the Spaniards in their excessive
Jealousy, and upon the Pretext that by Treaties, none were to Trade in their
Ports or Harbors, such as Carthagena, and Porto-bello without their License,
have seized and made prize of the Ships that they have found upon the Coast
betwixt the said Places; But first, they did this upon pretext of the said
Treaties. Secondly, Injury and Violence make no Right.

And thirdly, it is most certain when the Spaniards have been overcomeand beat
off in such Attempts, and forced to suffer both Dutch and English to cut
Logwood on that Coast, yet the Spaniards did never complain of any Violation of
Right, as knowing perfectly they had none, as may be seen in Dampier, Wafer,
and other writers.

The Spaniards at first endeavored to amuse the World, with the Popes Gift of
the West Indies, and after the King of Spain's becoming King of Portugal, and
in the Right of that Crown, claiming the Benefit of the Popes Gift of the
East Indies, he assumed the Magnifick Title of Indiarum Rex: Yet he was never
able to make good his Right, or exclude others by these empty Names; but in all
Competitions the Pretentions of Spain, did either resolve in Occupation of what
was void or surrendered, or conquest of what was possessed by Natives; and that
Title was never much regarded, either by Spain, Portugal, or any other Prince
Popish or Protestant.

The second Head which may be pleaded for the Spaniard, is, the Treaties that
have been betwixt the Crowns of England and Spain. But 1mo. Granting that the
Kingdom of Scotland will never disown any Treaty betwixt their King (whom GOD
long preserve and prosper) may be concerned, where are these Treaties that
exclude either the Scots or English, from possessing Darien? if not inhabited,
or where Inhabited, with consent of the Inhabitants? If the Spaniard propone
upon these Treaties, they must produce them. 2do. All to be found in the latter
Treaties betwixt the said Crowns, such as the Treaty 1667, and the Treaty
1670, which may be understood to be the only Regulating Treaties in this
Matter, is that in the former, The King of Spain obliges himself not to molest
the King of England, or his Subjects in their Plantations in America, these
particulars enumerated not by way of Exception, but because some of them had
been contraverted. And that in the other Treaty 1670, It is agreed in the 7th.
Article, That the King of Great Britain, and His Heirs and Successors, shall
have, hold, and possess, with full Right of Empire, Property, and Possession,
all Lands, Regions, Isles, Colonies, and Lordships, situated in the
West Indies, or any part of America, which his said Majesty, or his Subjects,
did then hold or possess, So that no contraversie on any pretense, was
thereafter to be moved on that Subject. And in the eight Article, That the
Subjects of the said King should abstain from all Commerce, and Navigation, in
the Ports and Places, having Forts, Castles, or Staples for Merchandise,
possessed by either of them. To wit, That the Subjects of Great Britain should
not Trade, nor Sail to the Ports nor Places, which the King of Spain has in
the West Indies, nor the Subjects of the King of Spain, Trade nor Sail to the
Places, which the King of Great Britain there possesses, without License given
hincinde, in the Terms therein set down. By which it plainly appears, that all
agreed to, was, and is, That the Kings and their Subjects respectively, should
forbear Injuries, as likewise to Trade and Navigate without License in the
Ports, Castles, and Staples, to either of them belonging, which can no ways
exclude the King of Great Britain and his Subjects from Trading, or making new
Plantations in to such Places in America, as either are not inhabited, or where
the King of Spain has no Right. The Spaniard may positively pretend, that the
Treaties provided to the King of England, and his Subjects of certain
particular Places, and generally what they then possessed in the West Indies,
may be construed an Exception, and import (as it were) an Acknowledgement, that
the rest of the West Indies did belong to the Crown of Spain. But, 1mo, The
Places provided to the King of England and his Subjects are only enumerate for
the greater Caution and Security, because some of them had been taken from the
King of Spain, and thereupon contraverted. And, 2do, It is evident by the
foresaid eight Articles, the Reserve of Trade is equally and mutually provided,
and restricted to the King of Great Britain and the King of Spain, their
respective Possessions; so that nothing can be elicite from these Treaties, to
give the King of Spain the Right to the whole West Indies, excepting the
foresaid places possessed by the King of England, nor to ty up the King of
Britain and his Subjects, from making new lawful Acquisitions in these Parts.
But it is agreed to, That they should secure the one, the other in their
respective Possessions; And thus these Treaties have been always understood,
nor have they hindered the English to enlarge their Possessions in the West
Indies upon (...) Occasions, which certainly belongs as much if not more to the
Scots.

2d. MEMORIAL, By the same.
THe Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, having by the other
Memorial, endeavored to clear the Justice of their Proceedings, as to their
Settling a Plantation in the Isthmus of Darien in America, do further in all
Humility Represent,

1mo, That there was never any Enterprise of a more National Concern, than the
foresaid Plantation is to the Kingdom of Scotland, the Erecting and
Establishing of the said Company, was the Unanimous Desire and Satisfaction of
the Nation, all Persons almost, and Families of any Consideration, did readily
subscribe for, and advance considerable Sums, for carrying on the Designs of
the Company, much above what could have been expected. The Success the Company
has had, in overcoming Difficulties, and fixing upon a Place that appears so
advantageous to Trade and Commerce, has likewise raised the Expectation and
Desire of its Continuance and Prosperity, to a far higher Degree than ever was
known in any Business of this Nature: And, Lastly, it is most certain, That
nothing could be more Grievous and Afflicting to the whole Nation, without
Exception, than that this Undertaking, so far and so happily advanced, should
meet with the least Discouragement, especially from such, whose Countenance and
Assistance is so earnestly craved.

2do, It appears from the whole Circumstances of this Affair, That the English
Nation can have no Prejudice, but rather Advantage by the foresaid Undertaking:
For, First, If it shall be profitable, the Profit evidently redounds to their
Fellow Subjects and good Neighbors. Secondly, The English have free Access, to
come in and partake of the Profit, when they please. Thirdly, The Product of
the Place is probably like to consist neither of Tobacco nor Suggars, the great
Commodities of the English Plantations, but of such Goods and Commodities, as
the English do not afford. Fourthly, It is true, That by the Act of Parliament,
and Patent of the Company, all Ships employed by the Company, are to return to
the Kingdom of Scotland with their Effects: But it is as true, That the said
Act and Patent did bear the Liberty and Privilege of a Free Port, and Market
for all Strangers that shall be pleased to Trade with them, who are not under
the foresaid Obligation, but may come and go with their Return whether they
please, which cannot but be of Advantage to the whole English Plantations, as
to a Free Course of Trade. Fifthly, It is likeways granted, That by the
foresaid Act of Parliament, the Ships, Goods and Effects whatsoever belonging
to the said Company, are declared free of all Customs and other Duties, for the
space of 21 Years, but then four of the said Years are already run, and this
small Encouragement was needful to begin so great a Work, whereof probably the
Profit can little more than equal the Expenses for all that space; And besides,
the Duties of Tobacco and Sugar, not of the Growth of the said Plantation, are
excepted, and not discharged: And also it is evident, That if the Plantation
prosper, the foresaid short Discharge of Customs, and other Duties, will be
richly compensed by the great Increase of Trade, and consequently of His
Majesty's Customs, that may for thereafter be thence expected. And, Sixthly,
The Company and Plantation cannot reasonably threaten any Diminution of His
Majesty's Customs in England; but on the contrary, this Plantation promising a
new Trade, far different from the Trade of all the English Plantations, and
offering to all, the Liberty of a Free Port, must rather increase the Trade of
England, both to the King and Subjects Advantage.

As for the Objection, That the Company, by the Immunity they have from Customs
and Duties, may Import, and then as freely Export, and so undersell any other
Nation, during that Immunity: Its Answered, That the Company in England have
almost the same Privilege, since, if they please to Export after their Return
from the Plantations, they are allowed to do it freely with a full Draw-back,
excepting only 3 or 4 per Cent.

3tio, It is with Submission Represented, That in all Appearance, if the
Company of Scotland had not seized the foresaid Post in Darien, the French had
certainly taken it: And now, that it is discovered to be so advantageous for
Trade, it is not to be doubted, but that the French, who show such Earnestness
to have the Scots excluded, will certainly, if any such thing should happen,
possess themselves of it, not only to the Hurt of the English Plantations, but
to the far greater Prejudice, if not the Ruin of the Spaniards Interest in the
Indies.

And therefore, All things truly and justly considered, it is hoped, that not
only the English will become more and more favorable to so good a Design, but
that even the Spanish will the more easily acquiesce to Reason and Justice,
that they see a more Powerful Competitor ready to catch hold of an Advantage,
that cannot be so safe for them in the Hands of any other Nation, as in the
Possession of the foresaid Company.

3d. MEMORIAL, By the same.
THe Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, being endued with
very ample Privileges, has settled a Colony at Darien, a Country very fit
and proper for that purpose, not only for the Richness of the Soil and Mines,
but likeways by its Situation for Trade.

The Spaniards have the most considerable Interest and Plantations in America,
and are not willing, that any other Nation, or People should have share of the
Advantages and Benefits they draw from thence, which is not Singular in the
present Case, because they have ever withstood all Planters, either upon the
Continent, or American Islands, by Acts of Violence and Hostility, as if every
Settlement in America were an Encroachment upon the Right of Spain.

There is lately a Memorial offered in behalf of the King of Spain, to one of
the Secretaries of State of the Kingdom of England, to the Effect following.

My Lord Ambassador of Spain finding himself obliged, by express Order, to
represent to His Majesty of Britain what follows, Prays Mr. Vernon to
represent to his said Majesty, That the King his Master, being informed from
several parts, and last of all, by the Governor of Havana, of the Insult and
Attempt of some Scots Ships, equipt with Men and Ammunition necessary, who
endeavors to post themselves in the Soverign Dominions of His Majesty in
America, and particularly in the Province of Darien.

His Majesty received this Information with Dissatisfaction, as a Mark of
little Amity, and a Rupture of the Alliance which is betwixt the two Crowns,
which His Majesty has always observed very Religiously, and from which so much
Advantage and Profit has resulted, both to His Majesty and his Subjects, after
which good Correspondence, His Majesty did not exspect such sudden Attempts and
Insults from His Majestys Subjects, and that in time of Peace, without any
Pretext or Cause, in the most inward part of his Dominions.

All that the King desires, That this be presented to His Majesty of Britain,
and that His Majesty is very sensible of such Hostilities and Unjust
Procedures, against which, His Majesty will take such Measures as are
convenient.

London, May 3d. 1699.
THe Charge is great, and if it can be made appear, that the King of Spain is
Invaded, as is pretended, it is but Reason there should be just Reparation.

It must be acknowledged, That it is a fair way of dealing, that the Spanish
Rights and Pretensions are thus asserted by Memorial, and an Opportunity
afforded, and that the whole World may be satisfied, that His Sacred Majesty,
the King of Great Britain, has granted no Patent to His Subjects in Scotland
disagreeable to Treaties with Spain, and that the Scots Company have not
exceeded the Limits of their Patent, to the prejudice of Spain.

There may be many Reasons offered to satisfy Spain, and all other Nations of
Europe, except the French, that if the Scots had not settled in that Isthmus,
or if they were now to remove from it, the same would be possessed by another
People, more dangerous to the Interest of Spain, and in due time it may be made
appear, that the Scots Settlement is for the Honor of the King, and the
Interest of England, but the present design is only to satisfy the World, that
the Patent granted by His Majesty, was agreeable to the Treaty with Spain, and
that the Scots Company have not exceeded the Terms of their Patent, and that
they have Right to what they possess in the Isthmus of Darien, according to the
Law of Nations, and that most part of the Nations in Europe have settled
Plantations in the American Islands, or Continent, upon no other Foundation
than the Scots.

It is the Interest and Policy of all Governments, to improve the Natural
Product of a Country, and to encourage Foreign Trade.

The Experience of all Nations makes appear, That nothing contributes so
effectually to these ends, as Foreign Plantations.

Scotland is amongst the last of the Nations of Europe, in settling Foreign
Plantations, though there be few that can propose more Advantage that way,
because the Nation affords many Subjects of Manufacture, and abounds in Men,
which is the greatest Riches, as well as the Strength of a Nation; Yet for want
of Foreign Plantations, many have been useless and burdensome to their Native
Country, and have been constrained to serve Abroad in Foreign Wars, or into
Plantations of other Countries: And it is to be observed, that wherever they
have planted, they have increased and multiplied, as particularly in Ireland;
but no part of the Benefit does accrue to their Native Country.

The Nation has very long desired Foreign Settlements of their own, and did
make some Attempts that way, which proved ineffectual for want of due
Encouragement, but His Sacred Majesty, as Father of his Country, regarding the
Welfare of it, did endue the same with suitable Encouragements by the 32d. Act,
Par. 1693. and by the 8th. Act, Par. 1695. Yet both these Laws were granted
with a due regard to all former Planters; And did only allow them to plant
Colonies, build Cities, Towns, and Forts in Asia, Africa, and America, upon
Places not inhabited, or in, or upon any other Place, by Consent of the
Natives, or Inhabitants thereof, and not possessed by any European Sovereign,
Potentate, Prince or State.

By these Acts of Parliament, and Patent conform, His Majesty did sufficiently
provide, that the Possession of no European Prince should be invaded or
molested: And if Spain be injured, the Company must acknowledge, that the
Injury flows from them, by exceeding the Limits of their Patent.

It remains to be cleared in behalf of the Company, that they have strictly
observed the Rules prescribed by the said Acts and Patent.

The King of Spain's Title to America by the Pope's Bull, is rejected by the
common Consent of all the Princes and States in Europe, who could not have
settled there without Injury to Spain, if the Pope's Bull had been a sufficient
Title; and neither Spain or Portugal has relied upon that Title, the one
having planted in the East Indies, and the other in the West, without regard to
it: And this Title is sufficiently discussed by Grotius in his Mare Liberum,
Cap. 3. and will never be insisted on any where, and least of all in Britain.

America being inhabited by Natives, before Spain or any European People
settled there, it is most certain, that the Right and Property did originally
belong to these Natives, because the Earth was created for, and freely given by
the Creator to the Children of Men, and the most Ancient and Uncontraverted
Right of Property of the Earth is by Occupation and Possession, which is an
outward Act of the Body quasi positio pedis, and not an inward Act of the Mind,
which cannot be known to others, beside many Men's wills might concur in wishing
and liking the same thing, but their Bodies cannot concur in possessing it, and
an outward Act of Possession warns others to abstain.

The Property that originally belonged to the Natives, could only be
transferred from them to Spain by Conquest or Consent, and Spain can pretend
neither of these Titles to the Isthmus where the Scots have settled.

It is alleged for Spain, That they do possess the Isthmus of Darien, in as
far as they are undoubted Masters of the Bay of Panama, and the whole Coast of
the Isthmus upon the South Sea: They have likewise Carthagena and Portobella on
the North Sea, and they are Masters of the whole Country betwixt Carthagena
and Portobello, and so must be reckoned Possessors of all, because Possession
does not require the particular Occupation of every part of a Country, but
Occupation of one part is a sufficient Act to demonstrate the Will and
Intention to possess the whole Pertinents: And the Spaniards having possessed
these two Extremes, the middle Space belongs to them, especially seeing they
have also settled in other Places betwixt these two, as their Convenience did
require, though they did afterward quite these Possessions, as particularly they
once possessed Nombre de Diot, and did also plant within the River Datien, and
though they did quite these Possessions, they did not relinquish or repudiate
their Right, but being better informed, they choosed more convenient Seats, but
still reckoned themselves Proprietors of the whole Isthmus, and divided the
same in several Jurisdictions. And the Natives upon that Isthmus were a mean
inconsiderable People not to be regarded, who could not be thought to retain
any Right or Property in Opposition to the Power of Spain.

They further add, That Spain has been considered as undoubted Proprietors of
the Bay of Mexico, and of that Isthmus, by other Nations in Christendom, and
most particularly by the English, as is well known, and will clearly appear in
two remarkable Instances.

Several English Merchants having advanced their Stock, for settling a
Plantation at Port Royal in the Bottom of the Bay of Campechay, for cutting of
Logwood, they desired the Countenance and Protection of the Government, for
carrying on this profitable Trade: The Case was considered by the Council of
England, and it was not found just, to allow the Protection of the Government,
but were only left in a Permissive State, to manage their Trade upon their
Peril.

The Second Case, which comes closer to the present Question, was a Proposal by
certain English Undertakers to settle in Darien, as the Scots have done, which
being brought to the Council of Trade of England, and by them laid before the
Lords Justices in His Majesty's Absence, and transmitted to the King himself,
Upon a full Consideration of the Case, that Project was thought to be an
Encroachment upon Spain, and let fall.

The King himself, and Council of England, being satisfied of the Right of
Spain, in these particular Cases of English Undertakers, the same judgment
ought to follow, in relation to the Sco^^ Company.

To all that is alleged, it is shortly and clearly Answered, That Spain has
neither Right by Treaties nor Possession to the Country now possessed by the
Scots: And, 1st. Though it be acknowledged, that the Spaniards have more
Strength, and larger Possessions on the South, than upon the North Sea, yet no
Possession there can be extended to the North-side of the Isthmus, being
possessed by a People Independent, who never received the Spaniards, or became
subject to them: The Spaniards indeed have made great Settlements upon the
South Sea, and in so far as they have possessed, have restricted the Natives to
narrower Bounds; but the Indians still continuing to possess what remains,
Possession on the Coast, or the Mouths of Rivers on the South Sea, can never be
extended to the North Coast: And the Spaniard can condescend upon no Ground in
Law or Reason for such an Extension, hor can they make appear, that what the
Scots possess is Part and Pertiennt of their Plantation, especially considering
that the Isthmus of Darien is naturally divided by a Ridge of high Hills
running from East to West.

Neither does the possession of Carthagena and Porto-bello, give Right to the
interveening Country, which is above 80 Leagues or 240 English Miles, and
these particular Forts, as well as the whole Spanish Plantations on the South
Sea, being fixed without consent of the Natives, who continue their Possession
in the interveening Country, without any Subjection to, or acknowledgment of
the Spaniard: It lies upon the Spaniards to condescend by what Rule the Limits
of these Possessions can be so far extended.

As to what is alleged, That the Spaniards have other Plantations nearer to
the Scots Settlement from which they removed, but still retain Possession and
Jurisdiction.

It is Answered, Admitting the matter of Fact as alleged, it comes to nothing;
For still it is to be remembered, That the Spaniard will not pretend to have
planted with the consent of the Natives: Nor, that the Darien Indians have ever
acknowledged Subjection; but they planted by Force and Violence: And therefore,
whatever Forts they made in the Isthmus of Darien, the moment that these
Plantations were left, the Right and Possession of the Natives did return.

It is freely acknowledged, That Possession lawfully obtained by an outward Act
of the Body, is retained by Acts of the Mind, if no other possess; but when
Possession is taken by way of Fact, and not actually detained, the Right and
Possession returns to the lawful Proprietor.

2. This alleged Possession of Nombre de Dios, and in the River of Darien, is
only pretended to have been at their first Settlement in America, before they
possessed Carthagena and Porto-bello.

3. None of these pretended Settlements are within 20 Leagues of the Scots
Colony; And tho Spain had yet Plantations there, the Limits could as little be
extended to 20 Leagues beyond the actual Possession as to a Thousand: Neither
can the Spaniards prove any Act of Jurisdiction over the Darien Indians,
whatever Title they may think fit to give to Governors or Viceroy's in
America, the Scots do neither know, nor are obliged to notice the same: If
Titles were enough, the King of Spain assumes a Glorious Title of Indiarum Rex,
but he has no more Jurisdiction over the Darien Indians, than in the
Plantations of any other European Prince.

As to what is alleged upon the Opinions given by the King and Council of
England, in relation to His Majesty's English Subjects projecting Settlements
in America, The Circumstances of the Projects, and the Motives of any
Resolution taken in them, are wholly unknown to the Scots, and nothing can be
founded on such Matters of Fact, unless the whole Circumstances were
Authentically instructed or acknowledged, but whatever was thought proper in
these Cases, nothing can be inferred from thence to determine this.

A Project is to be regulated either by Law or by Convenience; And it is very
ordinary and suitable, That his Majesty and the Government may discourage the
Project of an Undertaking, if not Convenient, tho lawful: But when a Project is
Undertaken, Carried on, and a Settlement made in pursuance of express Acts of
Parliament, and conform to a Patent, there is no more place to Deliberate what
is fit, but what is Lawful.

If the whole Circumstances were known, many Disparities might also appear, and
from the bare relation of the Case of the intended Settlement in the Bay of
Campeohay a manifest Disparity is evident.

The Bay of Campechay is in the Province of Nicaragua, in the Diocese of
Chiapo, which Province and Bishopric, are part of the Ancient Empire of
Mexico, which was conquered by Spain.

By the Conquest of Mexico, the King of Spain as Conqueror, had Right of
Sovereignty as far as the Dominions of Mexico did extend, and the Right and
Possession of the Conquered People may reasonably be reckoned to become the
Possession of the Conqueror; And therefore a Settlement in Nicaragua or Bay of
Campechay might be reckoned a down Right Encroachment upon Spain, which cannot
be drawn in Consequence to a Settlement upon Darien, because the Spaniards can
condescend upon no Title or Right beyond their actual Possession; for the
Dariens were never subdued, nor did they ever depend upon Mexico or Peru, or
any Prince or People subdued by the Spanirds.

And further, whatever be urged from these Cases, yet it can be made appear,
That the Undertaking to settle in Campechay was effectual, and the Cart is
marked Port Royal English-Colony; and it is known that the English cut Logwood
at Cape-Catach in Jucatan till the Charge of Carriage rendered it unprofitable,
and thereafter Settled at Port Royal for the same Effect, where there is plenty
of Logwood appropriated to the English.

It is also acknowledged, That the Darien-Indians are no powerful People, or
able by themselves to resist the Impressions of Spain, but the point of Right
and Property is the same in Rich and Poor, Strong and Weak, and they might
lawfully transfer their Right, and assume the Scots or any other Nation to
support or maintain the Right and Possession of that Isthmus, in as far as it
was free from the Spanish Dominions.

Yet the Dariens were not wholly neglected by the Spaniards as inconsiderable,
for there have been frequent and almost constant Wars between them and Spain,
in which the several Captains and Carriques have joined together, and there is
a famous Case of Barth: Sharp, who being accused in England as guilty of Piracy
and Robbery committed upon the Indians, he defended himself as acting by
Commission from Independent Native Indians then at War with Spain, and was
acquitted.

The Right of the Scots Colony, as flowing from the Native Indians, is already
sufficiently cleared, according to the most Ancient and Authentic Laws of
Property, acknowledged by all Nations: And for a further Evidence and
Demonstration of what has been asserted, and already sufficient-proven the
Settlement of the English, French, Danes, Portugueses, and Dutch, will all be
found to be Bottomed on the same Ground.

The Spanish are the most Ancient Planters, and if Spain pretend to any
Universal Title, either by Occupation of a part, or by the Popes Gift, or any
other Right, he thereby excludes the Claim of all Posterior Planters, either in
the Continent, or American Islands, which could not be thought to be separate
and indifferent Dominions: And if Spain recede from any Universal Title to the
whole, it will not be possible to extend his Claim beyond his proper
Possession, or the Possessions of these that are Subduced and Conquered by
Spain: And if this be called in Question, it is expected, That some other Title
will be condescended upon, that may clear the Limits and Extent of the Spanish
Colonies, so as to make a Difference betwixt the Scots Settlement in Darien,
and the Settlement of other Princes in the American Islands or Continent.

The Empires of Mexico and Peru are known, and may be yielded to Spain, but the
remainder of that vast Country was anciently possessed by little Princes, or
rather Captains or Heads of Families or Cariques, who have no Dependence upon
each other, nor upon any Prince or Potentate, but by Leagues and Agreement for
mutual Defense. Thus it is known, That the Land of the Amazons was possessed by
the Natives; And it is remarkable, That upon the Banks of Amazon, there are
Fifty different Nations: So it is in Brasil, in Chili, Paragua, Florida,
Carolina, Virginia, and generally over all the Continent, as well as in the
Islands of America, and likewise in Asia and Africa: And therefore, European
Princes have planted promiscuously, as they found Convenience, without Injury
or Encroachment upon former Planters.

The English possess the Continent from New England to Carolina, without the
Interposition of Colonies belonging to any European Prince, yet the Dutch, in
time of Peace, set down upon Long Island, and the Country now called New York,
betwixt New England and Pensilvania, and continued to possess till the end of
the War 1667: At which time, New York was exchanged for Suranam.

The Spanish Plate-Fleet do necessarly pass betwixt Cape-Florida and the
Bahaman-Islands, yet the English possess these Islands, which the Spaniards did
mightily resent, and used the English very barbarously upon it, yet Spain not
being able to justify any unlawful Title, the English did maintain their
Possession.

Whatever be alleged, That the Government did not interpose for establishing a
Logwood-Trade, yet it is certain, that the English did appropriate the Logwood
at Cape-Catch in Jucatan, till it was exhausted, and they afterward settled at
Port Royal in the Bay of Campechay, for carrying on the same Trade, which was
never questioned by the Spaniards.

The French have several times endeavored to settle in the River de Spiritu
Sancto in the Bay of Mexico, and also the Samballo-Islands upon the Coast of
Darien, and have actually settled a Colony in Petit-Guavis in Hispaniola, the
rest of that Island being possessed by the Spaniards: The French have also a
Settlement in Guiana in the Terra-Firma, and several Forts upon the Coast of
Caribana, and above twelve or thirteen American Islands.

The Dutch have also the City of Coro in the North of Terra-Firma, and Suranam,
and certain Forts upon the Coast of Guiana and Curasao, and several American
Islands.

The Portuguese have the Coast of Brasil divided into many Captainships. The
Interest of Spain was ever opposite to all these Settlements in America, and
wherever they were strong enough, they attempted to expel the Planters, without
regard to Peace or War, whereof the Scots did formerly feel the Effects, in
their Plantation at Carolina holden of the Crown of England, from whence they
were expelled: These things were done by way of Fact, but it is the first time
that ever Spain did openly pretend a Right beyond actual Possession, which was
never sustained by any European Prince. And it is desired and expected, that
there may be a further Condescendance of the Right and Title of Spain, to
exclude other Planters by the Consent of the Natives, where Spain has no
actual Possession, or Exercise of any Jurisdiction.

It is further alleged for Spain, That all the Business in America was settled
by the Pacification 1670, betwixt the Kings of Britain and Spain, which did
confirm all the Plantations possessed by English Colonies, and left the
Remainder of America to Spain, and whatever happened before that General
Treaty, could be no Rule thereafter, because there was almost perpetual War
with Spain in America, which were never settled or composed till the Treaty
1670, which did presuppose and establish the Right of Spain to all that was not
possessed by the King of Brittain's Subjects.

As to the Instance of Sharp, it is not denied that he was acquitted, and
amongst others did propone that Defense, That he Acted by Commission from an
Indian Prince; but that Defense was looked upon as a Jest, and it was not for
that Reason that he was acquitted.

It is Answered, There was indeed a Treaty in the Year 1670, concerning America
in particular, whereby it was provided, That the King of Britain should have,
hold and enjoy for ever, with full Right of Sovereignty, Dominion and Property,
all those Lands, Regions, Islands, Colonies, and Places whatsoever situated in
the West Indies, or any part of America, which the said King and his Subjects
did then hold and possess; From which Article the Spaniards would infer, that
all the rest of America was lost by the King of Britain, as a Right and
Dominion of Spain, because that Spain ratifies the Possession obtained by the
King of Britain, and there is not a mutual Ratification of the Possession of
the King of Spain.

This Article can bear no such Inference, for,

1. The King of Britain and his Subjects did not then, nor do they now in the
least question the Possessions of the King of Spain and his Subjects, but the
King of Spain did very much question the Right of the King of Britain to
several of his American Plantations, not only upon the general Ground of an
Universal Title to all the West Indies, which no European Prince will bear, but
likewise upon particular Claims, that the English had beat out the Spaniards,
and enjoyed what had been once possessed by them in several places: And the
former Treaties with Spain especialy that in the Year 1667, were only general,
establishing a perpetual Peace betwixt the Dominions and Teritories of Britain
and these of Spain: But the Question remaining anent the Right and Dominion of
these American Settlements to which the King of Spain did lay still a Claim,
The Treaty 1670, did renounce his Claim to the Colonies in the English
Possession, but did determine nothing as to those parts of America, which were
never Possessed by the Spaniard or British, and if it had been intended, that
the Right of Spain to all America that was not possessed by some other European
Prince should be asserted, and declared the same would not have been left to
such remote conjectures, but would have been specially expressed.

2. The whole Tenor of that Treaty does sufficiently clear, that no such thing
was intended as to presuppose, much less to assert the Right of Spain beyond
actual possession. For by the Second Article of the Treaty, it is provided,
That there be an Universal Peace in America, as in other parts of the World
between the Kings of Great Britain and Spain, and between the Kingdoms,
States, Plantations, Colonies, Forts, Cities, Islands and Dominions belonging
to either of them; and between the People and Inhabitants under their
respective Obedience.

This Article in the Treaty relating to America, only does clearly demonstrate,
that both Kings were set upon an equal foot, and did Treat for themselves and
the People and Inhabitants under their respective Obedience, and no further; so
that all matters were left untouched that did concern parts not Inhabited or
possessed by Natives, who were never under obedience to either Prince, nor
would the Treaty have been for Plantations, Colonies, Forts, etc. equally and
mutually, if either King had pretended an universal Title or Right beyond
Possession.

3. The Eight Article does yet further clear, that the King of Spain had no
Universal Claim, but according to his Possession, which Article provides, that
the Subjects, Inhabitants and Mariners of the Dominions of each Confederate,
shall forbear to Sail to, or Trade in the Ports and Havens which are fortified
with Castles, Magazines or Warehouses, and in all other. Places whatsoever,
possessed by the other Party in the West Indies. To wit, the Subjects of
Britain shall not Sail into, and Trade in the Havens and Places, which the
Catholic King holds in the Indies, nor in like manner shall the Subjects of
the King of Spain Sail into, etc.

This Clause is, plainly restrictive upon the King of Spain, That the Subjects
of the King of Britain shall not Trade into these places of the Indies which
belong to Spain; for thereby it presupposes that Spain has no Universal Title,
and its left free to the King of Britains Subjects to Sail into, and Trade in
all Ports and Havens which have no Fortifications, Castles, Magazines, or
Warehouses Possessed by the King of Spain, and consequently it was lawful to
have Sailed to, and Traded with the Darien Indians where the King of Spain had
no Fortifications, Castles, Magazines or Warehouses, nor can clear any manner
of Possession, and if they might Trade with the Indians it must be acknowledged
they might Settle among them.

It Is also provided by the Tenth Article, that in case the Ships of either
Party be forced by stress of Weather, or otherwise into the Rivers, Creeks,
Bays or Ports belonging to the other in America, they shall be treated there
with all Humanity and Kindness; Which Article states both Kings again upon an
equal foot, and mentions the Right of both as restrictive to particular Rivers,
Creeks, Bays, etc. in America as if neither Party claimed Universal Title over
all.

The 15th. Article of the said Treaty provides, that the same shall in nothing
derogate from any preheminency, Right or Dominion of any Confederate in the
American Seas, Channels or Waters, but that they have and retain the same in as
full and ample manner as may of right belong unto them, providing always that
the Liberty of Navigation ought in no manner to be disturbed.

This Article relates to certain Preheminencies and Privileges claimed by
Spain in the American Sea, which by the Treaty was not yielded, but left in the
same state as formerly; and if the King of Spain had pretended to an Universal
Right over all America, in so far as is not possessed by other European
Princes, why was he more careful to preserve his Claim of Sovereignty in the
Seas, and forgot his Dominion upon the main Land? There can be no other reason
for it, but because there was no such thing in prospect, as appears by the
whole Tenor of the Treaty.

Nothing has been alleged in behalf of Spain to make any disparity betwixt
all the Settlements that have been made in America by the Subjects of the King
of Britain or other Princes, except the Treaty 1670: Which when duly
considered, makes no disparity at all. For albeit the Possession of the King of
Britains Subjects be thereby confirmed; yet it will not be acknowledged by the
King of Great Britain, or any other Prince that the Settlements made by their
Subjects were illegal or violent, until confirmed by the King of Spain, and
all Nations who have Planted there must sustain and justify the Scots
Settlement, or acknowledge that the Settlement of their own Subjects were
injurious to the Right of Spain.

It is not, nor can be denied, that the Dariens have been at frequent War with
Spain, although they pretend, that the Dariens were rather Rebels than Enemies.
That is only for to beg the Question, for the Natives having the Ancient
undoubted Right, it must be instructed, that they became Subjects before they
could be Rebels.

And though it be alleged, that what was done in Sharp's Case was reckoned a
Jest, and that he was not acquitted upon that ground, as acting by Commission
from the Dariens; yet the matter of Fact is certain and known, and was indeed
remarked by all England, that Sharp joined with the Dariens, did commit acts of
Hostility and carried away great booty from the Spaniards, and was pursued for
Restitution in England, and did propone a Defense. That he acted by Commission
from an Independent People, and was acquitted by a competent Judicature in
England.

These matters of Fact being all acknowledged, it must be thought that a
Decision in the way of Justice was no Jest, but according to the Law of the
Nation.

To Conclude and Sum up the whole Matter, The Scots did not move one foot,
until they obtained two Acts of Parliament, and a Patent in their favors.
These Acts (though very ample) were framed with a just regard to former Planters,
who by the express Tenor of the said Laws were not to be invaded or molested in
their Possession; even the just Right and Property of the Infidel Natives was
considered, and the Undertakers not allowed to dispossess them by Force and
Violence, but to Plant with their consent: Upon the faith of these Laws, a
greater Stock was advanced in Scotland than ever was raised by any other
Nation, upon the first project of a Foreign Plantation; the Directors of the
Company did very narrowly and exactly consider all the Treaties with Spain, and
pitched upon a place, that the whole World considers to be of a great value for
founding and raising a profitable Trade to the Honor of the King who (as the
Father of the Country) did endue them with ample and just Privileges, to the
increase of the Strength and Riches of the Isle of Britain, which is all under
the Government of one Monarch, of one Religion and Interest, and can have no
different Friends or Enemies without endangering the whole. In one word, The
Scots Company have acted deliberatly, for advantage to themselves, the Nation,
and the Isle of Britain; they have only used their own Right and have wronged
no Nation or People, nor exceeded the Limits of their Patent in any
circumstance. And if any will stand up for the Interest of Spain, and call in
question the matters of Fact and principles of Law above asserted, which are
generally known and need not to be confirmed by particular Citations. they may
assuredly expect that what has been affirmed shall be made further clear and
evident beyond contradiction, and whatever Obstacles or Difficulties have, or
may fall in, Ardua quae Pulchra, the undertaking was deliberate, just for the
interest of the Nation, and with more regard to the Right of former Planters
and Natives than any former Project of that Nature.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHoever would be furnished with any more Arguments for proving the legality of
the Settlement of Caledonia, and with a full account of all the considerable
occurrences relating thereunto may have his judgment sufficiently informed, and
his Curiosity abundantly gratified by reading the following Books.

1. A Defense of the Scots Settlement at Darien.

2. A short and impartial view of the manner and occasion of the Scots Colony's
coming away from Darien.

3. An Enquiry into the Reasons of the Miscariages of the Scots Colony at
Darien, etc.

4. A just and modest Vindication of ^he Scots Design for the having
established a Colony at Darien.

6. A full and exact Collection of all the considerable Addresses, Memorials,
Petitions, Answers, Proclamations, Declarations, Letters and other Public
Papers relating to the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies,
since the passing of the Act of Parliament, by which the said Company is
established, together with the Act it self,


