

THE Complete Statesman, Demonstrated in the Life, Actions, and Politick^* Of
that great Minister of State, Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury:

Containing An Historical Account of his Descent, his Administration of Affairs
in the time of Oliver Cromwell, his unwearied Endeavors to restore His Most
Sacred Majesty, his Zeal in prosecuting the Horrid Popish Plot; several of his
Learned Speeches during his being Ld. Chancellor* his Two Commitments to the
Tower; the most material passages at his Trial: With many more considerable
Instances, unto his Lordships going for Holland.

London, Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible, and Thomas
Malthus, at the Su^ in the Poultry. 1683.

A View of the most Remarkable Transactions of that great Minister of State,
Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, Baron Ashley of Wimbourn S. Giles's, and Lord
Cooper of Pawlett. Descended from the Ancient and Honorable Family of the
Coopers of Wimbourn St. Giles's in the County of Dorset.
IT was an excellent Caution of the Moralist, de vivis nil nisi verum, de
mortuis nil nisi bonum, which if the Relators of our Age adhered to, there
could not be so many base reflections on the Living, nor such inhumane
Reproaches of the Memories of the Dead, as we daily see imposed upon the too
credulous World; so that we often see the gallant actions of the most Heroic,
and generous, smutted, and bespattered with false and palpably scandalous
Imputations; and on the other side, persons of little Figure, and small
Demerit, gilded and vernished with all the applause and encomium due to the
Brave and Noble.

It is therefore the design of this small Tractate, not to write after either
of these two Copies; but to manage this discourse with that deference to truth,
and the knowledge of the present Age, that calumny it self may not find where to
fasten upon any part of the ensuing Relation. Nor would I have the Reader
imagine, that any design of being seen in P^int, or of reflecting on the
present Administration of public Affairs, has occasioned the writing hereof;
but having heard that several Pens were employed in a work of this nature, and
being sensible likewise of the present detracting Genius before hinted; I
thought I might in some measure gratify the inquisitive World by a sincere and
candid Relation of the naked truth of things. Some men may object, that it
cannot be thought proper to expose the Reputation of any person in an
Historical way, until he has acted out his part, and be fairly gone off the
Stage, no more than it would be for a Naturalist to dissect a living person, to
discover the soundness of his vitals.

But, as it is reported of Queen M^ry, that on her Deathbed she said, Had there
been a Window to her Breast, they might have seen Callis in her heart: So
doubtless, could there be a view taken of the inside of this Noble Peer, we
might see his heart filled with Loyalty to his Prince, Love to his Country, and
Zeal for the Protestant Religion; the Settlement of which only can secure us
from the Attempts of His Majesty's and His Peoples Enemies. Ye^, if it be a
truth, that the Actions of men are Mirrours, in which their Souls are
discerned, we may, by taking a view of some of the most remarkable Passages of
his Life, in some measure calculate the Dimensions and Complexion of his Soul.

The wisest of Kings tells us, That in the (...) of Councellor^ there is
strength; and how much it is the Interest of Princes to advance men of the
highest Qualifications into such Trust, the Experience of all Ages testifies.
The Affairs of the Public receive their Exaltation or their De^ment, from
their Advices; and according to the Qualifications and Inclinations of those
great Ministers, may be calculated the Fate of Kingdoms. This has obliged
Monarchs to take to their Councils men of the largest Prospect, the greatest
Eloquence, and steddiest Principle to the Interest of the Government; persons
knowing in the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, whereof they are Members,
that Espouse the Interest of their Country with an Inviolable Resolution of
adhering to it, with the hazard of their dearest Lives and Liberties; such as
prefer the Concern of the Public above their own private Satisfactions and
Enjoyments; that dare deny themselves for the good of the Prince. And of this
sort, (without Encroachment on the just Acquirements of any other Minister) we
may affirm this Noble Peer to be. With what Admirable Polity did he influence
and manage the Councils he was concerned in during the Inter-Regnum, toward
His Majesty's Interest? With what exquisite Subtilty did he turn all the
Channels of their Councils to swell this Stream? And how unweariedly did he ^ugg
at the Helm of State, till he had brought his great Master safe into the
desired Port? A sense of these his great Abilities, and Firmness to the public
good, still kept him up in the Esteem of the Country, who would always choose
him one of their Representatives, in the great Emergencies of State. They knew
him to be one of those that could not believe Prerogative to be incompatible
with Property, but as he believed that Motto, Rex Legis Tutamen; so he would
not have that other, Grex Regis Tutamen to be rejected.

In the year 1656, when a Parliament was chosen without the consent of the
People, and to serve a a private Interest, we find him amongst those Worthies
that Remonstrated against that Arbitrary proceeding: for none were admitted
into the House but such as received a Certificate in the following Form.

Comt. Bucks. These are to certify that -- is returned by Indenture to serve
in this present Parliament for the said County, and approved by His Highness
Council. Sept. 17. 1656. Nath. Tailor, Clerk of the Commonwealth in Chancery.

Hereupon Complaint being made to the House that some persons returned for
Members, were not admitted into the House; upon the question it was Resolved,
That those persons should make their Application to the Council for Approbation.

Hereupon several of the Members that were chosen to serve in Parliament, and
not Returned, published a Remonstrance, wherein they claimed the privilege of
the Ancient Fundamental Laws, and their BirthRight as Freemen of England. But
the Remonstrance being much too large to be here inserted, I shall only present
you with one or two Paragraphs, as a Specimen of those brave Hero's Resolution
against a Protectorian Invasion: And the greatness of their Courage, and brave
English Gallantry, will be the more conspicuous, if we consider this was done
when the then Protector was in his Zenith; when almost all Europe trembled
before him; and he gave Law to the Neighbour-Princes; when he had in his hand
that Thunder that had shook the Nation off her very Foundations; And the House
too filled with those who either were, or seemed to be his Creatures: Yet in a
general Defiance of this so potent Conqueror, did those Noble Patriots
(amongst other things) Remonstrate.

When our Worthy Ancestors have been met in Parliaments, and have found
Oppression and Tyranny supported by such strong hands, that they could not
prevail to secure their Countries, Lives and Liberties by wholesome Laws, they
have often made their Protestations against the Injustice and Oppression; and
forewarned the people of their danger. In like manner, we who have been duly
chosen by the people to be Members of the Parliament, that should now have met,
and have an undoubted Right to Meet, Sir, and Vote in Parliament, although we
are Oppressed by Force of Arms, and shut out of the usual place of Parliament
Sitting; yet having Hearts sensible of that highest Trust reposed in us, and
being filled with Cares for the Church and Commonwealth, which with grief of
heart we behold bleeding; we do hold our selves bound in duty to God, and our
Country, to declare unto the People of England, their and our woeful condition,
and the most evident danger of the utter Subversion of Religion, Liberty,
Right, and Property.

We believe the Rumor is now gone through the Nation, that Armed men employed
by the L. P. have prevented the free Meeting and Sitting of the intended
Parliament, and have forcibly shut out of doors such Members as he and his
Council supposed would not be frighted or flattered to betray their Country,
and give up their Religion, Lives, and Estates to be at his Will, to serve his
Lawless Ambition. But we fear that the Slavery, Rapines, Oppressions,
Cruelties, Murders, and Confusions that are comprehended in this horrid Fact,
are not so sensibly discerned, or so much laid to heart as the case requires;
and we doubt not, but as the common practice of the Man has been, the Name of
God, and Religion, and formal Fasts and Prayers will be made use of to color
over the Blackness of the Fact: We do therefore in faithfulness to God, and our
Country hereby Remonstrate;

First, That whereas by the Fundamental Laws of this Nation the People ought
not to be bound by any Laws, but such as are freely consented unto by their
chosen Deputies in Parliament, and it is a most wicked Usurpation, even against
the very Laws of Nature, for any man to impose his Will or Discretion upon
another as a Rule, unless there be some Pact or Agreement between the Parties
for that intent. And whereas by the Mercy of God only, in preserving this
Fundamental Law and Liberty, the good People of England have beyond memory of
any Record, preserved their Estates, Families, and Lives, which had otherwise
been destroyed at the will of every wicked Tyrant; and by keeping this only as
their undoubted Right, they have been kept from being brutish Slaves to the
lusts of their Kings, who would otherwise have despoiled them of their Persons,
Lives, and Estates by their Proclamations, and the Orders of themselves and
their Council. Now the L. P. has by force of Arms invaded this Fundamental
Right and Liberty, and violently prevented the meeting of the peoples chosen
Deputies in Parliament; and he and his Council* boldly declare;

That none of the Peoples Deputies shall meet in Parliament, unless they agree
to the measure of their Fantasies, Humors and Lusts.

They now render the people such Fools, or Beasts, as know not who are fit to
be trusted by them with their Lives, Estates and Families: But he and his
Council, that daily devour their Estates, and Liberties, will judge who are fit
to counsel and advise about Laws to preserve their Estates and Liberties. Thus
does he now openly assume a power to pack an Assembly of his Confidents,
Parasites, and Confederates, and to call them a Parliament, that he may from
thence pretend that the People have consented to become his Slaves, and to have
their Persons and Estates at his Discretion. And if the people shall tamely
submit to such a Power, who can doubt but he may Pack such a Number as will
obey all his Commands, and consent to his taking what part of our Estates he
pleases, and to impose what Yoaks he thinks fit to make us draw in.

They know it to be the undoubted Right of the People to trust whom they think
fit, and as much the Right of every man duly chosen and trusted, to meet and
Vote in Parliament, without asking their Leave, or begging their Tickets. And
although there have been frequent Secret Designs for many years to subvert
Religion, Liberty, and Property in this Nation; and to that end the Designs of
Tyranny have attempted to destroy sometimes the Being, sometimes the Power,
Privileges, and Freedom of Parliaments; yet the Mercy of God has almost
miraculously preserved the Being, Privileges and Authority of Parliaments, and
therein Religion, Liberty, and Property, until the time of the Lord Protector.

But now he has assumed an Absolute Arbitrary Sovereignty (as if he came down
from the Throne of God) to create in himself, and his Confederates, such Powers
and Authorities, as must not be under the cognizance of the peoples
Parliaments. His Proclamations he declares shall be binding Laws to Parliaments
themselves; he takes upon him to be above the whole Body of the people of
England, and to judge and censure the whole Body, and every Member of it, by no
other Rule or Law than his pleasure, as if he were their Absolute Lord, and had
Bought all the people of England for his Slaves. Doubtless he would pretend
only to have conquered England at his own Expense; and, were there as much
Truth as there is Falsehood in that pretense, yet he could not but know that the
Right of the peoples Deputies to their Ancient Powers and Privileges would
remain good against him, as against their public capital Enemy* Whom every man
ought to destroy, until by some agreement with the the Body of the people in
Parliament, some sort of governing Power in him were submitted unto, that
hereby he might cease to be a public Enemy and Destroyer, and become a King,
or Governor, according to the conditions accepted by the people; and if he
would so pretend, he could not be so discharged from his public Enmity by any
Conditions or Agreement made with a part of the Peoples chosen Deputies, whilst
he shut out the other part; for no part of the Representatives Body are trusted
to consent to any thing in the Nations behalf, if the whole have not their free
Liberty of Debating and Voting in the Matters propounded.

If he would pretend no higher than to be our Conqueror, who for Peace and his
own safety's sake, was content to cease from being a public Enemy, and to be
admitted a Governor, he would not compass those ends by forcibly excluding (as
now he does) whom he pleases of the Representative Body of the People, who were
to submit to him on the Peoples behalf; therefore he either takes upon him to
be such a Conqueror as scorns the Peoples acceptance of him by their
Representative as their Governor, and fears not to remain a public Enemy, or
else he takes himself to be such an unheard of Sovereign, that against him the
people have no claim of Property or Right in themselves, or any thing else; for
he has now declared, that the peoples choice cannot give any man a Right to
sit in Parliament, but the Right must be derived from his gracious Will and
Pleasure, with that of his Counselors, and his Clerks Ticket only must be
their evidence for it.

Thus has he exalted himself to a Throne like unto God's, as if he were of
himself, and his power from himself, and we were all made for him, to be
commanded and disposed of by him, to work for him, and serve his Pleasure and
Ambition.

A little after there is an Instance of Chief Justice Tresilian, who was
executed at Tyburn in the time of Richard the Second, for advising the King,
that he might at any time dissolve the Parliament, and command the Members to
depart under the penalty of Treason. Diverse other Protestations were contained
in that Instrument against the Arbitrariness and Tyranny of that proceeding;
and in conclusion they declare they will (...) ^t their complaints before the
Lord against their powerful Oppressors, hoping he will redeem his people out of
the hands of wicked and deceitful Men. This protestation was signed by One
hundred and seventeen persons, whereof Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, the present
Earl of Shaftesbury was one, and many others of great Loyalty and Integrity,
some whereof are since dead, and others still alive in great Honor and Office.

By this may be easily discerned the Opinion he had of the Illegal and
Arbitrary proceedings of O. C. and how much of the sufferings of the Loyal
Party would have been prevented, had that point of a free Parliament been then
gained: His Majesty's Restoration must have been the natural consequence of
it. The constant correspondence he always kept with the Royal Party, and that
almost to the hazard of his Life and Family, are sufficient Testimonies of his
sincerity to his Masters Interest and Service.

His House was a Sanctuary for distressed Royalists, and his correspondence
with the Kings Friends (though closely managed, as the necessities of those
times required) are not unknown to those that were the principal managers of
His Majesty's Affairs at that time.

This made that great Politician O. C. so apprehensive of this great Assertor
of his Countries Rights, and Opposer of Arbitrary Government and Enthusiasm,
that though his vast Abilities were known (at least) to equal the ablest Pilot
of the State, yet we cannot find him amongst the Creatures of his Cabinet, or
Council, nor amongst the Eleven Major Generals, to whom the Care of the Nation
was committed: No, their Principles, their Aims and Designs were incompatible;
one was for Subverting, the other for Maintaining the Ancient standing
Fundamentals of the Nation; which once dissolved, it were impossible but an
universal Deluge of Confusion, Blood and Rapine must ensue. This made our brave
Patriot (with diverse of the Heroic English Race) to the utmost oppose the
growth of a Protectorian Power. So that we find Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper
accused before the Parliament in the year 1659. for keeping Intelligence with
the King, and for having provided a Force of Men in Dorsetshire, to join with
Sir George Booth in attempting to restore and bring His Majesty that now is to
His Rightful Throne. Many persons of great note were imprisoned on the account
of this Plot; and amongst the rest Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, who though (at
that time one of the Commissioners of the Army, and a Member of the House of
Commons, yet was complained of to the Parliament for a great Manager of the
Design; and although no man knew better how to obviate the Reasons of the
House, and plead his own Cause, yet was with great difficulty cleared and
discharged of that Imputation by the House of Commons.

The Eyes of the great Statesmen were so much upon him, that he was one of
those Loyal Persons mentioned by Baker in his Chronicle, whereof the Council of
State was composed; in which List we find General Monk to be the foremost; and
that Council the Chronologer calls men of Integrity, and well affected to
Kingly Government: And he that will but consider how soon His Majesty's
Restoration ensued upon the Election of this Council, will have good reason to
be of the same Opinion. And in the 673 page we find him to be one of the Nine
of the Old Council of State, who sent that encouraging Letter to the said
General, to promote his undertaking for the Advantage of the Three Nations.
Again, we find him in the List of that Council of State consisting of Thirty
Nine, upon whom an Oath was endeavored to be Imposed for the Abjuration of the
Royal Line, but by the Influence of Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, and General Monk,
upon Coll. Morly, that Oath was opposed in Council, as being a snare, and
against their Consciences. This was strongly pleaded by the Soberer part of the
Council, whereof this great Patriot was one, and so an end was put both to that
Oath, and to the Council. Nor is it in the least unknown to persons then in
being, how much his Advice influenced the Councils of those times.

He was the person that was particularly singled out of the whole Council by
Commissary Clargis in November. 1659. and had communicated to him a dangerous
Design, tending to Involve the Nation in further trouble, which this Honorable
person imparted to the Council of State. This-was that great Council that
complied with General Monk in that great Revolution of Restoring His Majesty.
And if that great Action were the occasion of a candid construction put on all
the former Actings of the General, why they should not have the same Candor
for this Noble person, I think none can determine. His Employment at this time
was in places of the highest Trust and Importance; an undeniable Testimony of
the great Opinion the then great Mininers had of his Loyalty, as well as known
Ability for the Management of the then Intrieate and close Designs. A further
prospect will be taken of his Concurrence with Genesis Monk in that Important
Juncture, if we remember that his Regiment was one of the first that declared
for the Parliament, and General Monk, in March 165^. So zealous was he in
putting all his strength to the turning the great Wheel of State.

At the time of His Majesty's Restoration, as a most signal Testimony of His
Majesty's good Sentiments of his former Actions, he was Advanced to be one of
the first Rank in His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and was placed
above His Majesty's Royal Brother, the Duke of Gloucester, and even Genesis Monk
himself, whom His Majesty used to call his Political Father. And about three
days before His Majesty's Coronation, he was in the Banqueting House created
Baron Ashly of Wimbourn St. Giles's; and another addition of Honor was
conferred on him ( viz.) Lord Cooper of Paulett; And at last in the year 1672.
he was made Earl of Shaftesbury, at the same time when Duke Lauderdale, the
Earl of Arlington, and the Lord Clifford were promoted. To his happy Councils
do both King and Kingdom owe for the happy Conduct of things for diverse years;
so that now he seemed to be incorporate into the heart of his Prince; the
Events of his Advices were commonly agreeable to what he at first proposed; so
that it may be said of him as was spoken of Polibius, that (as Scipio) so the
King seldom miscarried in any thing that was carried on by his Advice; so that
at length he seemed to be the Royal Oracle. In fine, such was the Opinion which
his wise Administration had gained, that as he sat in one of the highest
places in his Masters favor, so he was preferred to the highest Trust of
Honor in the Kingdom; he was made Chancellor of the Exchequer, and afterward
Lord High Chancellor of England, about the beginning of the Year 1672. Now was
the Kings Conscience (as it were) entrusted to his care and management; this
was the highest Orb a Subject was capable to move in; but with what Sagacity,
Honor and Integrity he acquitted himself in that great Employment, the
Transactions of the Court of Chancery at that time can best witness. Justice
ran in an equal channel, the cause of the Rich did not swallow up the Rights of
the Poor, he that was oppressed found Relief, and the Oppressor a Rebuke
suitable to his crime; the usual delays of that Court were much abated, and all
the Transactions thereof were managed with the greatest Judgment and Equity.

As an Instance of his constant adhering to the Interest of his Master, and the
commune Bonum, or Weal of the public, you may take a copy of his Thoughts from
that excellent Speech made by him in favor of the Subject in the Exchequer,
Jan. 24. 1673. at Baron Thurland's taking the Oath, a copy whereof follows.

Mr. Serj. Thurland,

The King of his Grace and Favor has made choice of you to be one of the
Barons of the Exchequer; he designed to place you in a Court of more profit,
though not of more Dignity; but your own Modesty and Virtue has chosen this
Court, where you thought you could serve the K. best. And I could not omit to
mention it here to your Honor, it being the greatest Instance of a good man,
that he had rather be found serviceable than rich. His Majesty has had large
proof of your former services; besides, he takes you upon the credit of that
Recommendation that has justly the best place with him, I mean his Royal
Brothers. Some few things it is fit I should here mention to you, and leave
with you as Admonitions, or rather Remembrances.

In the first place you are to maintain the Kings Prerogative, and let not the
Kings Prerogative and the Law be two things with you: For the Kings Prerogative
is Law, and the principal part of it, and therefore in maintaining that, you
maintain the Law. The Government of England is so excellently interwoven, that
every part of the Prerogative has a broad mixture of the Interest of the
Subject, the ease and safety of the people being inseparable from the greatness
and security of the Crown.

In the next place let me advise you that you acquaint your self with the
Revenue, as also with the ancient Records, Precedents, and Practices of this
Court, for want of which knowledge, I have seen this Court a most excellent
Common Pleas, when at the same time I could not say so much for it as an
Exchequer.

In the third place let me recommend to you so to manage the Kings Justice and
Revenue, as the King may have most profit, and the Subject least vexation.
Raking for old Debts, the number of Informations, Projects upon Concealments, I
could not find in the 11 years Experience I have had in this Court, ever to
advantage the Crown; but such proceedings have for the most part delivered up
the Kings good Subjects into the hands of the worst of Men.

There is another thing I have observed in this Court, which I shall mind you
of, which is, when the Court hearkens too much to the Clerks and Officers of
it; and are too apt to send out process, when the Money may be raised by other
ways more easy to the people. I do not say that the Kings Duty should be lost,
or that the strictest course should not be taken, rather than that be; but when
you consider how much the Officers of this Court, and the Undersheriffs get by
process upon small sums, more than the Kings Duty comes to; and upon what sort
of people this falls, to wit, the Farmer, Husbandman and Clothier, in the
Country, that is generally the Collector, Constable and Tythingman, and so
disturbs the industrious part of the Nation, you will think it fit to make that
the last way when no other will serve.

Give me leave also to mind you of one thing more, which is in your Oath, That
the Kings needs ye shall speed before all other: that is, the business of the
Revennue of the Crown you are to dispatch before all other, and not turn your
Court into a Court of Common Pleas; and let that justle out what you were
constituted for.

In the last place let me conclude with what concerns all my Lords the Judges,
as well as you, let me recommend to you the Port and way of Living suitable to
the Dignity of your place, and what the King allows you. There is not any thing
that gains more Reputation and Respect to the Government than that does: and
let me tell you, Magistrates, as well as Merchants are supported by Reputation.

His particular Application to prevent any misunderstanding between the King
and his Parliament, is very obvious to any that shall but look into his
Speeches to the Parliament during his Chancellorship, and with how great
concern he still vindicated his Masters Actions: He acquitted himself in all
the great Emergencies of this High Employment with that universal Applause and
satisfaction, as seldom happens to men in such an envied station: The vilest of
his Detractors not being able to fasten any Imputation upon his conduct in
those great and weighty Trusts he was advanced to.

So little of self appeared in his Actions, that it may be modestly affirmed of
him, he made his own Interest strike sail to the public, and his care for
others seemed more than for himself, and at the time of his highest Elevation,
he would not neglect the meanest Suitors that applied themselves to him.

Thus having gradually traced the Advancement of this great Minister to the
highest pitch of Honor, where he appeared sicut Luna inter Stellas minores. I
shall now take notice of his Relinquishment of that High Employment, and what
other contingencies have happened to him since.

About November 1673. His Majesty was pleased to send for the Lord Chancellor
to White Hall, where he resigned the Great Seal of England to His Majesty, and
was dismissed from being Under-Treasurer of the Exchequor, which place was
conferred on Si^ John Duncomb. In the Afternoon of the same day the Earl of
Shaftesbury was visited by Prince Rupert, with diverse other great Lords at
Exeter House, where they gave his Lordship Thanks for his Faithful and
Honorable Discharge of that great Employment. Thus this mighty Minister, who
had to the universal satisfaction of all good Men, been raised to that degree
of Interest in his Masters favor, without a murmur laid all his Honors at his
Masters Feet, and was observed not to abate of the cheerfulness of his Temper
upon the loss of his honorary Employment. I shall conclude this part with a
touch of this Earl's Character, which says,

-- His choice Sagacity
Strait solved the Knot that subtle Lawyers tied,
And through all Foggs discerned the oppressed side,
Banished delays, and so this noble Peer
Became a Star of Honor in our Sphere,
A needful Atlas of our State, etc.
The 16th of Feb. 1676. The Honorable Earl of Shaftesbury was sent a Prisoner
to the Tower by Order of the House of Lords: There were at the same time
committed the E. of Salisbury, and the L. Wharton. The Form of the Warrant for
their Commitment was as follows:

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Constable of His Majesty's Tower of London, His Deputy, or Deputies, shall
receive the Bodies of James Earl of Salisbury, Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, and
Philip Lord Wharton, Members of this House, and keep them in safe Custody
within the said Tower during His Majesty's pleasure, and the pleasure of this
House, for their High Contempts Committed against this House; And this shall be
sufficient Warrant on that behalf.

To the Constable of the Tower.
J. Brown, Cler. Par.

The 27th and 29th of Jan. 1677. The E. of Shaftesbury was brought to the
King's-Bench-Bar, upon the Return of an Alias Habeas Corpus, directed to the
Constable of the Tower, where the Council for the Earl prayed that the Return
might be filed, and the Friday following appointed for Debating the sufficiency
of the Return, and my Lord was remanded until that day.

On Friday the Earl was brought into Court again, and his Council argued the
Insufficiency of the Return. After Mr. Williams, Mr. Wallop, Mr. Smith, had
showed diverse weighty Reasons in behalf of the Earl, that that Court might
relieve him, they were opposed by the Solicitor General, and the Attorney
General, who brought diverse Instances why that Court could not discharge a
person Committed by Parliament; whereupon the Earl of Shaftesbury is said to
have spoke to this purpose:

My Lords,
I did not intend to have spoken one word in this business, but something has
been objected, and laid to my Charge by the King's Council, Mr. Attorney, and
Mr. Solicitor, that enforces me to say something for your better satisfaction.
They have told you, that my Council in their Arguments said, That this Court
was greater than the House of Peers, which I dare to Appeal to your Lordships,
and the whole Court, that it was never spoken by them; I am sure it was not by
any direction of mine. What is done by my Council and by me, is, that this is
the most proper Court to resort unto, where the Liberty of the Subject is
concerned. The Lord's House is the Supreme House of Judicature in the Kingdom;
but yet there is a Jurisdiction that the Lord's House does not meddle with. The
King's Council has mentioned as a wonder, that a Member of the Lord's House
should come hither to diminish the Jurisdiction of the Lords. I acknowledge
them to be Superior to this, or any other Court, to whom all Appeals and Writs
of Error are brought; and yet there are Jurisdictions that they do not
Challenge, and which are not natural to them, or proper for them. They claim
not to meddle in Original Causes and so I might mention in other things; and I
do not think it a kindness to any Power, or Body of Men, to give them some
Power that is not natural or proper to their Constitutions: I do not think it a
kindness to the Lords to make them Absolute, and above the Law, for so I humbly
conceive this must do, if it be adjudged that they by a General Warrant, or
without any particular Cause Assigned do Commit me, or any other man to a
perpetual and indefinite Imprisonment: And my Lords, I am not so inconsiderable
a person, but what you do in my Case, must be Law for every man in England. Mr.
Attorney is pleased to say I am a Member of the Lord's House, and to lay weight
on the word Member.

It is true, I am one of them, and no man has a greater Reverence or Esteem
for the Lords, than my self; but my Lords, I hope my being a Peer, or a Member
of either House, shall not lose my Privilege of being an English man, or make
me to have less Title to Magna Charta, or the other Laws of English Liberty. My
Opinion is not with one of my Council, who argued very learnedly, that the
Passing an Act by the King's Royal Assent, can make a Session, because the
usual promise was not in it. It was without any Instruction of mine to mention
that point. The King's Council tells your Lordships of the Laws and Customs of
Parliament; and if this were so, I should submit; but this Case of mine is
primae Impressionis, and is a new way such as neither Mr. Attorney, nor Mr.
Solicitor can show any President of; and I have no other Remedy or place to
Apply to, than the way I take.

Mr. Attorney confesses, that the King's pleasure may Release me without the
Lords: If so, this Court is Coram Rege, this Court is the proper place to
determine the King's pleasure. This Court will, and ought to Judge of an Act of
Parliament void, if it be against Magna Charta, much more may Judge an Order of
the House that is put in Execution to deprive any Subject of his Liberty. And
if this Order or Commitment be a Judgment, as the King's Council affirms, then
it is out of the Lords hands, and properly before your Lordships, as much as
the Acts which were lately Passed, which I presume you will not refuse to Judge
of; notwithstanding that the King's Atorney General says this Parliament is
still in being. I take it something ill that Mr. Attorney tells me I might have
Applied elsewhere.

My Lord, I have not omitted what became my Duty toward the King; for besides
the Oath of Allegiance I took as a Peer, or an English man, there is something
in my Breast that will never suffer me to depart from the Duty and Respect that
I owe him; but I am here before him; he is always supposed to be here present,
and he allows his Subjects the Law.

My Lord, They speak much of the Custom of Parliament; but I do affirm, there
is no Custom of Parliament that ever their Members were put out of their own
Power; and the Inconveniences of it will be endless.

Mr. Attorney was pleased easily to answer the Objection of one of my Council;
if a great Minister be so Committed, he has the Cure of a Pardon, a
Prorogation, or a Dissolution: But if the Case should be put, why Forty
Members, or a greater number, may not as well be taken away without Remedy in
any of the King's Courts, he will not so easily answer; and if in this case
there can be no Relief, no man can foresee what will be hereafter.

I desire your Lordship well to consider what Rule you make in my Case, for it
will be a President that in future Ages may concern every man in England. My
Lord, Mr. Attorney says, you can either Release or Remand me; I differ from
him in that Opinion. I do not insist upon a Release; I have been a Prisoner
above Five Months already, and come hither of Necessity, having no other way to
get my Liberty, and therefore am very willing to tender your Lordship Bail,
which are in, or near the Court, as good as any are in England, either for
their Quality or Estate, and I am ready to give any Sum or Number.

My Lord, This Court being possessed of this business, I am now your Prisoner.

The Court delivered their Opinion Seriatim.

Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Wild, Lord Chief Justice Reimsford; Mr. Justice
Twisden was absent, but he desired Justice Jones to declare that his Opinion
was, that the Party ought to be remanded, which being the sense of the Court,
his Lordship was Remanded by the Court.

His Lordship being denied Redress in the Court of King's Bench, he continued a
Prisoner in the Tower, until the following February; and on the Fourteenth of
that Month presents a Petition to the House of Lords, then Sitting, wherein his
Lordship makes a very humble Submission both to the King and House of Peers;
and for better satisfaction here is inserted, what was said to be a Transcript
of the Proceedings of that House relating to that Affair.

Die Jovis, Feb. 14. 1677.
A Petition was presented to the House from the Earl of Shaftesbury, wherein he
humbly submits himself to their Lordships pleasure, and is ready to make
acknowledgment, and submission according to their directions; but in regard it
did not appear to this House, that his Lordship had made his Acknowledgment to
His Majesty, after some Debate the Petition was rejected.

Die Mercurii, Feb. 20. 1677.
A Petition from the E. of Shaftesbury was presented to the House, and Read as
follows:

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled. The Humble Petition of Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury:
Shows,
THat your Petitioner on the 16th of Feb. 1676. was Committed Prisoner to the
Tower of London by your Lordships, because he did not obey your Lordships
Order, where he has continued under Close Confinement, to the great decay of
his Health, and danger of his Life, as well as prejudice of his Estate and
Family. In all humble Obedience therefore unto your Lordships, he does
acknowledge that his Endeavoring to maintain that this Parliament is
Dissolved, was an illadvised Action, for which he humbly begs the Pardon of the
King's Majesty, and of this most Honorable House; and does in all humble Duty
and Observance to your Lordships, beseech you to believe that he would not do
any thing willingly to incur your displeasure.

Wherefore your Petitioner in all humble Duty and Obedience both to His
Majesty, and your Lordships, has made his humble Submission and
Acknowledgment, in his most humble Petition unto the King's most Sacred
Majesty, and is ready to make his further Submission to His Majesty, and this
Honorable House, according to the direction thereof. And he does most humbly
implore your Lordships, That you will be pleased to restore him to your Favor,
and discharge him from his Imprisonment.

And your Petitioner, etc. Shaftesbury.

This being Read, the Lord Chancellor acquainted the House that His Majesty had
received a Third Petition from the E. of Shaftesbury, more submissive in Form
than
the Two First. But His Majesty understanding that the Earl of Shaftesbury has
endeavored to free himself from the Censure of this House, by Appealing to the
King'sBench, to have their Judgments thereupon, during the late Adjournment,
does not think fit as yet to signify his pleasure as to his Discharge, until
this House has taken that matter into consideration.

So that at that time the House refused to Address to the King for a Discharge
for the said Earl, but entered on a Debate concerning his Appeal from this
House to the King's Bench for an Habeas Corpus, which Debate was again resumed
the day following, and the Records of the King's Bench produced, by which it
did appear that two Rules of Court had been obtained upon the Motion of the E.
of Shaftesbury's Council, Trin. Term, 1677. and the Returns thereupon were
Read, by which it did appear, that the Earl of Shaftesbury was Committed the
16th of Feb. 1676. by this House for a Contempt, and then the Remittitur of the
Earl of Shaftesbury to the Tower was also Read.

After this a Petition from the Earl of Shaftesbury to this House was Read,
wherein his Lordship took notice of an Order of this House, of the 20th
Instant, for bringing the Records of the Court of King'sBench into this House,
concerning the Matter of an Habeas Corpus brought by him, that he takes himself
to be greatly concerned, and to have a Right to be present, and heard, when any
Debate of any new matter against him is entered upon. That he cannot pretend
but that he may have erred, for want of a President to guide him; and being
deprived of the benefit of Council by reason of his close Confinement, and
being resolved not to do any thing willingly, that might in the least offend
His Majesty, or their Lordships, he humbly takes this opportunity to give
further Evidence thereof by casting himself at their Lordships feet; and as he
has humbly begged the Pardon of His Majesty, so he beggs also the Pardon of
this House, for having offended them in any thing whatsoever.

This having been Debated a long time, the House at last came to this
Resolution following:

Resolved and declared, That it is a breach of the Privilege of this House,
for any Lord Committed by the House to bring an Habeas Corpus in any Inferior
Court, to free himself from that Imprisonment, during the Session of Parliament.

Resolved, That the Earl of Shaftesbury shall have Liberty to make his full
Defense, notwithstanding the Resolution and Declaration aforesaid.

Die Veneris, Feb. 22.
The House sent a Warrant to the Constable of the Tower, to bring the Earl of
Shaftesbury to the Bar of this House on the Monday following; accordingly on
the Monday following the Earl of Northampton, Constable of the Tower, brought
the Earl of Shaftesbury to the Bar of the House, where having kneeled, the Lord
Chancellor gave him an account of the foregoing Resolution of the House.
Whereupon the Earl of Shaftesbury answered to this Effect.

My Lords,
I have presumed to present two Petitions to this Honorable House; the first
your Lordship mentions, I do again here personally renew, humbly desiring that
I may be admitted to make that Submission and Acknowledgement your Lordships
were pleased to Order: And that after a Twelve-months close Imprisonment to a
man of my Age and Infirmities, your Lordships would pardon the folly or
unadvisedness of any of my words or actions. And as to my second Petition, I
most humbly thank your Lordships for acquainting me with the Resolution and
Declaration in that point; and though Liberty be in it self very desirable, and
as my Physician (a very Learned man) thought, absolutely necessary to the
preservation of my Life: Yet I do profess to your Lordships, upon my Honor,
that I would have perished, rather than have brought my Habeas Corpus, had I
then apprehended, or been informed, that it had been a breach of the Privilege
of this Honorable House. It is my Duty, it is my Interest to support your
Privileges; I shall never oppose them. My Lords, I do fully acquiesce in the
Resolution and Declaration of this honorable House; I go not about to justify
my self, but cast my self at your Lordships Feet, acknowledge my Error, and
humbly beg your pardon, not only for having brought my Habeas Corpus, but for
all other my Words and Actions that were in pursuance thereof, and proceeding
from the same Error and Mistake.

One Blany was then called into the House, who had delivered a paper to the
Lord Treasurer Danby, pretending to give a relation of some words spoken by the
E. of Shaftesbury, in the Court of King's Bench, at the time when he moved for
his Habeas Corpus; but though this whole Transaction were no longer since, than
the last Trinity Term, yet the said Mr. Blany could not affirm that what was
written in the said paper, was in part, or whole really spoken by the Earl of
Shaftesbury; so that the Lord Treasurer being able to make nothing of Mr.
Blany's paper, (which was a hard case) the House of Lords proceeded to a
Resolution, in what form the Earl of Shaftesbury should make his submission and
acknowledgment, which being drawn up in words importing much the same with what
the Earl had before declared; which being read to him by the Lord Chancellor,
the Earl of Shaftesbury repeated the same at the Bar of the House, and then his
Lordship withdrew.

The House then ordered, that the Lords with white staves should wait upon His
Majesty, to give His Majesty Account, that the House had received satisfaction
from the Earl of Shaftesbury, in the matter of the Habeas Corpus, and the other
contempt for which he stood committed; and are humble Suitors to his Majesty,
that he would be pleased to discharge him from his Imprisonment. And that their
Lordships do acquaint the House to morrow what they have done in this matter.

Die Martis, 26 Feb. 1677.
The Lord Treasurer reported to the House, That the Lords with white slaves had
waited on his Majesty, according to the Order of this House, To which His
Majesty was pleased to give this answer, That he will give Order for the Earl
of Shaftesburys discharge.

Thus was this great heat (whereby some of this worthy Peers Enemies thought
then to blast his Loyalty and Integrity, and endeavored to foment the disgusts
of the House against him) at last extinguished; and the Earl a little after saw
this Parliament first prorogued, and soon after dissolved.

Now was that Diabolical Plot of the Jesuits and Papists discovered, by the
great care and fidelity of Dr. Titus Oats, which convinced both the King,
Lords, and Commons, and all the Nation in General, of a damnable, treasonable,
popish design to murder our Protestant King, with the chiefest of the Nobility
and Gentry, and to reduce a Protestant Church to Romish Idolatry, and the State
to a Catholic slavery.

The seventh of March 1678. A Parliament met at Westminster, and chose the
Honorable Edward Seymour Esquire their Speaker, who had been Speaker of the last
long Parliament. This Parliament did like noble English Patriots, endeavor to
give check to the bloody popish Designs on foot, and passed many excellent
Votes for that purpose, many Members acquitting themselves in their Speeches
like Men of high sense of the Miseries the Nation was like to be involved in.
This House carried up the Impeachment to the House of Lords against William
Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Wandour,
William Lord Peter's, and John Lord Bellasis, for High Treason, and other high
crimes and misdemeanors. But this having been at large published to the World,
in diverse other prints, with diverse Instances how this Noble Peer was
personally struck at in that hellish Design; I shall refer the Reader for more
full satisfaction, to the several Narratives and Discoveries of the popish
Plot, printed by Authority. And shall now come to give you an Account of a
Speech said to be delivered by this Honorable person in the House of Lords, on
the 25th of the Instant March, Anno 1679.

You are appointing of the consideration of the State of England to be taken up
in a Committee of the whole House, some day the next week. I do not know how
well what I have to say may be received, for I never study either to make my
Court well, or to be popular; I always speak what I am commanded by the
dictates of the Spirit within me. There are some other considerations that
concern England so nearly, that without them you will come far short of
Safety and Quiet at home. We have a little Sister and she has no Breasts,
what shall we do for our Sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? If
she be a Wall, we will build on her a Palace of Silver; if she be a Door,
we will enclose her with Boards of Cedar. We have several little Sisters
without Breasts, the French Protestant Churches, the two Kingdoms of Ireland
and Scotland; the foreign Protestants are a Wall, the only Wall and Defense
to England; upon it you may build Palaces of Silver, glorious Palaces. The
protection of the Protestants abroad, is the greatest power and security the
Crown of England can attain to, and which can only help us to give check to
the growing Greatness of France. Scotland and Ireland are two doors, either to
let in good or mischief upon us; they are much weakened by the Artifice of our
cunning Enemies, and we ought to enclose them with Boards of Cedar.

Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand, sometimes the one goes
first, sometimes the other, in a doors, but the other is always following close
at hand.

In England Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland Slavery went
before, and Popery was to follow. I do not think your Lordships, or the
Parliament have Jurisdiction there. It is a Noble and Ancient Kingdom; they
have an Illustrious Nobility, a Gallant Gentry, a learned Clergy, and an
understanding, worthy People; but yet we cannot think of England as we ought
without reflecting on the condition thereof. They are under the same Prince,
and the influence of the same Fav^urites, and Councils: When they are hardly
dealt with, can we that are Richer expect better usage? For it is certain, that
in all absolute Governments, the poorest Countries are always most favorably
dealt with. When the ancient Nobility there cannot enjoy their Royalties, their
Shrievaldoms, and their Stewardies, which they and their Ancestors have
possessed for several hundreds of years* but that now they are enjoined by the
Lords of the Council to make deputations of their Authorities to such as are
their known Enemies, can we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long, under the
same persons and Administration of Affairs? If the Council Table there can
imprison any Nobleman, or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to
Trial, or giving the beast Reason for what they do; can we expect the same Men
will preserve the Liberty of the Subject here?

My Lords, I will confess that I am not very well versed in the particular Laws
of Scotland; but this I do know, that all the Northern Countries have by their
Laws an undoubted and inviolable Right to their Liberties, and Properties; yet
Scotland has outdone all the Eastern and Southern Countries, in having their
Lives, Liberties, and Estates subjected to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of
those that govern. They have lately plundered and harased the richest and
wealthiest Countries of that Kingdom, and brought down the barbarous
Highlanders to devour them; and all this almost without a colorable pretense
to do it: Nor can there be found a Reason of State for what they have done; but
that those wicked Ministers designed to procure a Rebellion at any rate; which
as they managed, was only prevented by the miraculous hand of God, or otherwise
all the Papists in England would have been armed, and the fairest opportunity
given, in the just time for the execution of that wicked and bloody design the
Papists had: and it is not possible for any man that duly considers it, to
think other, but that those Ministers that acted that, were as guilty of the
Plot as any of the Lords that are now in question for it.

My Lords, I am forced to speak this the plainer, because till the pressure be
fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, it is not possible for me, or any
thinking man to believe that good is meant us here. We must still be upon our
guard, apprehending that the Principle is not changed at Court, and that those
men that are still in place and Authority, have that influence upon the mind of
our excellent Prince, that he is not, nor cannot be that to us, that his own
Nature and Goodness would incline him to. I know your Lordships can order
nothing in this; but there are those that hear me can put a perfect cure to it:
until that be done, the Scottish Weed is like death in the pot, Mors in Olla.
But there is something too, now I consider, that most immediately concerns us,
their Act of Twenty two thousand men to be ready to invade us upon all
occasions. This I hear, that the Lords of the Council there have treated as
they do all other Laws, and expounded it into a standing Army of Six Thousand
Men. I am sure we have Reason and Right to beseech the King that that Act may
be better considered in the next Parliament there. I shall say no more for
Scotland at this time, I am afraid your Lordships will think I have said too
much, having no concern there; but if a French NobleMan should come to dwell in
my House and Family, I should think it concerned me to ask what he did in
France; for if he were there a Felon, a Rogue, a Plunderer, I should desire him
to live elsewhere; and I hope your Lordships will do the same thing for the
Nation, if you find Cause.

My Lords, Give me leave to speak two or three words concerning our other
Sister, Ireland: Thither I hear is sent Douglas's Regiment, to secure us
against the French. Besides, I am credibly informed that the Papists have their
Arms restored, and the Protestants are not many of them yet recovered from
being the suspected Party. The Sea-Towns as well as the Inland, are full of
Papists: That Kingdom cannot long continue in the English hands, if some better
care be not taken of it. This is in your Power, and there is nothing there but
is under your Laws. Therefore I beg, that this Kingdom at least, may be taken
into consideration, together with the State of England; for I am sure there can
be no safety here, if these Doors are not shut up and made sure.

Some few days after this Speech the King was pleased to make a great
Alteration in his Council, and to appoint the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of
Shaftesbury* President thereof. About the 18th of April 1679. His Majesty was
pleased to declare the Dissolution of the Late Privy Council, and for
Constituting a New one; The Lords of the Council not to exceed Thirty, besides
the Princes of the Blood which His Majesty may at any time call to the Board,
being at Court; and the President and Secretary of Scotland, which are
uncertain.

The Names of that most Honorable Council were,
His Highness Prince Rupert. William Lord A. B. of Canterbury. Heneage Lord
Finch, L. Chancellor. Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury, Lord President of the
Council. Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal. Christopher Duke of
Albermarle. James Duke of Monmouth, Master of the Horse. Henry Duke of
Newcastle. John Duke of Lauderdale, Principal Secretary of Scotland. James Duke
of Ormond, L. Steward of the Household. Charles Lord Marquess of Winchester.
Henry Earl of Arlington, L. Chamberlain of the Household. James Earl of
Salisbury. John Earl of Bridgwater. Robert Earl of Sunderland, one of His
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. Arthur Earl of Essex, first L.
Commissioner of the Treasury. James Earl of Bath, Groom of the Stable. Thomas
Lord Viscount Falconberg. George Lord Viscount Hallifax. John Lord Bishop of
London. Daniel Lord Roberts. Henry Lord Hollis. William Lord Russel. William
Lord Cavendish. Henry Coventry, Esquire one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries
of State. Sir Francis North Knight, L. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Sir
Henry Capell, Knight of the Bath, first Commissioner of the Admiralty. Sir John
Ernby Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas Chicheley Knight, Master
of the Ordnance. Sir William Temple Baronet. Edward Seymour Esquire. Henry
Powle Esquire.
This great Change put men upon various Discourses and Apprehensions suitable
to their respective Dispositions and Inclinations; but the most sober both of
the Parliament, and others, hoped now to see the Popish Plot wholly Eradicated,
especially considering the daily fresh Discoveries that were brought before the
Council and Parliament; the last of which was of no long continuance, for about
June 1679. this Parliament were dissolved. And about July there were Writs
issued out for the summoning another Parliament. October. the 17th. 1679. A
Parliament met at Westminster, and were by a commission directed to the Lord
Chancellor, prorogued until January following. It is almost incredible how in
this interval the Papists lifted up their Heads, braving the very face of
Justice; for now they had got such a cast of Evidence, that would have accused
Innocence itself: Now does Dugdale inform that he had been tampered with to
deny his former Evidence. Sir George Wakeman finds the benefit of an Ignoramus
Jury, without the Astonishment of Thompson or the Observator, The Diabolical
design of ruining the greatest Protestants in England, by leaving a Packet of
counterfeit Letters in Colonel Mansel's Chamber in Ax-Yard; discovered by Mr.
Dangerfield, besides an account of a great sum of Money offered him by the
Lady Powis, if he would murder the Earl of Shaftesbury; against whom the rage
of that bloody party was now so great, that they left no base and unwarrantable
Action unatempted to rob him of his Life. Some were hired to stab or pistol
him, others to swear Treason against him, or any other course the Devil could
suggest, so as he were but made away, on whose life they thought the ill
success of their Diabolical Machine depended.

Libels, containing the blackest Treasons against His Majesty, were forged in
the names of the most eminent Protestant Peers and Grandees of the Nation,
scarce any person of Integrity against the Roman superstitions, but would have
been made a party to it: But whoever was omitted, my Lord Shaftesbury was sure
to be drawn in neck and shoulders, and to be duckt over head and ears in the
Plot: These were by their mercenary Agents secretly to be conveyed into the
Houses of the Protestants aforesaid; and then they wanted not a set of base and
mean spirited Villains to swear it home upon them; persons of that prof^igate
and contemptible disposition, that for a Mess of Pottage would not only forsake
all claim to Honesty and Virtue, but prostitute their Souls to the lust and
ambition of the worst of Men: But these were no new things to the brave and
excellent, to be exposed by Trials of this Nature to the Rage of brutish and
inhumane Wretches: A Heathen could long ago observe it:

Integer Vitae, scelerisque purus,
Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec Arcu.
To what a pitch of Heroic Magnanimity must that Person needs be arrived that
can buoy up his Soul against such foul Tempests, when the consideration of
simple Innocence shall maintain a perpetual serenity within, amidst all the
cloudy Fogs of Adversity; that can be as steadfastly loyal under the Frowns as
the Favor of his Prince, and answers that witty character of such a one, in
Hudibras:

For Loyalty is still the same,
Whether it win or lose the Game;
True as a Dial to the Sun,
Although it be not shined upon.
Mr. Dangerfield gives a large account in his Narrative of two several times
that he had attempted to kill the Earl of Shaftesbury, and that he had been
instigated thereto by the popish Priests, and that the Lady Powis particularly
had offered him Five Hundred pounds to perform it, whereof he received Twenty
pounds in part, but that still he had been providentially disappointed of that
barbarous enterprise.

One day Dame Cellier demanded of him whether he had dispatched the aforesaid
Earl, and he replying that he could have no opportunity to come at him; Give me
the Poniard, says she, you shall see what a Woman can do for the Catholic
Cause: And accordingly, by the Instigation of the Devil, and a hellish rage,
which the Papists miscall a holy Zeal, she addressed her self to the Execution
of that execrable Design. She makes a visit to the Earl, under pretense of
paying her Thanks for Favors obtained through his means; but the consecrated
Dagger still lurked under the skirt of her Gown, ready to have expressed her
Gratitude by opening the Veins of this Protestant Peers Heart. He had no reason
to be over fond of the conversation of such cattle, and therefore in short time
she was dismissed without having an opportunity of putting her philonious and
treacherous design in execution.

Is then a loyal Innocence and protestant Integrity Armor of proof against
Poisons, Pistols, and Ponyards? The Catholic Gallantry stops not here, but
pursues this Noble Peer with Forgery of his Hand, and other their little black
Artifices and Sham-plots. What base and villainous Arts the Papists used to
destroy the Lord Shaftesbury, is not only evident by their many endeavors to
have stabbed him, as has been deposed by diverse persons, to whom the
Parliament as well as the Nation have given belief, but may be further
confirmed by their intercepting Letters directed to his Lordship; and after
they had (in a hand as near the Original as they could counterfeit) inserted
Treason in them, they were transmitted to such as would certainly acquaint our
Ministers with it. In short one story of their mischievous practice in this
kind is this: There is a Gentleman who was a Commander of a Regiment of Horse
in the late Kings service, and lost all for his sake, and his present
Majesty's, writ to this Noble Peer about relieving him against the Gout, with
which he uses be afflicted: This Letter was intercepted, and (the person then
living in the French King's Dominions) after adding to it an account, That the
Writer was able to furnish the Earl with Forty thousand men from France, to
oppose the D. of York's Interest: It was then conveyed to some of the French
King's Ministers, who they supposed would send a Copy of it hither; but by a
strange providence the Original was returned into the Gentleman's own hands.

December. 7. The following Humble Address and Advice of several of the Peers of
this Realm, for the Sitting of the Parliament, was Presented to His Majesty at
Whitehall.
A Copy whereof follows.

Sir,
WE are here to cast our selves at Your Majesty's Feet, being Ten of the Peers
of Your Realm of England, and in our own Names, and in the Names of several
others of our Fellow-Peers, do humbly beg, That Your Majesty would consider the
great Danger Your Royal Person is in; as also the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of these Your Nations.

We humbly pray, That in a time when all these are so highly concerned, Your
Majesty will effectually use Your Great Council the Parliament.

Sir, Out of the deepest sense of Duty and Loyalty to Your Majesty, We offer it
as our humble Advice and earnest Petition, That the Parliament may Sit at the
time appointed; and that Your Majesty would be graciously pleased to give
public Notice and Assurance thereof, that the Minds of Your Majesty's Subjects
may be settled, and their Fears (...).

(...) Address was offered in the Names, and by the Order of the Peers under
named, ( viz.)

Kent, Huntingdon, Bedford, Clare, Stamford, Shaftesbury, Say and Seal, Eure,
North and Gray, Chandos, Gray, Howard, Herbert, Rockingham, Townshend, Holles,
Delamer,
And was personally presented to His Majesty by four Earls, and five Barons, (
viz.)

Huntingdon, Clare, Stamford, Shaftesbury, North and Gray, Chandos, Gray,
Howard, Herbert.
With whom the Earl of Bedford had personally joined, but that by a sudden
indisposition he was prevented.

It was delivered by the Earl of Huntingdon, in the name of the rest of the
subscribed Lords. And they were introduced to His Majesty by his Highness
Prince Rupert.

His Majesty was graciously pleased to return this answer:

That he would consider of what they had offered, and could heartily wish that
all other People were as sollicitous for the Peace and Good of the Nation, as
he would ever be.

But on the Twelfth His Majesty, of his Princely Wisdom, thought fit to
prorogue the Parliament, from the 26 of January, until the 11th of November
next ensuing.

Near this time this Noble Peer recovered out of a violent and dangerous fit of
sickness.

So endless were the designs and Conspiracies of the Papists against this Noble
Peer, that notwithstanding they met with many disappointments in their
Attempts, the Almighty Providence protecting his Innocence from their ^ellish
Machinations, that now another Female Agent is discovered for Tampering with
Mr. Dugdale to retract what he had sworn before King and Parliament, toward
the detection of the damnable popish Plot, the sum of Two Thousand pounds was
offered him, by one Mrs. Price, and diverse great persons named by her to be
security for the payment of it, in case he would sign such a Recantation, and
affix the Odium of a Protestant or Presbyterian Plot on some of the Protestant
Peers, and others of known Loyalty and Integrity to their Prince and Country;
particularly on the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftesbury. Of which ^rous
design Mr. Dugdale (being at that time touched with some remorse at such a
horrid Villainy) gave his Lordship an account, which occasioned the miscarrying
of that foul and traitorous Enterprise. Nor were they wanting in their famous
Method and Artifice, in calumniating and throwing dirt on the Reputation of
this Noble Peer, which is a faculty they are very famous for; and on the
account of which they may particularly value themselves; ^ For now a Packet of
base Libels, and Treasonable Reflections, were by the Penny-Post transmitted to
a Printer, and Copies of the same dispersed about the parts of Westminster,
full of venomous and malicious slanders, and Imputations, tending to the taking
away the life of this Protestant Earl, and diverse other Peers of Right
Honorable Account: But the Printer detesting so black a design, published an
Invitation to any person that would detect the Author, or publisher of that
infamous Libel.

And now we are got into such a Bog of Plots, Sham-plots, Subornations and
Perjuries, as the History of no Age can parallel. 'Twas the mode for discarded
Varlets, Irish Skip-kennels, and indigent extravagants to be treated, and
treating one another with no less than the Assurances of vast and mighty
Fortunes, and Employments in places of Trust and Honor, on condition they
would lustily swear the Plot upon the Presbyterians; but none of these cursed
projects were ever proposed, but the Earl of Shaftesbury was principally
(though with many other Noble Heroes) to be charged as the chiefest Agent in it.

To this purpose David Fitz-Girald, one of their notorious Evidences,
endeavors both by Bribes and Threats, to draw diverse others of his
Contrymen and Accomplices to join with him in the Catholic Design. They had
been disappointed at the Poniard and Pistol, nor could have opportunity to
dispatch him that way: the remembrance of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfreys Cravat, and
the Assassination of Justice Arnold, were caution sufficient to any discerning
Protestant; and now that method had been so shamefully and notoriously
detected, and cast such a just Odium upon their party, other means must be
attempted: nothing so suitable to their Genius as an Oath; and it is no marvel
if those who cannot ordinarily discourse without discharging loud (...) of
Blasphemies and Execrations, the embellishment of whose comm^ik is the
Rhetoric of their (...) and Dam^e's: If such (I say) should at some (...) or
other make their loose Breath serve them to better purpose, and swear
themselves into Estates and Offices.

Fitz-Girald had store of Guinnys, he ch^nks them lustily, and shows them to
Mr. Hetherington, besides diverse Five-pound-pieces of Gold, telling him this
should be done to the man that was loved; with diverse other Invitations to come
over and transfer the popish Plot in Ireland on the Protestants. This was
deposed by Mr. Hetherington before the Lord Mayor of London.

In January before the meeting of the Parliament at Oxford, we find the Earl of
Shaftesburys hand amongst other Noble Peers, affixed to a Petition and Advice
to His Majesty, requesting His Majesty that the Parliament might ^it at
W^minster. And because the (...) Petition and Advice (...) all through it such
unque^able marks of a most tender Duty and ^ction to His Majesty's person. It
may not be improper here to insert it, to obviate the evil surmises of some,
who would stain the most loyal performances with imputations of a contrary
nature.

At the delivery of the Petition and Advice, the Right Honorable the Earl of
Essex is said to have made the following Speech.

May it please Your Majesty,
THe Lords here present, together with diverse other Peers of the Realm, taking
notice, that by your late Proclamation your Majesty has declared an Intention
of calling a Parliament at Oxford; and observing from Histories and Records,
how unfortunate many such Assemblies have been, when called at a place remote
from the capital City; as particularly the Congress in Henry the Seconds time
at Clarendon: Three several Parliaments at Oxford, in Henry the Thirds time;
and at Coventry, in Henry the Sixths time, with diverse others, which have
proved very fatal to those Kings, and have been followed with great mischief to
the whole Kingdom: And considering the present posture of Affairs, the many
Jealousies and Discontents which are among the People, we have great cause to
apprehend that the consequences of sitting of a Parliament now at Oxford, may
be as fatal to your Majesty and the Nation, as those others mentioned have been
to the then Reigning Kings; and therefore we do conceive that we cannot answer
it to God, to your Majesty, or to the People, if we, being Peers of the Realm,
should not on so important an occasion, humbly offer our Advice to your
Majesty; that if possible, your Majesty may be prevailed with, to alter this
(as we apprehend) unseasonable Resolution, The Grounds and Reasons of our
Opinion, are contained in this our Petition, which we humbly present to your
Majesty.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble Petition and Advice of the
Lords undernamed, Peers of the Realm.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Majesty has been pleased, by diverse Speeches and Messages
to your Houses of Parliament, rightly to represent to them the dangers that
threaten your Majesty's Person, and the whole Kingdom, from the mischievous and
wicked Plots of the Papists, and the sudden growth of a foreign Power; unto
which no stop or remedy could be provided, unless it were by Parliament, and an
Union of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, in one mind, and one Interest.

And the Lord Chancellor, in pursuance of your Majesty's commands, having more
at large demonstrated the said dangers to be as great as we, in the midst of
our fears, could imagine them; and so pressing, that our Liberties, Religion,
Lives, and the whole Kingdom would certainly be lost, if a speedy provision was
not made against them.

And your Majesty on the 21st of April, 1679. having called unto your Council
many Honorable and Worthy Persons, and declared to them, and to the whole
Kingdom, That being sensible of the evil effects of a single Ministry, or
private Advice, or foreign Committee, for the general Direction of your
Affairs, your Majesty would for the future refer all things unto that Council,
and by the constant Advice of them, together with the frequent use of your
great Council the Parliament, your Majesty was hereafter resolved to govern the
Kingdom: We began to hope we should see an end of our Miseries.

But, to our unspeakable grief and sorrow, we soon found our expectations
frustrated; the Parliament then subsisting was prorogued, and dissolved, before
it could perfect what was intended for our relief and security: And tho another
was thereupon called, yet by many prorogations it was put off till the 21st of
October. past; and notwithstanding your Majesty was then again pleased to
acknowledge, that neither your Person, nor your Kingdom could be safe, till the
matter of the Plot was gone through: It was unexpectedly prorogued on the 10th
of this Month, before any sufficient Order could be taken therein: All their
just and pious Endeavors to save the Nation were overthrown, the good Bills
they had been industriously preparing to Unite your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects brought to naught: The discovery of the Irish Plots stifled: The
Witnesses that came in frequently more fully to declare that, both of England
and Ireland discouraged, Those foreign Kingdoms and States, who by a happy
conjunction with us, might give a check to the French Powers, disheartened, even
to such a despair of their own security against the growing greatness of that
Monarch; as we fear may enduce them to take new Resolutions, and perhaps such
as may be fatal to Us: the Strength and Courage of our Enemies, both at home
and abroad, increased, and our selves left in the ^tmost danger of seeing our
Country brought into utter desolation.

In these extremities we had nothing under God to comfort us, but the hopes
that your Majesty (being touched with the groans of your perishing People)
would have suffered your Parliament to meet at the day unto which it was
prorogued, and that no further interruption should have been given to their
proceedings, in order to their saving of the Nation: But that failed us too; so
then we heard that your Majesty had been prevailed with to dissolve it, and to
call another to meet at Oxford, where neither Lords nor Commons can be in
safety, but will be daily exposed to the Swords of the Papists, and their
Adherents, of whom too many are crept into your Majesty's Guards. The Liberty
of speaking according to their Consciences will be thereby destroyed, and the
validity of all their Acts and Proceedings (consisting in it) left disputable.
The straitness of the place no way admits of such a concourse of persons as now
follows every Parliament: The Witnesses which are necessary to give Evidence
against the popish Lords; such Judges, or others, whom the Commons have
impeached, or had resolved to impeach, can neither bear the charge of going
thither, nor trust themselves under the protection of a Parliament, that is
itself evidently under the power of Guards and Soldiers.

The Premises considered, We your Majesty's Petitioners, out of a just
abhorrence of such a dangerous and pernicious Council, (which the Authors have
not dared to avow) and the direful apprehensions of the calamities, and
miseries that may ensue thereupon; do make it our most humble Prayer and
Advice, that the Parliament may not sit at a place where it will not be able to
act with that freedom which is necessary; and especially to give unto their
Acts and Proceedings that Authority which they ought to have amongst the
people, and have ever had, unless impaired by some Awe upon them (of which
there wants not precedents;) and that your Majesty would be Graciously pleased
to order it to sit at Westminster, (it being the usual place, and where they
may consult with Safety and Freedom.

And your Petitioners, etc.

Monmouth, Kent, Huntingdon, Bedford, Salisbury, Clare, Stamford, Essex,
Shaftesbury, Mordant, Ewers, Paget, Gray, Herbert, Howard, Delamer.
In October, during the Session of the last Parliament, it is very remarkable,
that Francisco de Faria, Interpreter to the Portugal Ambassador, amongst other
high matters relating to the popish Plot, gave it in his Information at the Bar
of the House; He declared that the said Ambassador had tempted him to kill the
Earl of Shaftesbury, by throwing a Hand-Granado into his Coach, as he was
passing the Rode into the Country.

And about the 20th of November. one Zeal being called to the Bar of the House
delivered his Information at the Bar, the purport whereof was this: That being
a Prisoner in the Marshalsea, Mrs. Cellier came diverse times to him, and
treated with him, not only to be Instrumental himself, but to procure others to
Assist him to fire His Majesty's Ships as they lay in the Harbor; as also to
swear against the E of Shaftesbury, such Art^es of High Treason as she should
get ready prepared for him, or to that purpose.

To sum up the many various Methods and Ways that were devised, and put in
execution to cut off the Life of this Noble Peer, would be Task enough to fill
many Volumes. The Jesuits (next to the Attempting His Majesty's Life) set all
their Inventions and Engines on work, to make away the Earl of Shaftesbury; he
was the Beam in their Eye, the Clog that hindered the motion of their Cursed
Designs. What have they not attempted that might render him distastful to the
King? throwing the foulness of their own Treasons upon him, as appears by the
Deposition of Brian Haines before the Council in October. 1681. That David Fitz
Girald told the said Brian Haines, that he the said Fitz Girald possessed His
Majesty, and had given it under his hand and Seal, that the late Plot was a
Presbyterian Plot, and Invented by the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of
Shaftesbury, on purpose to Extirpate the Family of the Stuarts, and dethrone
his present Majesty, and turn England into a Commonwealth, or else set the
Crown upon the Earls own Head; with more to this purpose, of which we shall
have occasion to make farther mention, when we come to the Trial of the said
Earl; and shall therefore now hasten to the Meeting of the Parliament at
Oxford, where Business of as high nature was agitated, as ever came before the
consideration of a Parliament, no less than the preservation of the King's
Majesty, the Protestant Religion, and the good people of England; all which
were now, as much as ever Invaded by the Bloody Designs of the Papists.

This Parliament met the 21th of March 1681. in the ConvocationHouse at Oxford.
The House of Lords Sare in the Geometry School, where was a Throne and State
Erected for His Majesty, in which His Majesty being Seated in His Royal Robes,
declared himself to both Houses to the Effect following.

That the unwarrantable Proceedings of the last House of Commons were the
reason of his parting with them; for that he who would never use Arbitrary
Government himself, would not suffer it in Others. That whoever calmly
considered the Assurances he had renewed to that last Parliament, and what he
had Recommended to them; His Foreign Alliances, the Examination of the Plot, and
the Preservation of Tangier, and reflect upon their unsuitable Returns, might
rather wonder at his Patience, than that he grew weary of their Proceedings;
that it was his Interest, and should be his Cause as much as Theirs, to
Preserve the Liberty of the Subject, the Crown not being safe when that is in
danger. That by Calling this Parliament so soon, he let them see, that no
Irregularities of Parliament should make him out of love with them; by which
means he gave them another opportunity to provide for the Public Security, and
had given one Evidence more that he had not neglected his part.

That he hoped the ill Success of former Heats, would dispose them to a better
Temper. That as for the further prosecution of the Plot, Trial of the Lords,
etc. he omitted to press them, as being obvious to consideration, and so
necessary for the Public Safety: But desired them not to lay so much weight
upon any One Expedient against Popery, as to determine that all other were
ineffectual.

That what he had so often declared touching the Succession, he should not
recede from. But that to remove all reasonable fears that might arise touching
the possibility of a `Popish Successor, if means could be found out that in
such a case the Administration should remain in Protestant hands, he should be
ready to hearken to any such Expedient by which Religion might be secured, and
Monarchy not destroyed.

Lastly, He advised them to make the known and Established Laws of the Land, the
Rule and Measure of their Votes.

The 22th. the Commons having chosen their Speaker, presented him to His
Majesty in the Lords House. Little beside was done until the 25. when the House
considered an Act for Repeal of the Act 35 Eliz. which had passed both Houses
in the last Parliament, but had not been tendered to His Majesty for his Royal
Assent. A conference was desired with the Lords, as to matters relating to the
constitution of Parliaments in passing of Bills.

Another Message was ordered to be sent to the Lords, to put them in mind, that
the Commons had form^ly by their Speaker demanded Judgment of High Treason at
their Bar, against the Earl of Danby; and therefore to desire their Lordships
to appoint a day to give Judgment against him the said Earl, upon the said
Impeachment.

The same day the Examination of Edward Fitz-Harris, relating to the popish
Plot was read in the House, upon which the said Examination was ordered to be
Printed, the said Fitz-Harris to be impeached at the Lords Bar, and a Committee
appointed to draw up Articles against him.

But the House of Lords rejected the Impeachment of Mr. Fitz-Harris, whereby a
stop was put to their proceedings. And on the 28th in the morning, the Commons
were sent for to the House of Lords, where His Majesty told them, That their
Beginnings had been such, that he could expect no good success of this
Parliament, and therefore His Majesty thought fit to dissolve them. And my Lord
Chancellor having declared them dissolved; His Majesty came the same night to
WhiteHall.

I must beg the Readers pardon, if he think I have in this Relation deviated
from my Theme, which was the Earl of Shafton; but nothing of a popish Plot has
been yet brought upon the stage, wherein he has not been levelled at; he
certainly knowing how destructive the Interest of the Papists is to the
Government and People of England, has set himself, to the hazard of his Life
and Family to oppose them. The next thing that appeared on the Booksellers
stalls was a paper with this Title.

The Protestation of the Lords Upon rejecting the Impeachment of Mr.
Fitz-Harris, giving for Reasons, why it was the undoubted Right of the Commons
so to do; because great Offenses that influence the Parliament, were most
effectually determined in Parliament, nor could the complaint be determined any
where else: For that if the party should be indicted in the KingsBench, or any
other inferior Court, for the same offense, yet it were not the same suit; an
Impeachment being at the suit of the People, but an Indictment at the suit of
the King. Besides that, they conceived it to be a denial of Justice, in regard
that the House of Peers as to Impeachments, proceeding by virtue of their
Judicial, not their Legislative, Power, could not deny any suitor, but more
especially the Commons of England, no more than the Courts of Westminster, or
any other inferior Courts, could legally deny any suit or criminal cause,
regularly brought before them. Signed according to the Printed Copy by the
following Peers.

Monmouth, Kent, Huntingdon, Bedford, Salisbury, Clare, Stamford, Sunderland,
Essex, Shaftesbury, Maclefield, Mordant, Wharton, Paget, Gray of Wark, Herbert
of Cherbury, Cornwallis, Lovelace, Crew.
Finding the Earl of Shaftesburys Name, amongst the other Noble Peers and
Patriots; I thought it not improper to insert the copy in this place, it being
the last Act of that great Man upon the public stage; For since that time he
has rather been passive, as will further appear by the remaining Discourse: We
shall only remember, that at his return from Oxford the Earl left a massy piece
of Plate as a Gift to Baliol College, as also did that Heroic Prince James
Duke of Monmouth, which will be to posterity a Testimony of their Magnificence
and Bounty.

And now to return to what remains, for the finishing this Tragical story, I
shall mention only what is already printed, either in Captain Wilkinson's
Information, Colledg's Trial, or else is matter of Fact, or set forth in the
Trial of this great Peer himself. Only I cannot omit that on the 15th of Aug.
1681. Mrs. Fitz-Harris gave a deposition upon Oath, that her Husband a little
before his Execution, not only told her what great offers he had made him if he
would at first have charged that Infamous and Treasonable Libel, for which he
was after executed, on this worthy Peer, and the Lord Howard; but that he also
advised her to do it as the only means to save his Life, though he protested at
the same time that they were wholly innocent. She likewise deposes that a
certain Gentleman, whose Name shall be for born assured her that she should
have what sums of Money she pleased, if she would accuse the Earl of
Shaftesbury, and Lord Howard, as the Authors of the said Libel: But they have
tampered with so many on the account of this baffled Design, that it is
impossible but their consults should take wind, especially when we consider
they were a people, that either to supply their necessities, or feed their
ambition, or more probably through an irresistible Fatality, had blab'd and
discovered the very Arcana of Holy Mother, and had spoke so unseasonably just
in her ^ip, that they had spoiled her Game. What security could the Romish
Sophisters have, but that these cracked Vessels would prove as leaky again, when
under the force of a Temptation? But they had such a Modly of Evidences, as is
almost comical to consider. There were the Mac's and the Mounsieur's, the
Midwife, and the Priest, the skipkennel, and the Newgate-Birds, the Justice,
and the Bog-trotter, the Counte*s and the Kitchen Wench. No discourse was heard
among them, But Captains places, Deanries, Rewards, Gratuities, Preferments,
and as much Money as you will. They were advanced from Bonny-Clapper to
Clarett, and Frontineack; from Torneps and Oat cakes, to Oysters and Pheasants;
from Brogues and Bandle, to Velvet, and Cloth of Silver. They discoursed of
his Majesty as if they had been of his Council, and of his great Ministers, as
if had been their Confederates. But there has been so much said of these, upon
Depositions taken before diverse of the Magistrates of the Nation; that I shall
take no farther notice of them before I proceed to Captain Wilkinson's
Information; only insert one passage of David Fitz-Girald, and it was given in
upon Oath, by Mr. E. E. who has approved his Loyalty to the King, upon many
occasions, and in diverse difficult and tempting Instances, his Deposition was,
That David FitzGirald told him* he would swear Treason against the Earl of
Shaftesbury, and procure others to do the like, and that if he would second him
in the said Accusation, he should be highly considered. Such was the Impudence
of this wretched man* not only to seek the Lives of the Innocent, and to
reflect upon his superiors, but to procure and subo^ mercenary Souls to
involve themselves in the same cursed and Diabo lical Designs.

Captain Wilkinson was a Gentleman that had always espoused the Royal Interest,
and hazarded his Life and Fortune in the service of his Prince; but having not
had that success that a brave and industrious man might expect, he applied
himself to the Proprietors of Carolina, to obtain an Employment in that
Country, and upon that score had a promise of the Lord Shaftesbury, (in
consideration of his great sufferings for His Majesty) of a considerable and
honorable Employment there; but was unfortunately made a Prisoner in the
King's Bench for Debt, before he could enter upon that Employment; of which he
gives a satisfactory account in his Information, a breviate of which take as
follows from the Printed Narrative:

This person (being known to be under very ill Circumstances, and in some
measure acquainted with the Earl of Shaftesbury) they thought very proper to
work over to their design, for (could they have obtained it) his Evidence
(having been a person of a standing credit) would have struck deeper than all
the Mac's about the Town: Therefore on the 8th of October. 1681. one Walter Bains
came to him at the KingsBench Prison, and after some infinuating discourse,
told him, that he could not but know much of the Lord Shaftesbury's Designs
against the King; and that he might do well to discover it to him; that he had
an Interest with the Lord Hyde, and had lately been with Mr. Graham, by which
it seems the Captain apprehended what was the meaning of his kindness, but
constantly asserted that he knew nothing of my Lord Shaftesbury's Designs
against His Majesty, but had cause to believe the said Earl loves his Majesty,
for that he was always pleased to show the Captain Respect upon account of his
services to the King.

Mr. Bains continued his importunities on the same Subject to the Captain,
until near night, and then left him full of great assurance, and promises to
see him in few days; not much questioning the Captains knowledge of the Earls
Design.

W. Narrat. On the 11th of the same month one Booth came to him upon the same
design, and after much discourse told the Captain, he had now an opportunity to
do himself a greater kindness than ever, for he might have either 10000 l. or
500 l. per Annum settled on himself or his Heirs, if he would but discover what
he knew of the Lord Shaftesbury, and his Design, in changing the Government to
a Commonwealth, and witness against him: He further told him, now was the time
to do something that would advance him, for it must now be a King or a
Commonwealth; much more was then urged to induce the Captain to it, to which
he gave such Answers as might encourage Booth to go on with his Proposals. In
the mean time the Captain imparts this Affair to another person in the
King's Bench, and desired him to put it in writing, (lest he should be tempted
with what offers were made) that in such case if he should ever declare that he
knew any thing of a Design against the King by the Lord Shaftesbury, that then
this person should witness the Truth against him, the said Captain; and
further, that the Captain would still give the said person a full account of
all Negotiations about that Affair. Mr. Booth told him, he must appear at
Court, and he should have an assurance of a Reward from some persons of Honor;
the Captain told him, he would not trust any Courtier he knew for a Groat.

W. Narrat. On the 12th of October. they were at the Captain again, and plied him
with Wine and good words, to work upon him to come in a Witness against the L.
Shaftesbury telling him, he might be assured of what he desired from the E. of
H. and the L. H. He told them, if they would give him 20000 Guinys toward his
own, and his friends losses, by Injuries sustained, he would* discover what he
knew; but still said he knew nothing of any Design by my Lord Shaftesbury.

Much more was transacted in this matter, as is more at large set forth in the
Captain's Information. But at length they came on the 15th day with a Warrant,
which the Marshal showed him, whereby he was compelled to go to Whitehall. In a
short time after his coming thither, he was conducted to Mr. Secretary
Jenkins's Office, where was also my Lord Conway, who very fairly and honestly
interrogated him concerning what he knew about my Lord Shaftesbury, and of any
Design against His Majesty; he gave the same Answer to them as he had done to
the former Attackers, that he knew nothing; great Arguments were used, but he
could give no satisfactory Answer, as (he conceived) was expected. In a little
time His Majesty came into the Office, and was pleased to say to the Captain,
that His Majesty knew him well, that the Captain had served his Father, and His
Majesty faithfully, and he hoped the Captain would not decline his Obedience.
To which the Captain answered, that he never deserved to be suspected: His
Majesty was pleased further to tell him, he had not had the opportunity to
serve his Friends, but hoped he might: His Majesty was pleased to promise to
consider him for his sufferings. Then after an excellent Exhortation, in which
His Majesty told him that the kindness was intended, was not with design to
speak a word but Truth it self, and if he knew the Captain, or any other person
did, he would never endure them: His Majesty demanded what he knew of a Design
against his Person and Government? he answered, he knew nothing of any Design
against His Majesty's Person or Government; that he admired why one that had so
faithfully served His Majesty, and Royal Father, both in England, and beyond
Sea, and was so Instrumental to His Majesty's Restoration, should be
suspected. But some persons had possessed His Majesty, that the Captain was
deep in some Design against the Government, and knew much of my Lord
Shaftesbury: At length after much pressing, His Majesty told him, if he would
say, As he hoped to be saved, he knew nothing of any Design against his Person,
that then His Majesty would believe him; which the Captain having said in the
very words, His Majesty seemed to be much surprised at it, and left him to the
management of the Secrery, who used such Arguments as he thought fit: At last
the Captain declared that he knew his Duty to his Sovereign, and would never
draw his Sword against him, but could freely do it against some of the Court,
who were Enemies both to His Majesty and his Friends. So he was taken into
another Room, where were His Majesty, Lord Chancellor, Lord Hallifax, Lord
Hide, two Secretaries of State, and Lord Chief Justice Pemberton; Mr. Graham,
Booth, and Baines were present. My Lord Chancellor would not believe but that
he must be guilty of knowing great things against the Lord Shaftesbury; he told
them, if he could not be believed on his word there, if they pleased to bring
my Lord Shaftesbury to his Trial, he should declare in open Court upon his
Oath, what his knowledge was, without any hopes of gain or Advancement; the
Lord Chancellor wittily replied, there were two sorts of Advancements, and he
was like to come to his own Trial first, before the Lord Shaftesbury. My Lord
Chancellor demanded, if he had no Commission for this New Service against His
Majesty, to which the Captain answered, No. Then the Chancellor told him, he
was to have a Troop to consist of Fifty Men; the Capt. said that was a small
Troop; he hoped, if ever he had Command of a Troop, it should be a better than
that: But the Captain desired to know, who gave that Information. The Lord
Chancellor told him, Mr. Booth, who was (by, and) Listed under him. Captain
Wilkinson desired Booth to tell him, whether he had given this Information upon
Oath, Booth answered, Yes, and it was true. At all this the Captain was not
concerned: so much does glorious Innocence triumph over the Forgeries, and
Impious Designs of Evil men, and out-braves them even in Death it self.

That which is very observable in Captain Wilkinsons Information, is, That at
that very time when Booth had sworn he was to have commanded a party of Horse
at Oxford, his whole Family, Wife, Children, and Servants, making about the
number of 37 persons, were all on Board his Ship, bound for Carolina, and all
lying at his proper charge; but when he thought himself most in readiness for
his intended Voyage, he found himself strangely entangled, that he could not
stir, some Debts he was bound for for others, and more of his own fell upon
him, and he was committed to the King's Bench, which put a stop to the designed
Voyage; and he has often since concluded there was a Divine hand in it.

I have thought it proper to insert in this place the Testimony of Major Jervas
James, whose Loyalty and Integrity to his Majesty has been sufficiently known,
having most faithfully, and as a true Subject, served His Majesty both beyond
the Sea and at home, and declares is still ready with all cheerfulness (when
his Majesty shall please to command him) to serve him to the last drop of his
Blood. He acknowledges himself a Son of the Church of England, as is it by Law
established, and has without scruple taken the Oaths of Allegiance, and
Supremacy. He styles the acquaintance he has with so deserving a person as
Captain Wilkinson, a great Happiness, and acknowledges himself obliged to him
for so timely entrusting him with so notable a secret, being a stranger to the
said Captain, which trust Major James looked upon as a great Adventure, and the
Discovery to endanger the Lives both of the Earl of Shaftesbury, and Captain
Wilkinson. He likewise declares, before God and Man, that he believes all the
Captains Information to contain nothing but the truth of what he had from
Booth, Bains, and Mr. Graham: For he lent him the convenience of his Chamber to
write the whole business, and saw him write it with his own Hand; as may also
be witnessed by Mr. Robert Bennet, who is an Officer in Leaden-Hall-Market, and
transcribed it for the Captain. He hopes his Majesty is, and will be, well
satisfied, that those who faithfully and truly serve His Majesty, and his
Subjects, are the persons both to be believed, and relied upon, and desires
that this may have credit, according to its Truth and Reality, both in the
heart of his Majesty, and all his loyal Subjects.

The Information of Jervas James, Gentleman.
I Jervais James, Gentleman, do declare, that the above named Captain Henry
Wilkinson came to me upon Tuesday, the 11th of October. 1681. in the Evening, and
did then, and likewise every day from time to time afterward, make me
acquainted with the several Treaties and Transactions between him the said
Captain Henry Wilkinson, and Mr. Booth, Mr. Bains, and Mr. Graham* and the
several other Persons in this his Information mentioned; and that they were the
very same in substance with what he has herein set forth and declared; for at
his Request, and for my own satisfaction, I kept a daily Journal during the
time of their Treating. All which shall be attested upon Oath when required.

This forementioned Information was published by Captain Henry Wilkinson,
during the time of my Lord Shaftesbury's confinement in the Tower, and was of
very great use to satisfy all loyal and honest minded men, of the base and
detestable practices of those evil minded persons, against his Life; and in how
dreadful a condition would the Nation have been, if through the means of these,
or such like Witnesses, the guilt of shedding Innocent Blood should have been
drawn upon us; and where would the rage of the Papists have ended, had they
succeeded in this their horrid attempt?

Abo^t the 29th of July, 1681. the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftesbury
was apprehended at his own House by a Sergeant at Arms, and carried before the
King and Council, and after some Examination he was committed to the Tower,
upon a charge of High Treason; the Right Honorable the Lord Howard having been
committed before, upon an Information that he had assisted in contriving Mr.
FitzHarris's Libel, and Stephen College, and Mr. Rouse having likewise been
committed about the 25th of the same Month. It is said, that some days after
his Lordships commitment, that as he was taking the Air in the Tower, meeting
accidentally with one of the popish Lords, he was asked by him, what his
Lordship did there, and that they little thought to have had his good compan^;
to which the E. of Shaftesbury replied, that he had lately been very ill of an
Agu^, and was come there to take some Jesuits Powder. It was said, tha^ during
the whole time of his Lordships consinement in the Tower, he appeared to be
very cheerful, and that many times he assumed a Courage and Vivacity, beyond
what could have been expected, from a person laboring under such violent pains
and diseases, as is well known his Lordship is frequently troubled withal.

And now that we may not omit to you with what other Methods and Designs they
endeavored to fasten the black and Hellish figure of a Traitor on this loyal
Peer, it will not be improper to take notice of a passage in the Trial of Mr.
Fitz* Harris, where Mr. Everard upon Oath affirms, that Mr. Fitz-Harris had
told him; that horrid Libel was to have been fathered upon the Protestant
Nonconformists, and when Colonel Mansel had deposed, that Sir William Waller
had said the design of Fitz* Harris's Libel, was against the Protestant Party,
Mr. Attorney* General replied, we believe it, The Protestant Party. And how far
this Peer was to have been concerned in that, will further appear, if we take
in what Sir William Waller affirmed at the said Trial, that Mr. FitzHarris had
told him, there were two Parliament Men which frequented my Lord Shaftesbury's,
whom his Lordship did not suspect, that came and sounded him, and then returned
to the French Ambassador, and acquainted him with all they could discover.

On Thursday the 24th of Novem. 1681. the great Affair for which the Lord
Shaftesbury was committed to the Tower, was tried at the Sessions House at the
Old Bailey: It may be excusable if we be the more particular and large in this
matter, and insert so much of the said Trial as may be needful to satisfy the
World of the fairness and equity of the Proceedings of the Kings Court in that
Affair; and we shall be somewhat the larger, because all persons, into whose
hands this Book may come, may not have seen what was printed of that Trial. The
Grand Jury that were to make enquiry both in behalf of the King and the Earl,
were persons of unstained Loyalty and Integrity, and persons so considerable
for their Estates and ^ortunes, that such a Jury has seldom been empanelled
upon the like occasion: The Names of the Grand Jury were as follows:

Sir Samuel Barnardiston, John Morden, Thomas Papillion, John Dubois, Charles
Hearle, Edward Rudge, Humphrey Edwin. John Morris, Edmund Harrison, Joseph
Wright, John Cox, Thomas Parker, Leonard Robinson, Thomas Shepherd, John
Flav^l. Michael Godfrey, Joseph Richardson, William Empson, Andrew Kendrick,
John Lane, John Hall.
The Oath.
You shall diligently enquire, and true presentment make, of all such Matters,
Articles, and Things, as shall be given you in charge, as of all other Matters,
and Things as shall come to your own Knowledge, touching this present service;
The Kings Council, your Fellows Council, and your own, you shall keep secret;
you shall present no person for Hatred or Malice, neither shall you leave any
one unpresented, for Fear, Favor, or Affection, for Lucre, or Gain, or any
hopes thereof, but in all things You shall present the Truth, the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth, to the best of your knowledge. So help you God.

My Lord Chief Justice gave a large and learned charge to the Jury, wherein he
first opened to them the Nature of their Commission, and the extent of it,
which reached to all Offenses whatsoever against the Law of the Land, as
Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, etc. He told them, he would at present
acquaint them with the nature of those Bills they were then like to be troubled
with, and their Duty concerning that Enquiry; He told them they were matters of
High Treason, a crime of the greatest and highest nature that could be
committed against man; other crimes, as Fellonies, Riots, (...), and (...) of
that nature, (...) (...) ^ders and troubles, in a State o^ (...) dom; but he
told them (...) struck at the Root and Life of (...) It tended to destroy the
very Government, King, and Subjects, and the Lives* Interest, and Liberties of
all; and therefore ha^ ^een always looked upon as a crime of the m^st notorious
nature that ca^ be whatsoever, and accordingly Pu^shments have been appointed
^or it, of the highest and severest extremity. He told them our Ancestors
thought it Wisdom to enact and declare what should be accounted Treason* and
enumerated several Acts of that nature; at length he came to an Act made the
13. of this present King: That if any one should c^pass, imagine, or intend the
Death of the King, or his Destruction, or any bodily harm that should tend to
his Death or Destruction, or any maiming or wounding his Person, any Restraint
of his Liberty, or any Imprisonment of him; or if any should design, or intend
to Levy any War against him, either within the Kingdom, or without; or should
design, intend, endeavor, or procure any Foreign Prince to Invade these h^s
Dominions, or any other of the King's Dominions, and should s^gnifie, or
declare this by any Writing, or by any Preaching, or Printing, or by any
advised, malicious speaking, or words; this shall be High Treason.

He told them the Intention of Levying War, was not Treason, before this Act,
unless it had taken Effect, and War had been actually Levied; and then as to
the Designing and Compassing the King's Death, that was not Treason, unless it
was declared by an Overt Act: As to the Imprisoning, or Restraining the Liberty
of the King, they of themselves were not High Treason; but now by this Law they
were made so, during His Majesty's Life; and the very designing of them,
whether it take Effect, or no, though it be prevented (before any Overt Act) by
the timely Prudence of the King, and his Officers, though it should be timely
prevented, that there is no hurt done; yet the very Design, if it be but
uttered, and spoken, and any ways signified by any Discourse, that this was
made Treason by this Act. Formerly it was said, and said truly, That words
alone were not Treason, but that since this Act words that import any Malicious
Design against the King's Life, or Government, any Traitorous Intention in the
Party, such words are Treason now within this Act.

Then as to the Indictments that were to be brought before them, he advised
them to consider, 1. Whether the matter contained in them, and which were to be
given in Evidence, were matter of Treason within the former, or the latter Act
of Parliament: and if they doubted, they were to enquire of the Court, and they
should be directed as to matter of Law. And they were to examine whether the
matters Evidenced to them were Testified by two Witnesses, for without two
Witnesses, no man could be Impeached within those Laws: If one man should swear
to words that import^ (...) (...) (...) D^sign or Intention, (...) (...) (...)
time, and in one place, and another Testify to Traitorous words spoken at
another time, and another place; that these were two good Witnesses, which had
been solemnly resolved by all the Judges of England upon a solemn occasion.

2. That they were to enquire, whether upon what Evidence should be given them,
there should be any reason or ground for the King to call the persons to
account; if there were probable ground, it was as much as they were to enquire
into. He urged pretty much to this purpose, and then told them Compassion or
Pity was neither their Province, nor his; that there was no room for that in
Enquiries of such a nature, that it was reserved to a Higher and Superior
Power, from whence theirs was derived: Therefore he required them to consider
such Evidence (...) should be given them; and prayed God to direct them in
their Enquiry, that Justice might take place.

Then a Bill of High ^son reason was offered against the E. of ^esbury, and Sir
Francis Withc^ moved, that the Evidence might be heard in Court.

Then the Lord Chief Justice told the Jury that the King's Council desired (and
they could not deny it) that the Evidence might be publicly given, and prayed
them to take their places, and hear the Evidence that should be given.

The Jury desired a Copy of their Oath, which the Court granted, and then
withdrew, after some time they returned, and then the Clerk called them by
their Names. Then the Foreman gave the L. C. J. an account, that it was the
Opinion of the Jury, that they ought to Examine the Witnesses in private; and
it has been the constant practice of our Predecessors to do it; and they
insisted upon it as their Right to Examine in private, because they were bound
to keep the K's Secrets, which could not be done, if the Examination were in
Court. Whereupon the L. C. J. told 'em, that perhaps some late usage had
brought them into that Error, that it was their Right, that the Witnesses were
always sworn in Court, and surely (he said) Evidence was always given in
Court formerly: That it was for their advantage, as well as the King's, that
nothing might be done clandestinly; that by their keeping Counsel, was meant
keeping secret their own private Debates.

To which the Foreman replied, That he begged his Lordships pardon, if he were
in a mistake: The Jury apprehend they were bound by the very words of their
Oath, to Examine in private; for it says, They shall keep the King's Secrets,
and their own Counsels; That there could be no Secret in public. Then Mr.
Papillion spoke to this purpose, That they had heard, that what had been the
Custom of England, had been the Law of England; and if it had been the Ancient
Usage and Custom of England, that had never been altered from time to time.
Diverse other Arguments were used on both sides; but at last the Court denied a
private Examination; then the Foreman told the Court, that the Jury desired it
might be Recorded, that they had insisted upon it as their Right, but if the
Court overruled it, they must submit. This was likewise refused by the Court.
Then Sheriff Pilkington desired that the Witnesses might be put out of Court,
and called in one by one, but he was refused it, and told it was not his Duty.
And Mr. Attorney General said, he appeared against the King. However, it was
afterward granted to the Jury. Then was Read the Indictment against Anthony
Earl of Shaftesbury, for High Treason against His Majesty, which being too long
here to insert, we are forced to omit.

The Jury desired a ^ist of the Witnesses Names, but they were told, they would
have them Endorsed on the back of the Indictment, when that was delivered to
them. Then the Foreman acquainted the Court, that the Jury desired a Copy of
the Warrant, by which the Earl of Shaftesbury was Committed, because there
might several Questions depend upon it: But my Lord Chief Justice answered,
That was not in the power of the Court to grant, for that it was in the hands
of the Lieutenant of the Tower, which he kept for his Indemnity, and they could
not demand it of him upon any terms. Then Mr. Papillion moved that they might
hear what the Witnesses had to give in Evidence, one by one, and that after the
Jury might withdraw, to consider what proper Questions to ask them, and after
might come down again, which the Court granted. Then all the Witnesses were
ordered to go out of the Court, and to be called in one by one.

This done Will. Blith^ Esquire was produced, and a Paper delivered in. Mr.
Blithwayt gave account, that that Paper was put into his hands by Mr. Gwin,
Clerk of the Council, who had seized it amongst others in my Lord Shaftesbury's
house; and that he had took that, and others out of a Velvet Bagg, which Mr.
Gwin had locked up in the great Trunk. Then Mr. Gwin testified that he had the
great Hair Trunk in my Lord Shaftesbury's house, when he was sent there to
search for Papers, by Order of the Council the second of July; my Lord, as soon
as he came there, delivered him the Keys, and said, He would seal them up with
his own Seal; but afterward sent Mr. Gwin word, if he pleased, he might put
his own Seal; that he had taken a note how he had parted several parcels of
Papers, that there were several sorts of them in the great Hair Trunk; and
there was a Velvet Bag* into which he had put some Papers that were loose in my
Lord's Closet above Stairs; that he had put his Seal upon the Trunk, and being
sent another way, had put it into the Custody of Mr. Blithwait. The Lord Chief
Justice asked Mr. Gwin whether all the Papers in the Velvet Bag were in my L.
Shaftesbury's Closet, and whether there was nothing in that Bag, but what he
had taken in my Lord Shaftesbury's Closet? to which Mr. Gwin replied, that
there was nothing.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins witnessed that that was the Paper he had of Mr.
Blithwayt. Some things I am forced for brevity to omit. My Lord Chief Justice
said, Now it appears this was the Paper taken in my Lord Shaftesbury's Closet.
And the Paper was Read, which contained the words of that commonly called The
Form of an Association. When it had been Read, Sir F^n. Withins said, This
Paper was very plausibly penned in the (...), and runs a great way so; but in
the last clause but one, there they come to perfect Levying of War; for they do
positively say, They will obey such Officers, as either the Parliament, or the
major part of them; or after the Parliament is Dissolved, the major part of
them that shall subscribe this Paper shall appoint.

The Foreman of the Jury enquired, what Date that Paper was of and whether
there were any hand to it; to which Sir Francis answered, that it was after the
Bill for Exclusion of the Duke of York; for it says, that way failing, they
would do it by force; as to the having a name to it, Sir Francis said, there
was none at all. The rest of the Evidence were,

John Booth, John Macknamara, Edward Turbervill, Dennis Macknamara, John Smith,
Edward Joye, Bryan Haynes, Bernard Dennis.
Booth deposes, That in January last he was introduced into my Lord
Shaftesbury's acquaintance by Captain Henry Wilkinson, in order to get a
Commission, and Plantation in Carolina; That the first time he went to my Lord,
there was my L. Craven, and Sir Peter Colliton, who are of the Proprietors of
that Collony; that after this acquaintance, he had been there between Christmas
and March, four or five times, and that he found great difficulty in his
Accession to his Lordship, who was cautious of what company were admitted to
him; that the said Earl used to inveigh sharply against the Times, and look
upon himself as not so valued, nor respected, nor in those Places and Dignities
as he expected, and seemed discontented. Particularly, that the Earl of
Shaftesbury should say, that the Parliament would never grant the King Money,
nor satisfy him in those things that he desired, unless he first gave the
People satisfaction in those things that they insisted on before; and
particularly the Bill of Excluding the Duke of York from the Crown. Another was
the Abolishing the Statute of the 35th of Elizabeth. The third was giving his
Royal Assent for the passing a New Bill, whereby all the Dissenting Protestants
should be freed from those Penalties and Ecclesiastical Punishments, that they
are subject to, by the present Established Law. That he had Established fifty
Gentlemen, persons of Quality, that he believed would have men along with them,
that they were to come to Oxford at such a time; that if there were any
Violence offered to any of the Members by the King's Guards, or the Retinue of
the Court, that then these men, with others that other Lords had appointed,
should repel his force, by greater force, and should purge the Guards of all
the Papists and Tories; that Captain Wilkinson was Entrusted with the Command
of these men; and that these men should be ready to Assist himself, and those
of his Confederacy, to purge from the King those Evil Councillors that were
about him: That particularly there were named, the Earl of Worcester, Lord
Clarendon, Lord Hallifax, Lord Feversham, Lord Hide, which persons were looked
upon to be dangerous, and gave the King Evil Advice: That those Lords should by
Violence be taken from the King, and the King brought to London, where those
things should be Established which they designed for their Safety in those two
Respects, for the preserving the Protestant Religion, and likewise for the
defending and keeping us safe from Arbitrary Power and Government: And
likewise, that the said Booth had provided Arms, and a good Stone-Horse for
himself, and Arms for his Man, before the Parliament Sat at Oxford. That the
Thursday before the Parliament was Dissolved, Captain Wilkinson told him, he
expected that very week to be called up to Oxford, with those men that were
Listed with him; but Saturday bringing News of the Dissolution of the
Parliament, it had no further Effects. This was the most material of what Booth
said; for being straightened in Room, I am forced to render it as short as I can.

Turbervil declared, That about the beginning of February, waiting on my Lord
Shaftesbury, to have his advice how he might come by some Moneys and to gain
his Lordships Letter in his behalf to the President of the Council; the Earl
should say, there was little good to be expected from the King as long as his
Guards were about him; that his Lordship should say the Rabble about Wapping,
and Aldersgate were of that side; that the rich men of the City would vote for
Elections, but it could hardly be expected they should stand by them in case of
a disturbance; for they valued their Riches more than their Cause; and that at
Oxford he had heard the Earl say, he wondered the People of England should
stickle so about Religion, if he were to choose a Religion, he would have one
should comply with what was apt to carry on their Cause.

Smith said, that one time being sent for by my Lord Shaftesbury, by one
Captain Manly, his Lordship should tell him, that Mr. Hetherington had told
him, he was afraid the Irish Witnesses would go over to the Court Party, and
retract what they had said formerly, that he advised him to persuade them not
to go near that Rogue Fitz-Girald, that great Villain, that is pampered up and
maintained by the King and the Court party, to stifle the Plot in Ireland, and
that the Earl had further said, That if the King were not as well satisfied
with the coming in of Popery, as ever the Duke of York was, do you think the
Duke of York would be so much concerned for the bringing in of Popery as he is?
That a little before my Lord went to Oxford, he should tell the said Smith,
there were great preparations made, and a great many gathered together upon the
Rode be tween London and Oxford, and Smith asking his Lordship what it might
mean, my Lord should answer, that it was only to terrify the Parliament to
comply with the Kings desire, which he was sure the Parliament would never do:
That they were now more resolute than ever: That they clearly saw the Kings aim
was to bring in Popery: That they had the Nation for them, and might lawfully
oppose him, and he would meet with very strong opposition; for that all that
came out of the Country should be well Horsed, and armed, and so they should
all be: That the City had resolved to bear the charge of their Members, and
send so many men to wait on them; and that he would be hanged before he would
ever bring in Popery, or any thing of that nature.

Bryan Hains deposed, that among other Discourse with the L. Shaftesbury, the
said Earl told him, that the Duke of Bucks's Mother was descended of the Family
of the Plant aginets, naming some of the Edwards, and that in her Right he
should have the Barony of Ross, and in her Right had as good a Title to the
Crown of England as ever any Stewart had.

John Macknamara deposed, That a little after the Parliament had been dissolved
at Oxford, the Earl of Shaftesbury said to him, That the King was Popishly
affected, that he took the same methods that his Father before him took, which
brought his Head to the block, and said, We will also bring his thither; and
that the Earl had said the King deserved to be deposed as much as ever King
Richard the second did.

Denis M^cnamara declared, that my Lord Shaftesbury had said, The King was a
man that ought not to be believed, and that ^e ought to be deposed as well as
Richard the second, that the Duchess o^ Mazarine was one of his Cabinet
Council, that he did nothing but by her, Advice.

Edward Ivey said, that the Earl of Shafton soon after the Parliament was
dissolved at Oxford, speaking against the King, said he was an unjust man, and
unfit to reign, that he was a Papist in his heart, and would introduce Popery:
That another time he heard him exclaim against the King, and that they designed
to depose him, and set another in his stead.

Bernard Dennis deposed, that amongst diverse other things the Lord Shaftesbury
had told him, that they intended to have England under a Commonwealth, and no
Crown, to have no supreme head, particular Man, or King, nor owe Obedience to a
Crown.

Lord Chief Justice told the Jury, they intended to call no more Witnesses
against the Earl of Shaftesbury, the Jury being charged only with that.

Mr. Papillion desired to know what S^atute the Indictment was grounded upon;
my Lord Chief Justice said it was contra formam Statut', which might be
understood Statutorum, or Statuti, so they might go upon all Statutes that
might be the form o that Indictment. The Jury desired to know whether any of
the Witnesses stood indicted or no. To which the Lord Chief Justice answered,
they were not properly here to examine the credibility of the Witnesses; for
that would be a matter upon a Trial before a Petty Jury, where the King would
be heard to defend the credibility of his Witnesses, if any thing were objected
against them: That they were to see whether the Statute were satisfied, in
having matter that was Treasonable, and witnessed by Two Men, who are intended
Prima facie credible, unless of their own Knowledge they knew any thing to the
contrary.

Mr. Papillion prayed his Lordships Opinion, whether his Lordship thought they
were within the compass of their own Understandings and Consciences, to give
Judgment; for if they were not left to consider the credibility of the
Witnesses, they could not satisfy their Consciences. To which the Lord Chief
Justice replied, that they ought to go according to the Evidence, unless there
were any thing to their own knowledge, and that i^ they expected to enter into
proofs concerning the credit of the Witnesses, it were impossible to do Justice
at that rate. The Jury withdrew, and the Court adjourned till Three a Clock.
When met the Jury put many questions to the Witnesses, of which (for brevity) I
can but take notice of some.

Mr. Gwin was asked by the Foreman, whose writing the Paper was, to which he
answered he could not tell: whether it was in the Closet before he came there;
he said it was certainly in the closet, for there he found it, he knew not the
particular Paper, but all the Papers in the bag were there.

They asked whether he knew not of a Discourse of an Association in Parliament.
He said he was not of the last Parliament, but had heard an Association talked
of. Then the Foreman asked Mr. Secretary Jenkins whether he knew not of a
Debate in Parliament concerning an Association, whether he remembered not that
it was read upon occasion of the Bill: The Secretary answered, that he was not
present at the Debate; that there was an answer to a Message from the House of
Commons, had something in it which did strongly imply something of an
Association; that he heard such a thing spoke of, but was not present at the
Reading. Being asked the date of the Warrant for my Lord Shaftesbury's
commitment, he must (he said) refer himself to the Warrant; that he thought it
was about the beginning of July. Being asked whether all the Witnesses had been
examined before the Committee, he answered, they were, and he was present at
the Examination. Being asked again whether all, he said he knew not whether
all; but he was sure he was at the Examination of several, but could not tell
how many.

Then the Jury examined the rest of the Witnesses, one by one, Booth being
asked whether he had easy admittance into my Lords company, said, he ever went
with Capt. Wilkinson, and had easy admittance; whether Captain Wilkinson were
with him every time, he said, no, not every time, not this time; to diverse
other questions he answered; That he had been in Orders; that he had not been
indicted for Felony; that he did not directly know any one man of the Fifty
beside himself; that he never was with my Lord but at his own House; that he
was never desired to be a Witness against my Lord, until he had intimated
something of it, till he was told of Brownrigg the Yorkshire Attorney,
concerning somewhat my Lord had said to Irish men, he then said he was sure
there was something as to that purpose to English men; that he thought he had no
Commission to offer him a Reward; that he was not acquainted with Callaghan,
nor Downing; never heard their names, nor was in their company, that he knew
of; that he knew not one Mr. Shelden, nor Mr. Marriot, only had heard of one
Marriot that belonged to the D. of Norfolk, but never was in his company, nor
discoursed with from him, but had heard from Baines, about Brownrigg, about
Irish Witnesses. Mr. Godfrey asked whether he had never heard of Irish
Witnesses sent down by Mr. Marriot to the Isle of Ely: Then the L. Chapter Just.
said, We have given you all the Liberty in the World, hoping you would ask
pertinent questions, but these are trifles; he did not expect that any wise men
would have asked such questions: Then he asked of Mr. Godfrey what it was to
the purpose, whether Mr. Marriot sent any Irish Witnesses to his Tennant, or
no. To which the Foreman told his Lordship, that he had it under the hand of
the Clerk of the Council. Mr. Turbervil answered to several questions, that he
had the Discourse with my Ld. Shaftesbury about the beginning of February, and
about July 4. communicated it to Mr. Secretary Jenkins. The Foreman then asking
whether he had met with no body about the beginning of July, after my Lords
Commitment, and when he was challenged, and told he was to be a Witness against
him, whether he did not then say, as he was alive he knew no such thing?

Mr. Attor. Genesis told my Lord, this was not to be allowed, this was private
Instruction, which the Ju^ was not to take. The Foreman replied, no, it was no
private Instruction, but asked Turbervill, whether he had not spoke such words
to Mr. Herbert. Then the L. C. J. asked whether they had any Information
touching that to Mr. Herbert; the Foreman said, he had, a long time ago, that
the person told him so, set down the day, and was very angry with Turbervill
for it. The L. C. J. told them, that discourses taken up at random, at
Coffee-houses, were not fit to be brought in, when Treason was in question
against the King's Life; that it was not ground to cavil at persons, because
they heard such discourse at a Coffee-house.

The Foreman said, he never was in a Coffeehouse with Mr. Herbert in his life,
but had the discourse of him some months ago. The L. C. J. asked whether they
thought that groundenough against the Witness; Mr. Papillion replied, they only
asked the question, whether he had not contradicted, or said the contrary to
any body. Turbervill said, he did not remember he had said any thing to Mr.
Herbert in his life, and that at that time he was discarded by all persons of
my Lord's Interest; and if he would then have given under his hand, that he
knew nothing against him, he believed he might have been in their favor as
before. He was asked, whether he was not one of them that petitioned the Common
Council, and declared that he was tempted to witness against his Conscience;
Turbervill said he did, but that he believed he never read the Petition, but
was drawn to it by the order of Mr. College, by a Scriviner about Guild Hall.
That his design in it was, that the City should take care of him; that he was
not very poor, nor over full of money; some Members of the House of Commons had
told them, that the City should advance money for the support of the Witnesses,
and that they were to Petition that they would answer the design of the
Parliament; being asked what Members they were, he said, it was a Member of the
House of Commons that told him so; he would assure them, he said what he spoke,
was voluntarily, and that he knew nothing more than what he had here declared;
he supposed his Deposition was given in after the Commitment of my L. Shaftesbu.

Smith being asked, whether he had not used to go by the name of Barry, said,
he had gone by several names, as all Popish Priests do; he said, he had given
in his Information to Secretary Jenkins; he thought a little after my L. was
committed; but had given notice long before of what he intended to do to other
persons. But the Questions put to him being not very material, and his Answers
of little moment, for want of room, must be waved; and we come to Bryan Haines,
who in answer to diverse Questions put to him by the Jury, said, That he gave in
his Information against my L. Shaftesbury, the day that he the said Bryan was
taken by a Messenger; that he had before given in another account to Sir G.
Treby, of a design against the L. Shaftesbury, about March last, which was,
That Fitz-Girald had told him, that he had given it under his Hand to the King,
that the E. of Shaftesbury did resolve to set the Crown on his own Head, or
turn the Kingdom to a Commonwealth; that he had discourse with my Ld. at
several times, sometimes at his own House, sometimes in Ironmonger-Lane; that
there Hains had proposed a Rebellion in Ireland; that the Earl said that was
not the best way, they had other means to take, and so the Discourse was waved;
being asked whether ever he had bin a Witness for, or against the Lady Windham,
he said she arested him, because he had said he lay with her.

John Macknamara answered to several questions put to him, that he had
discourse with the Lord Shaftesbury in March and April; that he could not tell
exactly when he gave in his Information, but that it was to Secretary Jenkins;
that Ivey was by when they had the discourse; That he signed the Petition to
the Common Council, but did not see it till 'twas brought him to sign; that he
did not read it, nor knew the Contents of it. Then Mr. Papillion told the
Court, that in that Petition they say, they were tempted to swear against their
Consciences, and that some of the Witnesses had made Shipwreck of their
Consciences; but if we should ask them who tempted them, and who those
Witnesses were that made shipwreck of their Consciences, it would signify
nothing; for since they do not know what was in the Petition, it is in vain to
ask them any more.

J. Macknamara said, he heard Mr. College that was executed at Oxford, was
concerned in promoting the Petition by my L. Shaftsburys Advice.

The Answer of Dennis Macknamara to diverse questions put by the Jury, was to
this purpose, That he was introduced to my Lord by his Brother, in March or
April last, he knows not which; that none but Ivey was by; that he gave in his
Information to the Secretary of State, long before the Earl was committed. Then
Mr. Papillion proposed to the Court, whether they might not ask, if he had a
Pardon, for it would be satisfaction to them. Ld. Chapter Just. North answered, it
might be proper when the Prisoner made Exceptions to the Witnesses, but that
there were no Exceptions to the Witnesses. Mr. Papillion said they made no
exceptions, but they must satisfy their Consciences, and that was very much as
they found the credibility of the Witnesses.

My L. Chapter J. North asked what he should have a Pardon for: Mr. Papillion
answered for Crimes: My L. C. J. North said, They must not ask him to accuse
himself. Mr. Papillion said, if he had a pardon he was in Statu quo; suppose my
Ld. some of them have been guilty of Poisoning, some of Felony, some of Robbing
on the High way; they did but ask them if they were pardoned. L. C. J. North
answered, a Man must not be impeached, but where he may answer for it. Mr.
Papillion said, My Lord, if you do not give leave we must for bear then. L. C.
J. N. said he did not think it proper.

Edward Ivey gave in answer to several questions demanded of him, That the
discourse he had with my Lord, was some time after the sitting of the
Parliament at Oxford, about the latter end of March, or beginning of April,
that he could not be positive when he made his Information, but it was given to
the Secretary of State; that he thinks the two Macknamara's were by and no body
else; he is sure one of them was: That he gave his Information as soon as he
could; that he knew nothing more than he had deposed.

To Questions asked of Bernard Dennis, he answered to this purpose; That he had
this discourse in April, 4 or 5 days after the Parliament was dissolved at
Oxford, In March after the Parliament was dissolved at Oxford, that it was at
his own House, that Mr. Shepherd, a Gentleman of my Lords, was there, and some
of his Pages; but he could not tell whether they heard any thing; that my Lord
did not whisper, that he made this Information in June, before my Lord was
committed; that he gave it to Secretary Jenkins; that he concealed it so long,
because he continued so long in the City; That he had been a Protestant since
February: that he had the Discourse with my Ld. in his own Chamber, the great
Chamber, he knew not whether it was called the Hall, or the Parlor; that he
knew nothing more but what he had declared; that he could not tell whether all
his kindred were Papists, but most were.

Then the Jury took up the Statute Book; and in short time came down, and
returned the Bill Ignoramus. At which the People gave a great shout; the
Attorney General desired it might be recorded, this hollowing and hooping in a
Court of Justice.

The Witnesses had several times declared they were in danger to be stoned by
the People, upon which the Sheriffs guarded them with a strong guard as far as
Temple Bar.

Nov. 28. 1681. His Lordship the E. of Shaftesbury was brought up from the
Tower, to the Bar of the King's Bench, upon Habeas Corpus, and several persons
of Honor offering themselves for Bail, his Lordship prayed the Court, that
some friends and relations of his own might be accepted; which was accordingly
granted. The same time Mr. Wilson, a Gentleman belonging to the E. of
Shaftesbury, (who had been committed to the Gate House for Treason, during his
Lordships Confinement in the Tower) was discharged upon Bail. And a
Proclamation was Issued out for preventing of Bonfires, it not being thought
fit that people should be encouraged in their triumphs on that occasion; tho
many considerable Towns and Cities in the Country, upon the news of the
discharge of his Lordship, and the Lord Howard, proclaimed their
Congratulations by Bells and Bonfires. During the time of the Earl of
Shaftesburies Confinement, many made it their buisiness to detract, and
vilipend him, 'twas the mode among some to drink his Health, with a Pendulum,
at a Hempen string, to call him Ton^, Tapskin, and King of Poland, etc. a man
could hardly be admitted to drink a glass of Wine, without casting some of it
in his face. After this great Trial, the Right Honorable the Earl of
Shaftsbury (as it is said) arrested one Baines, one of the Witnesses against
him, on a Writ of Conspiracy, and had likewise Booth, (a Prisoner in the
King's Bench) with a Writ of the same nature, intending to do the like with
other the Aspersours of his Honor, and Loyalty. One Mr. Graham of Staples Inn,
and Mr. Craddock, of PaterNoster-Row, were Arrested, about December. on an Action
of Scandalum Magnatum, at the Suit of the said Earl.

Monday, Feb. 14. 1681. My L. Shaftesbury, my L. Howard appearing in Westminster.
Hall, it being the last day of the Term, and there being nothing to be charged
against them, they were discharged, together with Mr. Wilmore, and Mr. Whitaker.

May 4. 1682. being the first of the Term, a motion was made by the Council for
Mr. Craddock, who (we said) had been Arrested by the Right Honorable the E. of
Shaftesbury, and a Declaration was delivered, that the E. intended to come to
Trial that Term. Mr. Craddock's Council moved, that the great Intimacy betwixt
his Lordship, and the Sheriffs, and Inhabitants of London, might influence the
Jury; and therefore prayed the Court that the Trial thereof might be orderdered
in another County. The Court ordered Friday following for his Lordship to show
cause why it might not be Tried by an Indifferent Jury of another County. On
the Friday his Lordship himself appeared in Court, and declared he would not
oppose the making the Rule absolute; for he desired it should be Tried by an
Indifferent Jury, only desired to have it Tried that Term: The Defendant's
Council still pressed the changing of the Venire, that it might arise out of
some other County, and that they could have such Affidavits as would induce the
Court thereunto. The Court ordered the Monday following to file the Affidavits,
that my Lord's Council might have notice.

May 12. The Council for Mr. Graham made a motion in Court to the same purport,
as Mr. Craddock's Council had done. After which his Lordship declared, That if
he could not have the Liberty of a Subject, to lay his Action in what County he
pleased, he would remit it until such time as he had further considered it.
Thus have we faithfully given you an Account of the most Remarkable Occurrences
relating to this great Peer unto this time: Afterward he lived at his own
house in ^ldersgate-street, and continued there until the beginning of this
present November. when it is said, he Embarked for the Brill, and has since his
Arrival received great Testimonies of an Honor and Respect suitable to the
Character of so great and known a Statesman, whose Fame is not only celebrated
in the Court of Holland, but amongst all the Statesmen in Europe.

FINIS.

