The Bishop of London his LETTER to the Clergy of his Diocese.
SIR,
YOU may remember, that by the help of your ready compliance, we had three
Conferences, the last year, upon the two Sacraments and Catechizing, in the
reason of which, that you may be the better provided to satisfy such as shall
enquire, especially those that are immediately under your care: I have thought
fit to let you know, in short, what induced me to take this method:

Which was in general, that notwithstanding the great duty and importance of
each particular, with the necessary and prudent directions of our Church for
their due observance, there was so great a neglect in most places, that the
substance of Religion, unless timely remedied, would be lost amongst us.

Baptism.
THE first Conference we had was concerning Baptism, for the performance of
which, you are directed by 29 and 30, and 68, 69 and 70 Canons, and the
Rubricks contained in the Office for the Administration of Baptism. And to
persuade us the more earnestly and effectually to prosecute this, we
considered, 1. Of how great use and experience public Baptism was in the
Church. 2. What might be the best means to recover the shameful disuse of it.

1. The great use and expedience did appear from the several advantages the
Church receives by public Baptism, which are all lost in Private. 1. There is
the joynt-Prayers of the Congregation to give a blessing to that holy
performance. 2. There is an occasion given to the people to reflect upon their
own promises, both which are exercises of mutual Charity. 3. It makes us not to
be ashamed of our vow of Christianity. And, Lastly, If gives that solemnity
which is due to so great a Sacrament, and from which a greater awe and regard
is contracted upon the minds of men, who are in a great measure moved by the
outward appearance, and for the want of which, by being hudled up in private, I
fear I may but too truly say it is grown into contempt among us. That which
adds great weight to confirm these reasons, is the constant and universal
practice of the Church in all Ages; which, however different in the manner, was
always attended with two circumstances, a high Reverence to the sacredness of
the Institution, and a solemn and public Performance: witness the Primitive
usage in the burying-places of their Martyrs, where their Assemblies were then
held, and afterward their magnificent Baptistaries, the remains of which, are
to be seen in some Cities to this day. It would be to little purpose to quote
either Councils or Fathers for this, when there is not a Church, to this hour,
that does not appoint as public an administration as its condition can allow
of. And if any come shorter of this decent observation than another, (except
some wild Christians) it is the Church of Rome, which by superstition has
defaced the beauty of it.

2. The way therefore to recover this decent and most useful practice, and to
restore the Church to its just Discipline, is, earnestly to lay before those
who are committed to our care, not only the reasonableness of their duty in
complying, but likewise the great obligation that lies upon us, especially in
obedience to so just a command. So that at the least, if they will not bring
their Children into the Congregation (supposing they have health to bear it) we
ought to refuse the Registring of them.
The Lords Supper.
THE next Conference was upon the Lords Supper, in the observation of which,
you are directed by 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, and 28 Canons, as likewise by the
Rubricks in the Office. All which we did unanimously agree, not only entirely
to obey, so far as concerns our selves, but likewise to promote in others where
we are enjoined, as having sworn to observe all such Injunctions. But we found
our misfortune here, not so much to lie in unworthy or irreverent Communicants,
as that there is a general Apostasy (if I may so call it) from this sacred
Institution. Our great work therefore in this particular, was, and still is
like to be, to persuade men of the great benefit and necessity of this
Sacrament; and from thence to excuse our selves, while we leave no means
unattempted to bring them to this Communion.

Nothing certainly can be more positive than the Institution set down in three
of the Gospels; nor the benefit and great advantage more clearly expressed than I
Cor. x, xi. Chapters; where you have in the xi Chap. v. 26. a plain Declaration
of the continuance of it to the end of the World, from this expression, Ye do
show the Lords death till he come.

It is evident to any that shall in partially read the forementioned places of
Scripture, that none can pretend to Gospel-obedience that omit this Ordinance.
And it does as evidently appear, that there is a shameful neglect of it
throughout this whole Kingdom.

The reason of which is plain to any that will look back to the late times, and
observe how industriously by an universal discouragement, either through a
superstitious terror, or profane contempt, the omission of it was promoted.
And this was natural under an usurped power, where sin was the Law, and
transgression the best obedience. But now that these hardships are blown over,
where shall we find the bond of peace, and the unity of the spirit without
Communion? What security have we of being one body, if we are not one bread? I
Cor. x.17. How know we that there are not more Papists amongst us than
Protestants, and more that offer up strange Fire, and partake of other Altars
than ours, if they eat not of the Sacrifice? ver. 18. Surely, if we condemn the
Church of Rome for putting off half the Communion, they will rise up in
judgment against us at the last day, and utterly condemn all such as neglect
the whole.

Since then the security, not only of every private person, but even of the
whole Church, depends upon the due observation of this Sacrament; it may easily
be concluded what diligence we ought to use to bring the people to a just sense
of this duty, by Exhortation, Reproof, private Communcation from house to
house, especially at such times as we appoint Communions, and whatever else Law
or Prudence can suggest to us.

Catechism.
THE last thing we met upon was Catechizing, the want of which has left the
Church without a foundation; for as the wise man says, If early provision of
good principles be not laid up in the youth, wherewithal shall a man have to
support himself in his riper years? Eccles. xii. 1. I am sure the Church has
ordered the care, in this particular, with great exactness, as may be seen in
the Rubricks of the short Catechism, and in the 59th Canon, besides the several
public admonitions, whereby its execution has been recommended to us. What
reverence or respect can be looked for from the people to the two Sacraments,
when they have never learnt what they are? What obedience or other Morality to
be expected, when they have never understood the Commandments? What Faith shall
we think to find upon the earth, when the first Principles of its Articles have
been never laid?

And therefore if Parents will not answer at the last day for the ruin of their
Children; if Masters and Mistresses will not take upon them the miscarriages of
their Servants and Apprentices; if we do not intend to be found guilty of the
sins of the growing Generation in our respective flocks: we ought certainly to
use all diligence and Authority to bring such as have need of it, to receive
due instruction at the appointed times, or oftener if we find it needful; that
at least, whoever miscarries, we may save our own souls.

I hope I have pressed this duty so often, and earnestly, to my Brethren of the
Clergy, that I shall never find cause to complain of their neglect. Which,
should I find my self disappointed in, I could not but resent it with great
grief. But in full assurance of your complying, I shall only recommend one
method to you, that what part of the Catechism you expound one day, you would
make those you Catechize, give you an account, the next day, of its meaning:
That so you may be assured of the understanding and improvement each person
receives from that instruction.

All this, and whatever else, in your own discretion, you shall find necessary
for the promoting of what has been said, I do beseech you, from my self, and
conjure you, by the obedience you owe the Church you are established in, that
you omit no care nor diligence for the effecting of it. For this you may be
confident of, that I shall never enjoin you any other thing, than what you have
already submitted to, and are bound to observe. Our Canons and Constitutions
are the common voice of the Church; the words of which only, are they that can
direct us to an obedience of I Cor. 1. Chap. ver. 10. That we all speak the
same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst us, but that we be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. Otherwise, without
some common direction and mark to steer our selves by, it were impossible to
avoid the same confusion as they are subject to, that are disordered by
uncertain sounds, I Cor. xiv. That God would direct you and your Flock in these
and all things else, is the most hearty Prayer of,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and Brother, H. London.
April 25. 1679.
LONDON: Printed for H. Brom.


