THE Bishop of London's SEVENTH LETTER, OF THE Conference with his Clergy, Held
in the YEAR 1686.

UPON THE KING's Letter, Dated 1685. AND Directed to the Two Archbishops, with
Directions concerning PREACHERS.

LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte, 1690.

Good Brother,
I Am sure you must now be convinced, as I make no question you was then, that
nothing could be more pernicious to Prince or People, than to carry the Duty of
Submission beyond the bounds of just Reason or due Patience; and that therefore
the first Article against Meddling with Matters of State, was a great
Inducement to me, to invite you to this Conference upon the whole Directions
concerning Preachers, which was managed to this effect.

YOU cannot but be every day more sensible than other, how seasonable this
Letter of his Majesty's was, and how highly it concerns us to reflect upon it.
Indeed there is nothing in it but what has been formerly directed by his Royal
Predecessors after the same manner; and yet the Matter is of that weighty
consequence, as not to be one jot the less necessary to be repeated at this
time.

THE Reasons His Majesty urges, are from politic Considerations, and so
Reasons of State; but there are others, which may be taken from Moral Topics,
of that great consideration, that we may boldly say, The King has not more
Interest in them, in His Royal Capacity, than the Ministers of the Gospel have
in their Spiritual Capacity. For Disobedience is as reproachful to the
religious as to the politic Person; Sedition as pernicious; and Rebellion as
criminal.

BUT to come to the purpose, I will pursue the Heads we went through, as near
the same order, and as much to the same sense, as my Memory will give me leave:
We therefore considered the Directions under these two general Heads, as I.
Negative. II. Affirmative.


I. The Negative part is contained in the first three Articles concerning, 1.
Matters of State. 2. Notional and School Divinity. 3. Controversy.


First, As to Matters of State, We are forbid to declare, limit or bound the
constitutive Laws of the Realm between Prince and People. Every Nation has its
peculiar Rights and Customs; the Decision of which belongs ultimately to the
Resolutions of Parliaments, as they do ordinarily to the Exposition of the
Judges. These things depending upon ancient Customs, original Contracts and
Constitutions contained generally in the public Records, are quite besides our
purpose; they come not within the compass of our Studies, but are more proper
for Statesmen and Lawyers to meddle with; and as they are of public concern,
so are they likewise of public Interpretation. However, should our Curiosity
lead us into an enquiry after them, their Doctrine would by no means be a proper
Subject for us to descant upon; because our business is to teach a Christian
Behavior upon all occasions, without entering into the Merits of any Cause
betwixt Prince and People. We have been happy above all other Countries, in
having Kings, that out of their Grace and Bounty, have made ample Concessions
for our Ease and Security, by so fixing our Liberties and Properties, that we
cannot be wronged in either, without the open Violation of a solemn Oath. If
therefore we would speak honestly to this matter, we ought to do right to both
Parties; and then think but how improper and ridiculous this would look out of
a Pulpit, to be stating the secular Rights and Privileges on both sides. But if
we exalt the Kings Prerogative above the Law, we do as good as tell the People,
that notwithstanding their Rights, the King may ravish their Wives, spoil their
Goods, and cut their Throats at pleasure. And thus we should pursue a Method
the most contrary to the Mind of God, that possibly could be: For it would
prove a Doctrine that might do much harm, and could never do good; either it
would alarm the People with an apprehension that some Design were working
against their just Rights, (For which pernicious strain of Courtesy, we may be
sure a wise Prince, as ours is, would give us small thanks, since the least
Mischief we could expect, would be Dissatisfaction, Murmuring, Jealousy, and a
readiness to rebel.) or if it should operate as we intend, if we intend any
thing else by it, we should hereby make a Halter for our own Necks, by
disposing Men to avow a Principle that should invite their King to put a Yoke
upon them. So that I look upon it as a Rule, that we ought in common Prudence
to set our selves in this Affair; To be as cautious of Flattering our Prince
into Tyranny, as of stirring up the People to Sedition and Tumult. For we have
scope enough without a servile Flattery, to do our Prince right and our selves
too, by preaching up a peaceable and Christian Temper, to wait with patience
for the good effect of those ordinary Remedies we have by Passive Obedience,
Westminster Hall, Parliament, and what other Methods may be; which if they
prevail not, will produce that in God's good time that may.

Secondly, THE next thing we are cautioned against, is Meddling with high
notional Points, which rather distract than edify, and rather engender Strife
and Envy, than procure Peace and Love. This is certain, that whoever preaches
after this manner, either wants Discretion to make choice of more proper
Subjects, or else, vainly puffed up by his fleshly Mind, prefers the Magnifying
himself before the Edification of his Hearers. It is directly against the
divine Rule, which says, The Servant of the Lord must not strive.

WE are particularly warned against the Scholastical handling of the Doctrine
of Election and Reprobation, which are Determinations appointed by the hidden
Wisdom of God's secret Methods. For indeed it is an unpardonable Presumption in
Dust and Ashes, which cannot give a reason for the Growth or Color of the
least Herb that grows, to handle these Points, which have, and ever will be the
Amusement of all Sects and Religions under the Sun, as being the abstrusest
Parts of God's Workings toward the Children of Men.

THERE are several other Niceties relating to the Operation of the Spirit, and
the Work of Justification; the critical Resolutions of which, some, by too much
refining, have reduced to Air; and others, by endeavoring to make too
familiar, have rendered contemptible.

AND therefore it behoved our Superiors to give a Check to the too bold and
daring Spirits of some rash Men, that they might be prevailed with, if
possible, to steer by a better Compass than that of their own Brains, and
rather keep out at Sea than hazard their Skill too near the Rocks. Security and
Satisfaction attend the former course, but Censure and great Peril the latter;
the first may miscarry, but the other is next to certain of doing so.

Thirdly, THE last Negative Article seems to discourage that sort of
Controversal Preaching which directs to the distinguishing Tenants of the
several Sects of Religion, as Popery, Presbyterianism, Independency, etc. in
the managing of which, there is such a Prudence and Discretion requisite, as is
not every Man's Talent. It is therefore very justly advised, not to be hasty in
entering upon such Undertakings, but rather avoid the Invitations our own
forwardness will be but too apt to draw us into. It is the ready way to draw
Attention, and gain a sort of Applause, if we do but say sharp things and
Satirical: For the more slightly the Controversy is handled, the better it
takes, provided the Argument be heightened with earnest Expressions or foolish
Jesting. But however this Style may be pleasing at the first Accost, it can
make no solid Impression to Edification, which ought to be the End of all
Preaching. It will always be despised by wise Men, and do Fools no real good.
And yet there is another sort of Treating our Adversaries, which is still
worse, that is, foul and reviling Language; such Behavior will either
prejudice our Cause, or at least render us contemptible, that serve it in so
dirtily.

THE way to avoid this in a great measure is, not to affect and force
controversal Points upon a Text; but rather forbear, till we are constrained to
it by the drift of the Subject we treat upon, or from the necessity of Time and
Place. All things are likeliest then to proceed in the most reasonable manner,
when they flow most easily and naturally from the subject of our Discourse. For
then we are most apt to do wisely, and speak like rational Creatures. We shall
then be better composed for the putting on of a Christian Spirit, in
Expressions of Compassion, Good Will, Gentleness, Modesty, and whatever other
Virtues may best soften and steal into Men's Hearts. To tell a Man at the first
salute, that he is a Heretic, and is damned, is to provoke Choler rather than
Attention, and utterly to frustrate our own Endeavors by frighting away those
that we would be thought to invite to us.

BUT as we ought to be very cautious how we enter into Controversy, and very
careful in the handling of it: so must we by no means be discouraged from it,
when there is occasion. It may so fall out, as to be indispensibly necessary.
If the Plague be begun in your Congregation, you must make have with your
Censers. If you see it approaching or hanging over, you must prepare your
People with the best Antidotes you can think of. For Truth, tho it never fails
in it self; yet is it very fleeting, if you are not industrious to keep it with
you. It is the noblest Virtue in the World, and will be treated accordingly.

II. THE other General Denomination of these Articles is Affirmative: where you
are told what to do in order to the more successful discharging your Ministry.
And this contains four Heads, 1. Catechizing. 2. Acquainting the People with
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church. 3. The Bishops being careful not
hastily to License Preachers. 4. To use all Persuasion and Authority to stop
the Licentious Practice of Profaning the Lords Day.


I. THE First is a Direction to the teaching of such sort of Divinity, as may
be most edifying: And this is most justly presumed to be Catechetical, so that
there lies not only a Duty upon you to instruct Children in the Catechism; but
likewise to pursue the same Method in your Sermons to them of riper years. By
which means you will best improve the first Principles laid down, during the
time of Childhood; in making your Superstructure more suitable and of a piece
with your Foundation. It is indeed that course which most tends to edifying:
And that chiefly for these three Reasons.

1. BECAUSE it admits of the plainest and easiest Style. For it is not
perplexed with Doubts or the Improvement of refined Notions and learned
Enquiries, as all other Methods are; but goes directly to the Point, in a plain
familiar way suitable to the meanest Understanding.

2. IT contains the fullest and most complete Body of Divinity. It has all that
is necessary and nothing superfluous. Other ways of proposing Religion, however
they may be more elaborate, and make a greater boast to the World, through the
contrivance of Humane Wit; yet you will find their Original mean at least, and
sometimes base and degenerate. For either it smells of the Schools, or else
proceeds from Arrogance, Vain Glory, or some such like foolish Passion: I do
not say this in reference to those necessary Attendants of Chronology, History,
or the like, but to the plain Doctrinal Point.

3. IT has this Advantage, that it is more edifying, and settles Men better in
the most essential Principles. For if you should preach to grown Men in another
Style than that by which you had instructed them in their Youth, you would make
them apt to despise the Foundation-Work of their Religion, and conceit
themselves entered upon another Ordinance. They would be tempted to think the
common Duties of Christianity only incumbent upon Boys: And so whilst they
become speculative Christians, to follow their own Lusts. What swarms of Sects
such Methods have visited the Church of Christ with, Ecclesiastical History
will tell, and the sad Experience of our present Age afford too many woeful
Instances.

IT is therefore pressed with great Justice, that ye should recommend to the
People the most important Virtues of a true Christian Behavior, and urge them
by your Example, as well as Doctrine, that their Practicableness, as well as
Excellency, may the more evidently appear. Ye are likewise enjoined to warn
your Flock against those Sins which are most prevalent in the present Age. For
the end of all Religion is to eschew evil and do good, that we may glorify God
in our Souls and in our Bodies, which are the Lords.

IT is recommended to you, to take occasion now and then in your Sermons, to
explain the several Offices in the Liturgy, that the People may the better pray
with their understanding. For they are composed with that Gravity and true
Devotion, that they could never have fallen into that Contempt, they did in the
late times, but that Men generally were not so well possessed of the meaning
and reason of them, as they ought to have been. And therefore there is another
thing needful to the same purpose, and that is carefully and distinctly to read
Divine Service. For it is a Paraphrase upon the Text, to read it sensibly, and
with a due Emphasis.

II. THE next is the reading the 39 Articles and the Canons, yearly at least,
to the People, which is an Injunction as early as the Canons and Articles
themselves. And good reason there was for it.

THAT which distinguishes Christians from other Sects is the Articles of our
Religion, the which whoever professes to believe, is a Member of Christ's
visible Church. So that it is necessary for every Christian to be well informed
of them. Not that every Article in the 39 obliges to an explicit belief: It is
enough for many of them, that they are not opposed. However they are so
instructive all of them, that they do in short give the People Marks, by which
they may judge more easily, whether or no they that preach, deliver Sound
Doctrine: And they that preach may the better be directed how to speak in the
Style of the Church, thereby to preserve that Harmony and Consent, recommended
by the Apostle in speaking the same things, 1 Cor. 1. 10. And thus giving the
same sound, People may without Distraction know how to perform their Duty.

THE outward Adornment of this Doctrine, is to have all things done decently
and in order; the World is constituted and governed by Order, and God is the
God of it. This is the Discipline contained in our Canons, which adds Strength
to our Faith, and Life to our Charity. For where we find Peace and Concord, we
are inclined to believe, that God is there, and our brotherly Love is
encouraged by such Agreement. It directs every one to his proper Post, and
places all in that Harmony and Consent, and unites and knits them together in
such close Order, that they stand like a Wall against their Enemy in the Day of
Trial. Ye cannot study these Rules too much, since they are those by which ye
ought to walk in all your outward Behavior toward your Flocks. They are the
Directions for the Peoples Behavior; that they may avoid the mutual Offense
which Disorder and Licentiousness would cause among them. And therefore it is
highly necessary they should be acquainted with them; that they may not think
the Church Discipline to be a Device of their immediate Pastor, nor excuse
their Irregularity upon pretense of Ignorance.

III. ANOTHER Injunction is concerning Licenses to Preach: That care should be
taken who are Licensed, and that it be only during pleasure. It is thought
requisite likewise, that none for the future but the Archbishop or Bishop of
the Diocese do License, as being the most proper Judges. But this is a matter
so highly concerns your Ministry, that it requires a very serious and distinct
Observation, to weigh in what Latitude these Words are to be allowed.

THE Preaching of the Gospel is expressed severally; but there are but two
Expressions that have any considerable difference: The first is (...), which
signifies the plain denouncing of the Gospel, be it what it will: The other is
(...), which includes the Merits of what is preached, by giving it the Style of
Good Tidings.

HOWEVER, that Consideration which must give you your Measures, is carefully to
distinguish the difference betwixt the Preaching of the Apostles, and that of
their Successors. The Apostles laid the Foundation. Built upon the foundation
of the Apostle and Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. It is very true, they built on, as
occasion served: But their great Work was to discover the glad Tidings of the
Gospel to all Mankind. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. Mar. 16. 15. And therefore it is that S. Paul assumes to himself, as
an Apostle, a share in the Foundation-work. I have laid the foundation, and
another builds thereon. I Cor. 3. 10. It must be acknowledged at the same
time, that the Apostles did upon occasion exercise the ordinary ministerial
Functions, but with this Caution, I baptized also the household of Stephanus:
Besides I know not whether I baptized any other. For Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel. I Cor. 1. 16, 17.

HOWEVER it is certain, whether the Apostles had exercised it or no, that
whoever had the supreme and extraordinary Power, had likewise that which was
ordinary and common to other Ministers of the Gospel. For most certainly
whatever Power remains to you, ye have it as the Apostles Successors. And
therefore ye ought to distinguish between that Authority which ended with the
Apostles, and that which is derived down to the Ministers of the succeding
Generations.

1. THE universal Jurisdiction they had, was peculiar to them. For tho every
Bishop is a Bishop of the Universal Church; yet he is not an Universal Bishop.
He is a Bishop every where; but has ordinary Power to act only within his
Diocese.

2. THE Power of working Miracles and miraclous Gifts of Tongues, Prophecies,
etc. were complete only in the Apostles. In the Infancy of the Church others
had these Gifts; but it was in part, one after this manner and another after
that, till in process of time all ceased.

3. THEIR Dictates were infallible; so as whatever they said or writ was
certainly true, because they were inspired of God. This, none after them ever
pretended to, except Impostors.

THEREFORE we have nothing to do with these three Qualifications; which God
has judged to be more proper for Foundation-work than Superstructure, to
constitute the Church than to continue it so established. So that to us is left
only the Power of executing what is already settled, and the improving what we
have before us to the best advantage.

1. OUR Call is of the same nature of that with the Apostles. Christ sent them,
they ordained others, from whom has been derived a Succession to this Day. It
is true, their inward Mission was much more glorious than ours, the Call more
clear and powerful, adorned with diverse Gifts; but ours comes from the same
Fountain. For if we enter in by the Door, and are true Pastors, we were
inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon us the Ministry of the Gospel.

2. WE have a Power to Ordain others to succeed us, as the Apostles had.

3. WE have a power to preach the Gospel, tho but at second hand: For we preach
but what they delivered down to us, and what we add by way of Explanation, or
what may be agreeable to that, which has been left with us. And this not as
secure from all mistake, but according to our best Skill with the ordinary help
of God's Grace and our own Sincerity.

4. THE Administration of the Sacraments, and the performance of other
religious Rites are incumbent upon us, as well as they were upon the Apostles.

5. AND the Power of the Keys is delivered to us down from their hands; whereby
the Discipline of the Church is committed to us, for the Correction of those
that do ill, by Excommunication; and the Comfort of those that repent, by
receiving them into Communion.

THIS being the Case; we must allow the Apostles an uncontrolable Authority.
For it was necessary from the consideration of what state the World was in. The
World was in darkness, and under the shadow of Death: When Christ, who is the
Fountain of Light sent his Lights into the World to direct into the way of
Life. He gave them Power accordingly to command the Elements, and do Miracles
at will; that the grossest Opposers might by silenced, if not convinced. Ye may
see the Conflict they had with the World by what S. Paul says to the Ephesians.
We wrestle against principalities, against powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, Chapter 6. v.
12. And the bold consequence of it. Our weapons are mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds: casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ; and having in a readiness to avenge
all disobedience. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6. This was the Work and this the success of
it.

BUT our Authority is not attended with such a miraculous and unerring Power.
We may be deceived, and may deceive. Therefore are we under a coercive Power,
may be restrained from the exercise of our Functions, and ought for Peace and
Orders sake to submit to it. We have a Commission, but it is subordinate; we
have Power, but it is controlable. Therefore is it to be no surprise to you, if
ye are not left absolute Judges of the executive extent of your Power: But that
where ye have no reason to look upon your selves as in a state of Persecution,
ye are bound to submit to the restraints of your Superiors. I say then,

1. WHERE I am forbid upon an account, which I think to be to the intolerable
prejudice of Religion in Doctrine or Discipline, and that no Appeal can be had
by reason of a general defection: There I put my self, but at the dreadful
peril of being in the right, into a state of Persecution, and know Canonical
Obedience no longer.

2. IF the wrong go no farther than your own Persons, ye ought to bear it
patiently, and seek no farther, than by Appeal, if it may be had.

3. IT makes a great difference in this consideration, whether ye are only
under the general Obligation of your Orders; or have the Incumbency of a Cure
of Souls: Since ye may upon easier Terms be tied up under the first Capacity,
than under the second.

BUT I say not this to quarrel with the Article, which I look upon to be of
great use: For it would be an Affront to God's Word, to let some have the
handling of it. And if it be asked, Why then have ye such scandalous Priests? I
answer with another Question, Why then have ye such scandalous Maintenance in
many places? Besides there may happen such times, that the State may be
concerned to put Restraints upon Preaching, to hinder Trumpets of Rebellion.

IV. THE last Article is that which at all times ye ought to be concerned for:
To see that the Solemn Day of our Religious Worship be observed, as becomes
sincere Professors. But most especially at this time it lies upon us to apply
double Diligence. For this Indulgence which the King has granted, upon the
notion of having a Dispensing Power in himself, has been so little considered
in reference to the abuse wicked and profane Men will make of it: That it has
laid the Lord's Day open to all Contempt imaginable. We have already the sad
experience of it. Worldly People stay at home on that Day and attend their
secular Affairs: The Loose and Debauched lie at the Alehouse; and every one
that fears not God, takes occasion to be an Offense to those that do. As to
what Remedies we should use to prevent these Mischiefs, as much as may be: I
think we fully considered in our last Conference before this, whither I refer
you.

ALL therefore that I shall add, is to remind you, of what ye were at the time
of our Conference so sensible: That greater Care could not be taken, than what
every Circumstance of the present time stands in need of: We have a Prince of
another Religion, who for that reason cannot choose but be most influenced by
our Adversaries: And what the Mercies of that Religion are, when exercised to
the height, ye all very well know. What if we have His Royal Word never so
solemnly passed? There is no reason we should expect it farther to be made
good, than we on our parts suitably behave our selves. If we be a lessening,
hindrance or discredit to our own Religion by disorderly Walking, supine
Negligence, or any other Fault: to be sure he will then think it just to
abandon us, as a lost sort of People that deserve no pity, but have forfeited
all claim to his Protection. In which case to be sure he will set himself to
establish that, which his affection must necessarily most incline him to. The
least we can expect from one so wedded to that Religion, is that he should
promote it all he could. And therefore should we make any default, it is but
reasonable for us to expect, that he should endeavor to rid ours out of the
way. Nay, should we be any ways careless or foolish at this time, it would be
to play the Game into our Enemies Hands; who would not fail to make use of that
Advantage to lead or drive away our Flocks, and leave us useless Shepherds. And
what a shameful Reproach would this be to us in this World, and what a dreadful
Sentence would it draw upon us in the next! Therefore my daily Prayer shall be,
and I hope yours will be so too, that we may be courageous in this day of
Trial, and behave our selves like Men.

Your affectionate Brother, Dec. 10. 1686. to serve you, H. LONDON.


